How Do Interest Rates Work?
Interest rates can be considered the price of borrowing money.

"Quite simply, it's the amount charged to a borrower by a lender for use of an asset, expressed as a percentage of the principal value," says Peter C. Earle, director of economics and economic freedom and senior research fellow at the American Institute for Economic Research.
Assets borrowed could include a car, home, business property or cash.
Your interest rate will depend on whether you are borrowing money from a credit card issuer, taking out a loan or saving money in a bank account.

Credit cards. Most credit cards come with an interest rate that is expressed as an APR, or annual percentage rate, which is the yearly cost of borrowing and includes fees, unlike the interest rate. A credit card can either have a fixed APR or variable APR for purchases that will be based on your credit score.

Loans. When you take out a loan, the lender charges interest as a way to manage risk. A loan that is secured by property may have a lower interest rate than an unsecured loan, such as a personal loan.

Savings accounts. The bank pays you interest when you open a savings account and keep funds on deposit. It can then use your cash to make loans.

Interest rates for savings accounts, certain types of loans and credit cards are influenced by the federal funds rate.
What Is the Federal Funds Rate?
The federal funds rate is the target interest rate set by the Federal Reserve – the U.S. central bank – that banks use for overnight lending. The Federal Open Market Committee within the Federal Reserve, or FOMC, meets eight times yearly, or about every six weeks, to determine a target range.

"Lower interest rates stimulate more economic activities, which leads to economic growth in our society," explains Albert Williams, chair and associate professor of finance and economics at the H. Wayne Huizenga College of Business and Entrepreneurship at Nova Southeastern University in Ft. Lauderdale, Florida. That's because lower interest rates mean cheaper loans, and cheaper loans should mean more borrowing and spending that helps financial markets recover.

However, if the Fed sets the benchmark rate too low, the economy can heat up, leading to inflation problems. "The Federal Reserve has the responsibility to find that sweet spot," says Williams. If inflation gets too high, the Fed may opt to increase interest rates. The Fed maintains an annual inflation target of 2%, meaning goods and services get 2% more expensive each year.

Keeping tabs on all of this falls to the FOMC. The committee performs a national and global economic outlook using a range of economic data to get a pulse of the nation and the world, says Williams. It also considers the Federal Reserve's primary goals of stable prices, a low level of unemployment and moderate long-term interest rates, he adds. "With all this information, it then sets the federal funds rate and a target range for the federal funds rate."

This rate is applied when banks borrow from each other. All depository institutions, such as banks or credit unions, are required by the Fed to keep a certain amount of cash on hand each night. "When they are short, they borrow from other banks who have excess funds at the Federal Reserve Bank," Williams says. Note that as of March 2020, the Federal Reserve reduced the reserve requirement to 0% of total deposits (down from 10%), meaning that banks could theoretically lend all of their deposits, he adds.

What Is the Prime Rate?
Financial institutions base interest rates for consumers on the Fed's rate and offer their lowest-risk customers what's known as the prime rate. This rate is generally 3 percentage points higher than the federal funds rate and is the best interest rate you can get when you borrow money. For example, if the Fed's rate is 4.5%, that means the prime rate is around 7.5%. If your credit isn't ideal, you should expect higher rates.

When the Fed rate rises or falls, it influences consumer interest rates, such as those on home equity lines of credit, credit cards and car loans.

The federal funds rate is also used as a benchmark for setting the interest rates you can earn on deposit accounts. That includes savings and money market accounts and certificates of deposit. Generally, deposit rates increase and decrease along with the Fed's rate.

Read: Best Mortgage Refinance Lenders.
What Is Today's Federal Interest Rate?
At the Federal Open Market Committee's July meeting, the rate range held steady at a target range of 4.25% to 4.5%. The committee last cut rates in December, by a quarter-point.

How Do Changing Interest Rates Affect You?
Interest rate changes can have both negative and positive effects, depending on whether you're trying to borrow or save. "In essence, the federal funds rate impacts interest rates for all consumers, all businesses and the government," says Williams. Changes in interest rates might influence whether you can afford major life purchases, such as a home, a car and even a college education.

Low-interest-rate environments help prospective buyers afford mortgage loans and refinances. A more competitive homebuying market also pushes prices higher, fueling inflation. A rise in rates flips the script, however. Borrowing may be more costly, while opening certificates of deposit or savings accounts could become more lucrative.

"Small changes in a short amount of time usually don't have much of an effect on individual consumers or savers," Earle says. "But the level of interest rates over a longer time period definitely affects the consumer's propensity to (spend) versus save."

It's also worth noting that as rates rise, the disposition of lenders changes, Earle says, "meaning that some lenders will increase or decrease their willingness to loan funds based upon changes in prevailing interest rates." 

What Should You Do When Interest Rates Fall?
You can take advantage of low interest rates to improve your financial situation. "For borrowers, lower interest rates are always welcome," says Williams. You might consider making some of these moves:

Buy a home or car. If you're considering a big purchase, "lower interest rates make purchasing a first home or a vehicle more desirable and cheaper to finance," says Williams.  
Refinance your mortgage. If your housing loan has an interest rate of 7% and mortgage rates fall to 5%, a homeowner could refinance and save thousands on interest charges on a 30-year mortgage.  
Refinance a student loan or car loan. The same idea applies to other types of loans with a high interest rate. Refinancing to a lower rate can help lower your overall loan costs.
Pay off or transfer high-interest credit card balances. As long as you don't take on more debt, Williams says, "the consolidation of loans at a lower interest rate will provide interest savings." 
Choose investments that hedge against inflation. Investors seeking an inflation hedge sometimes turn to gold, which is seen as a store of value. "We usually encourage investing in gold when there is a high level of uncertainty in the economy," Williams says. Additionally, Treasury inflation-protected securities, or TIPS, can be beneficial when inflation is expected to rise," he adds.
What Should You Do When Interest Rates Rise?
Rising rates offer the best opportunities for savers since savings accounts should begin to earn higher yields as interest rates rise. Here are some tips on how to adjust to higher rates.

Credit cards. Work to pay off high-interest credit cards if you are carrying balances, which will cost you more when interest rates go up and may lead to a cycle of debt.
The most affordable method to pay down credit card debt is to target the balance with the highest interest rate first. This is known as the debt avalanche method.
If you need motivation to stay on track, you can use the snowball payoff method instead. Rather than tackling the balance with the highest interest rate first, focus your efforts on paying off the smallest balance.
The snowball method may cost you more in the long run compared with the avalanche method, but it could pay off if you end up with no credit card debt.
Loans. Even a small increase in the federal funds rate could dramatically affect your ability to make a major purchase, such as a home.
The good news is that the Fed's actions don't directly influence mortgage interest rates, especially for conventional 30-year fixed-rate loans. Adjustable-rate mortgages are likely more directly affected than fixed-rate mortgages.
Other factors that affect your mortgage rate include your credit score, loan size and down payment amount.
Improving your credit score is a wise long-term strategy to blunt the effect of higher interest rates on any type of loan. Generally, the higher your credit score, the lower your interest rate may be.
Savings accounts. Rising interest rates are ideal for your savings account because it should earn more money, Earle says.
"If a bank depositor wants to take advantage of rising interest rates, they might do well to see what savings accounts, CDs and other instruments are paying the highest rates local to them," he says.
Community banks and credit unions tend to offer some of the most competitive savings account interest rates, as do online banks.