**The Technical Approach**
3 chapter one to Trading and Investing Few human activities have been so exhaustively studied during the past century, from so many angles and by so many different sorts of people, ashas the buying and selling of corporate securities. The rewards which thestock market holds out to those who read it right are enormous; the penaltiesit exacts from careless, dozing, or “unlucky” investors are calamitous. Nowonder it has attracted some of the world’s most astute accountants, ana-lysts, and researchers, along with a motley crew of eccentrics, mystics, and“hunch players,” and a multitude of just ordinary hopeful citizens. Able brains have sought, and continue constantly to seek, for safe and sure methods of appraising the state and trend of the market, of discovering the right stock to buy and the right time to buy it. This intensive research has not been fruitless — far from it. There are a great many successfulinvestors and speculators (using the word in its true sense, which is withoutopprobrium) who, by one road or another, have acquired the necessaryinsight into the forces with which they deal and the judgment, the fore-thought, and the all important self-discipline to deal with them proﬁtably. In the course of years of stock market study, two quite distinct schools of thought have arisen, two radically different methods of arriving at theanswers to the trader’s problem of what and when. In the parlance of “the Street,” one of these is commonly referred to as the fundamental or statistical, and the other as the technical. (In recent years a third approach, the cyclical, has made rapid progress and, although still beset by a “lunatic fringe,” itpromises to contribute a great deal to our understanding of economic trends.) The stock market fundamentalist depends on statistics. He examines the auditors’ reports, the proﬁt-and-loss statements, the quarterly balance sheets,the dividend records, and policies of the companies whose shares he hasunder observation. He analyzes sales data, managerial ability, plant capacity,the competition. He turns to bank and treasury reports, production indexes,price statistics, and crop forecasts to gauge the state of business in general,and reads the daily news carefully to arrive at an estimate of future businessconditions. Taking all these into account, he evaluates his stock; if it is sellingcurrently below his appraisal, he regards it as a buy. (EN9: And, no surprise, the buyer’s name is Warren Buffet, and he buys the company, not the stock, forwhile this is an excellent way to buy companies it is not a very good way to buystocks.)

EN: Read Robert Prechter’s summation of the fundamental methodology as an amusing endnote at the end of this chapter. AU3772_book.fm Page 3 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
As a matter of fact, aside from the greenest of newcomers when they

ﬁrst tackle the investment problem, and to whom, in their inexperience, any other point of view is not only irrational but incomprehensible, your purefundamentalist is a very rare bird. Even those market authorities who pre-tend to scorn charts and “chartists” utterly are not oblivious to the “action”chronicled by the ticker tape, nor do they conceal their respect for the DowTheory which, whether they realize it or not, is, in its very essence, purelytechnical. Deﬁnition of Technical Analysis The term “technical,” in its application to the stock market, has come to havea very special meaning, quite different from its ordinary dictionary deﬁni-tion. It refers to the study of the action of the market itself as opposed to the study of the goods in which the market deals. Technical Analysis is the science of recording, usually in graphic form, the actual history of trading (pricechanges, volume of transactions, etc.) in a certain stock or in “the Averages”and then deducing from that pictured history the probable future trend. EN: With the advent of the computer, many schools of technical analysis have arisen.Number-driven technical analysis, e.g., moving average studies oscillators, etc.,attempts to completely objectify the analysis of the markets. The work of Edwardsand Magee is the embodiment and deﬁnition of “classical technical analysis.” SeeAppendix C. The technical student argues thus: it is futile to assign an intrinsic value to a stock certiﬁcate. One share of United States Steel, for example, was worth$261 in the early fall of 1929, but you could buy it for only $22 in June of1932! By March 1937, it was selling for $126 and just 1 year later for $38. InMay of 1946, it had climbed back up to $97, and 10 months later, in 1947,had dropped below $70, although the company’s earnings on this last datewere reputed to be nearing an all-time high and interest rates in generalwere still near an all-time low. The book value of this share of U.S. Steel,according to the corporation’s balance sheet, was about $204 in 1929 (end ofthe year); $187 in 1932; $151 in 1937; $117 in 1938, and $142 in 1946. Thissort of thing, this wide divergence between presumed value and actual price,is not the exception; it is the rule. It is going on all the time. The fact is thatthe real value of a share of U.S. Steel common is determined at any giventime solely, deﬁnitely, and inexorably by supply and demand, which areaccurately reﬂected in the transactions consummated on the ﬂoor of the NewYork Stock Exchange. Of course, the statistics which the fundamentalists study play a part in the supply–demand equation — that is freely admitted. But there are manyother factors affecting it. The market price reﬂects not only the differingvalue opinions of many orthodox security appraisers, but also all the hopesand fears and guesses and moods, rational and irrational, of hundreds ofpotential buyers and sellers, as well as their needs and their resources — intotal, factors which defy analysis and for which no statistics are obtainable, AU3772_book.fm Page 4 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter one: The Technical Approach to Trading and Investing 5 but which are nevertheless all synthesized, weighed, and ﬁnally expressed in the one precise ﬁgure at which a buyer and a seller get together and makea deal (through their agents, their respective stock brokers). This is the onlyﬁgure that counts. Moreover, the technician claims, with complete justiﬁcation, that the bulk of the statistics which the fundamentalists study are past history,already out of date and sterile, because the market is not interested in the FIGURE 1. Monthly price ranges of U.S. Steel common from January 1929 to December 1946. Compare the great swings in the market price for this stock — from 1929 (extreme high, 261 ¾) to 1932 (extreme low, 21 ¼), from 1932 to 1937, from 1937 to 1938, from 1942 to 1946 — with its book values for those years as cited on theprevious page. 240 220200180 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946U. S. STEEL X AU3772_book.fm Page 5 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
past or even in the present! It is constantly looking ahead, attempting to

discount future developments, weighing and balancing all the estimates andguesses of hundreds of investors who look into the future from differentpoints of view and through glasses of many different hues. In brief, the goingprice, as established by the market itself, comprehends all the fundamentalinformation which the statistical analyst can hope to learn (plus some thatis perhaps secret from him, known only to a few insiders) and much elsebesides of equal or even greater importance. All of which, admitting its truth, would be of little signiﬁcance were it not for the fact, which no one of experience doubts, that prices move intrends and trends tend to continue until something happens to change thesupply–demand balance. Such changes are usually detectable in the actionof the market itself. Certain patterns or formations, levels or areas, appearon the charts which have a meaning, and can be interpreted in terms ofprobable future trend development. They are not infallible, it must be noted,but the odds are deﬁnitely in their favor. Time after time, as experience hasamply proved, they are far more prescient than the best-informed and mostshrewd of statisticians. The technical analyst may go even further in his claims. He may offer to interpret the chart of a stock whose name he does not know, so long asthe record of trading is accurate and covers a long enough term to enablehim to study its market background and habits. He may suggest that hecould trade with proﬁt in a stock knowing only its ticker symbol, completelyignorant of the company, the industry, what it manufactures or sells, or howit is capitalized. Needless to say, such practice is not recommended, but ifyour market technician is really experienced at his business, he could, intheory, do exactly what he claims. Should the reader, at this point, ﬁnd the technical approach to trading or investing, as explained in the foregoing, completely abhorrent, perhapshe had better close the book now. For it is primarily the technical approach,the science of technical analysis, with which the remainder of the book deals. EN: The Elliott Wave Theory: Perspective and Comments* This week we had the pleasure of attending the December meeting of the MarketTechnicians Association of New York. Long-term subscribers will remember the MTANY as the organization which honored John Magee with its “Man of the Year” award in 1978. The speaker wasRobert Prechter, publisher of “The Elliott Wave Theorist,” an investment advisorywhich bases its forecasts on interpretations of R.N. Elliott’s work on the stockmarket.… Of primary interest to SAS subscribers are Prechter’s comments on technical analysis itself. The Elliott Wave Theory, it must be remembered, is really no morethan a “catalog” of stock market price movements, laid one on top of the other, so * From the John Magee Market Letters, December 15, 1984. AU3772_book.fm Page 6 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter one: The Technical Approach to Trading and Investing 7 to speak, until a grand, underlying, and enduring pattern is observed; in short, pure technical analysis. Among Prechter’s deﬁnitions and observations regarding funda-mental analysis are the following: 1. “First let’s deﬁne ‘technical’ versus ‘fundamental’ data…technical data is that which is generated by the action of the market under study.” 2. “The main problem with fundamental analysis is that its indicators are removed from the market itself. The analyst assumes causality betweenexternal events and market movements, a concept which is almost certainlyfalse. But, just as important, and less recognized, is that fundamentalanalysis almost always requires a forecast of the fundamental data itselfbefore conclusions about the market are drawn. The analyst is then forcedto take a second step in coming to a conclusion about how those forecastedevents will affect the markets! Technicians only have one step to take, whichgives them an edge right off the bat. Their main advantage is that they don’thave to forecast their indicators.” 3. “What’s worse, even the fundamentalists’ second step is probably a process built on quicksand.… The most common application of fundamental anal-ysis is estimating companies’ earnings for both the current year and nextyear, and recommending stocks on that basis.… And the record on that basisalone is very poor, as Barron’s pointed out in a June 4 article, which showedthat earnings estimates averaged 18% error in the 30 DJIA stocks for anyyear already completed and 54% error for the year ahead. The weakest link,however, is the assumption that correct earnings estimates are a basis forchoosing stock market winners. According to a table in the same Barron’sarticle, a purchase of the 10 DJIA stocks with the best earnings estimateswould have produced a 10-year cumulative gain of 40.5%, while choosingthe 10 DJIA with the worst earnings estimates would have produced awhopping 142.5% gain.” We enjoyed Prechter’s polished exposition of a technical approach different from our own. As for his observations about fundamental analysis, we simply couldn’tagree more. AU3772_book.fm Page 7 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 8 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

9 chapter two Charts Charts are the working tools of the technical analyst. They have been devel oped in a multitude of forms and styles to represent graphically almostanything and everything that takes place in the market, or to plot an “index”derived therefrom. They may be monthly charts on which an entire month’strading record is condensed into a single entry, or weekly, daily, hourly,transaction, “point-and-ﬁgure,” candlestick, etc. They may be constructedon arithmetic, logarithmic, or square-root scale, or projected as “oscillators.”They may delineate moving averages, proportion of trading volume to pricemovement, average price of “most active” issues, odd-lot transactions, theshort interest, and an inﬁnitude of other relations, ratios, and indexes — alltechnical in the sense that they are derived, directly or indirectly, from whathas actually been transacted on the exchanges. With most of these, fortunately, we shall not need to concern ourselves at all; they are of interest only to the full-time economic analyst. Many ofthem have derived from a completely futile (so far, at least) endeavor todiscover some one “mechanical” index or combination of indexes which willalways, automatically, without ever failing or going wrong, give warning ofa change in trend; such, in our experience, are often confusing and sometimesdownright deceptive at a most critical juncture. This book, however, isdesigned for the layman, the business or professional man who cannot spendall his hours on his investing or trading operations, but to whom theseoperations are, nevertheless, of sufﬁcient importance or interest to warranthis devoting at least a few minutes a day to their study and management. (EN9: In retropsect an underestimation of the importance of the work. In the 21stcentury the best professionals are acutely aware of the importance of trend analysisand use this work as their text book.) The theories and methods outlined herein will require only the simplest form of stock chart — a record of the pricerange (high and low), closing price, and volume of shares traded each day.These daily graphs will be supplemented, for certain purposes which willbe discussed farther on, by weekly or monthly charts, which for most stockscan be purchased ready-made and which are easily generated by almost allcommercially available investment software. Nearly all the illustrations throughout the following pages are examples of such daily charts. They are easy to make and maintain manually, requiringonly a supply of graph or cross-section paper (almost any kind can serve),a daily newspaper which gives full and accurate reports on stock exchange AU3772_book.fm Page 9 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
dealings, a sharp pencil, and a few minutes of time. EN: Alternatively, numer

ous data services are available for use with computer software packages, not to mention Internet sites (which are mentioned in Resources). The use of this technol-ogy eliminates the burden of manual chart keeping altogether. If there is a drawbackto this technology it might be in the loss of the “feel” the investor gets throughmanual charting. It is customary in preparing ordinary daily stock charts to let the hori zontal axis represent time, with the vertical cross-lines (or as some prefer,the spaces between them) from left to right thus standing for successive days.The vertical scale is used for prices, with each horizontal cross-line thenrepresenting a speciﬁc price level. Space is usually provided at the bottomof the sheet to plot volume, i.e., the number of shares which change handseach day. The newspapers publishing complete stock market reports givethe day’s turnover or volume (exclusive of odd-lot transactions which mayfor our present purpose be disregarded), the highest and lowest price atwhich each stock sold during the day, the closing price (which is the priceat which the last sale effected during the day was made), and usually theopening or ﬁrst sale price. On our charts, the daily price range is plotted bydrawing a vertical line connecting the points representing the high and thelow. Then a short horizontal “tick” is added, either crossing the vertical rangeline or extending out to the right from it, at the level of the closing price.Sometimes all transactions in a stock during a day take place at one and thesame price; the high, low, and close are thus all on a level and the only markon our chart will then be the horizontal dash representing the closing ﬁgure.Volume is depicted by drawing a vertical line up from the base line of thechart. The opening price need not be recorded.*

Experience has shown that it seldom, if ever, has any signiﬁcance in estimating future developments,which is all that ordinarily should interest us. The closing price is important,however. It is, in fact, the only price which many casual readers of theﬁnancial pages ever look at. It represents the ﬁnal evaluation of the stockmade by the market during the day. It may, of course, be registered in theﬁrst hour of trading, provided no other sales are subsequently effected, but,it becomes, nevertheless, the ﬁgure upon which a majority of prospectivetraders base their plans for the following day. Hence, its technical signiﬁ-cance, which will appear in various contexts in later chapters. Different Types of Scales Many speciﬁc suggestions as to the details of charting are deferred fordiscussion in the second section of this book, but there is one chart featurewhich may well be considered here. Until recent years, nearly all stock price * EN: Edwards considered the opening price unimportant. Some technicians, myself included, do observe it to be of use. And in some charting systems it is indispensable, for example, candlestick charting whereit is accorded enormous importance. AU3772_book.fm Page 10 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter two: Charts 11 charts were kept on the common form of graph paper ruled to what is known as plain or arithmetic scale. But more and more chartists have now come touse what is known as semilogarithmic paper, or sometimes as ratio or per-centage paper. Our own experience indicates that the semilogarithmic scalehas deﬁnite advantages in this work; most of the charts reproduced in thisbook employ it. The two types of scale may be distinguished at a glance bythe fact that on arithmetic paper, equal distances on the vertical scale (i.e.,between horizontal lines) represent equal amounts in dollars, whereas onthe semilogarithmic paper, they represent equal percentage changes. Thus,on arithmetic paper the distance between 10 and 20 on the vertical scale isexactly the same as that from 20 to 30 and from 30 to 40. On the logarithmicscale the difference from 10 to 20, representing an increase of 100%, is thesame as that from 20 to 40 or from 40 to 80, in each case representing another100% increase. Percentage relations, it goes without saying, are important in trading in securities. The semilogarithmic scale permits direct comparison of high- andlow-priced stocks and makes it easier to choose the one offering the greater(percentage) proﬁt on the funds to be invested. It facilitates the placing ofstop-loss orders. Area patterns appear much the same on either type of paperbut certain trendlines develop more advantageously on the ratio scale.Almost anyone can quickly become accustomed to making entries on semi-logarithmic paper. We recommend its use. However, its advantages are notso great as to require one to change, one who, because of long familiarityand practice, prefers an arithmetic sheet. Such percentage calculations, asmay seem to be required, can, after all, be made on another sheet or in thehead and the results then entered on the arithmetic chart if a record is desired. Several ﬁrms specializing in the manufacture of graph paper and other engineers’ and architects’ supplies now offer sheets speciﬁcally designed forstock charting, on which heavier lines to deﬁne the business week mark eachsixth day on the time scale, and the price scale is subdivided into eighths torepresent the standard fractions of the dollar in which stocks are traded onall American exchanges. (EN9: Eighths went the way of the New Haven and now decimals reign.) These sheets are available in various sizes and with either arithmetic or logarithmic price and volume scales. EN: This paper of course is only of interest to the manual chartist, as modern software, as detailed in AppendixD on Resources, enables the computer chartist to easily switch between price scalesand methods of charting. References to such paper are also found there. On weekly charts, each vertical line represents a week’s trading. The price range for the week is plotted thereon and usually the total volume, butthe closing price may or may not be omitted. The range extends, of course,from the highest price at which the stock sold on any day during the weekto the lowest price at which it sold on any day; these two extremes might,and sometimes do, occur on the same day, but the weekly chart makes nodistinction as to day. Monthly charts are prepared in the same way but donot, as a rule, record volume. These two — often referred to as long-term ormajor charts — are used chieﬂy for determining important Support and AU3772_book.fm Page 11 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Resistance Levels and marking long-term trends. Weekly charts — if the

reader prefers to keep his own — can be posted easily from the Sundaymorning editions of those daily newspapers (e.g., The New York Times or Barron’s Business and Financial Weekly) that publish a summary of the previous week’s transactions. In concluding this chapter on the construction of the charts that we shall study in succeeding chapters, it can well be said that there is no specialvirtue, certainly no magic, in the chart itself. It is simply a pictorial recordof the trading history of the stock or stocks in which we may be interested.To the man possessed of a photographic memory, no chart work is necessary;his mind records all the necessary data — he carries his charts in his head.Many of the expert “tape-readers” who have no use for charts are giftedwith that rare memory talent which renders reference to graphic recordsunnecessary. But most of us are not so blessed; to use the chart is necessaryand useful because it lends itself conveniently to the type of analysis whichindicates future probabilities. There is a saying on Wall Street to the effect that “there is nothing wrong with charts — the trouble is with the chartists,” which is simply anotherway of expressing the truth that it is not the chart itself but its interpretationthat is important. Chart analysis is certainly neither easy nor foolproof. Yet,it is not at all uncommon for some casual investor who has no idea whateverof market technics to pick up a chart by chance and see in it something whichhe had not hitherto suspected, something perhaps which saves him frommaking an unfavorable commitment. If you have never used stock charts, never paid much attention to them, you may be surprised at some of the signiﬁcant things you will quicklydetect as soon as you begin to study them seriously. EN9: Surprise and astonishment are the words to describe the reactions of even professionals when they are fully exposed to a coherent presentation of the methodsof Edwards and Magee. I have often commented that no understanding of other(non-chart) methods of technical analysis is possible without a ﬁrm grasp of theconcepts and principles of this book. Some other comments are worth noting relevant to Edwards’ discussion above. For manual charting semi-log remains the superior scale. Given the ease of changingscale and time frames on Internet sites (e.g., prophet.net and stockcharts.com) andin the stand alone software one may switch from a close up of a month to a longrange perspective of years. In this process it is important to maintain perspective.Multiyear log charts of large ranges lose graphic importance at the top as chartintervals shrink. This distortion must be countered by breaking the time frame intosmaller increments. So instead of 5 years of a chart which spans a range of 10 to200 we look at ﬁve charts of a year each as well as the 5-year chart. AU3772_book.fm Page 12 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

13 chapter three The Dow Theory The Dow Theory is the granddaddy of all technical market studies. Although it is frequently criticized for being “too late,” and occasionally derided (par-ticularly in the early stages of a Bear Market) by those who rebel at acceptingits verdicts, it is known by name to nearly everyone who has had anyassociation with the stock market, and respected by most. Many who heedit in greater or lesser degree in determining their investment policies neverrealize that it is purely and simply “technical.” It is built upon and concernedwith nothing but the action of the stock market itself (as expressed in certain“averages”), deriving nothing from the business statistics on which the fun-damentalists depend. There is much in the writings of its original promulgator, Charles H. Dow, to suggest that he did not think of his “theory” as a device for fore-casting the stock market, or even as a guide for investors, but rather as abarometer of general business trends. Dow founded the Dow–Jones FinancialNews Service and is credited with the invention of stock market averages.The basic principles of the theory, which was later named after him, wereoutlined by him in editorials he wrote for The Wall Street Journal. Upon his death in 1902 his successor, as editor of the Journal, William P. Hamilton, took up Dow’s principles and, in the course of 27 years of writing on thestock market, organized them and formulated them into the Dow Theory aswe know it today. Before we proceed to an explanation of the theory itself, it will be nec essary to examine the stock averages which it employs. Long before the time of Dow, the fact was familiar to bankers and businessmen that the securitiesof most established companies tended to go up or down in price together.Exceptions — stocks that moved against the general ﬁnancial tide — wererare, nor did they as a rule persevere in that contrary course for more thana few days or weeks at a time. It is true that when a boom was on, the pricesof some issues rose faster and farther than others, and when the trend wastoward depression, some stocks declined rapidly while others would put upconsiderable resistance to the forces that were dragging the market down,but the fact remained that most securities tended to swing together. (Theystill do, needless to say, and always will.) AU3772_book.fm Page 13 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
This fact, as we have said, has long been commonly known and

accepted — so completely taken for granted that its importance is usually overlooked. For it is important — tremendously important from many anglesin addition to those which come within the province of this volume. One ofthe best of all reasons for a student of market technics to start with the DowTheory is because that theory stresses the general market trend. Charles Dow is believed to have been the ﬁrst to make a thorough effort to express the general trend (or, more correctly, level) of the securities marketin terms of the average price of a selected few representative stocks. As ﬁnally set up in January of 1897, in the form which has continued to date, and usedby Dow in his studies of market trends, there were two Dow–Jones Averages.One was composed of the stocks of 20 railroad companies only, for therailroads were the dominant corporate enterprises of his day. The other,called the Industrial Average, represented all other types of business, andwas made up, at ﬁrst, of only 12 issues. This number was increased to 20 in1916 and to 30 on October 1, 1928. The Dow Averages The stocks included in these two Averages have been changed from time totime in order to keep the lists up to date and as nearly representative aspossible of their respective groups. Only General Electric, of the present30 industrial stocks, was included in the original Industrial Average, andthat was dropped at one time (in 1898) and subsequently reinserted. In 1929,all stocks of public utility companies were dropped from the IndustrialAverage and a new Utility Average of 20 issues was set up; in 1938 its numberwas reduced to 15. The 20 rail, 30 industrial, and 15 utility stocks are nowaveraged together to make what is known as the Dow–Jones Stock Compos-ite. The history of these Averages, the various adjustments that have beenmade in them and their method of computation, is an interesting story initself which the reader may want to look up elsewhere. EN: Cf. Resources for references. Note also that there is now a proliferation of Dow–Jones Averages. For our present purpose, it remains only to add that the Dow Theory pays noattention to the Utility or Composite Averages; its interpretations are basedon the Rail and Industrial Averages only. EN: “Rails” now known as “Trans portation.” In recent years, the values of the Dow–Jones Averages have been com puted for the end of each hour of trading as well as the end of the day. EN: Now computed in real time and available over the Internet.

These hourly ﬁgures are published in The Wall Street Journal as well as on all market tickers. In fact presently the Averages are computed in real time, a necessity for options and futurestrading which takes place based on them. The Wall Street Journal also prints in each issue a summary of the important highs and lows of each average bydate for the preceding two or three years. Their daily closing prices arereported in many other metropolitan daily newspapers. AU3772_book.fm Page 14 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter three: The Dow Theory 15 Basic Tenets To get back to the Dow Theory itself here are its basic tenets: 1. The Averages Discount Everything (except “Acts of God”) — Be cause they reﬂect the combined market activities of thousands of investors, including those possessed of the greatest foresight and thebest information on trends and events, the Averages in theirday-to-day ﬂuctuations discount everything known, everything fore-seeable, and every condition which can affect the supply of or thedemand for corporate securities. Even unpredictable natural calam-ities, when they happen, are quickly appraised and their possibleeffects discounted. 2. The Three Trends — The “market,” meaning the price of stocks in general, swings in trends, of which the most important are its Major or Primary Trends. These are the extensive up or down movements which usually last for a year or more and result in general appreci-ation or depreciation in value of more than 20%. Movements in thedirection of the Primary Trend are interrupted at intervals by Second ary Swings in the opposite direction — reactions or “corrections” that occur when the Primary Move has temporarily “gotten ahead ofitself.” (Both Secondaries and the intervening segments of the Pri-mary Trend are frequently lumped together as Intermediate Move-ments — a term which we shall ﬁnd useful in subsequent discus-sions.) Finally, the Secondary Trends are composed of Minor Trends or day-to-day ﬂuctuations which are unimportant to Dow Theory. 3. The Primary Trends — These, as aforesaid, are the broad, overall, up and down movements which usually (but not invariably) last formore than a year and may run for several years. So long as eachsuccessive rally (price advance) reaches a higher level than the onebefore it, and each Secondary Reaction stops (i.e., the price trendreverses from down to up) at a higher level than the previous reac-tion, the Primary Trend is Up. This is called a Bull Market. Conversely, when each Intermediate Decline carries prices to successively lowerlevels and each intervening rally fails to bring them back up to thetop level of the preceding rally, the Primary Trend is Down and that is called a Bear Market. (The terms Bull and Bear are frequently used loosely with reference, respectively, to any sort of up or down move-ments, but we shall use them in this book only in connection withthe Major or Primary Movements of the market in the Dow sense.)Ordinarily — theoretically, at least — the Primary is the only one ofthe three trends with which the true long-term investor is concerned.His aim is to buy stocks as early as possible in a Bull Market — justas soon as he can be sure that one has started — and then hold themuntil (and only until) it becomes evident that it has ended and a Bear AU3772_book.fm Page 15 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Market has started. He knows that he can safely disregard all the

intervening Secondary Reactions and Minor Fluctuations. The trader,however, may well concern himself also with the Secondary Swings,and it will appear later on in this book that he can do so with proﬁt. 4. The Secondary Trends — These are the important reactions that interrupt the progress of prices in the Primary Direction. They arethe Intermediate Declines or “corrections” which occur during BullMarkets, the Intermediate Rallies or “recoveries” which occur in BearMarkets. Normally, they last for 3 weeks to many months, and rarelylonger. Normally, they retrace from one third to two thirds of thegain (or loss, as the case may be) in prices registered in the precedingswing in the Primary Direction. Thus, in a Bull Market, prices interms of the Industrial Average might rise steadily, or with only briefand minor interruptions, for a total gain of 30 (or 300) points beforea Secondary Correction occurred. That correction might then beexpected to produce a decline of not less than 10 points and not morethan 20 points before a new Intermediate Advance in the PrimaryBull Trend developed. Note, however, that the one third/two thirds rule is not an unbreakable law; it is simply a statement of probabilities. Most Sec-ondaries are conﬁned within these limits; many of them stop veryclose to the halfway mark, retracing 50% of the preceding PrimarySwing. They seldom run less than one third, but some of them cancelnearly all of it. Thus we have two criteria by which to recognize a Secondary Trend. Any price movement contrary in direction to the PrimaryTrend that lasts for at least 3 weeks and retraces at least one third ofthe preceding net move in the Primary Direction (from the end ofthe preceding Secondary to the beginning of this one, disregardingMinor Fluctuations) is labeled as of Intermediate Rank, i.e., a trueSecondary. Despite these criteria, however, the Secondary Trend isoften confusing; its recognition, its correct appraisal at the time itdevelops and while it is in process, poses the Dow theorist’s mostdifﬁcult problem. We shall have more to say about this later. 5. The Minor Trends — These are the brief (rarely as long as 3 weeks — usually less than 6 days) ﬂuctuations which are, so far as the DowTheory is concerned, meaningless in themselves, but which, in toto, make up the Intermediate Trends. Usually, but not always, an Inter mediate Swing, whether a Secondary or the segment of a Primarybetween successive Secondaries, is made up of a series of three ormore distinguishable Minor Waves. Inferences drawn from theseday- to-day ﬂuctuations are quite apt to be misleading. The MinorTrend is the only one of the three trends which can be “manipulated”(although it is, in fact, doubtful if under present conditions even thatcan be purposely manipulated to any important extent). Primary and AU3772_book.fm Page 16 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter three: The Dow Theory 17 Secondary Trends cannot be manipulated; it would strain the resourc es of the U.S. Treasury to do so. Right here, before we go on to state a sixth Dow tenet, we may well take time out for a few minutes to clarify the concept of the three trends bydrawing an analogy between the movements of the stock market and themovements of the sea. The Major (Primary) Trends in stock prices are likethe tides. We can compare a Bull Market to an incoming or ﬂood tide whichcarries the water farther and farther up the beach until ﬁnally it reacheshigh-water mark and begins to turn. Then follows the receding or ebb tide,comparable to a Bear Market. But all the time, during both ebb and ﬂow ofthe tide, the waves are rolling in, breaking on the beach, and then receding.While the tide is rising, each succeeding wave pushes a little farther up ontothe shore and, as it recedes, does not carry the water quite so far back as didits predecessor. During the tidal ebb, each advancing wave falls a little shortof the mark set by the one before it, and each receding wave uncovers a littlemore of the beach. These waves are the Intermediate Trends, Primary orSecondary, depending on whether their movement is with or against thedirection of the tide. Meanwhile, the surface of the water is constantly agi-tated by wavelets, ripples, and “cat’s-paws” moving with or against or acrossthe trend of the waves — these are analogous to the market’s Minor Trends,its unimportant day-to-day ﬂuctuations. The tide, the wave, and the ripplerepresent, respectively, the Primary or Major, the Secondary or Intermediate,and the Minor Trends of the market. Tide, Wave, and Ripple A shore dweller who had no tide table might set about determining thedirection of the tide by driving a stake in the beach at the highest pointreached by an incoming wave. Then if the next wave pushed the water upbeyond his stake he would know the tide was rising. If he shifted his stakewith the peak mark of each wave, a time would come when one wave wouldstop and start to recede short of his previous mark; then he would knowthat the tide had turned, had started to ebb. That, in effect (and muchsimpliﬁed), is what the Dow theorist does in deﬁning the trend of the stockmarket. The comparison with tide, wave, and ripple has been used since the earliest days of the Dow Theory. It is even possible that the movements ofthe sea may have suggested the elements of the theory to Dow. But theanalogy cannot be pushed too far. The tides and waves of the stock marketare nothing like as regular as those of the ocean. Tables can be preparedyears in advance to predict accurately the time of every ebb and ﬂow of thewaters, but no timetables are provided by the Dow Theory for the stockmarket. We may return to some points of this comparison later, but we mustproceed now to take up the remaining tenets and rules of the Theory. AU3772_book.fm Page 17 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Major Trend Phases

6. The Bull Market — Primary Uptrends are usually (but not invari ably) divisible into three phases. The ﬁrst is the phase of accumulation during which farsighted investors, sensing that business, although now depressed, is due to turn up, are willing to pick up all the sharesoffered by discouraged and distressed sellers, and to raise their bidsgradually as such selling diminishes in volume. Financial reports arestill bad — in fact, often at their worst — during this phase. The“public” is completely disgusted with the stock market — out of it entirely. Activity is only moderate but beginning to increase on the rallies (Minor Advances). The second phase is one of fairly steady advance and increasing activity as the improved tone of business and a rising trend in corporateearnings begin to attract attention. It is during this phase that the “tech-nical” trader normally is able to reap his best harvest of proﬁts. Finally, comes the third phase when the market boils with activity as the “public” ﬂocks to the boardrooms. All the ﬁnancial news isgood, price advances are spectacular and frequently “make the frontpage” of the daily papers, and new issues are brought out in increas-ing numbers. It is during this phase that one of your friends will callup and blithely remark, “Say, I see the market is going up. What’s agood buy?” — all oblivious to the fact that it has been going up forperhaps two years, has already gone up a long ways, and is nowreaching the stage where it might be more appropriate to ask, “What’sa good thing to sell?” In the last stage of this phase, with speculationrampant, volume continues to rise, but “air pockets” appear withincreasing frequency; the “cats and dogs” (low-priced stocks of noinvestment value) are whirled up, but more and more of thetop-grade issues refuse to follow. 7. The Bear Market — Primary Downtrends are also usually (but again, not invariably) characterized by three phases. The ﬁrst is the distribution period (which really starts in the later stages of the preceding BullMarket). During this phase, farsighted investors sense the fact thatbusiness earnings have reached an abnormal height and unload theirholdings at an increasing pace. Trading volume is still high, thoughtending to diminish on rallies, and the “public” is still active but begin-ning to show signs of frustration as hoped-for proﬁts fade away. The second phase is the Panic Phase. Buyers begin to thin out and sellers become more urgent; the downward trend of prices suddenlyaccelerates into an almost vertical drop, while volume mounts toclimactic proportions. After the Panic Phase (which usually runs toofar relative to then-existing business conditions), there may be a fairlylong Secondary Recovery or a sideways movement, and then thethird phase begins. AU3772_book.fm Page 18 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter three: The Dow Theory 19 This is characterized by discouraged selling on the part of those investors who held on through the Panic or, perhaps, bought during it because stocks looked cheap in comparison with prices which hadruled a few months earlier. The business news now begins to dete-riorate. As the third phase proceeds, the downward movement is lessrapid, but is maintained by more and more distress selling from thosewho have to raise cash for other needs. The “cats and dogs” maylose practically all their previous Bull Advance in the ﬁrst two phases.Better-grade stocks decline more gradually, because their ownerscling to them to the last. And, the ﬁnal stage of a Bear Market, inconsequence, is frequently concentrated in such issues. The BearMarket ends when everything in the way of possible bad news, theworst to be expected, has been discounted, and it is usually overbefore all the bad news is “out.” The three Bear Market phases described in the preceding para graph are not the same as those named by others who have discussedthis subject, but the writers of this study feel that they represent amore accurate and realistic division of the Primary down moves ofthe past 30 years. The reader should be warned, however, that notwo Bear Markets are exactly alike, and neither are any two BullMarkets. Some may lack one or another of the three typical phases.A few Major Advances have passed from the ﬁrst to the third stagewith only a very brief and rapid intervening markup. A few shortBear Markets have developed no marked Panic Phase and othershave ended with it, as in April 1939. No time limits can be set forany phase; the third stage of a Bull Market, for example, the phaseof excited speculation and great public activity, may last for morethan a year or run out in a month or two. The Panic Phase of a BearMarket is usually exhausted in a very few weeks if not in days, butthe 1929 through 1932 decline was interspersed with at least ﬁvePanic Waves of major proportions. Nevertheless, the typical charac-teristics of Primary Trends are well worth keeping in mind. If youknow the symptoms which normally accompany the last stage of aBull Market, for example, you are less likely to be deluded by itsexciting atmosphere. Principle of Conﬁrmation 8. The Two Averages Must Conﬁrm — This is the most-often ques tioned and the most difﬁcult to rationalize of all the Dow principles.Yet it has stood the test of time; the fact that it has “worked” is notdisputed by any who have carefully examined the records. Thosewho have disregarded it in practice have, more often than not, hadoccasion to regret their apostasy. What it means is that no valid signalof a change in trend can be produced by the action of one Average AU3772_book.fm Page 19 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
alone. Take, for example, the hypothetical case shown in Diagram 1. In this, we assume that a Bear Market has been in effect for severalmonths and then, starting at

a, the Industrial Average rises (along with the Rails) in a Secondary Recovery to b. On their next decline, however, the Industrials drop only to c, which is higher than a, and then turn up to d, which is higher than b. At this point, the Industrials have “signaled” a change in trend from down to up. But note theRails during this period: their decline from b to c carried them lower than a, and their subsequent advance from c to d has not taken them above b. They have (so far) refused to conﬁrm the Industrials and, hence, the Major Trend of the market must be regarded as still down. Should the Rails go on to rise eventually above their b, then, and then only, would we have a deﬁnite signal of a turn in the tide. Untilsuch a development, however, the chances remain that the Industrials DIAGRAM 1. A hypothetical daily market chart to show how one average may fail to conﬁrm the other’s Dow signal. Closing prices, indicated by short horizontal dashes, are connected with vertical lines to make the day-to-day trend easier to follow. bRAIL AVERAGE a cdc abdINDUSTRIAL AVERAGE AU3772_book.fm Page 20 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter three: The Dow Theory 21 will not be able to continue their upward course alone, that they will ultimately be dragged down again by the Rails. At best, the directionof the Primary Trend is still in doubt. The above illustrates only one of the many ways in which the principle of Conﬁrmation applies. Note also that at c, it might have been said that the Industrials had thus far not conﬁrmed the Rails incontinuing the downtrend — but this had to do only with the con-tinuation or reafﬁrmation of an existing trend. It is not necessary thatthe two Averages conﬁrm on the same day. Frequently, both willmove into new high (or low) ground together, but there are plentyof cases in which one or the other lags behind for days, weeks, oreven a month or two. One must be patient in these doubtful casesand wait until the market declares itself in deﬁnite fashion. 9.

> “Volume Goes with the Trend”
— Those words, which you may often hear spoken with ritual solemnity but little understanding, arethe colloquial expression for the general truth that trading activitytends to expand as prices move in the direction of the prevailingPrimary Trend. Thus, in a Bull Market, volume increases when pricesrise and dwindles as prices decline; in Bear Markets, turnover in-creases when prices drop and dries up as they recover. To a lesserdegree, this holds for Secondary Trends also, especially in the earlystages of an extended Secondary Recovery within a Bear Market,when activity may show a tendency to pick up on the Minor Ralliesand diminish on the Minor Set-backs. But to this rule, again, thereare exceptions, and useful conclusions can seldom be drawn fromthe volume manifestations of a few days, much less a single tradingsession; it is only the overall and relative volume trend over a periodof time that may produce helpful indications. Moreover, in DowTheory, conclusive signals as to the market’s trend are produced in the ﬁnal analysis only by price movement. Volume simply affordscollateral evidence which may aid interpretation of otherwise doubt-ful situations. (We shall have much more to say in later chaptersabout volume in speciﬁc relation to other technical phenomena.) 10.

> “Lines” May Substitute for Secondaries
— A Line in Dow Theory parlance is a sideways movement (as it appears on the charts) in oneor both of the Averages, which lasts for 2 or 3 weeks or, sometimes,for as many months, in the course of which prices ﬂuctuate withina range of approximately 5% or less (of their mean ﬁgure). Theformation of a Line signiﬁes that pressure of buying and selling ismore or less in balance. Eventually, of course, either the offeringswithin that price range are exhausted and those who want to buystocks have to raise their bids to induce owners to sell, or else thosewho are eager to sell at the “Line” price range ﬁnd that buyers havevanished and that, in consequence, they must cut their prices in orderto dispose of their shares. Hence, an advance in prices through theupper limits of an established Line is a Bullish Signal and, conversely, AU3772_book.fm Page 21 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
a break down through its lower limits is a Bearish Signal. Generally

speaking, the longer the Line (in duration) and the narrower or morecompact its price range, the greater the signiﬁcance of its ultimatebreakout. Lines occur often enough to make their recognition essential to followers of Dow’s principles. They may develop at important Topsor Bottoms, signaling periods of distribution or of accumulation,respectively, but they come more frequently as interludes of rest orConsolidation in the progress of established Major Trends. Underthose circumstances, they take the place of normal Secondary Waves.A Line may develop in one Average while the other is going througha typical Secondary Reaction. It is worth noting that a price move-ment out of a Line, either up or down, is usually followed by a moreextensive additional move in the same direction than can be countedon to follow the “signal” produced when a new wave pushes beyondthe limits set by a preceding Primary Wave. The direction in whichprices will break out of a Line cannot be determined in advance ofthe actual movement. The 5% limit ordinarily assigned to a Line isarbitrarily based on experience; there have been a few slightly widersideways movements which, by virtue of their compactness and well-deﬁned boundaries, could be construed as true Lines. (Further on inthis book, we shall see that the Dow Line is, in many respects, similarto the more strictly deﬁned patterns known as Rectangles whichappear on the charts of individual stocks.) 11. Only Closing Prices Used — Dow Theory pays no attention to any extreme highs or lows which may be registered during a day andbefore the market closes, but takes into account only the closingﬁgures, i.e., the average of the day’s ﬁnal sale prices for the compo-nent issues. We have discussed the psychological importance of theend-of-day prices under the subject of chart construction and neednot deal with it further here, except to say that this is another Dowrule which has stood the test of time. It works thus: suppose anIntermediate Advance in a Primary Uptrend reaches its peak on acertain day at 11 a.m., at which hour the Industrial Average ﬁguresat, say, 152.45, and then falls back to close at 150.70. All that the nextadvance will have to do in order to indicate that the Primary Trendis still up is register a daily close above 150.70. The previous intraday high of 152.45 does not count. Conversely, using the same ﬁgures forour ﬁrst advance, if the next upswing carries prices to an intradayhigh at, say, 152.60, but fails to register a closing price above 150.70,the continuation of the Primary Bull Trend is still in doubt. In recent years, differences of opinion have arisen among market students as to the extent to which an Average should push beyonda previous limit (Top or Bottom ﬁgure) in order to signal (or conﬁrmor reafﬁrm, as the case may be) a market trend. Dow and Hamiltonevidently regarded any penetration, even as little as 0.01, in closing AU3772_book.fm Page 22 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter three: The Dow Theory 23 price as a valid signal, but some modern commentators have required penetration by a full point (1.00). We think that the original view hasthe best of the argument, that the record shows little or nothing inpractical results to favor any of the proposed modiﬁcations. Oneincident in June of 1946, to which we shall refer in the followingchapter, shows a decided advantage for the orthodox “any-penetra-tion-whatever” rule. 12. A Trend Should Be Assumed to Continue in Effect Until Such Timeas Its Reversal Has Been Deﬁnitely Signaled — This Dow Theory tenet is one which, perhaps more than any other, has evoked criti-cism. Yet, when correctly understood, it, like all the others we haveenumerated, stands up under practical test. What it states is really a probability. It is a warning against changing one’s market position too soon, against “jumping the gun.” It does not imply that one shoulddelay action by one unnecessary minute once a signal of change intrend has appeared. But it expresses the experience that the odds arein favor of the man who waits until he is sure, and against the otherfellow who buys (or sells) prematurely. These odds cannot be statedin mathematical language such as 2–1 or 3–1; as a matter of fact, theyare constantly changing. Bull Markets do not climb forever and BearMarkets always reach a Bottom sooner or later. When a new PrimaryTrend is ﬁrst deﬁnitely signaled by the action of the two Averages,the odds that it will be continued, despite any near-term reactions orinterruptions, are at their greatest. But as this Primary Trend carrieson, the odds in favor of its further extension grow smaller. Thus, eachsuccessive reafﬁrmation of a Bull Market (new Intermediate high inone average conﬁrmed by a new Intermediate high in the other)carries relatively less weight. The incentive to buy, the prospect ofselling new purchases at a proﬁt, is smaller after a Bull Market hasbeen in existence for several months than it was when the PrimaryUptrend was ﬁrst recognized, but this twelfth Dow tenet says, “Holdyour position pending contrary orders.” A corollary to this tenet, which is not so contradictory as it may at ﬁrst seem, is: a Reversal in trend can occur any time after that trend has been conﬁrmed. This can be taken simply as a warning that theDow Theory investor must watch the market constantly if he has anycommitment in it. EN: Modern Market Importance of Dow Theory and Necessity for Moving to a New Composite Market Theory Dow Theory has much to recommend it. Concepts embodied within Dow Theory retain their validity to the present day, and retain their importance as the foundation thinkingfor technical analysis. Concepts of waves, major secondary and minor movements areabsolutely descriptive of the reality of the market. Other constructs within Dow Theory AU3772_book.fm Page 23 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
are similarly important — that all information is discounted; that major market move

ments are like the tide and, as it were, raise all boats; that trends tend to continue.These are not just theoretical musings, but observations of reality. In addition to its technical validity the Dow has now taken on a mythic dimension. It now has a symbolic function which interacts with its originallyintended purpose. Dow and Hamilton saw their measurement of the market as aneconomic barometer for the entire economy. Its use as a tool for investing in themarket came later. In the opinion of this editor, the Dow Theory is no longer adequate to its original purpose — or even to its secondary purpose. It is a simple theory propounded in asimple time. Expounders of Dow Theory have implicitly recognized the necessityfor evolutionary changes to the doctrine with the addition of the Rails (now Trans-portations) and the Utilities ad inﬁnitum. Thirty stocks may have been sufﬁcientoriginally to reﬂect the American economy. No one would deny that simple paradigmmust be changed to reﬂect an economic structure geometrically more diverse thanthat of Dow and Hamilton. Entering the 21st century, the American and Globaleconomy require more sophisticated econometrics than the Dow alone. For that reason I now consider that in order to fulﬁll the functions of the old Dow we now must consider a variety of averages and indexes to measure the stateof the market — not to mention the economy, which is another question, althoughnot altogether another question, but at least another question. Magee foreshadowedsome instruments of great value to this end in his writings, speciﬁcally on the MageeEvaluative Index (Chapter 38), which may be used for the entire market, and notjust for one summary index or average. The value and power of this tool are stilllittle used and understood. In 21st century markets, there are not just broad tides and markets ﬂowing in one direction as they might on Magee’s Cape Cod. Instead the currents, rip tides,and cross currents are like the economy of the country, moved West. They are nowsymbolized by the Paciﬁc Ocean roaring in and out of San Francisco Bay. Whilethe Dow is in a secondary Downtrend, the broader S&P; 500 is going to new highs,and while they are both whipping sideways, the NASDAQ is rocketing into space.For this reason, I now believe that only a composite of the three indexes can expressthe true state of the markets as a whole. And, in addition, to dissect the entrails ofthe market, the Magee Evaluative Index should be run across the three indexes. The Dow Theory required that the Rails and Industrials move in harmony in order to signal Bull or Bear Markets. In this century, there is a similar need for harmonicconvergence among the averages to indicate to us the state of the markets as a whole. When all three indexes agree in the direction of their trends, up or down or sideways, Bulls may assumed to be safe in general, and vice versa for Bears. Failureof the three to be in harmony is a clear sign of mixed markets and advises one toarrange his bets and portfolio to correspond with economic uncertainty. Capitalshould ﬂow naturally to the area which is most productive. What reason is there toride the Dow down when the NASDAQ is raging up? If the investor follows thephilosophy of this book, he will never sit passively through an extended Downtrend.At the very least, he will be hedged, if not outright short. (As Edwards and Mageepreferred and as this editor prefers.) AU3772_book.fm Page 24 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

25 chapter four The Dow Theory in Practice EN9: The casual and careless reader will shake his head at this chapter and ask why on earth the Editor has not excised it from the book. The Editor has not deleted thechapter because, like old-fashioned cod liver oil, it is good medicine. It will appealmainly to the serious student of not just Dow Theory, but of long-term investing. If the reader has absolutely no interest in Dow Theory or long-term investing hemay skip over this chapter and return to it in his old age, when he is wiser. At this point, the reader, if he has little previous knowledge of the stockmarket, may be suffering a mild attack of mental indigestion. The DowTheory is a pretty big dose to swallow at one sitting. We departed deliber-ately in the foregoing chapter from the order in which its principles areusually stated in an effort to make it a little easier to follow and understand.Actually, not all of the 12 tenets we named are of equal import. The essentialrules are contained in 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, and 11. Number 1 is, of course, thebasic assumption, the philosophical justiﬁcation for these rules. The otherpoints (6, 7, 9, and 12) furnish “background material,” as the news reportersmight put it, which aid in interpretation. Theoretically, one should, by strictadherence to the essential rules alone, accomplish just as much as he couldwith the added collateral evidence. But the utilization of Dow Theory is, after all, a matter of interpretation. You may memorize its principles verbatim and yet be confounded when youattempt to apply them to an actual market situation. We can better organizeour knowledge of the theory and acquire some understanding of its inter-pretation by following through a few years of market action and seeing howit looked at the time through the eyes of a Dow theorist. For this purpose,we may well take the period from late 1941 to the beginning of 1947, sincethis covers the end of one Bear Market, an entire long Bull Market, and partof another Bear Market, and includes examples of most of the market phe-nomena with which the Dow Theory has to deal. Five Years of Dow Interpretation

## _Figure 2 is a condensed chart of the course of the two Dow Jones Averagesfrom January 1, 1941, to December 31, 1946, on which most of the MinorTrends have been disregarded but all the recognized Intermediate Swings(Primary and Secondary) have been indicated. Certain portions of this his-tory will be supplemented by complete daily charts in connection with ourdetailed discussion which follows._
AU3772_book.fm Page 25 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The year 1941 opened with the stock market in a Minor Rally. A Primary

Bear Market had been signaled when prices collapsed in the spring of 1940, and that Bear Market was still in effect. After the May Panic had ended, aSecondary Recovery swing, which lasted for more than 5 months, hadregained more than half of the ground previously lost by the Averages,carrying the Industrials from their closing price of 111.84 on June 10 to 138.12on November 9 and the Rails from 22.14 on May 21 to 30.29 on November 14.(During this long Bear Market Secondary, incidentally, volume tended toincrease on rallies, which encouraged many who did not hold strictly to ﬁrstprinciples to believe that this rise was the beginning of a new Bull Trend,illustrating the point we cited under “Volume” in Chapter 3.) From theNovember highs, however, the trend turned down again. Then a Minor Rallydeveloped, as we have said, at the end of the year, reaching its peak onJanuary 10 at 133.59 in the Industrials and 29.73 in the Rails. From there,prices fell again to 117.66 and 26.54, respectively, on February 14. FIGURE 2.

> “Swing”
(EN: OR Wave) chart showing all the Intermediate and some of the more extensive Minor Trends of the Dow–Jones Industrial and Rail Averages, January 1941 to December 1946. Industrial price scale left, Rails right.DOW-JONES INDUSTRIALS RAILS RAILSINDUSTRIALS ’41 ’42 ’43 ’44 ’45 ’46220 200180 160140 120 100 8070 605040 30 20 AU3772_book.fm Page 26 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter four: The Dow Theory in Practice 27 The First Severe Test The next few months will be particularly interesting for us to trace because they put the Dow Theory to a real test. Figure 3 shows the daily ranges andclosing prices of the two Averages and total daily market volume for the7 months from February 1 to August 31, 1941. Before we examine it in detail,however, let us ﬁrst review the situation on February 14. The Bear Marketlows to date had been registered in May–June, 1940. Thereafter, an extendedIntermediate Recovery had advanced the Industrial Average 26.28 pointsand the Rail Average 8.15 points. This had been followed by a 3-monthdecline of 20.46 and 3.75 points, respectively, and this decline, incidentally,had consisted of three well-deﬁned Minor Waves. In duration, and in extentof price change with respect to the previous swing — 46% in the Rails andnearly 78% in the Industrials — this downswing qualiﬁed as an IntermediateTrend, and now prices were turning up again. Dow theorists were on thealert. If both Averages could continue their rise to levels above their highcloses of the previous November (138.12 and 30.29), that action would con-stitute a signal of a new Primary Bull Market, and reinvestment of fundswithdrawn from stocks in May 1940 would be at once in order. Also, it wouldthen be necessary to go back and label the May–June lows of 1940 as theend of a Bear Market, the advance to November as the ﬁrst Primary Swingin the new Bull Market, and the decline to February as its ﬁrst Secondary FIGURE 3. Closing price levels of the Dow–Jones Industrial and Rail Averages, February 1 to August 31, 1941, and total daily market volume. Vertical lines show net daily change from one closing level to next. 130 128 126124122 120 116118INDUSTRIALS RAILS1941 31 30 29 28 27 26 FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST 8 15 22 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30Sales in Millions 2.0 1.5 1.0.5Total Vol. AU3772_book.fm Page 27 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Reaction. But note that Rule 12 of our preceding chapter applied here; the

presumption was that it was still a Bear Market until a deﬁnite signal to thecontrary appeared. Let us now turn again to Figure 3 and see what actually did happen. The Industrials rallied for 6 weeks, reaching 124.65 on April 3. The Rails gotup to 29.75 on the same date, registering double the percentage gain of theIndustrials, but both Averages were still below their November highs. Thenthe Industrials slipped off within 2 weeks, and had broken down below theirFebruary low and drifted down to close at 115.30 on May 1. This Averagewas, therefore, still in an Intermediate Downtrend. But the Rails, meanwhile,were staging a different sort of performance. They dropped back from theirApril 3 high for 2 weeks, but held at 27.72, rallied smartly and then sold offagain to 27.43 on May 31. The picture became at once even more interesting.Here was a Divergence between the two Averages, a failure to conﬁrm; theRails, after two opportunities, were refusing to conﬁrm the Industrials in thelatter’s downtrend. Failure to Conﬁrm When prices began to work upward in June, many commentators seizedupon this “failure to conﬁrm” as a Bullish omen and the wishful thinkersagain talked Bull Market. There is an unfortunate tendency in “the Street”to overstress any such divergence, particularly when it can be twisted intoa favorable sign. The fact is that, in Dow Theory, the refusal of one Averageto conﬁrm the other can never produce a positive signal of any sort. It hasonly negative connotations. Divergences sometimes occur at Reversals in theMajor Trend — there have been several instances in market history, in which,perhaps, the most remarkable occurred way back in 1901 and 1902, and weshall soon inspect another — but they also occur with equal frequency attimes when no Major Reversal is developing, and the instance we are dis-cussing here was one of the latter. So the situation at the end of May in 1941 was precisely the same to the Dow theorist, insofar as the Major Trend was concerned, as it had been onFebruary 14. The June–July rally topped out in the Rails at 30.88 on August1, and in the Industrials at 130.06 on July 28 (compare these ﬁgures withtheir 1940 November highs) and prices then declined at an accelerating pacewhich culminated, temporarily, in the “Pearl Harbor” Panic. This took theIndustrial Average below its previous Bear Market low (111.84 on June 10,1940), although the Rails, again, did not follow. They had, however, by thistime, broken below their previous (February 14) Intermediate Bottom by aliberal margin. The next period of importance began in April 1942. We can skip any detailed chart of the months between December and April because theyposed no Dow Theory problems. After a Minor Rally in the Rails in January,prices simply drifted lower and lower, but it was increasingly evident thattrading volume did not expand on the dips (Minor Declines). Liquidation AU3772_book.fm Page 28 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter four: The Dow Theory in Practice 29 was drying up; the boardrooms were void of customers; the atmosphere was typical of the last stages of a Bear Market.

## _Figure 4 shows the daily action of the Averages from March 2 to_
October 31, 1942. New lows (since 1940) were registered in both in late April,at 23.72 on April 24 in the Rails and at 92.92 on April 28 in the Industrials.Shortly thereafter, a notable Divergence developed, when, after rallying foronly 7 days, the Railroad Index began to slip off while the other Averagekept right on going up. Trading activity remained at a low ebb (there wasno sustained volume increase, in fact, until late September). On June 1, theRails dropped to another new low and on the 2nd closed at 23.31. On June22, it looked as though the Industrials were going to be pulled down again,but only a few days later, the best rally in months got started, taking theIndustrials to new highs and more than recovering all of the April–May lossin the Rails. Activity also speeded up brieﬂy, with one day registering agreater turnover than the market had enjoyed in any session since earlyJanuary. EN9: Note this warning sign. The ringing of an alarm clock. Signs of Major Turn

Again the Dow theorists were very much on the alert. An advance of Inter-mediate proportions was obviously under way. Until proved otherwise, it hadto be labeled a Secondary within the Bear Market which was still presumably FIGURE 4. Daily closing price levels of the Dow–Jones Industrial and Rail Averages from March 2 to October 31, 1942, and total daily market volume. This period saw the beginning of a 4-year Major Bull Market. INDUSTRIALS RAILS1942 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23116 114 112110108106104102100 98 96 94

## _92 Sales in_
MillionsTotal Vol.1.02.01.5

.5 MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER 7 14 2128 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 AU3772_book.fm Page 29 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
in effect, but that Major Downtrend had by now run for nearly 3 years —

nearly as long as any on record — and its last decline had shown no sellingpressure whatever, simply a dull drift. This presumed Secondary might turnout to be, instead, a new Primary; hopes for such a denouement had beenblighted 12 months earlier under somewhat similar circumstances, but thistime prices were lower and there was a different “feel” to the market. Thegeneral news offered little encouragement, but the Dow Theory does notconcern itself with any news other than that made by the market itself (whichdiscounts all other kinds of news). In any event, there was nothing to do butwait and see — let the market, in its own time and way, state its own case. In early July, the Industrials started to “mark time”; for 11 weeks, they ﬂuctuated within a 5-point range, building a typical Dow Line from whichthey emerged on the upside in late September. The Rails pushed up to a newhigh for the move at the same time, and by November 2, both Averages hadsurpassed their Rally Tops of the preceding January. At this stage, some Dowtheorists were willing to announce that a Bull Market had been signaled.Their arguments, aside from points of a nontechnical nature or having noth-ing to do with Dow Theory, were: 1. The conspicuously low level of volume at the April–June Bottom, typical of the end of a Bear Swing. (True and cogent.) 2. The Rail Average had refused to follow the Industrials into new Major low ground at that time. It had held above its closing level of May1940. (Also true, but of questionable signiﬁcance. More about thislater.) 3. The Industrials had constructed a Line and gone up out of it. (Again true, but the Line was somewhat short to have, beyond a doubt,major import.) 4. The Rail Average had for 4 months produced successively higher Minor Tops and Bottoms. (And this also was true but did not permitof positive differentiation from a Bear Market Secondary.) The more conservative Dow theorists were not yet convinced. They maintained that this uptrend had yet to undergo the test, bound to occursooner or later, of an Intermediate Reaction. They admitted that the picturewas most encouraging, but called attention to the fact that, except for Point1, it was no better than that of November 1940. Let’s follow along throughthe next 5 months. Figure 5 shows the daily market action from November1, 1942, to June 30, 1943. The Bull Signal After reaching 29.28 at their close on November 2, the Rails declined inalmost a straight line for 6 weeks to 26.03 on December 14. This moveindubitably rated as an Intermediate in duration, and it had “given up” morethan half of that Average’s entire advance from the June 2 low point. The AU3772_book.fm Page 30 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter four: The Dow Theory in Practice 31 Industrial Index, however, held stoutly in another narrow Line throughout November, December, and January. From December 14, the Rails turned up,and ﬁnally, on February 1, 1943, closed at 29.55, out above their previousIntermediate Top of 29.28 recorded the previous November. By then, theIndustrials had also moved up into new high ground. This development atlast satisﬁed every strictest requirement of Dow Theory; a new Primary BullMarket was in force. Trading volume had also been expanding on each MinorAdvance during the fall and winter months, but its evidence was not needed;the price action alone was conclusive. The Rails had produced the necessarysequence of higher Intermediate Tops and Bottoms. In the Industrials, Lineshad served the purposes of the theory as substitutes for Intermediate Reactions. It was necessary now to relabel the up-move from April–June to Novem ber of 1942 as the ﬁrst Primary Swing in a Bull Market. The decline of theRails from November 2 to December 14 was now recognized as the ﬁrstSecondary within that Major Trend. FIGURE 5. Daily closing price levels of the Dow–Jones Industrial and Rail Averages from November 2, 1942, to June 30, 1943, and total daily market volume. This chart follows and should be compared with Figure 4. The decline in the Rail Averageduring November and early December produced the ﬁrst test of the Major Trendsince the preceding June. When this Index recovered and, on February 1, 1943, closedabove its November 2 high, a Primary Bull Market was thereby signaled accordingto Dow Theory. INDUSTRIALS RAILS 1942–1943142 140138136134132130128126 124 122120 118116 11438 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY MARCH FEBRUARY APRIL MAY JUNE 71 4 2 1 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 51 2 1 9 2 63Sales in MillionsTotal Vol.2.0 1.5 1.0.5 AU3772_book.fm Page 31 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
We may turn back for a moment at this point to comment on the per

formance of the Rail Index in June 1942. Because it held then above its low of May 1940, some commentators have maintained that the Bull Marketshould really have been dated from that former year as representing the last“conﬁrmed” lows. This strikes us as rather impractical hair-splitting. Regard-less of the 1.17 higher level in the Rail Average in June 1942, a genuine BullMove did not start until that time. We suspect that before many years havepassed, Dow theorists will have occasion greatly to regret the importancewhich has since been assigned to the Rails’ “failure to conﬁrm” in the springof 1942. Remember, such a Divergence does not and cannot produce a pos-itive signal; at the time of its occurrence, it can serve merely to negate orcast in doubt the implications of the other Average; only subsequent actionin the opposite direction can establish the existence of a change in trend. Ifthe Rails’ decline in May 1942 had carried them below 22.14, but theirsubsequent action had followed the course which it actually did, point forpoint but at a lower level, a Bull Market Signal would nevertheless havebeen given at the very same time, not one day later and not one day sooner. Moreover, a Divergence does not necessarily imply that a move of con sequence in the opposite direction will ensue. We have already examinedone comparable instance (in the spring of 1941) which resulted otherwise.Logically, also, if a failure to conﬁrm such as occurred in 1942 is to be takenas an indication of a turn in trend, then its opposite, i.e., conﬁrmation orreafﬁrmation by both Averages, should argue with equal force against a turnin trend. Yet the simple truth is that many more Major Reversals have comewhen the Averages were in agreement than when they were divergent. Wehave no wish to belabor the point or waste the reader’s time, but we do feelthat he should be warned against the wishful thinking that every “failure toconﬁrm” seems to inspire when the market is in a Bear Trend. To return to our history, the Averages closed at 125.88 and 29.51, respec tively, on the day following our conclusive Bull Market Signal in February1943. Theoretically, there is where an investor who followed the Dow Theorystrictly would have bought his stocks. (Those who were satisﬁed that thePrimary Trend was up in November 1942 bought with Averages around114.60 and 29.20.) It was reasonable to assume that this Bull Market, whichas yet showed few of the usual characteristics of the second phase and nonewhatever of the third phase, would continue for some time to come. Thenext 4 months produced no market developments that required interpreta-tive attention, and we can move on to the events of July. Figure 6 charts theaction from July 1, 1943, to January 31, 1944. The First Correction After closing at 145.82 on July 14, 1943, the Industrial Average drifted off.The Rails pushed up to a new high (38.30) 10 days later, but the Industrialsrefused to join in the rally and then both indexes cracked down sharply for7 sessions. Turnover increased and the decline was the greatest that had AU3772_book.fm Page 32 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter four: The Dow Theory in Practice 33 occurred in the Bull Market up to that date. But, everyone realized that the market, after several months of quite persistent advance, was “entitled to acorrection.” In neither duration nor extent could this down move be qualiﬁedas more than a Minor Trend. Next ensued 3 months of desultory ﬂuctuationwith little net progress in either Average. The Industrials pulled up to 141.75on September 20 and then drifted off again, while the Rails struggled backto 35.53 on October 27. Another quick break developed in early November,culminating in a high-volume shakeout which cut the value of the Industrialsby 3.56 points and the Rails by 1.75 on November 8. Prices rallied a little andsold off again, reaching new lows (since early spring) on November 30 —Industrials 129.57 and Rails 31.50. There was no question now but that a full-ﬂedged Secondary Reaction had developed. The problem for Dow interpreters was whether more thanthat was involved. If the ﬁrst drop in July could be construed as an Inter-mediate Trend in itself, and the August–October action as another Interme-diate Swing, then the November break would signal a Bear Market. As amatter of fact, no Dow theorist, so far as we know, gave very serious con-sideration to any such interpretation. The July break, as aforesaid, did notrate as an Intermediate in either duration or points retraced; the whole movefrom July to November 1943 had to be regarded as all-of-a-piece, all oneSecondary Reaction. The real Major Trend test would come on the nextadvance, whenever that should develop; if that failed to top the July peaks,and prices thereafter declined to new lows, a Bear Market would indeed bein effect. FIGURE 6. Daily closing prices of Dow–Jones Industrial and Rail Averages, and total market volume, July 1, 1943, to January 31, 1944. INDUSTRIALS RAILS1943–1944146 14414214013813613413213037 36 35 34 33 32 30 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 1825 1 8 15 22 29 5Sales in Millions 2.0 1.5 1.0.5Total Vol. AU3772_book.fm Page 33 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The decision was long deferred. Prices began again to move up, but the

advance in the Industrials was slow and grudging. The Rails forged ahead more rapidly and pushed through their July Top on February 17, 1944, goingon to a Minor Peak at 40.48 on March 21. The Industrial Average attained141 on March 13, but still nearly 5 points below its “signal” level, falteredand fell back. Here was another striking case of “failure to conﬁrm.” Forthose who chose to assign grave signiﬁcance to such developments, it couldhave only a very Bearish meaning. But all it did mean, in fact, was thatcontinuation of the Primary Bull Move had not as yet been conﬁrmed. Onlyif both Averages now declined and closed below their respective November30 Bottoms would the new high registered by the Rails alone in Februaryhave to be disregarded and a Primary Bear Market announced. In brief, thesituation at the end of March was no different, so far as its Major Trendimplications were concerned, from what it had been in early January beforethe Rails pushed through. Bull Trend Reafﬁrmed The situation remained in doubt (but subject always to that basic presump-tion of the Dow Theory which we named as Number 12 in the precedingchapter) until June 15, 1944, when the Industrials ﬁnally came through toclose at 145.86. It had taken them 4 months to conﬁrm the Rails, almost afull year to reafﬁrm the Primary Uptrend. The effect of this “signal” ontraders was electric; trading volume increased by 650,000 shares on thefollowing day as prices jumped another full point. The following 12 months need no detailed discussion as they produced nothing in the way of market action to give a Dow theorist any concern.Prices drifted off irregularly for 9 weeks after mid-July but their net loss wasof minor proportions, and they then climbed with only brief interruptionsto 169.08 in the Industrial Index on May 29, 1945, and 63.06 in the Rail Indexon June 26, 1945. We should take a brief look at the period which followed,not because it illustrates anything new in our study, but because it takes inthe surrender of Japan and the end of ﬁghting in World War II.

## _Figure 7 covers the 7 months from May 1 to November 30, 1945. The_
Industrials held steady for 4 weeks while the Rails were making the spurtto their June 26 Top. On June 28, with nothing in the newspaper headlinesto account for such a radical trend change, prices broke sharply and turnoverclimbed to nearly three million shares, the highest day’s total for the BullMarket up to that time. But the Industrial Average gave ground reluctantlythereafter, and by June 26, at 160.91 had given up less than 5% of its topprice. The Rails shook down rapidly, however. The Hiroshima bomb wasdropped on August 5 and Japan surrendered on the 14th. The Industrialswere now rallying up from their July 26 low, but the Rails couldn’t hold andplunged again, hitting bottom ﬁnally (for this move) on August 20 at 51.48,for a loss of more than 18% of their June peak value. AU3772_book.fm Page 34 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter four: The Dow Theory in Practice 35 The Rails Falter Before we go on with our examination of the market action here, it is inter esting to note that, up to this point, the Rail Average had been the “hero”of our story. Starting with its refusal to go down to a new Bear Market lowin June of 1942, it was the spearhead of each important advance, had stagedthe most spectacular rallies, had gained 170% in value as compared with theIndustrials’ 82%. In retrospect, the explanation is obvious: the railroads werethe chief business beneﬁciaries of the war. They were rolling up proﬁts,paying off indebtedness, and reducing their ﬁxed charges at a rate unheardof in this generation (and probably never to be seen again). While the “pub-lic’s” eye was on the traditional and better publicized “war industries,” themarket began, as far back as Pearl Harbor, to shrewdly appraise and discountthis unprecedented harvest for the Rails. But from here on, the picturechanges and the Rails become the laggards. As we look back now, it is justas obvious that, with equal shrewdness, the market began in July of 1945 todiscount a change in their fortunes. An illuminating demonstration of thebasic assumption (Tenet Number 1) in Dow Theory! FIGURE 7. Daily closing price levels of the Dow–Jones Industrial and Rail Averages from May 1 to November 30, 1945, and total daily market volume. This period, which saw the end of World War II, produced only a moderate Secondary Correction in thePrimary Bull Market, which had already run for 3 years from its beginnings in April/June, 1942. INDUSTRIALS RAILS 1945192 188184180 176172 168 164 16066 64626058 56 5452 50 MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER 5 1 21 92 6 2 9 1 62 33 0 7 1 42 12 8 4 1 11 82 5 1 8 1 52 22 9 6 1 32 02 7 3 1 01 72 43 1Sales in MillionsTotal Vol.2.01.51.0.5 AU3772_book.fm Page 35 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Turning back to our chart, prices began to push up again with renewed

vigor after August 20. Both Averages had experienced a Secondary Reaction and now Dow theorists had to watch closely to see if the Primary Uptrendwould again be reafﬁrmed by their going to new highs. The Industrials“made the grade” when they closed at 169.89 on August 24, but the Railshad much more ground to recover and were running into offerings as theycame up in succession to each of the Minor Bottom levels of theirJune–August downtrend (a phenomenon to which we shall devote someattention later on in the chapter on Support and Resistance). Not until earlyNovember 1945 were they able to conﬁrm the signal of the Industrials byclosing above 63.06. At this point, the Averages had, once again, announcedthat the Primary Bull Market was still in force. It had now lasted for threeand a half years — longer than most Bull Markets, and “third phase” signswere rapidly appearing. The public was buying, the boardrooms werecrowded, stock market news was making the front pages of even small citynewspapers, the “cats and dogs” were being whooped up, business wasbooming. With both Averages in new high ground and the Bull Market reafﬁrmed, all previous low points could now be disregarded. For example, the 160.91Bottom of July 26 in the Industrials and the 51.48 of August 20 in the Railshad no further signiﬁcance in Dow Theory. This is a point we have notstressed heretofore, but it is important. It might, indeed, be added to our setof rules in the preceding chapter were it not implicit in the basic tenets. Oncea Primary Trend has been conﬁrmed or reconﬁrmed, the past is forgottenand everything hinges on future action. At the end of 1945, with “thirdphase” symptoms rife, the action of the market had to be followed withredoubled vigilance. The third phase could last for 2 more years (as it didin 1927 to 1929) or be concluded at any moment. Our next chart (Figure 8)carries us through May 1946. The Spring of 1946 The market went through a Minor Setback in late December, a developmentwhich has come to be expected as the normal pattern for that month andwhich is usually attributed to “tax selling” — and stormed ahead again inJanuary 1946. Daily volume on January 18 exceeded 3 million shares for theﬁrst time in more than 5 years. During the ﬁrst week of February, prices“churned” with little net change. Extreme high closes were registered duringthis period by the Rail Average at 68.23 on February 5, and by the IndustrialAverage at 206.97 on February 2. On February 9, both started to slide off,pulled back sharply from the 13th to the 16th, and then broke in a sellingwave that ran to a climax on February 26 with closings at 60.53 and 186.02,respectively. The loss in the Industrials was the greatest in points (20.95) theyhad suffered during the entire Bull Market; in the Rails, it was exceeded onlyby their July–August decline of the previous year. It amounted to a little AU3772_book.fm Page 36 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter four: The Dow Theory in Practice 37 more than 10% in the former and 11% in the latter, and gave up a little less than half of their advances from the 1945 summer lows. The decline was3 weeks old on February 26. It was an unqualiﬁed Intermediate — in DowTheory a Secondary Reaction presumptively within the still existing MajorUptrend. Labor troubles were dogging the steel and motor industries in 1946 from early January on, and a coal strike was looming. The February break wasattributed to those news developments, but the ruling cause was more likelythe discontinuance of margin trading. The Federal Reserve Board hadannounced in January that after February 1, stocks could be bought only forfull 100% cash. The late January up-ﬂing was featured by the “little fellow”seizing his last chance to buy on margin. (Those who participated in thisscramble will doubtless regret it for a long time yet to come.) Professionalsseized the opportunity to unload their trading commitments, but the “littlefellow” was now temporarily out of funds; his brokerage account was FIGURE 8. Daily closing price levels of the Dow–Jones Industrial and Rail Averages from December 1, 1945, to May 31, 1946, and total daily market volume. Noteworthy features of this period included the extremely high volume which prevailed duringJanuary and February as compared with lower turnover in April and May, and thelaggard performance of the Rails when the Industrial Average pushed up to a newhigh in April and again at the end of May. At the latter date, the February lows werestill the critical downside “signal” levels according to the Dow Theory. INDUSTRIALS RAILS1945–1946216 21220820420019619218818470 68 6664 62 60 DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1Sales in MillionsTotal Vol.2.0 1.5 1.0.5 AU3772_book.fm Page 37 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
quickly “frozen.” Under the circumstances, as we look back, it is amazing

that a more extensive Panic did not then eventuate. But the Dow theorist was not concerned with causes. The Bull Market had been reafﬁrmed by both Averages in early February, canceling all pre-vious “signal” levels. Bullish Forces were still evidently in effect because theFebruary 26 lows held and prices began to recover. The Industrials cameback quickly, and by April 9 had closed in new high ground at 208.03. TheRails dragged. When the market showed signs of weakening at the end ofApril, the Rail Average was still nearly 5 points below its early Februaryhigh. Was this another “failure to conﬁrm” to worry about? Final Up Thrust The late February Bottoms were now the critical points on the downside; ifboth Averages should decline below the Intermediate Low closes thenrecorded, before the Rails could make a new high above 68.23 (in whichevent the Bullish Signal of the Industrials would be canceled), a Bear Marketwould thereby be signaled. But, despite a miner’s strike and an imminentrail workers’ strike, the market turned ﬁrm again in mid-May and put fortha surprising rally which swept the Industrial Index up to 212.50 on May 29,1946 — a new Bull high by nearly 6 points. The Rails failed in May by only0.17 to equal their February high close, slid back a triﬂe, and then pushedthrough at last on June 13 to close at 68.31, thereby conﬁrming the Industrialsin their announcement that (as of that date) the Primary Trend was still up.The February lows (186.02 and 60.53) now ceased to signify in Dow Theory,but keep those ﬁgures in mind because they are involved in an argumentwhich raged among Dow students for months thereafter.

## _Figure 9 overlaps the preceding picture, taking up the market’s action_
on May 4 and carrying it forward to October 19, 1946. Trading volume, itmay be noted, in late May and early June did not come up to the levels ofeither the late January to early February Top or the late February Bottom;the market appeared to be losing vitality, an ominous, although by no means,decisive manifestation. Prices began to fall off rapidly immediately after theRail Conﬁrmation on June 13. The Industrials rallied for 2 weeks in earlyJuly, but the Rails continued to decline; the Industrials broke again on July 15and the two Averages continued their slide until they stood at 195.22 and60.41 at the close on July 23. There, as it subsequently developed, was the end of that particular

Intermediate Swing — one which in accord with our Rule 12 had to belabeled a Secondary Reaction in a Bull Market until proved otherwise. Themarket swung up again. It climbed slowly and steadily, but with turnoverrunning well under a million shares, until exactly 3 weeks later, the Indus-trials at 204.52 (August 13) had regained a little more than half of theirJune–July loss and the Rails at 63.12 (August 14) a little more than a thirdof theirs. This advance, therefore, had met the minimum requirements of anIntermediate Trend. If prices could continue to rise and eventually push AU3772_book.fm Page 38 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter four: The Dow Theory in Practice 39 through their May–June Tops, the Major Bull Trend once again would be reafﬁrmed. But if they should now turn down and fall below the July 23closing levels, that action would signal a Reversal of the Primary Trend. FIGURE 9. Daily closing price levels of the Dow–Jones Industrial and Rail Averages from May 4 to October 19, 1946, and total daily market volume. This chart overlaps

## _Figure 8. Compare the closing price of the Rail Average on June 13 with its February 5high close. This June action nulliﬁed the previous Dow Theory importance of theFebruary lows. Note signiﬁcant change in volume pattern after May, especially dur-ing the August rally._
INDUSTRIALS

RAILS 1946216 212 20820420019619218818418017617216816416070 6866 64 62 605856 54 52 50 484644 MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER 111825 18 15 22 29 61 3 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7142128 51219Sales in Millions 2.0 1.51.0.5Total Vol. AU3772_book.fm Page 39 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The Bear Market Signal

That the situation was critical was evident in the volume chart. Ever since the end of May, turnover had tended not only to increase on the declinesbut, what was much more important, to dry up on the rallies. CompareFigure 9 with 7 and 8, and you can see how conspicuous this phenomenonhad become by mid-August. Prices did turn down, with activity increasingon the breaks, and on August 27, the closing prices, 191.04 for the Industrialsand 58.04 for the Rails, told a sad story. The Averages had spoken: a 4-yearBull Market had ended, and a Bear Market was under way. A Dow investorshould have sold all his stocks on the following day (at approximately190 and 58 in terms of the two Averages). To clear the record, it was necessary for the Dow theorist now to go back and mark the May 29 and June 13 highs in the Industrials and Rails, respec-tively, as the end of the Bull Market. The June–July decline then became theﬁrst Primary Swing in the new Bear Trend, and the July 23 to August 14advance became the ﬁrst Secondary Recovery within the Major Downtrend.A second Primary Swing was now in process of development. You will have noted in the foregoing that a Bear Market was signaled as soon as both Averages penetrated their July 23 lows. Let us return nowand take up that argument which we mentioned on the preceding page.Some students of Dow Theory refused to recognize the new high of June 13in the Rail Average as a decisive reafﬁrmation of the Bull Trend. The previousclose should be bettered by at least a full point (1.00), many argued, in orderto conﬁrm the signal previously given by the Industrials; the margin of only0.08 was inconclusive. But this opinion, if accepted, had logical consequenceswhich later proved embarrassing. For, if the Bull Market had not been reaf-ﬁrmed in June, then the critical levels on the downside remained at 186.02in the Industrials and 60.53 in the Rails, the February 26 Bottoms. Therefore,a Bear Market could not be “called” until those prices had been penetrateddownside by both Averages. This view acquired a large following, especiallyamong those who were not interested in “hair splitting” theory but wanted “togive the market every chance in view of the still improving fundamentals.” The market did, of course, proceed to break its February lows, and by that time, the Panic (second phase) was on. Obviously, in this case, theorthodox “any-penetration-whatever” school had all the best of it; they hadsold out at least 13 points higher up in terms of the Industrial Index (at least6 in the Rails). Six weeks later, on October 9, 1946, to be exact, this secondPrimary Intermediate Swing ended at Industrials 163.12, Rails 44.69, andanother Intermediate Recovery Move started. Before closing this history of 6 years of Dow Theory interpretation, we might note that the June 13 high in the Rail Average furnishes a perfectillustration of the rule that a trend can change any time after it has beenconﬁrmed or reafﬁrmed, also of the diminishing odds in favor of continuancewith each successive reafﬁrmation of the Primary Trend. AU3772_book.fm Page 40 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

41 chapter ﬁve The Dow Theory’s Defects Our readers, we suspect, heaved a deep sigh of relief when they closed the preceding chapter on a difﬁcult, tedious, and, at times, confusing subject.Some may even wish at this point that the Dow Theory had never beenconceived. Others doubtless spotted one or more of its real or supposeddefects and have questions to ask. Before we proceed to more interestingchart matters, we had better devote a few pages to clearing them up. First, let’s take up the charge of “second guessing” which is so often ﬂung at writers on Dow Theory. It is a charge which will continue to cropup so long as opinions differ among Dow theorists at critical periods (which,unfortunately, is often the case). Even the most experienced and careful Dow analysts ﬁnd it necessary occasionally to change their interpretations when a stand ﬁrst ventured is rendered untenable by some subsequent action ofthe market. They would not attempt to deny it — but, they say, in the longrun, surprisingly little is lost by such temporary misinterpretations. Manyof them publish their comments regularly and can refer you to the printedﬁles of opinions and advice expressed before and during the event, as wellas after it. As for the preceding chapter of this book, the reader, if he caresto check such records, will ﬁnd that the interpretations given therein (asidefrom the remarks made “in retrospect” and so labeled) were precisely theinterpretations published at the time by the best established Dow analysts. EN9:

While, in the modern age Richard Russell (dowtheoryletters.com) is probably senior in terms of reputation, a host of other Dow Theorists (actually trying toround them up is like herding cats) inhabit the scene, among them Jack Schannep(thedowtheory.com) and Richard Moroney (dowtheory.com) who must be taken intoaccount when consulting the sacred-chicken bones. Robert W. Colby (robertw-colby.com) is currently doing interesting work in Dow Theory. Note that it is thechicken which is sacred, and the bones only secondarily. The Dow Theory Is “Too Late” This is a more valid objection. It is sometimes expressed in the rather intem-perate statement that “the Dow Theory is a sure ﬁre system for deprivingthe investor of the ﬁrst third and the last third of every Major Move, andsometimes there isn’t any middle third!” Or, to give a speciﬁc example: AU3772_C005.fm Page 41 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
A Primary Bull Market started in 1942 with the Industrial Average at 92.92

and ended in 1946 at 212.50, for a total gain of 119.58 Average points, butthe strict Dow theorists could not buy until the Industrials were up to 125.88and couldn’t sell until prices had already declined to 191.04, thus capturing,at best, only about 65 points, or not much more than half of the total move.This speciﬁc statement cannot be disputed. But the answer to the generalobjection is “Try and ﬁnd a man who ﬁrst bought his stocks at 92.92 (or evenwithin 5 points of that level) and stayed 100% long throughout the interven-ing years, and ﬁnally sold out at 212.50, or within 5 points thereof.” Thereader is welcome to try; he will, in fact, ﬁnd it very difﬁcult to locate evena dozen who did as well as the Dow Theory. A still better answer, since it comprehends all of the hazards of every known kind of Bull and Bear Market to date, is the overall dollars and centsrecord of the past 60 years. We are indebted to Richard Durant for permissionto reprint the following computation of what would, in theory, have resultedif a fund of only $100 could have been invested in the stocks of theDow–Jones Industrial Average on July 12, 1897, when a Primary Bull Marketwas signaled by the Dow Theory, and those stocks were thereafter sold andrepurchased when, and only when, the Dow Theory had deﬁnitely con-ﬁrmed a change in the Major Trend (see Table 1). In brief, an investment of $100 in 1897 would have become $11,236.65 in 1956 simply by buying the Industrial Average stocks each time the DowTheory announced a Bull Market and holding them until the Dow Theoryannounced a Bear Market. During this period, the investor would have made15 purchases and 15 sales, or about 1 transaction every 2 years on average. The record is not perfect. It shows one losing transaction and three instances where reinvestment would have been made at a higher level thanthe preceding liquidation. But, at that, it hardly needs defending! Also, ittakes no account of commissions and transfer taxes, but neither does itinclude the dividends the investor would have received during the time heheld his stocks; the latter would, needless to say, have added many moredollars to the fund. For the enlightenment of the man who believes in “just buying good stocks and putting them away,” compare the above results with the best thatcould have been done by buying shares only once at the lowest pricerecorded by the Industrial Average during these entire 50 years and sellingthem only once at the highest. $100 invested at the all-time low, 29.64 onAugust 10, 1896, would have become only $1,757.93 at the all-time high,521.05, 60 years later on April 6, 1956, as against the $11,236.65 derived fromthe straight Dow Theory program. EN: This record of the Dow Theory is updated to the year 2006 in Chapter 5.1.

The Dow Theory Is Not Infallible Of course, it isn’t. It depends on interpretation and is subject to all thehazards of human interpretive ability. But, again, the record speaks for itself. AU3772_C005.fm Page 42 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

Chapter ﬁve: The Dow Theory’s Defects 43 The Dow Theory Frequently Leaves the Investor in Doubt This is true in one sense and not in another. There is never a time when the Dow Theory does not afford a presumptive answer to the question of thedirection of the Primary Trend. That answer will be wrong for a relativelyshort time at the beginning of each new Major Swing. There will also betimes when a good Dow analyst should say, “The Primary Trend is stillpresumably up, but it has reached a dangerous stage, and I cannot consci-entiously advise you to buy now. It may be too late.” Frequently, however, the above objection simply reﬂects the inability of the critic mentally to accept the fundamental concept that the Averagesdiscount all the news and statistics. He doubts the Dow Theory because he

## _Table 1._
The Dow Theory’s 60-Year Record

Original fund $100.00 DateIndustrial average pricePercent gain Proceeds Invested July 12, 1897 44.61Stocks sold December 16, 1899 63.84 43.1 $143.10Proceeds reinvested October 20, 1900 59.44Stocks sold June 1, 1903 59.59 0.3 143.53Proceeds reinvested July 12, 1904 51.37Stocks sold April 26, 1906 92.44 80.0 258.35Proceeds reinvested April 24, 1908 70.01Stocks sold May 3, 1910 84.72 21.0 312.60Proceeds reinvested October 10, 1910 81.91Stocks sold January 14, 1913 84.96 3.7 324.17Proceeds reinvested April 9, 1915 65.02Stocks sold August 28, 1917 86.12 32.5 429.53Proceeds reinvested May 13, 1918 82.16Stocks sold February 3, 1920 99.96 21.7 522.74Proceeds reinvested February 6, 1922 83.70Stocks sold June 20, 1923 90.81 8.5 567.17Proceeds reinvested December 7, 1923 93.80Stocks sold October 23, 1929 305.85 226.1 1849.54Proceeds reinvested May 24, 1933 84.29Stocks sold September 7, 1937 164.39 95.0 3606.61Proceeds reinvested June 23, 1938 127.41Stocks sold March 31, 1939 136.42 7.2 3866.29Proceeds reinvested July 17, 1939 142.58Stocks sold May 13, 1940 137.50 (Loss 3.6) 3727.10Proceeds reinvested February 1, 1943 125.88Stocks sold August 27, 1946 191.04 51.9 5653.71Proceeds reinvested October 2, 1950 228.94Stocks sold April 2, 1953 280.03 22.3 6911.01Proceeds reinvested January 19, 1954 288.27Stocks sold October 1956 468.70 62.6 11,236.65 AU3772_C005.fm Page 43 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
cannot reconcile its message with his own ideas, derived from other sources,

of what stocks should do. The theory, needless to say, is usually more nearlyright. This criticism in other cases reﬂects nothing but impatience. There may be weeks or months (as, for example, during the formation of a Line) whenthe Dow Theory cannot “talk.” The active trader quite naturally rebels. Butpatience is a virtue in the stock market as elsewhere — in fact, essential ifserious mistakes are to be avoided. The Dow Theory Does Not Help the Intermediate Trend Investor This is perfectly true. The theory gives little or no warning of changes in Intermediate Trend. Yet, if a fair share of these can be captured, the proﬁtamounts to more than can be derived from the Primary Trend alone. Sometraders have worked out supplementary rules based on Dow principleswhich they apply to Intermediate Movements, but these have not proved tobe satisfactory. The remainder of our book is devoted to a better approachto this problem. The Dow Theory is a mechanical device, designed to tell the direction of the Primary Market Trend, which is important because, as we said at thebeginning of this study, most stocks tend to go with the trend. The DowTheory does not and cannot tell you which individual stocks to buy, asidefrom those stocks which make up the averages themselves. That, again, is aproblem for the remainder of this book. EN: An Old Criticism, obsolete in Modern Markets. The Dow Theory does not tell you which stocks to buy. True at the time Edwards wrote this. But in modernmarkets the investor can buy substitute instruments which almost perfectly mimicits behavior (DIA). As it is possible to trade in surrogates for the Dow Averages inpresent markets, see Chapter 15.1. AU3772_C005.fm Page 44 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

45 chapter 5.1 The Dow Theory in the 20th and 21st Centuries As may be seen in the following table, replacing the table from Chapter 5, the Dow Theory continued to provide its user an advantage over theunaware Buy-and-Hold Investor. From its original investment of $100 in1897 the Theory investment would have grown to $345,781.94

by December 31, 2005, with the long trade still open. The table below shows the details,including the post-2000 bust drawdown. To my mind this table is a powerfuldemonstration of the power of methodical technical investing. By contrast, the investment of $100, if bought at the low, 29.64, and sold at the historic high, 11762.71, in January 2000 would have grown to $39,685.03. AU3772_C005.fm Page 45 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
AU3772_C005.fm Page 46 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

Chapter 5.1: The Dow Theory in the 20th and 21st Centuries 47 AU3772_C005.fm Page 47 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
I am indebted to Jack Schannep of

The Dow Theory.Com (www.thedowtheory. com) for the data recapitulated here. At that URL an enlightening exposition of the Theory and its record may be found — much more complete than thatwhich is found here outside of Edwards’ magisterial presentation. Minor discrepancies are acknowledged within these and others’ data, a point which will be raised by purists. This is occasioned by disagreementswithin the priestly circles of those who keep the sacred records. That is, notall theorists are in 100% agreement as to the exact date or nature of thesignals. (Some will say the reentry date of October 1, 1956, should have beenOctober 7, 1957, for example.) Meaning, of course, that some judgment isinvolved in interpretation of the entrails. The Dow Theory is not a 100%objective algorithm, just as chart analysis is not reducible to an objectivealgorithm. (I am allowed to jest at the priesthood as I am a junior acolyte inthese matters. It would not be seemly for the uninitiated to burlesque.) In brief, an investment of $100 in 1897 would have become $345,781.94 simply by buying the Industrial Average stocks each time the Dow Theoryannounced a Bull Market and holding them until the Dow Theoryannounced a Bear Market, then selling. The Technical Investor would have had this amount in pocket marked to market at the end of 2005 as opposed to the $39,685.03 of his dozingcounterpart, or the Trust Department of the Rip Van Winkle Bank of SleepyHollow. And, in addition, he would not have been deliquidiﬁed during BearMarkets. Whether or not the Dow Theory retains its validity over the market as a whole, there can be no question that it still calls the turn for its sector ofthe market, which as Jack Schannep correctly notes, has ﬁve times the cap-italization of the NASDAQ. As Mark Twain observed, everybody talks about the Dow Theory, but nobody does anything about it. Perhaps that is not precisely what Twainsaid, but close enough for government work. As further inquiry into theinner workings of the Theory I have initiated a series of studies of the recordwith Brian Brooker, MS Finance, Golden Gate University. Following are someof the results of our study, from the monograph, Dissecting Dow Theory. AU3772_C005.fm Page 48 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

Chapter 5.1: The Dow Theory in the 20th and 21st Centuries 49 AU3772_C005.fm Page 49 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
AU3772_C005.fm Page 50 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

Chapter 5.1: The Dow Theory in the 20th and 21st Centuries 51 It seems obvious that the risk characteristics of Dow Theory investing are unique, and I will belabor the obvious. The Buy-and-Hold Investor mentioned above for comparison with the Dow Theory Investor not onlyrealized less proﬁt over the period of his investment; he also experiencedgreatly expanded risk over the life of the investment. At ﬁrst blush all theproﬁts garnered by the Reversing Investor in the table above represent riskactually experienced by the Buy-and-Hold Investor. But that is only ﬁrstblush. A little deeper thought reveals that the true extent of theBuy-and-Hold Investor’s risk is measured by maximum drawdowns overany given period of time. It is not necessary to theorize about this question.The measurement is empirical. When viewed in perspective these risks are startling. From the top in 2000 to the low in 2002 a 39% drawdown occurred. Is this disquieting? A 41%drawdown occurred during the Reagan crash of 1987. A mere bagatelle. Thedrawdown from 1929 to 1932 was 89%. Of course such things are unlikely tohappen again. The big guys would step in and support the market. Clearly the way to reduce market risk to zero is to be out of the market. Less obviously, or perhaps blatantly, the second most important way toreduce risk is to be right the trend — or not to be wrong. And in fact becauseof the nature of the Theory much time is spent on the sidelines by the DowInvestor. A natural reduction of risk. In fact of the total days from 1897 to2006, 39,493, the Dow Investor spent 14,378 (or about 37% of the time) daysat the beach or at the S&L.; But his accumlated proﬁts have not been creditedwith interest as this is a “pure” study. As will be readily apparent Table 1.2 is much richer in data than just the duration of investments in the long side of the market. Acting on the maxim(my own) that it is unwise to invest on only one side of the market I havecomputed the accumulated proﬁts gained by trading the Dow long andshort. After all the market goes down as well up, and for a reversing systema liquidation of longs is a signal to go short. If the record on the long sideis impressive, showing accumulated proﬁts to 2006 of $345,781.94, how muchmore impressive is the accumulated proﬁt of $1,902,859 garnered from trad-ing both sides of the Dow, long and short. The reader who listens carefully will hear the meta message here. For the great majority of investors it is the long run which is important. In the“right now” culture of the Internet and the computer and get rich quick onewonders if there are still such investors, outside of the very rich and veryintelligent. Perhaps there are still a few aged readers of early editions of thisbook. And, not to despair, perhaps some new converts. In Figures 9.1 and 9.2 I practice what I preach. I post historical Dow Theory buy and sell signals on the Dow chart. I am constantly urging stu-dents and clients to take the chart of an issue they have done poorly (orwell) in and post their trades on it. The mere examination of this kind ofchart should be an enlightening experience. When this exercise is accom-plished the investor may see whether in fact he is operating according to AU3772_C005.fm Page 51 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 9.1. To my knowledge the only charts existing of the performance of the Dow Theory fr om beginning to

2006. The numbers on the charts of the Dow in ﬁgures 9.1 and 9.2 ar e keyed to the row numbers of Tables 1.1 and 1.2. In the tables the reader may see the exact date and price of the Dow Theory transaction by ﬁnding the matching number. Thus, Number 19 represents the sale of the portfolio on November 23, 1929 at 305.85 during the Gr eat Crash. DOW JONES 30 11270.29 – 47.14 – 0.42% 05 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 751050 910 840770700 630 560 490 420 350 280 210 140 70 404 657 891011 1213 1415 16171819 2021 222324 25262728293031 323334 35 3637 38394041 42 43 44454647 48 1998—2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. Terms of use a pply. AU3772_C005.fm Page 52 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

Chapter 5.1: The Dow Theory in the 20th and 21st Centuries 53 FIGURE 9.2. The second half of graphic representation of the timing of Dow Theory signals from beginning to 2006. Note Number 82. $INDU (Dow Jones Industrial Average Index) 03/23/2006 11:54 PM EST (all, monthly) DOW JONES 30 11270.29 −47.14 −0.42% 11270.29 10400 9600 8800 80007200 6400 5600 4800 4000 3200 2400 1600 800 570 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 © 1998-2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. All rights reserved. AU3772_C005.fm Page 53 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
sound methods. Sound Methods being, in the opinion of this book and this

Editor, mid- to long-term trend following methods. Further, these charts of the Dow Theory method may be compared with

## _Figures 210 and 210.1 showing the use of Basing Points and the reader willhave extensive cases of two methods for following the market in additionto the chart analysis methods prevalent thoughout the book._
Robert W. Colby (robertwcolby.com), a member of the Market Techni

cians Association (mta.org), in a paper published by that organization (andavailable at his website), explored many objective algorithms for duplicatingthe performance of Dow Theory. Among these is a naturalistic channelbreakout algorithm which I ﬁnd worth further investigation. I will quote therules here without further comment, reminding the reader that no (repeatNO) system should EVER be backed with money until the trader has exhaus-tively vetted it. Colby’s algorithm: 1. Enter Long (Buy) when INDU rises to a new 9-trading day high and TRAN rises to a new 39-trading day high. 2. Close Long (Sell) when INDU falls to a new 22-trading day low andTRAN falls to a new 166-trading day low. 3. Enter Short (Sell Short) when INDU falls to a new 22-trading daylow and TRAN falls to a new 166-trading day low. 4. Close Short (Cover) when INDU rises to a new 36-trading day highand TRAN rises to a new 32-trading day high. AU3772_C005.fm Page 54 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:40 PM

55 chapter six Important Reversal Patterns In our discussion of certain deﬁciencies in the Dow Theory from the point of view of the practical trader, we mentioned the fact that it did not tell uswhat speciﬁc stocks to trade in. (EN9: Obviously no longer a problem as the investor may buy the DIA and trade the Average like a stock.) A conservative and wealthy investor, more interested in safety than maximum proﬁt, can solvethis problem by making up a comprehensive and thoroughly diversiﬁed listof sound, well-seasoned “blue chip” issues and handing his broker an orderto buy the lot when the Dow Theory signals a Bull Trend. Some of hisselections will do better than others; some may “go sour,” but wide diver-siﬁcation will ensure his getting a fair Average result. Better results should be obtained if we can ﬁnd a way to select for purchase the most favorably situated issues at any given time, and can manage to sell them promptlyand switch to others whenever the prospects for the ﬁrst have been fullydiscounted. There is the possibility, too, of increasing our gains if we can, at times, buy with safety earlier in an uptrend than the Dow theorist does, and sellbefore the market has reacted far enough to give a Dow Bear Signal. We mentioned also the fact that the Dow Theory is of little or no assis tance in trading on the Intermediate Trends. There is obviously more moneyto be made if we can get the beneﬁt of all of each up move without havingto write off some of our proﬁts in each reaction. Or if we can proﬁt bothways by trading on both the “long side” and “short side” of the market. Finally, although all stocks tend to move with “the market” as typiﬁed in the Averages, there are in fact wide variations in the price paths of indi-vidual issues. An average, after all, is just that, a device for expressing inone ﬁgure a diversity of other ﬁgures. A Primary Bull Market ended in theDow–Jones Industrial Average on May 29, 1946; but United Air Lines regis-tered its highest price in December 1945; General Motors saw its peak inJanuary 1946; Goodyear in April, DuPont in June, and Schenley in August.Is there a way of capitalizing on these Divergences? Technical analysis of the charts of individual stocks deﬁnitely answers the ﬁrst and most important of these four problems, the matter of selection.It frequently, but not always, gives us a running start on the Dow Theory;it also, in large part, takes care of the question of the Intermediate Trend,although there are certain reservations as to policy and risk in connectionwith both these points which will be taken up in due course. Finally, careful AU3772_book.fm Page 55 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
technical analysis should, in nearly every case, get us out of a stock that

> “tops out” ahead of the Averages long before it has suffered any considerabledecline, often in time to transfer funds to other issues which have yet tocomplete their advances.
Just as the Averages constantly discount all known and foreseeable fac tors affecting the future of security prices in general, in the same way doesthe market action of an individual issue reﬂect all the factors affecting itsindividual future. Among these factors, and, expressed in its chart, are thegeneral market conditions which inﬂuence all stocks to a greater or lesserdegree, as well as the particular conditions applying to the particular stock,including the operations of “insiders.” Let us assume right from the start that you, the reader, are not a member of that mysterious inner circle known to the boardrooms as “the insiders.”Such a group — genuinely entitled to be called insiders, thoroughly informedon every fact, ﬁgure, and development that might determine the fortunes ofa certain corporation — may exist from time to time, may inﬂuence themarket price of its stock (EN9: and wind up in prison). But it is fairly certain that there are not nearly so many “insiders” as the amateur trader supposes,and that they do not cause one tenth of the market movements for whichthe public blames them. It is even more certain that insiders can be wrong;they would, in fact, be the ﬁrst to admit it. Frequently, their plans are upsetby some development which they could not foresee, or by some blind forcewhich puts to scorn all expert estimates of value. Any success they have,however, can be accomplished only by buying and selling on the ﬂoor ofthe Exchange. (EN9: No longer strictly true. Insiders sold stock to their companies in the tulip bubble which went unreported publicly for up to a year. Still, only an isolated problem.) They can do neither without altering the delicate poise of supply and demand which governs prices. Whatever they do is sooner orlater reﬂected on the charts where you, the “outsider,” can detect it. Or detect,at least, the way in which the supply–demand equation is being affected byinsiders’ operations plus all other prevailing market factors. So, you don’tneed to be an insider in order frequently to ride with them. Important Reversal Patterns Stock prices move in trends. Some of those trends are straight, some arecurved; some are brief and some are long-continued; some are irregular orpoorly deﬁned and others are amazingly regular or “normal,” produced ina series of action and reaction waves of great uniformity. Sooner or later,these trends change direction; they may reverse (as from up to down) orthey may be interrupted by some sort of sideways movement and then, aftera time, proceed again in their former direction. In most cases, when a price trend is in the process of Reversal, either from up to down or from down to up, a characteristic area or “pattern” takesshape on the chart, becomes recognizable as a Reversal Formation. Some ofthese chart pictures are built and completed very quickly, while others may AU3772_book.fm Page 56 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter six: Important Reversal Patterns 57 require several weeks to reach a stage where one can surely say that a reversal of trend is deﬁnitely indicated. Speaking in broad generalities, the greaterthe Reversal Area — the wider the price ﬂuctuations within it, the longer ittakes to build, the more shares transferred during its construction — themore important its implications. Thus, roughly speaking, a big ReversalFormation suggests a big move to follow and a small pattern, a small move.Needless to say, the ﬁrst and most important task of the technical chartanalyst is to learn to know the important Reversal Formations and to judgewhat they may signify in terms of trading opportunities. There is one recognized Reversal Pattern which appears and is com pleted within a single day’s trading, and is, in consequence, named the

> “One-Day Reversal.” There are times when it has great signiﬁcance as callinga halt, at least temporarily, to any up or down move, but in its ordinarymanifestations it does not imply much of an immediate move in the oppositedirection. It is a useful pattern and we shall have more to say about it later.But the price formations from which extensive new trends proceed take timeto build. One does not bring instantly to a stop a heavy car moving at 70 milesan hour and, all within the same split second, turn it around and get itmoving back down the road in the opposite direction at 70 miles an hour.
Time Required to Reverse Trend But we do not need to lean on a racing automobile analogy to explain why it takes time (and volume and price action) to produce an important TrendReversal. The logic of it is plain enough, if we take but a moment to examineit. We can do so most easily by describing what might have (and, doubtless,many times has) happened in speciﬁc terms. Suppose a certainwell-informed and well-ﬁnanced coterie (EN9: A congerie of mutual funds, for example.) decides that the shares of a certain company, now selling around 40, are cheap, that this company’s affairs are progressing so satisfactorilythat, before long, it will attract the attention of many investors and its stockwill be in demand at much higher levels, perhaps at 60 or 65. Our grouprealizes that if they manage their market operations skillfully, if nothingunforeseen intervenes to upset their calculations, they can “take” 20 pointsout of the situation. So they proceed to buy in all offerings, going about thisbusiness as quietly as possible, until they have accumulated their “line,”which may run to several thousand shares and represent practically all ofthe current ﬂoating supply of the issue. Then they wait. Presently, profes-sionals become suspicious and the rumor circulates that there is “somethingdoing in PDQ,” or other canny bargain hunters discover the company’sbright prospects, or chart analysts detect the signs of accumulation in thestock’s action. Buyers now ﬁnd that the stock is scarce; there are few offeringson the books and they have to raise their bids to get it. An advance starts. The up-move gathers momentum as more and more traders are attracted by rising prices. It is helped along by the good reports (higherearnings, increased dividend, etc.) which our group knew were to be AU3772_book.fm Page 57 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
expected. Eventually, prices approach the level at which they had planned

to take proﬁts. But this operation, the “distribution” of their holdings, may require even more patient and skillful handling than did the accumulation.Suppose they have 20,000 shares to unload. They cannot throw all on themarket at once; to do so would defeat their own ends immediately and,perhaps, permanently. They must feed their line out little by little, trying toavoid attention, feeling their way along and never permitting a surplus ofofferings to kill the demand. If activity in their stock has reached a level of,say, 2000 shares transferred daily, they may be able to dispose of 500 sharesa day from their holdings without bringing the price down. (They will becompeting, sooner or later, with others who have followed their play, whobought lower down and will be ready to take proﬁts as soon as the advanceshows signs of weakening.) So they start to sell when the rising Trendappears to have attained maximum momentum, or as it nears their priceobjective, but well before it has reached its probable limit, and they pushout their shares as rapidly as buyers will take them. Before long, as a rule — before they have distributed their entire line — a lull in demand will occur. Perhaps prospective buyers sense the increasein supply. A reaction develops. Our group quickly ceases selling, withdrawsits offers, perhaps even buys back a few shares to support prices if theythreaten to drop too far. With supply temporarily held off the market, thedecline halts and the advance resumes. Our group lets it proceed this timeuntil it carries prices into new high ground; this reassures other holders andbrings in more buyers. As soon as the pot is once again merrily boiling,distribution is started anew and, if the maneuver has been well directed,completed in perhaps 2 or 3 weeks, before the second wave of demand hasbeen exhausted. Our group is now out of its stock with a nice proﬁt; its 20,000 shares have passed into other hands. If they gauged the market correctly anddistributed their line at a price about as high as the situation would bear,demand will have been satiated for a long time to come. Prices will probablyﬁrst drift back to somewhere near the level where they were supported onthe previous dip, then rally feebly on the strength of a little new buying fromtraders who were waiting for just such a Minor Reaction, meet sales fromother traders who failed to seize the opportunity to take their proﬁts on thepreceding volume Top and are now anxious to get out, and then break downinto a decline of Intermediate or Major proportions. You can see now why, under one speciﬁc set of circumstances, a Top area, a chart pattern of distribution, takes time and volume to complete. But,it doesn’t matter whether we have to deal with the highly organized oper-ations of a single group of insiders or of an investment syndicate or, as ismore often the case, with the quite unorganized activities of all the investorsvariously interested in an issue. The result is pretty much the same. Distri-bution, which is simply the Street’s way of expressing the process of supplyovercoming demand, takes time and a change in ownership (turnover) of a AU3772_book.fm Page 58 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter six: Important Reversal Patterns 59 large number of shares. And it is amazing to see how these patterns of distribution, which hereafter we shall ﬁnd it simpler to refer to as “Tops,”tend to assume certain well-deﬁned forms. Most of the same pattern formsappear also as “Bottoms,” in which manifestation they signify accumulation,of course, instead of distribution. The Head-and-Shoulders If you followed closely and were able successfully to visualize how the fore-going example of distribution would appear on a chart, you saw aHead-and-Shoulders Top Formation. This is one of the more common and, by all odds, the most reliable of the Major Reversal Patterns. Probably you have heard it mentioned, for there are many traders who are familiar with its name,but not so many who really know it and can distinguish it from somewhatsimilar price developments which do not portend a real Reversal of Trend. The typical or, if you will, the ideal Head-and-Shoulders Top is illus trated in Diagram 2. You can easily see how it got its name. It consists of: A. A strong rally, climaxing a more or less extensive advance, on which trading volume becomes very heavy, followed by a Minor Recessionon which volume runs considerably less than it did during the daysof rise and at the Top. This is the “left shoulder.” B. Another high-volume advance which reaches a higher level than the top of the left shoulder, and then another reaction on less volumewhich takes prices down to somewhere near the bottom level of thepreceding recession, somewhat lower perhaps or somewhat higher,but, in any case, below the top of the left shoulder. This is the “Head.” C. A third rally, but this time on decidedly less volume than accompa nied the formation of either the left shoulder or the head, which failsto reach the height of the head before another decline sets in. This isthe “right shoulder.” D. Finally, decline of prices in this third recession down through a line (the “neckline”) drawn across the Bottoms of the reactions betweenthe left shoulder and head, and the head and right shoulder, respec-tively, and a close below that line by an amount approximately equiv-alent to 3% of the stock’s market price. This is the “conﬁrmation” or“breakout.” Note that each and every item cited in A, B, C, and D is essential to a valid Head-and-Shoulders Top Formation. The lack of any one of them castsin doubt the forecasting value of the pattern. In naming them, we have leftthe way clear for the many variations that occur (for no two Head-and-Shoulders are exactly alike) and have included only the features which mustbe present if we are to depend upon the pattern as signaling an importantReversal of Trend. Let us examine them in greater detail. AU3772_book.fm Page 59 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Volume Is Important

First, the matter of volume. It is always to be watched as a vital part of the total picture. The chart of trading activity makes a pattern just as does the chart of price ranges. The two go together and each must conform to the requirements of the case. But note also that volume is relative. When wespeak of high volume, we mean a rate of trading notably greater than hasbeen customary in that particular stock during that particular period underexamination. The exact number of shares traded is not important, nor willit ordinarily signify anything for our purposes to compare a daily volumeof, say, 6500 shares in Radio Corporation with 500 in Bohn Aluminum and DIAGRAM 2. A hypothetical daily stock chart — price in the upper part and volume at bottom — drawn to show how an ideal Head-and-Shoulders Top Reversal Formation would develop. A, B, C, and D refer to essential features listed on theprevious page. AB C DNECKLINE VOLUME AU3772_book.fm Page 60 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter six: Important Reversal Patterns 61 Brass. The former may be very low and the latter very high as judged by the proper technical criterion which is, in each case, the average recentactivity in the same issue. In the case of a Head-and-Shoulders Top, we havesaid that high volume attends the making of the left shoulder; so, this meansthat activity on the rise to and at the Top of the left shoulder should begreater than on the preceding rally waves in the same issue, then a MinorRecession on dwindling activity, and then a new advance on high volume.The action thus far does not differ from what we should expect of normalwave development within a continuing uptrend. In these respects, any twotypical, successively higher waves in an advance may, as you can see, becomethe left shoulder and head, respectively, of a Head-and-Shoulders Reversal. The ﬁrst suggestion that a Head-and-Shoulders is really developing may come when the volume record shows that activity accompanying the mostrecent Top was somewhat less than on the one preceding it. If this volumedisparity is conspicuous, and if it becomes evident from the way prices arereceding that the second and higher rally has ended, then the chart shouldbe tabbed with a “red” signal and further developments closely scrutinized.But such a preliminary warning does not always appear, nor should it betaken as conclusive when it does appear. Roughly estimated, about one third FIGURE 10. Starting in March, “HUM” formed a broad Head-and-Shoulders Top pattern on the daily chart. August’s decline penetrated the neckline by 3%, conﬁrm ing the Reversal Pattern. The minimum objective for the Head-and-Shoulders Topwould be 18. HUMANA INCORPORATED HUM 1988 SH S NL38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER 27 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 XD.20 XD.234000 3200 2400 1600 800Sales 100’S AU3772_book.fm Page 61 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
of all conﬁrmed Head-and-Shoulders Formations show more volume on the

left shoulder than on the head, another third show about equal volume, andthe ﬁnal third show greater volume on the head than on the left shoulder. Another warning — or, more often, the ﬁrst — comes when prices drop in the course of the second reaction (i.e., from the head) below the level ofthe Top of the left shoulder. Such action, as we shall see later on in ourspeciﬁc study of Support and Resistance levels, is signiﬁcant of weakness inthe price structure. So far it is Minor; it may be only temporary; it is certainlynot conclusive. Nevertheless, when this occurs, put a double red tab on yourchart. Breaking the Neckline The real tip-off appears when activity fails to pick up appreciably on thethird rally, the right shoulder. If the market remains dull as prices recover(at which stage you can draw a tentative “neckline” on your chart) and if,as they approach the approximate level of the left shoulder Top and beginto round over, volume is still relatively small, your Head-and-Shoulders Topis at least 75% completed. Although the speciﬁc application of these patternstudies in trading tactics is the province of the second part of this book, wemay note here that many stock traders sell or switch just as soon as they aresure a low-volume right shoulder has been completed, without waiting for theﬁnal conﬁrmation which we named under D as the breaking of the neckline. Nevertheless, the Head-and-Shoulders is not complete, and an impor tant Reversal of Trend is not conclusively signaled until the neckline hasbeen penetrated downside by a decisive margin. Until the neckline is broken,a certain percentage of Head-and-Shoulders developments, perhaps 20%,are “saved”; i.e., prices go no lower, but simply ﬂounder around listlesslyfor a period of time in the general range of the right shoulder, eventuallyﬁrm up, and renew their advance. Finally, it must be said that, in rare cases, a Head-and-Shoulders Top is conﬁrmed by a decisive neckline penetration and still prices do not go downmuch farther. “False moves” such as this are the most difﬁcult phenomenawith which the technical analyst has to cope. Fortunately, in the case of theHead-and-Shoulders, they are extremely rare. The odds are so overwhelm-ingly in favor of the downtrend continuing once a Head-and-Shoulders hasbeen conﬁrmed that it pays to believe the evidence of the chart no matterhow much it may appear to be out of accord with the prevailing news ormarket psychology. There is one thing that can be said and is worth noting about Head-and Shoulders Formations that fail completion or produce false conﬁrmations.Such developments almost never occur in the early stages of a PrimaryAdvance. A Head-and-Shoulders that does not “work” is a warning that,even though there is still some life in the situation, a genuine turn is near.The next time something in the nature of a Reversal Pattern begins to appearon the charts it is apt to be ﬁnal. AU3772_book.fm Page 62 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter six: Important Reversal Patterns 63 Variations in Head-and-Shoulders Tops There is a tendency, surprising when one thinks of all the vagaries of news and crosscurrents which may inﬂuence day-to-day trading, for Head-and-Shoulders Patterns to develop a high degree of symmetry. The neckline tendsto be horizontal and the right shoulder tends to resemble the left in priceconﬁrmation (although not, of course, in volume); there is a sort of satisfyingbalance to the overall picture. But symmetry is not essential to a signiﬁcantHead-and-Shoulders development. The neckline may slope up (from left toright) or down. The only qualiﬁcation on an up-sloping neckline is that theBottom of the recession between the head and right shoulder must formappreciably below the general level of the Top of the left shoulder. It issometimes said that a down-sloping neckline indicates an unusually weaksituation. This is so obvious that it is apt to be given even more weight thanit deserves. A share of that excessive weakness, it should be noted, will havealready been discharged by the time the down-sloping pattern is formedand prices have broken the neckline. The measuring formula which we shalldiscuss later applies to such situations. Because of the tendency toward symmetry in shoulder development, some traders, as soon as the neckline has formed, will draw on their charts FIGURE 11. Daily chart of Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul & Paciﬁc common from January 1 to June 29, 1946. Head-and-Shoulders which topped this issue’s Primary Advance in February was unmistakable despite small size of shoulders (S S). Notevolume pattern. Measuring implication (see following pages) of this formation wascarried out by April. Rectangular price congestion of March 30 to May 4 is a subjectof Chapter 9. “ST” fell to 11 ½ in October. CHI., MIL., ST. P. & PAC. ST 1946 S GH S G NL S H S38 36 34 3230 2826 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE 51 2 1 9 2 62 91 6 2 32 91 6 2 3 3 061 3 2 0 2 741 1 1 8 2 51 81 5 2 2 2 9Sales 100’s 250 200 150 100 50 AU3772_book.fm Page 63 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
a line parallel to the neckline, extending from the top of the left shoulder

through the head and on to the right. This furnishes a guide as to theapproximate height that the right shoulder rally should attain and, conse-quently, a selling level. But you will not see very many formations as perfectand symmetrical as our ideal picture, a fact which the several actual exam-ples accompanying this chapter amply illustrate. Either shoulder may, infact, go higher or take more time than the other. Either or both may comeup nearly to the level of the head (but not equal it, else no Head-and-Shoul-ders) or both may fall considerably short of it. If activity attending the rightshoulder is abnormally dull, that shoulder is apt to be low but protracted intime. In general, there seems to be a balanced relation between the threeelements of price pattern, time, and volume which is practically impossibleto express in words or ﬁgures, but which one comes with experience to sensein its development. However, there are no “laws” beyond those stated in ourA, B, C, and D; within those limits, look for an inﬁnity of minor variations. FIGURE 12. Bull Market Top of Westinghouse Electric in 1946 was the “wideswing ing,” powerful type of Head-and-Shoulders (S-H-S). Decline that broke neckline (NL) on February 13 produced a Breakaway Gap (G) discussed in Chapter 12. Measuringformula (see following pages) called for initial decline to 33. The possible BottomHead-and- Shoulders pattern (S?-H?-S?) formed in March was never completed (seeChapter 7). Note failure of prices to push up through neckline of latter at any time,despite several rally efforts in late spring while general market Averages were actu-ally reaching new high levels. By the following November, “WX” had broken ondown to 21 ½. Study in detail the change in volume pattern after the end of January. WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC WX 1945–1946SHS GNL S? S? H?44 40 383634 32 30 DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25Sales 100’s 250 200 150 100 50S H S AU3772_book.fm Page 64 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter six: Important Reversal Patterns 65 Price Action Following Conﬁrmation: The Measuring Formula The ﬁnal step, the downside penetration of the neckline, may be attended by some increase in activity, but usually isn’t at ﬁrst. If volume remains smallfor a few days as prices drift lower, a “Pullback” move frequently ensueswhich brings quotations up again to the neckline level (rarely through it).Normally, this is the “last gasp”; prices then turn down quickly, as a rule,and break away on a sharply augmented turnover. Whether or not a PullbackRally will occur after the initial penetration seems often to depend on thecondition of the market in general. If the whole market trend is turning downat the same time as our individual issue, which has just completed itsHead-and-Shoulders, there will probably be no Pullback; prices instead willtend to accelerate their decline, with activity increasing as they leave thevicinity of the Top. If, on the other hand, the general market is still ﬁrm,then an attempt at a Pullback is likely. Also, the odds seem slightly to favora Pullback if the neckline has been broken before much of a right shoulder FIGURE 13. A large Head-and-Shoulders Topping Pattern evolved in “TDY” over 5 months, with December’s high-volume plunge through the neckline conﬁrming the Trend Reversal. Since this was a very expensive stock, you might have consideredbuying the April 260 puts instead of selling “TDY” shares outright. Our measuredobjective in this issue was 44 points from penetration of the 264 neckline, or 220. TELEDYNE INC. TDY 1984SH S304 288 272 256 240 224208 192 176 160 JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29Sales 100’s 2000 1600 1200 800 400 AU3772_book.fm Page 65 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
developed, but certainly no very sure rules can be laid down. In any event,

the Pullback Rally is of practical interest chieﬂy to the trader who wants tosell the stock short, or who has sold it short and has then to decide wherehe should place a stop-loss order. Now we come to one of the most interesting features of this basic Rever sal Formation — the indication which it gives as to the extent (in points) ofthe move which is likely to follow the completion of a Head-and-Shoulders.Measure the number of points down vertically from the Top of the head tothe neckline as drawn on the chart. Then measure the same distance downfrom the neckline at the point where prices ﬁnally penetrated it followingthe completion of the right shoulder. The price level thus marked is theminimum probable objective of the decline. FIGURE 14.

> “ICX” was in a powerful uptrend for over a decade and gains were
spectacular. But the upward momentum began to fade and Topping indications were evident. The August peak fulﬁlled the objective of the measuring Flag formed during1985. The August gap to new highs was quickly ﬁlled, indicating that it was anExhaustion Gap. The reaction back to Support, followed by a slow, relatively low-volume rally to the July high, formed a credible right shoulder. The ﬁnal week’s high-volume plunge through the neckline conﬁrmed the Reversal. The minimum objectivefor the Head-and-Shoulders Pattern was 19 ¼, the top of the 1985 Flag. A possible alternative cover point was the Bottom of the Flag at 14 ¼. I C INDUSTRIES ICX 1986 SH S NL32 30 28 26 24 2264 6056 52 48 1035612414 JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 23 6 30 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 16Sales 100’s 1000 800 600 400 200 2/1SPLIT XD.40 XD.20 XD.20 AU3772_book.fm Page 66 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter six: Important Reversal Patterns 67 Let us hasten to state one important qualiﬁcation to the Head-and Shoulders Measuring Formula. Refer back to our original set of speciﬁcations for a Head-and-Shoulders. Under A, we required “strong rally climaxing amore or less extensive advance.” If the up-move preceding the formation ofa Reversal Area has been small, the down-move following it may, in factprobably will, be equally small. In brief, a Reversal Pattern has to havesomething to reverse. So, we really have two minimums, one being the extentof the advance preceding the formation of the Head-and-Shoulders and theother that derived by our measuring formula; whichever is the smaller willapply. The measuring rule is indicated on several of the examples thatillustrate this chapter. You can see now why a down-sloping neckline indi-cates a “weaker” situation than an up-sloping, and just how much weaker,as well as the fact that more than half of the minimum expected weaknesshas already been expended in the decline from the Top of the head to thepenetration of the neckline. The maximum indications are quite another matter, for which no simple rules can be laid down. Factors that enter into this are the extent of the FIGURE 15. Reversal Formations, which develop in important stocks while the general market is still apparently in a strong trend, are often difﬁcult to believe, much less act upon. But they may be highly signiﬁcant. DuPont topped out in 1936,4 months ahead of the Averages. Despite its extended right shoulder (but note vol-ume), Reversal implications were clear on December 19. The Pullback of January,meeting supply at the old neckline level, and the second try in March were interestingand typical of such a general market situation. Compare with Figure 12. DU PONT DD 1936–1937208 192176 160 152 144 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCHS H SSHS 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 6 13 20 27Sales 100’s 50 40 302010 AU3772_book.fm Page 67 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
previous rise, the size, volume, and duration of the Head-and-Shoulders

Formation, the general market Primary Trend (very important), and thedistance that prices can fall before they come to an established Support Zone.Some of these are topics for later discussion. Relation of Head-and-Shoulders to Dow Theory Without doubt, some readers have already suspected that the Head-and-Shoulders Pattern is, in a sense, just an adaptation of the principles of DowTheory to the action of an individual stock. So it is. The decline of pricesfrom the head to the neckline, the rally to the right shoulder, and then theensuing decline that breaks the neckline set up a sequence of lower Topsand Bottoms analogous to those which signal a downtrend in Dow Theory.This logical relation of the Head-and-Shoulders to Dow Theory is anotherreason, in addition to its basic importance, frequency, and dependability,why we have placed it ﬁrst in our study of Reversal Formations. But it is FIGURE 16. Another 1937 Bull Market Top of Head-and-Shoulders Form, with only one quick Pullback (February 10). In this case, volume increased sharply on February 5 with the initial break through the neckline (NL). Measuring formula was satisﬁedin March. Study this picture in connection with “ED’s” long-range chart (Figure 89)in Chapter 10, and turn back to it later when you come to the Support-Resistancestudy in Chapter 13. CONSOLIDATED EDISON ED 193748 44 40 38 36 3432 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 20 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 27 3 61 3Sales 100’s 50 4030 20 10S SHS SH NL AU3772_book.fm Page 68 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter six: Important Reversal Patterns 69 more deﬁnite, gives advance warnings which are relatively easier to detect, and is quicker with its signals in the case of up-sloping necklines. Also, itrequires no speciﬁed minimum time for any of its component moves, andno conﬁrmation by another stock or Average. There are Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms (EN: An undescriptive term for a bottom formation which I would prefer to call the “Kilroy Bottom.” See Figure 23.1) as well as Tops, with equally important implications. The Bottom Formationswill be taken up in our next chapter. FIGURE 17. The 6-month-long Head-and-Shoulders Top of Republic Aviation in 1946. Such a pattern became a possibility to be watched for when prices broke down in May below the level of the February high (ﬁrst S). Refer to requirement B. Notealso how the Head-and-Shoulders Measuring Formula (Chapter 7) is applied to patternswith up-slanting necklines. Minimum downside requirement here was 12 ½, reached in November. The quick Pullback on July 27 gave a last good selling opportunity. REPUBLIC AVIATION RA 1946 FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY 2 9 16 23 2 9 16 23 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 MEASUREMENT MEASUREMENT24 22 20 19 18 17 16SH HS SSSales 100’s 250 200 150 100 50 AU3772_book.fm Page 69 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 18. After a sharp reaction from its 1983 high, which lasted a year and

pushed “DIS” back to long-term Support, the Bulls took over and sent Walt and friends on a trip to the moon. But beginning in April, the rocket began to lose power,and it looked like reentry had begun. Since the big-volume days of spring, this issueetched out a large Head-and-Shoulders Top. High-volume penetration of the necklineby 3% conﬁrmed the Reversal. DISNEY WALT PRODUCTION DIS 1986 56 524844 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBERSH S NL207871.1260 19066 2010219244 18056 17473 Sales 100’s 2000 1600 1200 800 400 XD. 08 XD. 08 AU3772_book.fm Page 70 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter six: Important Reversal Patterns 71 FIGURE 19. New York Central made a Head-and-Shoulders Top in June 1945. Intermediate Up Trendline (IUT) was broken by drop from head on July 5. Minimum measuring implication was carried out at 24 on August 18. Reaction ended a fewdays later at 22 ¾. Prices recovered to projected neckline (see September 25), dropped again to 26 ⅞

in October, and then pushed up, giving “rebuy” signal (on Fan Line construction) at 30 in ﬁrst week of November. Final Bull Market High was made inJanuary at 35 ½. The period from August 1945 to February 1946 was difﬁcult for technical traders in this stock. Those who sold at 26–27 in July 1945 could, however,congratulate themselves in May 1947 when “CN” hit 12. NEW YORK CENTRAL CN 194532 30 28 26 24 22 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 25 29Sales 100’s 500 400 300 200100 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBERS SH IUTNL AU3772_book.fm Page 71 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 20. The great 1929 Bull Market Top was characterized by many impressive

Head-and-Shoulders Formations, of which this is an interesting example. Note the small Head-and-Shoulders Pattern of September, which became the head of a muchlarger formation of the same character. The Pullback of October 9 to the upperneckline afforded a second chance to get out at 128 to those who did not sell imme-diately when this ﬁrst line was decisively penetrated on September 28. The largerpattern “broke” on October 19, with a quick pullback on October 22. Less than amonth later “UUK” had lost half its peak value. By 1932 it had fallen to 15 ½. Although such a catastrophic decline as 1929–32 may never come again, the moral is, nonethe-less, plain: Never scorn a Head-and-Shoulders Formation. Patterns such as this mergeinto the “multiple” types discussed in Chapter 7. Although this example is selectedfrom the 1929 portfolio, they were not at all uncommon mid-20th century. Severalmodern examples appear in our later pages. UNION CARBIDE & CARBON UK 1929136 128 120 112 104 96 88 76 72 68 6480 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBERSales 100’s 125 100 755025SS S SH AU3772_book.fm Page 72 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter six: Important Reversal Patterns 73 FIGURE 20.1. A massive Head-and-Shoulders in the S&P;? It can clearly be seen here, even when not pointed out by Richard Russell. It is marked on the chart with a complex head. If one took the complex head alone the formation might be said tohave fulﬁlled itself with the bear market of 2001-2002. The long term trendline whichwas broken in 2000 should have been signal enough that the drunken binge wasover. Not to mention numerous Basing Points and/or lower lows. The bull market(or bear market rally of 2004) presents an interpretation problem. The question is hasthis prolonged rally nulliﬁed the massive Head-and-Shoulders? Such an extendedpenetration of the neckline might imply that we were reading too much into thepattern. And, in 2005, this rally is nose to nose with the huge top resistance made in1999-2000. the technician is forced to conclude that it will take years to overcome this resistance. But remember, as technicians we are obliged to change our analysis asold highs are taken out, and new situations develop. 1455.00 1332.001220.00 1023.00 937.00 858.00 786.00 720.00 659.00 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Created with TradeStation943.94Shoulder ShoulderComplex Head 1130.00$SPX.X(D) -Weekly CBOE L=1130.65 –11.40 –1.00%C=1130.65 Neckline AU3772_book.fm Page 73 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 74 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

75 chapter seven Important Reversal Patterns — Continued Head-and-Shoulders (EN: or Kilroy) Bottoms A formation of the Head-and-Shoulders type may develop at an important Reversal of Trend from down to up. In that case, it is, of course, called aHead-and-Shoulders Bottom, and its price pattern (as compared with a Top)is turned upside down, i.e., it stands on its head. EN: The present Editor has always been disturbed by the undescriptive nature of the term “Head-and-ShouldersBottom.” And so he has renamed it the “Kilroy Bottom.” See Figure 23.1. The volume pattern is somewhat the same (not turned upside down) as at a Top,but with some important changes in the latter half of the formation, which we shall discuss in detail. We can lay down speciﬁcations for it in much thesame words as we used for the Head-and-Shoulders Top. Here they are, with the portions that differ in principle from the Top printed in italics. A. A decline, climaxing a more or less extensive downtrend, on which trading volume increases notably, followed by a Minor Recovery onwhich volume runs less than it did during the days of ﬁnal declineand at the Bottom. This is the “left shoulder.” EN9: Or left hand. B. Another decline that carries prices below the Bottom of the left shoul der, on which activity shows some increase (as compared with thepreceding recovery) but usually does not equal the rate attained on the left shoulder decline, followed by another recovery which carries above the Bottom level of the left shoulder and on which activity may pickup, at any rate exceed that on the recovery from the left shoulder. This is the “head.” EN9: Or nose. C. A third decline on decidedly less volume than accompanied the making of either the left shoulder or head, which fails to reach thelow level of the head before another rally starts. This is the “rightshoulder.” EN9: Or right hand. D. Finally, an advance on which activity increases notably, which pushes up through the neckline (EN9: Or fenceline) and closes above by an amount approximately equivalent to 3% of the stock’s market price, with a conspicuous burst of activity attending this penetration. This is the

> “conﬁrmation” or “breakout.”
AU3772_book.fm Page 75 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The essential difference between Top and Bottom patterns, you can see,

lies in their volume charts. Activity in Head-and-Shoulders Bottom Forma tion begins usually to show uptrend characteristics at the start of the headand always to a detectable degree on the rally from the head. It is even moremarked on the rally from the right shoulder. It must be present on the penetra tion of the neckline, else the breakout is not to be relied upon as a decisive conﬁrmation. There is an important basic principle of technics involved here which merits further discussion. Wall Street has an old saying that expresses it: “Ittakes buying to put stocks up, but they can fall of their own weight.” Thus,we trust, and regard as conclusive, any price break (by a decisive margin)down through the neckline of a Head-and-Shoulders Top even though itoccurs on a light turnover, but we do not trust a breakout from a Head-and-Shoulders Bottom unless it is deﬁnitely attended by high volume. A low-volume breakout from a Bottom Pattern may only be premature, to befollowed after more “work” around the Bottom levels by a genuine advance,or it may be a “false” move entirely. It pays generally to wait and see. Thissame distinction in volume development applies to some of the other Rever-sal Patterns we shall take up farther on. FIGURE 21. After “rounding over” in October 1943 in the last phase of a long decline from 41 in 1940, Lockheed made a conspicuous 2-month Head-and-Shoulders Bottom. Note especially, on the above chart, the volume on the rally in early Decemberand in the ﬁrst week of January with reference to points B and D on the precedingpages. “LK” dropped back to 15 again in June 1944, then ran up quickly to 23 byNovember and ﬁnally reached 45 in January 1946. One advantage of logarithmicallyscaled charts is that they expand, and thus call attention to important formationswhich develop at low price levels, and which would be obscured on an arithmeticscale. LOCKHEED AIRCRAFT LK 1943–194418 17 16 151413 2 91 6 2 3 3 061 3 2 0 2 741 1 1 8 2 51 81 5 2 2 2 951 2 1 9 2 641 1 1 8 2 5OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCHS S SS H HSales 100’s 125 100 75 5025 AU3772_book.fm Page 76 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seven: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 77 Other differences between Top and Bottom Head-and-Shoulders do not involve any new principles. It can be said that Bottoms are generally longer and ﬂatter, i.e., they take more time in relation to depth of pattern in pointsthan do Tops. This is particularly true when they occur at Reversals in thePrimary Trend. The overall volume at Bottoms tends to be less than at Tops,and the turns more “rounded.” In the construction of a Head-and-ShouldersTop the activity that goes into the left shoulder usually exceeds that on anypreceding rally in the entire uptrend. In a downtrend, on the other hand,there may be Panic Selling in some of the earlier phases of decline, whichruns the volume chart up to a mark higher than any that is subsequentlyregistered in the ﬁnal Bottom Formation. But none of these differences affectsour essential Head-and-Shoulders speciﬁcations. FIGURE 22. Weekly charts are particularly useful for detecting Major Bottom Rever sals, since Bottom Formations characteristically take longer to build than Tops. Dome Mines made a typical Head-and-Shoulders base, 13 months long, at its Primary TrendReversal in 1942. Note volume pattern. (Volume detail, however, is better studied ondaily charts.) Dome’s powerful Head-and-Shoulders Bottom was “high” enough to beconspicuous on an arithmetic monthly chart. Reached 25 in 1944. DOME MINES DM 1941–194319 18 17 1615 14 13 12 11 10 9 SO N D JF M A M J J O N D JF M ASS S HNL Sales 100’s 125 100 75 5025 AU3772_book.fm Page 77 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The measuring implications of the Head-and-Shoulders Bottom are the

same in all respects and are applied in the same way as with Tops. Tendency to symmetry is again the rule, with variations as to slope of neckline, relativesize of shoulders about the same as in Tops. Reactions to the neckline fol-lowing the initial breakout from the Bottom type appear in about the samefrequency and proportions as do the Pullback Rallies which follow initialbreakdown from the Top type. Multiple Head-and-Shoulders Patterns The Head-and-Shoulders Formations we have examined up to this pointhave been, despite minor variations, relatively simple and clean-cut, consist-ing of three well-deﬁned elements. We come now to a group of relatedpatterns which carry much the same technical signiﬁcance but have moreelements and are much less clearly deﬁned. These are the Multiple Head-and-Shoulders Tops and Bottoms, also known as Complex Formations. Weneed not take much of our space to deﬁne them or lay down speciﬁcationsfor them, since they may be described quite sufﬁciently as Head-and-Shoul-ders Reversals in which either the shoulders or the head, or both, have beendoubled or proliferated into several distinct waves. FIGURE 23. With a strong movement toward lower interest rates evident since June, the timing of the low in “FNM” is not surprising. Neither is the massive width (from March through October) of its evolving pattern, which closely matches that ofthe huge, complex Inverse Head-and-Shoulders Bottom in Treasury Bills (December1984), September 25, 1984. Even the slight timing lag is appropriate. FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSN. FNM 1984 MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24S HSNL20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 Sales 100’s 4000 320024001600 800 X D.04 X D.04 AU3772_book.fm Page 78 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seven: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 79 Almost any combination is possible, of which only a few can be illus trated in the actual chart examples reproduced with this chapter. Formations of this type appear with fair frequency at Primary Bottoms and Tops, butmore often at Bottoms than at Tops. They appear less frequently at Interme-diate Reversals. A common form consists of two left shoulders of approximately equal size, a single head, and then two right shoulders, again of approximatelyeven size and balancing the two on the left. Another is made up of two headswith two or more shoulders on either side. Still another, of which you willusually ﬁnd several good examples at any Major Market Turn, consists ofdouble shoulders on either side of a head which is itself composed of a smallbut quite distinguishable Head-and-Shoulders development. Tendency to Symmetry We have mentioned the tendency toward symmetry in the simple Head-and-Shoulders Formation. Patterns of the Multiple or Complex type show aneven stronger urge toward symmetry — so strong, in fact, that it may becounted on in determining trading policy. If there are two shoulders on theleft, there are almost always two on the right of nearly the same size andduration. (Of course, one does not know that a Multiple is in process offormation until its right shoulder becomes evident.) Except in volume, theright-hand half of the pattern is, in the great majority of cases, an approxi-mate mirror image of the left. Necklines on Multiple Head-and-Shoulders Formations are not always easy to draw, since the reactions between the shoulders and between shoulders FIGURE 23.1. EN: At the risk of being considered a comic (actually, a satirist), I suggest that, though the image is comical, the pattern is more descriptive of the incongruously named

> “Head-and-Shoulders Bottom” than the present terminology. Left hand equals left shoulder.Right hand equals right shoulder and nose equals head and neckline equals fence line, or, aseasily, neckline. I am teaching all of my students to think and use this term, which makesmuch more sense than the absurd “upside down Head-and-Shoulders Bottom standing onits head.” One hundred years from now this contribution to the nomenclature will be acceptedas totally descriptive and appropriate and the term “Head-and Shoulders Bottom” will havedisappeared from the lexicon.
AU3772_book.fm Page 79 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
and heads may not stop at levels that all fall on a single line. Up-sloping

and down-sloping variants seldom appear in this class of patterns; necklinesare almost always very close to the horizontal. Sometimes, it is possible toestimate by simple inspection where the critical line really lies. More often,there are two necklines, an inner and an outer, and no price movement ofconsequence is to be expected until the outer has been penetrated (which,of course, is simply another expression of that tendency toward symmetryreferred to above). Curiously enough, the “power” of a Multiple Head-and-Shoulders Pat tern is more apt to be over- than underestimated. One might think, in viewof the length of time and amount of trading entering into its construction,that it would signal a move (in reverse direction to the trend preceding it)of greater extent than the simple Head-and-Shoulders. Yet, in its immediate FIGURE 23.2. A ragged Kilroy (or if from the old school a Head-and-Shoulders) Bottom which ended the bear market (or ﬁrst phase thereof) of 2001-2002. Some 7 ½ months in formation it threw a few knuckle balls and curves and looked right up to March 2003 as though it were a bear market rally. Once the neckline was taken outthere was no arguing with it. It was a real bottom. It balked at the neckline for acouple of months before becoming the full bull. Complex economic and politicalrealities affected the markets. The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, which putpaid to the tulipomania of the roaring nineties and the ill-advised tax cuts of theBush (II) administration. Using the Reagan formula of cut taxes and increase spend-ing and start a war the market was sufﬁciently stimulated to rally exuberantly.Although the trend line is not drawn here the reader should have no trouble seeingthat the break of the long-term down trend as well as the Kilroy Bottom demandinga shifting of gears from bear to bull. 10300.00 9847.00 9414.00 9000.00 8604.00 8226.00 7864.00 7518.00 F M A M J J A S O N D 03 F M A M J J A S 02 Created with TradeStation 9082.64 Faceline–Neckline Hand Nose Hand $INDUDaily US L =10125.40 –114.52 –1.12% O =10239.84 C =10125.40 10125.40 AU3772_book.fm Page 80 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seven: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 81 consequences, at least, the Complex shows consistently less power. Mini mum measuring rules for the two types of formations are the same and areapplied in the same manner. The difference between the patterns appears inthe price action after the minimum has been reached. The ﬁrst downswingout of a plain Head-and-Shoulders Top, not counting any early PullbackRally, will frequently carry out the minimum measuring implications of thatpattern quickly and run well beyond it. From a Multiple Top, the ﬁrstdownswing is often more leisurely, and very seldom does it exceed the bareminimum — a probability well worth remembering when you are dealingwith an Intermediate rather than a Primary Top. Of course, if the Complexdoes develop at a turn in the Primary Trend, prices will eventually go muchfarther, but even then there is usually a strong recovery (or reaction, in thecase of a Bottom) from the “minimum rule” level. A Leisurely Pattern The volume attending the construction of Multiple Head-and-Shouldersconforms in general to the “laws” we have previously stated and explainedfor simple Head-and-Shoulders Reversals. During the earlier stages of Multiple FIGURE 24. “ MCA” enjoyed an excellent advance from 1980–1986. But the going became increasingly difﬁcult after the turn of the year, when this issue began to challenge its 1985 high. Although the Bulls did manage to set a new high water markin April, a series of Pullbacks kept this issue well away from any further tests. Indeed,a large Complex Head-and-Shoulders Top appeared to be unfolding with the MajorNeckline penetrated slightly on the sell-off. M C A INCORPORTED MCA 198668 646056 52 48 44SHH SSS NL FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST 81 5 2 21 81 5 222 9 5 1 21 92 6 3 1 01 72 43 1 7 1 42 12 8 5 1 21 92 6 2 9 1 62 33 0Sales 100’s 200016001200800400 AU3772_book.fm Page 81 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Formation development, the volume chart may show much irregularity with

little recognizable pattern, but in the latter stages, its correspondence withthe Head-and-Shoulders Trend should be plainly seen. There is something about Multiple Head-and-Shoulders patterns espe cially pleasing to technical chart followers. Because of their symmetricaltendencies, it is fascinating to watch them evolve to completion. Once com-pleted, however, they may try your patience by their seeming reluctance to“get going” with a new trend. On that account, it becomes easy at times tojump to the conclusion that they have “blown out,” i.e., produced a falsesignal. Actually, except in the matter of extent of move which we havealready discussed, they are fully as reliable as the plain Head-and-Shoulders.False moves are relatively rare with both. And in those extraordinary caseswhen a Complex Formation does go wrong, it still stands, like the plainHead-and-Shoulders, as a warning that the ﬁnal Reversal is near. Rounding Tops and Bottoms The Multiple Formations we have just examined are produced by a sort ofextension or proliferation of the ordinary Head-and-Shoulders pattern. Carrythis process still further and the Complexes merge into our next class ofReversals, known as Rounding Turns. FIGURE 25. An “ideal” Multiple Top made by Budd in 1946, with two heads. Observe accompanying volume. Prices often break away from Complex Formations more reluctantly than from the simple Head-and-Shoulders type. The late Marchrally, which went back through the old neckline, was greater than normal in thatrespect, but the general market Averages were pushing to new highs at this time.Re-penetration of a neckline does not, of itself alone, cancel the implications of aReversal Formation. BUDD MANUFACTURING1945–1946 26 24 22 20 19SH H S S HH SBF DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25NL 125 100 75 50 25Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 82 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seven: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 83 In our ﬁrst approach to the theory of chart Reversal Patterns, we saw why it takes time and a considerable volume of trading to swing an estab lished trend in prices from up to down or down to up. In the Head-and-Shoulders type of Reversal, the trend surges, struggles, attacks again andagain before it ﬁnally gives up and retreats. During this struggle, the balancebetween the forces of supply and demand ﬂuctuates, often wildly, untilﬁnally the one overcomes the other. In the Multiple Formations, a similarprocess goes on but rather less violently and, over a period of time, theprogressive change from one force to the other becomes clearly apparent. The Rounding Turn is a much more simple and logical manifestation of this technical phenomenon. It pictures simply and plainly a gradual, pro-gressive, and fairly symmetrical change in the trend direction, produced bya gradual shift in the balance of power between buying and selling. If, for example, the buying has been stronger than the selling for some time past, we know that the result will have been a general upward trendin the price of our stock, as indicated by our pictorial chart record of itstrading history. So long as the buyers of the stock remain more anxious, morenumerous, more aggressive, more powerful than the sellers, that precedingupward trend will continue. Now, however, suppose the selling grows a FIGURE 26. The long Multiple Head-and-Shoulders Top made by American Lo comotive in 1946 displays very well the sort of volume pattern — irregular, but taking on deﬁnitely Bearish character in its latter half — that is normal to this formation.The rounded Bear Market Rally of August (compare price and volume trends) wasunable to attain the old neckline, but was stopped at a Resistance (RL) created byearlier Bottom levels (see Chapter 13). G and G mark Breakaway Gaps which werenot “covered” (see Chapter 12). AMERICAN LOCOMOTIVE LA 194640 38363432 30 28 26 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28125 100 75 50 25G G Sales 100’sRLSIL AU3772_book.fm Page 83 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
little stronger, while the buying either weakens slightly or remains stationary

at its previous strength. This slight change in the technical balance will beindicated by a slowing up of the previous advance. As the selling increasesin relative power, it will ﬁnally become equal to the buying power, with theresult that the market level moves neither up nor down but remains for atime quite stationary (except for Minor and insigniﬁcant ﬂuctuations). Assume that the new development continues and the selling pressure grows until it is ﬁnally stronger than buying power. Now the balance ismoving the other way. There are now more sellers than buyers, and the resultwill be a gradual decline in the market quotations for the stock. If this changein the balance of power is fairly steady and continues to its logical conclusion,we can see, even without the aid of a chart, that our picture of the pricemovement for that stock would be one of a long advancing trend slowlybeginning to round off, holding in stationary suspense for a time, and thencommencing a retreat, reversing the previous upward movement into a newand Accelerating Downward Trend. Rounding Bottoms are commonly referred to as Bowl or Saucer Patterns. Rounding Tops are sometimes called Inverted Bowls. Despite the logic of their construction, neither type appears as frequently as Head-and-Shoulders For-mations. Rounding Bottoms occur most often in low-priced stocks, in an FIGURE 27. From a Head-and-Shoulders Top in February, Digital plunged sharply lower into mid-June, retracting roughly two thirds of the 1983–85 advance. The summer low was the head of a Broad, Complex Head-and-Shoulders (EN: Or Kilroy) Bottom. “DEC”, however, had already enjoyed a high-volume penetration of theneckline and was, therefore, in a buying position. DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORPORATION DEC 1985136 128120112104 96 88 80 MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5SS SS H 4000320024001600800Sales 100’sNL AU3772_book.fm Page 84 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seven: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 85 extended, ﬂat-bottomed form which usually takes many months to complete. There was a host of such developments during 1942 and 1943 among issuesselling under $10 a share. (It should be noted here that “Saucer” Bottoms oftwo or three months’ duration also appear frequently, one right after another,in the charts of low-priced issues during an extended up-movement. Their characteristics and denotations will be discussed later when we come to Consolidation.) Tops of the Rounding type are very rare among stocks in the lower- and medium-price ranges, but are found occasionally in the charts of those high-priced common stocks which command an AA rating among wealthy investorsand do not ordinarily interest the general public. They also appear frequentlyin the charts of high-grade preferred stocks and quite naturally, because thedemand for their shares reﬂects chieﬂy two factors — supply of funds seekingconservative investment and interest rates — both of which tend to changevery slowly. The speculative appeal which produces wide-swinging price ﬂuc-tuations is absent in such issues. The same line of reasoning explains whyRounding Tops almost never develop in lower-priced, speculative commonstocks; Bull Markets in those are topped off by excited public buying whichpays little or no heed to long-range investment considerations. FIGURE 28. After testing its 1980 high in mid-1983, “ADM” turned sharply lower, retracing roughly 40% of the 1982–83 advance by mid-1984. The summer low, how ever, appeared to be a Bottom. Indeed, if one looked at the volume pattern fromApril to November and correlated it with price activity, it was not difﬁcult to makea good case for a Complex Head-and-Shoulders Bottom. A neckline through thecloses gave us a go signal on a penetration of 20 ⅝. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. ADM 1984ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 294000320024001600800 XD.035 XD.035 XD.035 5 % STK.S SSS HNL30 25201510 5 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 85 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 29. An Intermediate Bottom of the Complex class, abnormal in its lack of

symmetry but, nonetheless, easy to recognize. Low volume on reactions after head was completed gave usual (and essential) Bullish Conﬁrmation. The sluggish startof the new trend was a common feature of Multiple Head-and-Shoulder Reversals. FIGURE 30. The slide in Amdahl occupied the Bears from March–June before a sharp rally gave notice that the Bulls were still alive. After that, a choppy sidewaystrading range evolved with Support near the Pullback lows established earlier in theyear. Overall, there was a ﬁne symmetry to this chart, including volume, whichindicated the price action from March to September was actually a Broad Head-and-Shoulders Bottom. Entry was on a 3% breakout of the neckline with a minimumobjective of 19 ¾. GENERAL BRONZE GLZ 194528 26 24 22 20 19 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 21 2850 40 3020 10 XD 20 ¢ XD 20 ¢Sales 100’s AMDAHL CORPORATION AMH 198515 14 1312 11 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER 3 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 192000 1600 1200 800 600S SS HNL XD.05 XD.05Sales 100’sS AU3772_book.fm Page 86 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seven: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 87 How Rounding Turns Affect Trading Activity We have not, as yet, mentioned the volume half of the Rounding Turn picture. It is interesting, as well as meaningful. In the case of Rounding Bottoms, itspattern is usually as clean-cut and decisive as the price pattern. The ﬁrst stepin the gradual conquest of supply by demand, which produces a Rounding FIGURE 31. Another variant of the Head-and-Shoulders within a Major Reversal Formation. The smaller Head-and-Shoulders pattern was easily overlooked on the daily chart. Moreover, although it was 6 months long, this pattern in itself did notnecessarily imply Primary Reversal. But when it pushed “PJ’s” prices up in Octoberthrough the great supply which had been lodged at 12–13 the previous December,something more than a Secondary Advance could obviously be in prospect. An up-move of consequence was not ﬁnally signaled, however, until February 1943 whenthe upper neckline was penetrated and prices closed at 14. Public Service “threwback” to 12 in November 1943 (to the old neckline exactly), but then advanced steadilyto 30. Study this again when you take up Support and Resistance, Chapter 13. Thischart reiterates the point that, whereas Top Formations are often completed in arelatively short time, Major Bottoms usually require many months, and call for agreat deal of patience. Allowing for the greater time needed, however, most TopPatterns have their counterparts in Bottom Formations. PUBLIC SERVICE CORP. OF N. J. P J 1941–194320 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 SO N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M1000 800 600 400 200S SHSS Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 87 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Bottom, appears as a lessening in selling pressure. Volume, which has been

running high, gradually decreases. Demand is still timid, but the pressureon it less; so, while prices still decline, the pace is slower and the trend curvesmore and more to the horizontal. At the Bottom, with the two forces techni-cally in balance, relatively few transactions are recorded. Then demandbegins to increase, and as the price curve turns up, trading becomes moreactive. Volume accelerates with the trend until often it reaches a sort ofclimactic peak in a few days of almost “vertical” price movement on thechart. In such formations, the tips of the volume lines at the bottom of the chart, when connected, will describe an arc that often roughly parallels thearc formed by the price “Bowl” above. These patterns, when they occur after an extensive decline, are of outstanding importance, for they nearly always denote a change in Primary Trend and an extensive advance yet to come.That advance, however, seldom carries in a “skyrocket” effect which com-pletes the entire Major Move in a few weeks. On the contrary, the uptrendthat follows the completion of the pattern itself is apt to be slow and subjectto frequent interruptions, tiring out the impatient trader, but yielding even-tually a substantial proﬁt. FIGURE 32. Still another form that the Complex Reversal may take. This can be described as a Head-and-Shoulders Pattern with two widely separated heads. Study its volume pattern, noting breakout June 20 and subsequent Pullback. Compare itwith Bethlehem Steel’s Bottom Reversal shown in Chapter 12, Figure 123. NATIONAL SUPPLY NS 1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER 61 32 02 7 4 1 11 82 5 1 8 1 52 22 9 6 1 32 02 7 3 1 01 72 43 1 7 1 42 12 824 2220 19 18 17 16 1514 125 100 75 50 25Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 88 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seven: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 89 FIGURE 33. Major Top Reversal Patterns in high-priced investment issues are frequently long and “ﬂat.” The 1946 Top of Phillips Petroleum could be classiﬁed as either a Multiple Head-and-Shoulders or an irregular Rounding Top. An importanttrendline (Chapter 14) was broken downside in July. FIGURE 34. The war-end reaction of 1945 in American & Foreign Power 2d Pre ferred, as well as in many other issues, took the form of a Rounding Bottom. Comparethe price and volume trends. By October 4, the implications here were plain to see. PHILIPS PETROLEUM P 1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER 61 3 2 0 2 741 1 1 8 2 51 81 5 2 2 2 961 3 2 0 2 731 0 1 7 2 4 3 171 4 212872 68646056 125 100 75 5025G Sales 100’s AMERICAN & FOREIGN POWER 2d PFD. A FPD Pr 1945 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER 71 4 2 1 2 841 1 1 8 2 51 81 5 2 2 2 961 3 2 0 2 731 0 1 7 2 41 81 5 2 2 2 940 383634 3230 28 26 125 100 7550 25Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 89 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Let us repeat that trading volume should ebb to an extreme low at the

Bottom of a Bowl Pattern if its implications are to be trusted. After prices have passed dead center, however, and begun their ﬁrst gradual climb withas yet only a slight pickup in activity, something in the nature of a prematurebreakout may occur. Without warning, a burst of buying may shoot quota-tions straight up for a day or two. These incidents are by no means rare, but,almost invariably, prices will quickly drop back again into their formerchannel, and the gradual rounding movement is resumed. There is no par-ticular danger for the trader in these premature bursts but, if he is temptedto jump in on such a sudden showing of strength, he should realize thatthere probably will still be need for patience. A classic example of this typeof premature break appears in one of our accompanying illustrations,Figure 38. FIGURE 35. Monthly chart, on arithmetic scale. American Safety Razor’s 1932 Major Bottom was a Head-and-Shoulders, also its 1936 Bull Top. Its 1942 to 1946 Bull Market started from a Rounding Bottom nearly two and a half years long! Monthlychart study pays. AMERICAN SAFETY RAZOR ARZ20 15 10 5 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 19463/1 SPLIT 3/1 SPLIT AU3772_book.fm Page 90 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seven: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 91 See Chapter 16.1 for some interesting 2005 rounding bottoms. The Dormant Bottom Variation There is one sort of Major Bottom chart picture that has been called a Dormant Bottom, but which relates logically to our Bowl Pattern, being, in effect, an extreme development of the “extended, ﬂat-bottomed form” to which we have alluded above. It appears characteristically in “thin” stocks, i.e., thosein which the total number of shares outstanding or, more particularly, theﬂoating supply of shares is very small. In such issues, a normal day’s turn-over may be only two or three hundred shares in an active rising market.Finally, weeks and sometimes months will pass during which no sales will FIGURE 36. Monthly chart of Budd Company. Note that 1942 was the ﬁrst year to produce a dull Saucer-shaped Pattern, a Rounding Bottom of Major import. “BF” climbed from below 3 in 1942 to above 26 in 1946. FIGURE 37. Similar formation in CertainTeed Products, which rose from below 2 in 1942 to above 25 in 1946. Study volume, 1940 to 1945. The up-curving type ofMajor Bull Trend shown on these charts will be discussed in Chapter 15. BUDD CO. BF 30 20 10 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 200 100Sales 100’s CERTAIN–TEED PRODS. CT30 2010 100 50 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 91 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
be registered for days at a time, or only an occasional lot at a ﬁgure which

ﬂuctuates within a fractional range. The chart appears “ﬂy specked.” Eventually, there may appear a sudden and usually quite inexplicable ﬂurry of activity. Several hundred shares appear on the tape and pricesadvance sharply. This “breakout of dormancy” can be a premature move,such as we have noted in connection with typical Rounding Bottoms, to befollowed by several more weeks of inactivity, or it can be the ﬁrst lift in asort of step-up process with shorter and shorter intervals between each step,until ﬁnally a consistent uptrend develops. In any event, it is a signal thatwe are dealing with an important Accumulation Pattern. What has happened to form these Dormant Bottoms is easy to guess. With relatively few shares outstanding, and only an occasional lot put upfor sale “at the market,” investors (perhaps insiders connected with thecompany) would succeed only in running the price up out of reach if theystarted to bid for the stock. So they simply “hold a basket under it,” as the FIGURE 38. A classic example of Rounding Bottom at the Major Trend Reversal of 1932. The jump out of line on June 10 and subsequent return to the Saucer Pattern is a common development in Rounding Bottoms. J. I. CASE J I 1932 MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY 20 27 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 1360 5040 30 20 10 800600400200Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 92 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seven: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 93 saying goes, quickly picking up anything that is offered but never reaching for it, until eventually the tree is shaken clean. Then they may raise theirbids a point or so; if that seems to bring out a lot of stock for sale, they goback to their waiting tactics. Volume Pattern at Tops The volume pattern on Rounding Tops is seldom as clearly deﬁned as atBottoms. Indeed, it is apt to be rather high and irregular throughout theentire rounding-over movement in prices. Under close scrutiny, one canusually see some signs of a change from Bullish to Bearish activity in theMinor Fluctuations after the peak has been passed, but the volume warningsdo not become conspicuous in most cases until the downtrend has begun toaccelerate toward the vertical. We know of no measuring formula which can be applied to Rounding Turns (except for the minimum qualiﬁcations we mentioned in connectionwith Head-and-Shoulders, i.e., they cannot be counted upon to produce agreater move than the preceding price swing in the opposite direction). Butthey almost never deceive. Their implications can be roughly estimated fromthe magnitude of the trends that led to them and the length of time theytake in the rounding-over process. The Rounding Turns that often appearon weekly and monthly charts, thus, have major import. FIGURE 39. An extreme case of “Dormant Bottom.” There were many days in the ﬁrst 4 months during which no shares were traded. A “buy” signal appeared on April 26. Note volume. GAMEWELL CO. GAC 1944 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE 81 52 22 9 5 1 21 92 6 4 1 11 82 5 1 8 1 52 22 9 6 1 32 02 7 3 1 01 72 4 142 40383634 32 302826 25 2015 10 5 Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 93 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
This leads us to the general consideration of weekly and monthly chart

patterns. Thus far, we have been speaking in detail of only daily chart developments, but all of the formations we have taken up appear, as well,in the much larger swings into which daily movements are condensed onweekly and monthly charts, and with identical signiﬁcance. Thus, volumerecord may not be quite so easy to read (climactic activity may occur on oneday of a week and the other days run dull, which would not show at all inthe week’s total ﬁgure) but is less critical — may almost be disregarded.Head-and-Shoulders Tops are particularly plentiful on monthly charts andshould be accorded due respect. In fact, any clearly deﬁned pattern, whichis built to completion on a weekly or monthly chart, is proportionatelysigniﬁcant (bearing always in mind that “a Reversal must have somethingto reverse”). FIGURE 40. The March 1935 reaction produced many Rounding Bottoms. This one verges on the dormant type. The gap (G), a Breakaway through a Resistance Level, was not closed until late 1937. (See Chapter 12.) INLAND STEEL IAD JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE 5 1 21 92 6 2 9 1 62 3 2 9 1 62 33 0 6 1 32 02 7 4 1 11 82 5 1 8 1 52 22 91935G68 646056 52 48 44 50 40 30 20 10Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 94 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seven: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 95 FIGURE 41. In a broad trading range (11–17 ½) during 1988, “APM” turned down from Resistance in the summer. The reaction, however, was slow, forming a Saucer like Pattern from July through November on generally Bullish price/volume corre-lation. Of particular note was the fact that the low point of the Saucer was above theFebruary low, i.e., higher lows were beginning to emerge. The High-Volume Rallythrough the Short-Term Downtrend Line signaled the start of the next upleg. APPLIED MAGNETICS CORP. APM SDT1988 JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 3120 191817 16 15141312 1000 800 600 400 200Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 95 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 42. Cray Research, a powerhouse stock for over a decade. Trading at under

one dollar in 1976, it reached 135 ¾ before the late April gap, through the Bottom of a 7-week Diamond, started the decline. However, after the High-Volume Rally in mid-January, “CYR” also managed to form an impressive Rounding Top. The concavevolume pattern, clearly evident after the high-volume decline to Support that fol-lowed the Diamond breakdown, was particularly signiﬁcant in illuminating thisTopping Pattern. CRAY RESEARCH INC. CYR 1987 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY 3 1 01 72 43 1 7 1 42 12 8 7 1 42 12 8 4 1 11 82 5 2 9 1 62 33 0 6 1 32 02 7 4 1 1 18144 136128120112 104 96 88 2000 1600 1200 800400Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 96 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seven: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 97 FIGURE 43. 1984. We love the Scalloping tendency of Northern Indiana Public Service. Although it is obviously not a pattern portending rocket-like advance, the technical picture brightens with the high-volume breakout through Resistance atchart end. NORTHERN INDIANA PUBLIC SERVICE NI 1984 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 1330 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 13990 5642 8900 10018 8420 200016001200800400 XD. 375 XD. 39 XD. 39Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 97 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 98 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

99 chapter eight Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles We come next to an entirely different family of technical patterns, the Triangles, a group that has not been as well represented on the charts of the decade ofthe 1940s as it was during the 1920s and 1930s. Their scarcity in that decadeis regrettable because they are an intriguing lot with excellent proﬁt potential.( EN: Demonstrating that charts from the 1920s may be intermixed with charts from the 2000s, compare Figures 269 and 269.1.) Before we examine them in detail, however, a quick review of the basic theory, which gives meaning and valueto technical analysis, may be appropriate. That theory can be resummarizedin the following brief statements. 1. The market value of a security is determined solely by the interaction of supply and demand. 2. Supply and demand are governed at any given moment by many hundreds of factors, some rational and some irrational. Information,opinions, moods, guesses (shrewd or otherwise) as to the futurecombine with blind necessities in this equation. No ordinary mancan hope to grasp and weigh them all, but the market does thisautomatically. 3. Disregarding Minor Fluctuations, prices move in trends that persist for an appreciable length of time. 4. Changes in trend, which represent an important shift in the balance between supply and demand, however caused, are detectable sooner or later in the action of the market itself. By this time, the fact expressed in the italicized words of the last state ment may have begun to raise some misgivings in your mind. The complaintthat the Dow Theory is often “late” has already been discussed. The ReversalPatterns studied in the two preceding chapters give no certain signal untilafter the trend has changed, usually “sooner” as compared with Dow Theory,but never at the absolute top or bottom price. The man who sells a stock assoon as, but not until, a Head-and-Shoulders Top has been completed on itschart may cash in on no more than half of the total decline from its extremehigh to extreme bottom, since by the very terms of our measuring formula,the ﬁrst half of the decline can have taken place before the Top ReversalFormation was ﬁnally conﬁrmed. AU3772_book.fm Page 99 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Make up your mind that there is no help for it. Somebody, of course,

managed to sell his shares at the very top eighth of a point on the peak of the “head” (and some poor devil bought them). The seller was just plainlucky! His exploit can be truly compared with a “hole-in-one” in golf. Evena complete duffer occasionally enjoys that thrill. But the more experienceda player, the better satisﬁed he is to land safely on the green and not too farfrom the cup. The more experienced an investor, the less concerned he iswith getting the last point, or even the last ten points, out of his marketcommitments. No one can ever be sure at the time that he is selling at the ﬁnal high. No rules or methods have ever been devised — or ever will be — to ensure buying within fractions of the Bottom, or selling within fractions of the Top.Of course, a man can make certain of buying a stock at its absolute lowprovided he is prepared to take at that ﬁgure every last share offered, evento the entire outstanding issue if necessary. It might, in theory, require asmuch as $3.7 billion to “put a bottom” under U.S. Steel at 70, (EN9: ca. 1950s) in case you are tempted. The reader, who at this point may think we “protest too much,” will see more excuses for the foregoing remarks when we take up the habits of Triangles, for these formations are not always indicative of Trend Reversal.On the contrary, except in certain rather uncommon varieties, they are moreapt to signal what may most conveniently be termed Consolidation, termi nating an up or down move only temporarily and setting the stage foranother strong move in the same direction later on. (Schabacker called such chart formations “Continuation Patterns.”) The reason for including Trian-gles in this section of our studies under the general heading of ReversalFormations is that they do, at times, develop at periods of Major Trendchange, and those are, by all odds, the periods which it is most essential forthe investor to recognize. Symmetrical Triangles The most common form of a Triangle is composed of a series of price ﬂuc-tuations, each of which is smaller than its predecessor, each Minor Top failing to attain the height of the preceding rally, and each Minor Recession stoppingabove the level of the preceding Bottom. The result is a sort of contracting“Dow Line” on the chart — a sideways price area or trading range whoseTop can be more or less accurately deﬁned by a down-slanting boundary line and whose Bottom can be similarly bounded by an up-slanting line. This type of Triangle is called a Symmetrical Triangle. If we wanted to make a moreaccurate application of the language of geometry, we might better call it anAcute Triangle, since it is not at all necessary that its Top and Bottom bound-aries be of equal length or, in other words, make the same angle with thehorizontal axis. However, there is a very strong tendency in these formationsto approximate the symmetrical form; so, the established name will do wellenough. This pattern is also sometimes referred to as a “Coil.” AU3772_book.fm Page 100 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 101 While the process of contraction or coiling, which makes up the price action of the Symmetrical Triangle Pattern, is going on, trading activity exhibits a diminishing trend, irregularly perhaps, but nevertheless quitenoticeably as time goes on. The converging upper and lower boundary linesof the price formation come together somewhere out to the right (the futurein the time sense) of the chart, at the apex of our Triangle. As prices worktheir way along in narrower and narrower ﬂuctuations toward the apex,volume ebbs to an abnormally low daily turnover. Then, if we are dealingwith a typical example, comes the action which ﬁrst suggested the name“Coil.” For suddenly and without warning, as though a coil spring had beenwound tighter and tighter and then snapped free, prices break out of theirTriangle with a notable pickup in volume, and leap away in a strong movewhich tends to approximate in extent the up or down move that precededits formation. There is seldom any clue given on the one chart containing the Triangle to tell in which direction prices are going to break out of the pattern untilthat action ﬁnally occurs. Sometimes you can get a pretty good idea of whatis likely to happen by observing what is going on at the same time in thecharts of other stocks (which is an important topic for later discussion), but FIGURE 44. A ﬁne Symmetrical Triangle Reversal Formation on a weekly chart. Upper boundary sloping down from February 1942 recovery high at 21 and lower boundary sloping up from “Pearl Harbor” Bottom at 16 ⅜

converge to an apex at about 18 ⅝. From this Major Bottom Pattern, “HD” advanced to 45 in 1946. Note shrinkage in volume as pattern formed, and increase as price broke out through Topin October 1942. Breakout came not quite three quarters of the way over from ﬁrstTop to apex. HUDSON BAY MINING & SMELTING HD 1941–1943 SO N DJF MAM J J A S O N D J F M26 242220 19 18 17 50 40 30 20 10Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 101 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
often, there is nothing to do but wait until the market makes up its mind

which way to go. And “making up its mind” is just what the market seemsto be doing when it builds a Triangle; everything about this pattern appearsto exemplify doubt, vacillation, and stalling until ﬁnally a decision is reached. Some Cautions About Symmetrical Triangles A compact, clean-cut Triangle is a fascinating picture, but it has its trickyfeatures. The beginner in technical chart analysis is quite naturally prone tolook for Triangles constantly, and will often think he has detected them when,in fact, something entirely different is in the process of development. Remem-ber that it takes two points to determine a line. The top boundary line of aprice area cannot be drawn until two Minor Trend Tops have been deﬁnitelyestablished, which means that prices must have moved up to and then downaway from both far enough to leave the two peaks standing out clear andclean on the chart. A bottom boundary line, by the same token, cannot bedrawn until two Minor Trend Bottoms have been deﬁnitely established.Therefore, before you can conclude that a Symmetrical Triangle is building,you must be able to see four Reversals of Minor Trend. If it comes after an advance in prices, you must have ﬁrst a Top, next a Bottom, next a secondTop lower than the ﬁrst, and ﬁnally a second Bottom higher than the ﬁrstBottom (and prices must move up away from the second Bottom before youcan be sure it is a Bottom). Then, and only then, can you draw your boundarylines and proceed on the assumption that you have a Symmetrical Triangle. FIGURE 45. Sear’s Roebuck made a Symmetrical Triangle Reversal at its Bull Mar ket Top in 1946, and then went into another long Triangle which turned out to be a Consolidation rather than Reversal Formation. (Logarithmic volume scaling mini-mizes volume variations.) Sell signal was given at 44 ½

and again at 41. Decline continued to 30 ½. SEARS, ROEBUCK S 1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER 61 3 2 0 2 741 1 1 8 2 51 81 5 2 2 2 961 3 2 0 2 731 0 1 7 2 4 3 171 4 2 1 2 848 44 40 38 250 200 150100 50Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 102 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 103 Another point to remember — and one which does not conform at all to the “coil” simile — is that the farther out into the apex of the Triangle prices push without bursting its boundaries, the less force or power thepattern seems to have. Instead of building up more pressure, it begins tolose its efﬁcacy after a certain stage. The best moves (up or down) seem toensue when prices break out decisively at a point somewhere between halfand three quarters of the horizontal distance from the base (left-hand end)to the apex. If prices continue to move “sideways” in narrower and narrowerﬂuctuations from day to day after the three quarter mark is passed, they arequite apt to keep right on to the apex and beyond in a dull drift or ripplewhich leaves the chart analyst completely at sea. The best thing to do in suchcases is go away and look for something more promising elsewhere in yourchart book. And a third tricky point is that it becomes necessary sometimes to redraw one or both boundaries of a Triangle before it is ﬁnally completed (i.e., beforeprices break out and move away from it in a decisive fashion). This canhappen, for example, when, after the ﬁrst two Rally Tops have establisheda down-slanting upper boundary line, the third rally starting from the lowerboundary pushes up and through the original Top line by a moderate margin and then, without developing a recognizable breakout volume on this move,stops short of surpassing the highest level of the preceding (second) patternTop. When prices subsequently drop back again into pattern, it is necessaryto abandon the original upper boundary line and draw a new one across thehighs of the ﬁrst and third rally tops. How Prices Break Out of a Symmetrical Triangle Prices may move out of a Symmetrical Triangle either up or down. There isseldom, if ever, as we have said above, any clue as to direction until themove has actually started, i.e., until prices have broken out of their triangular“area of doubt” in decisive fashion. In a very general way, the precepts wehave laid down for breakouts from Head-and-Shoulders Formations applyhere as well. For example, the margin by which prices should close beyondthe pattern lines is the same, roughly 3%. It is equally essential that an upside break in prices be conﬁrmed by a marked increase in trading volume; lackingvolume, do not trust the price achievement. But a downside breakout, again as in the case of the Head-and-Shoulders, does not require conﬁrmation bya pickup in activity. As a matter of record, volume does visibly increase inmost cases, but in a majority of down breaks, not to any notable extent untilafter prices have fallen below the level of the last preceding Minor Bottomwithin the Triangle, which, as you can see, may be several points lower thanthe boundary line at the place (date) of the actual breakout. The curious fact is that a downside breakout from a Symmetrical Triangle which is attended right from the start by conspicuously heavy volume is muchmore apt to be a false signal rather than the start of a genuine downtrend that AU3772_book.fm Page 103 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
will be worth following. This is particularly true if the break occurs after

prices have worked their way well out into the apex of the Triangle; a highvolume crack then frequently — we might even say usually — develops intoa 2- or 3-day “shakeout” which quickly reverses itself and is followed by agenuine move in the up direction. All of the above the reader will have undoubtedly found most discon certing. Here is a very pretty technical pattern and it cannot always betrusted. Unfortunately, Symmetrical Triangles are subject to false moves to a far greater extent than the Head-and-Shoulders or any of the other forma-tions we have discussed or will discuss later. Unfortunately, some of thesefalse moves cannot be identiﬁed as such until after a commitment has beenrisked (although good trading tactics should prevent their occasioning muchmore than a trivial loss). And, unfortunately again, even a typical shakeout,such as we described in the preceding paragraph, may produce a doublecross, proceeding right on down in a genuine decline. No technical chartformation is 100% reliable, and, of all, our present subject is the worstoffender. But most Symmetrical Triangles — lacking an actual statistical count, our experience would suggest more than two thirds of them — behavethemselves properly, produce no false signals which cannot be spotted before FIGURE 46. Johns-Manville’s Primary Trend Reversal in 1942 developed out of a Symmetrical Triangle which had also some aspects of a Head-and-Shoulders Pattern with a long right shoulder. Although this is a weekly chart, the volume here is worthyof detailed study in connection with the price action. “JM” (old stock) advanced morethan 100 points in the next 4 years. JOHNS – MANVILLE JM 1941–1943 SO N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M80 76726864 60 5652 50 40 3020 10Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 104 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 105 any damage is done. Upside breakouts on high volume may be premature in the sense that prices return to pattern and do some more “work” therebefore the genuine uptrend gets under way, but they seldom are false. Weshall have a little more to say about false signals in this chapter and morelater on what we trust will be helpful in developing the experience a traderneeds to defend himself against them. A Typical Triangle Development The several actual chart examples of Symmetrical Triangles that illustratethis chapter will serve, we trust, to give the reader a working acquaintancewith their appearance in various manifestations. Yet it may help to clear upsome of the more important points if we describe in detail just how a typicalpattern develops step by step. Let us suppose that you are watching a stockon your charts which has climbed, with only the normal, brief hesitationsand inconsequential reactions, from around 20 to 30, 32, 35, and is still FIGURE 47. Logarithmic price scaling on weekly chart emphasizes important tech nical developments at low price levels. “DH’s” Symmetrical Triangle Bottom started a Bull Market which reached 57 in 1945. Note Throwback to apex of Triangle, a notuncommon development. The apex itself is a strong Support (Chapter 13). DELAWARE & HUDSON DH 1941–1943 SO N D J F M A M J J A S O N DJF M13 121110 9 8 7 125 150 755025Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 105 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
moving up. (Let’s hope you bought it at 20!) Lower down, its turnover ran

between 300 and 600 shares daily, but now, above 30, it has attracted quitea following, and daily volume has increased to around 1000. As it approaches40, activity shoots up to nearly 2000 shares, the market “churns” between39 and 40, and then prices begin to drop. As they fall back, you (especiallyif you own the stock) watch it with some concern, but you know it is hardlylikely that it is going to go straight down again to 20; stocks don’t act thatway. (EN9: Sometimes they do now, in the 21st century.) If the trend of this issue has actually been reversed, it should, nevertheless, spend some more timeand effort around its top levels, make some sort of a Distribution Pattern. The decline continues for 10 days with the turnover also declining quite appreciably. By the time prices have worked back to 33, volume is runningat about 700 shares daily. At 33, it may pick up again for a single day to800 or 900 shares, but the reaction stops there, and after a day or two, pricesbegin to climb again with little change in their turnover rate. In 8 or 9 days,quotations have gotten back into the upper 30s and activity increases andreaches, say, 1200 shares on the day 39 is reached. Instead of going on to40 or beyond, however, a new reaction sets in and prices drift back to 37.(Perhaps you will ﬁnd this growing picture easier to visualize if you pencilits development on a scrap of chart paper.) Now it is evident that a secondTop has formed at 39; you can now draw a tentative pattern line (there areother names for this, as we shall see later) on your chart across the two FIGURE 48. Triangles often form as a part of a larger and more important pattern of some other type. Here a symmetrical ﬁgure constitutes the latter half of a Rounding Turn. Note premature breakout October 17, return to pattern, and then ﬁnal break-away on November 8. CUBAN – AMERICAN SUGAR CSU

## _1945 G_
JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER

7 1 42 12 8 4 1 11 82 5 1 8 1 52 22 9 6 1 32 02 7 3 1 01 72 4 1 8 1 52 22 928 26 24 22 20 1918 125 100 75 50 25Sales 100’sG−G AU3772_book.fm Page 106 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 107 extreme high ranges (not closing prices) which will slant downward from left to right. So far you have only one Bottom point so you can draw no linesfrom that. But this second decline brings out even less trading activity thanthe ﬁrst. Volume ebbs to 400 shares and the down move halts at 34; the pricetrack “rounds out” and turns up again; trading is very dull, but begins topick up as 36 is reached. This action deﬁnes a second Minor Bottom and now you can draw a Bottom “tangent,” an up-slanting line across the extreme low prices regis-tered on the two reactions, the ﬁrst at 33 and the second at 34. Your twopattern lines will converge, meeting near the 36 ½

level about 4 weeks ahead (i.e., to the right) on your chart. You have a Symmetrical Triangle — but you don’t know whether prices are going to fall out of it eventually or shake offpresent doubts and push up in a new advance worth following. You canonly watch further developments very closely and be prepared to take what-ever action is, in due time, indicated. The second rally picks up a little in activity, attains a daily turnover of about 700 shares, and pushes up to 38 and on for part of a day to 38 ½. This nudges through the previously drawn pattern line by perhaps a quarter ofa point (since each swing is shorter in points traveled and, accordingly, in FIGURE 49. Prices in this Symmetrical Triangle squeezed way out into the apex before erupting. Breakout at that stage is unreliable; above is a fair sample of the false moves that occur there. Real move was down. NATIONAL GYPSUM NG 1945 FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL JUNE JULY MAY 3 1 01 72 4 3 1 01 72 43 1 7 1 42 12 8 5 1 21 92 6 2 9 1 62 33 0 7 1 4 2 12 824 22 20 19 181716 15 14 125 100 755025Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 107 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
duration). But the volume on this Minor Penetration is less than on the

preceding Top (at 39), and buying again ebbs. As the price range line fallsback to 37 and 36, you had best now draw a new upper tangent across theﬁrst Top at 40 and the last Top at 38 ½. There is the suggestion here in this slight “lift” that the balance may be swinging slightly to the demand side,but don’t count on it. Pinpoint accuracy is not to be expected; Triangles mustbe allowed some leeway. On the third reaction, activity dwindles away to the lowest yet. The up-slanting Bottom boundary will be reached at about the 35 level if pricescontinue their present course. It is worth noting now if they will come allthe way down to it this time, because if they don’t — if their recession ishalted half a point or so above it — that action would give some signiﬁcanceto the previous bulge through the upper boundary. But this doesn’t happen;the drift continues right on down to 35, and now volume is running at therate of only 200 shares daily, less than it ran in the early stages of the originaladvance above 20. This is a critical spot. The price track ﬂattens out momen-tarily, turns up feebly but keeps on hitching up, crosses 36 ½, picks up activity, FIGURE 50. Recovery rallies from “Panic” Bottoms are often capped by Triangles, for those are periods in which doubt and indecision are prevalent. The doubt in such cases, however, is usually resolved in favor of renewed decline. “Panic” Bottomsseldom hold. This chart shows a typical Symmetrical Pattern topping the recoveryfrom the famous Selling Climax of October 19, 1937. Note Pullback to apex. NORTH AMERICAN CO. NA1937–1938 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 5 12 19 2624 2220 19 18 1716 1514 250 200150 100 50 Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 108 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 109 reaches the (new) upper Triangle boundary at 37 ½

and, on the next day, punches through on a turnover of 1500 shares to close at 39 ⅛. This is a breakout; the doubt is resolved and (barring a false move, unlikely at this point) the trend is once again up. Note that it was not necessary for pricesto surpass the previous high at 40 to produce this signal — that is one ofthe interesting things about Symmetrical Triangles. Reversal or Consolidation But, we started to discuss Symmetrical Triangles as Reversal Patterns, andour example has turned out to be, instead, a Consolidation Pattern, i.e., only a sort of resting stage in a continued uptrend. Well, three out of four of theseformations will turn out to be just that. The fourth is the dangerous one (ifyou own the stock). How would it differ? The example described might have been a Reversal instead of a Consol idation Formation any time up to the point of the decisive breakthrough to39. If it had been a typical Reversal, the ﬁrst change would probably haveappeared shortly after the ﬁnal rally started up from the third Bottom at 35.That rally would have petered out at about 36 ½, and prices would have started to drift back again. Then, with the activity increasing slightly, theBottom boundary would be penetrated. As quotations dropped to 34, daily FIGURE 51. A Major Symmetrical Triangle Top in which prices squeezed out into the apex and then produced a false move upside (see Figure 49). “VEC,” as a matter of fact, was a bad actor technically, but this particular breakout would be suspectanyway. VERTIENTES – CAMAGUEY SUGAR VEC 1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER 6 1 32 02 7 4 1 11 82 5 1 8 1 52 22 9 6 1 32 02 7 3 1 01 72 43 1 7 1 42 12 826 24 22 20 1918 17 16 125 100 7550 25Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 109 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 52. The other side of the story — an imposing Symmetrical Triangle which failed badly, although for the alert

and experienced technician, there were warnings of something amiss in Mar ch and April. Eastern Airlines built, in late 1946 and early 1947, a formation which, so far as price pattern was concerned, left little to be desir ed. Prices broke out topside decisively in late March. A Throwback in April met normal Support at the upper T riangle boundary. But the subsequent advance fell short, weakened, and ﬁnally broke down, producing an “end r un” around the apex. Warnings referred to were high and irregular volume, particularly on reactions, in February and Mar ch — not characteristic of valid Triangle devel opment — and failure of prices to push up rapidly and vigorously after the April 14 Throwback. EASTERN AIRLINES EAL 1946–1947 NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRU ARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 424 2220 19181716 125100755025Sales100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 110 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 111 volume might mount to 600 or 700 shares. Any further decline would con stitute a down signal and would result in a further pickup in turnover andan acceleration in the price decline as the stop-loss orders (to be discussedlater) spotted under 34 were “touched off.” Before we leave our typical example, we might make some mention of the post-breakout reactions or Pullbacks that sometimes occur. As in the caseof the Head-and-Shoulders Formation, the initial breakout move from aSymmetrical Triangle may halt before prices are carried very far away fromthe pattern and be followed by a Minor Reaction, usually lasting only 2 or3 days, which will carry quotations back to the nearest pattern boundary.Thus, in our ﬁrst example in which the break, when it came, took our stockup through the top side to 39 ⅛, the next day might have seen a push on to 40, and then prices might have backed off again in a couple of days ofdecreased activity to 37 ½

or 38. The up-move would then normally be FIGURE 53. A weekly chart. The 7-month Consolidation area of 1944 — in “NG,” undeﬁnable at ﬁrst, developed eventually into a typical Symmetrical Triangle. Two months after the high-volume breakout in January 1945, prices reacted nearly to apexlevel, then pushed away rapidly. Minimum measuring implications of this Trianglewere satisﬁed at 16. NATIONAL GYPSUM NG 1944–1945 JFMAMJ JAS O N DJF M AM J19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 Sales 100’s 50 40 3020 10 AU3772_book.fm Page 111 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
resumed with greater vigor. Downside breakouts are sometimes followed in

much the same manner by pullbacks to the lower boundary of the pattern,after which the decline is resumed with an increase in volume. However,these post-breakout reactions occur less often with Triangles than they dowith Head-and-Shoulders patterns. Another matter we might take up, before going on to study the next formation, is the rationale of the Symmetrical Triangle. It may help to ﬁx its characteristics in mind if we try to deduce what sequence of events mighttypically produce it. Of course, any effort of this sort can result only in agross oversimpliﬁcation which will not ﬁt all of the Triangle’s various man-ifestations, but it is an interesting mental speculation — and one not withoutbeneﬁt to our understanding of the general theory of chart formations. Letus turn back again to our typical example. We started with a stock that ranup rather steadily from around 20 to 40 and then reacted. It is fairly obviouswhat happened at 40: many investors had substantial paper proﬁts,approaching 100%, at that price. (A “round ﬁgure” such as 40, 50, 75, or 100is apt to become a sort of mental proﬁt objective and, hence, bring inincreased selling.) Some of them were ready to cash in and did so, tempo-rarily swinging the technical balance from demand to supply; they sold lessfreely, of course, as prices receded. Other would-be investors had beenattracted to the stock, but too late to “get aboard” below 30. Unwilling to“chase” it up to 40, they welcomed the reaction and, by the time prices haddropped back to 33, enough of them were now ready to buy to swing thebalance back again to the demand side of the equation. Watching the ensuing rally, however, were the owners of the stock who had failed to grab their proﬁts near 40 on the previous advance and hadmade up their minds to be a little less greedy if given a second opportunity. FIGURE 54. A small Symmetrical Triangle which tended toward the “Ascending” type. Note that the higher volume that developed within this pattern in early January came on a rally. This sort of action is fairly typical of very “thin” stocks. U. S. INDUSTRIAL CHEMICALS UD 1944–1945 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 17 24 3144 40 3836 Sales 100’s 25 20 15 10 5 AU3772_book.fm Page 112 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 113 Their offerings began to come in above 37, say, and were sufﬁciently copious at 39 to stem the advance at that level. Behind the scenes, we can imaginethis process repeated again and again, with new money constantly comingin and meeting supply from owners increasingly anxious to cinch theirproﬁts. Eventually, the offerings of the latter are all absorbed, or perhapswithdrawn, and then professionals, as well as hopeful investors, suddenlydiscover that there is no stock ahead on the books and rush to buy results. Since the advance (or decline) that follows the completion of a Symmet rical Triangle usually runs to worthwhile trading proportions (we shall dis-cuss measuring implications later), there would be evident advantage to thetrader who could tell in advance of the breakout which way prices were FIGURE 55. An Ascending Triangle 10 months long which was the start of a Major Bull Trend, carrying “ABN” to 45. Refusal of prices to react to the lower pattern boundary, as here in August 1942, is a frequent development in strong formations,a warning of near completion and breakout. AMERICAN BANK NOTE ABN 1941–194314 1312 11 10 9 8 7 6 Sales 100’s 50 40 30 20 10 SO N D J F M AM J J A SOND J FM AU3772_book.fm Page 113 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
going to move. The odds are, as we have already said, that the new move

will proceed in the same direction as the one prior to the Triangle’s formation.These odds are greatest, of course, in the early stages of either a Primary Bull or Bear Market, with the chances of Reversal increasing as those Major Trendsmature. But the charts of other stocks often furnish valuable collateral evi-dence. Thus, if at the same time you detect a Symmetrical Triangle in processof formation in “PDQ,” a majority of your charts are showing Saucers orHead-and-Shoulders Bottoms or Ascending Triangles or some other patternof typically Bullish import, it is a fair assumption that your SymmetricalTriangle will break out topside. There are times when advance indicationsof this sort are strong enough to justify taking a position on it. The Right-Angle Triangles We mentioned Ascending Triangles in the preceding paragraph. The Ascend ing and Descending are the Bullish and Bearish manifestations, respectively,of our next class of patterns, the Right-Angle Triangles. In many respects, in most in fact, they perform like their Symmetrical cousins, but with this verygratifying difference: they give advance notice of their intentions. Hence,their names, for the supposition always is that prices will ascend out of theAscending form and descend from the Descending form. The Symmetrical Triangles, as we have seen, are constructed of a series of successively narrower price ﬂuctuations which can be approximatelybounded across their Tops by a down-sloping line and across their Bottomsby an up-sloping line. Right-Angle Triangles are distinguished by the fact FIGURE 56. Premature breakouts from Right-Angle Triangles, such as appeared in Celanese in March 1946, are temporarily disappointing to the trader who buys on them, but work out all right eventually. Celanese, before its 1946 split, was subjectto frequent and peculiar shakeouts, as here on March 9 and 26. CELANESE CORPORATION CZ 1946 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 3052 48 44 40 38 50 40302010Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 114 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 115 that one of their boundaries is practically horizontal, while the other slants toward it. If the top line is horizontal and the bottom line slopes up to meetit somewhere out to the right of the chart (at the apex), the Triangle is of the Ascending persuasion. If the bottom line is horizontal and the top line slopes down, the Triangle is Descending. These formations are perfectly logical and easy to explain. The Ascend ing Triangle, for instance, pictures in the simplest and most normal formwhat happens when a growing demand for a certain stock meets a largeblock of shares for sale at a ﬁxed price. If the demand continues, the supplybeing distributed at that price will eventually be entirely absorbed by newowners looking for still higher levels, and prices will then advance rapidly.A typical Ascending Pattern starts to develop in much the same way as the“ideal” Symmetrical Triangle previously described, with an advance in ourcertain stock from 20 to 40 where sufﬁcient supply suddenly appears on themarket to ﬁll the orders of all buyers and produce a reaction. Sensing thetemporary satiation of demand, some owners may dump their holdings onthe decline, but offerings are soon exhausted as prices drop back to, say, 34,and renewed demand then stimulates a new rally. This runs into supply FIGURE 57. A steep recovery from a Panic Bottom (the “Pearl Harbor” selling) ﬂattened out into a ﬁne Ascending Triangle. Note horizontal supply line at 19, above a gradually rising demand line. The breakout at the end of September signaledinitiation of an advance of some consequence. It turned out to be a Primary BullMarket which took Briggs up to 53. BRIGGS MANUFACTURING CO. BG 1941–194326 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 50 40302010 SO ND J F M AM J J A SONDJ F MSales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 115 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
again at 40, and again, all buyers are accommodated at that level. The second

recession, however, carries quotation down only to 36 before anotherup-move develops. But the pool or inside group that is distributing at 40still has some of its holdings left to sell, so it may take more time, anotherbacking away and another attack at the 40 line, before the supply there isexhausted and the trend can push along up. A Planned Distribution This type of market action evidences a planned campaign by owners of afairly large quantity of shares to liquidate at a predetermined price. It con-tains little of the element of doubt that we mentioned as characterizing theSymmetrical Pattern. So long as demand persists, the distributing poolknows it can ultimately cash in its entire line at 40 and need not sell for less.It is equally apparent, so long as demand keeps coming in at higher andhigher levels, that, once the supply at 40 has all been absorbed, the marketwill advance rapidly and easily. As soon as prices break out above 40, thosewho took over the supply at that ﬁgure will feel their judgment has beenvindicated and will not be disposed to sell until they, in turn, can register agood proﬁt. The crux of the matter is, of course, contained in the two preceding sentences. Demand must continue to come in at higher and higher levels; FIGURE 58. Sears’ 1936 Bull Market Top was a Symmetrical Triangle, out of which it declined 15 points. An Ascending Triangle then produced an Intermediate Recovery to the Supply Zone (see Chapter 13) at the lower side of the top Triangle. Comparethis chart with the 1946 Top in Figure 45. SEARS ROEBUCK S 1936–1637 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH112 104 96 88 80 76 125 150 25 50 25 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 6 13 20 27 XR Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 116 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 117 otherwise, our formation will cease to be an Ascending Triangle. And the overhead supply must eventually be absorbed, permitting an upside break-out. If demand begins to falter any time before the Supply Line (horizontalTop boundary) has been broken through, the ensuing reaction may dropprices down “out of pattern,” and then the chart technician is faced with thenecessity of revising his chart picture. One might think that such a develop-ment, blasting the earlier promise of the chart, would occur fairly often, but,as a matter of experience, it is surprisingly rare. We say “surprisingly”because it is obvious that in many cases of Ascending Triangle development,the group whose selling creates its Top boundary or Supply Line mustbelieve that level to be just about as high as the stock has any right to go.As holders of a large enough block to inﬂuence the market for several weeks, FIGURE 59. An Ascending Triangle at an Intermediate Bottom. This chart runs from April through August 1936. Extreme shrinkage in trading volume during this formation indicated a very strong situation technically. SOUTHERN RAILWAY PFD. SR Pr 1936 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST40 383634 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 50 40 30 2010 41 1 1 8 2 52 9 2 3 16 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 23 29Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 117 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends FIGURE 60. One of the early 1947 disappointments (to the Bulls) was the failur e of “AM” to break out topside from the
long Ascending Triangle depicted above. Here is a case (see page 1 12) where supply at 15 ﬁnally overwhelmed demand. A

pattern such as this indicates a potentially strong underlying situation for the long pull. Or dinarily, the consequence of an Ascending Triangle’s “failure” of this sort is the development either of an extended Rectangular base within the general range of the Triangle (in this case, 10 to 15), or formation of a Double Bottom at or near the earlier low (in this case near 10). However, “AM” dropped lower after several more attempts to over come the Major Supply at the 15 level, which was not substantially penetrated until 1955. ARMOUR & COMPANY AM 1946–1947 MAY JUNE JULY AUGUS T SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECE MBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH19 18171615 14 13 12 11 125100755025 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 1 7 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 1 8 5 22 29 5Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 118 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 119 and sometimes for months, their judgment is hardly to be scorned. Yet, once it becomes evident that the lower boundary or Demand Line is slanting up, the odds are certainly somewhere in the neighborhood of 9–1 that the newbuyers will eventually have the best of it. On occasion, the third reaction or fourth reaction within an Ascending Triangle Formation will break down through the previously establishedup-slanting Demand Line (lower boundary), but will be halted at the samelevel as the previous reaction. The pattern from there on is apt to developas a Rectangle, a formation to be discussed in our next chapter, and should be treated as such. (The tactics of trading on Ascending and Descending Triangles, including protection against the rare cases of collapse, will be taken up in the second section of this book.) Descending Triangles Descending Triangles have a horizontal lower boundary or Demand Line and a down-sloping upper boundary or Supply Line. It is evident that theyare created by market conditions just the reverse of those responsible for theAscending Pattern. Their implications are equally strong and their failuresequally rare. Development of a Descending Formation hinges upon a cam-paign by a group or syndicate (often an investment trust) (EN9: or Mutual Fund or a takeover

group) to acquire a large block of shares in a certain company at a predetermined price below the market. Their orders are placedand allowed to stand until executed at that level. If the successive ralliestherefrom, which their buying generates, are stiﬂed by new supplies of stockfor sale at lower and lower levels (thus creating the typical Descendingpicture on the chart), orders to buy are eventually all ﬁlled and quotationsbreak through and on down. The mere breaking of the critical line, whichmany traders have seen function as a support under the market for a moreor less extended period, often shakes the conﬁdence of holders who had notpreviously considered selling. Their offerings now come on the market andaccelerate the decline. Volume Characteristics Same as Symmetrical Type The volume section of the Right-Angle Triangle’s chart requires little com-ment. It will ordinarily present a picture practically identical with thataccompanying the development of a Symmetrical Triangle. Activity tends tolessen as prices move out toward the apex. In the Ascending Formation,there will usually be a pickup on each rally and an ebb in turnover on eachdecline within the pattern; in the Descending Formation, the opposite is true,but sometimes not quite so evident. These Minor ﬂuctuations, however, donot affect the overall diminishing trend of volume until the breakout pointis reached. AU3772_book.fm Page 119 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
As to breakouts also, practically everything we have said about the Sym

metrical Triangle will apply as well to the Right-Angle type. Upside breakouts (from an Ascending Pattern, of course) are attended by a conspicuous increasein trading volume; if not, they should be treated as suspect. Downside break-outs (from Descending Patterns) may not evince much of a pickup in activity,but turnover usually speeds up the second or third day out of pattern. Throw-back reactions to the pattern’s boundary line after a breakout are fairly common;their occurrence seems to depend largely on general market conditions. Thus,if prices break down out of a Descending Triangle in an individual stock at atime when the rest of the market is ﬁrm, a Pullback Rally is fairly certain tointervene before any very extensive further decline takes place. Good, reliable breakouts from Right-Angle Triangles usually occur at about the same stage of pattern completion as they do in Symmetrical Tri-angles. The earlier the breakout, the less apt it is to be a false move (althoughfalse moves from Right-Angle Formations are considerably rarer, it shouldbe noted, than from Symmetrical). In those infrequent cases when prices FIGURE 61. The 1942 Bear Market Bottom in Socony–Vacuum was an unusual Head-and-Shoulders formation, the head consisting of an Ascending Triangle. Note increase in volume on the breakout from the Triangle in July and again on the breakthrough the Head-and-Shoulders neckline in October. SOCONY VACUUM OIL SOV 1941–194312 11 10 9 8 7 6 125 100 75 50 25 SO N DJF MAM J J A S ON D J F MSales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 120 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 121

> “squeeze” right on out of the apex without producing a deﬁnite breakout,
the pattern seems to lose much of its power. Measuring Implications of Triangles We have stated (in Chapter 6) a minimum measuring rule to apply to pricemovements developing from a Head-and-Shoulders Formation, and we canlay down a somewhat similar rule for Triangles — one that applies to both theSymmetrical and the Right Angle species. The method of deriving the Triangleformula is not easy to explain in words, but the reader can familiarize himselfwith it quickly by studying its application on several of the actual exampleswhich illustrate this chapter. Assuming that we are dealing with an up-move-ment (upside breakout), draw from the Top of the ﬁrst rally that initiated the FIGURE 62. Because a dividend of $1.00 went ex on March 14, the lower boundary of this Descending Triangle Top in “BIW” had to be dropped 1 point from 33 and redrawn at 32. Despite the added leeway thus afforded, however, the original patternimplications were quickly carried out. Prices pulled back three times to the new lowerboundary line of this Triangle on April 4, April 16, and May 31 — unusual, butexplained by the existence of a strong general market uptrend during this period.Whenever a stock goes ex-dividend during the formation of an Area Pattern of anytype, the lines bounding that pattern should immediately be adjusted to the newvalue by lowering them a distance corresponding to the amount of the dividend. BATH IRON WORKS BIW 1946 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE 51 2 1 9 2 6 29 2 3 16 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 2938 36 3432 30 28 26 24 22 125 100 755025 X D S1.00 Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 121 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
pattern (in other words, from its upper left-hand corner) a line parallel to the

Bottom boundary. This line will slope up away from the pattern to the right.Prices may be expected to climb until they reach this line. Also, as a rule, theywill climb, following their breakout from the pattern, at about the same angleor rate as characterized their trend prior to their entering the pattern. Thisprinciple permits us to arrive at an approximate time and level for them toattain the measuring line. The same rules apply (but measuring down, ofcourse, from the lower left corner) to a descending move. Although application of the above formula does afford a fair estimate of the extent of move to be expected from a Triangle, it is neither as deﬁnitenor as reliable as the Head-and-Shoulders formula. Do not forget the impor-tant qualiﬁcation that the Triangle has somehow lost a part of its potentialstrength if the breakout is delayed until prices are crowded into the apex. FIGURE 63. On the basis of “fundamentals,” Revere was an attractive holding in 1946, which may account for its reluctance to “give up” when the market generally started downhill in earnest in June of that year. Its ﬂuctuations from mid-May to lateAugust constructed a ﬁne, large Descending Triangle, in which, however, BearishVolume Signals had already appeared in late June and on July 23. The breakout came(with a wide Breakaway Gap) on August 27. Prices clung to the edge of the patternfor 4 days, then collapsed. The small formations outlined in April and May are Flags,to be discussed in Chapter 11. REVERE COPPER & BRASS RVB 1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 125 100 75 5025 6 13 20 27 4 11 25 18 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 122 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 123 FIGURE 64. The 1937 Bull Market Top in Westinghouse was this Descending Trian gle which started in January and broke on February 15. Prices hung at the lower edge of the Triangle for 4 days, fell away, and then pulled back to its lower line onMarch 4 at the time when the general market Averages were making their ﬁnal Bullhighs. This chart, and a number that have preceded it, illustrate an important point for the market technician which may well be restated here: When a large number ofindividual issues, after an extensive advance, make well-deﬁned Reversal Patternsof plainly Bearish import, break down out of them, and then succeed only in pullingback no farther than their lower boundaries or “Resistance Lines” at a time whenthe Averages are going on up to new highs, the whole market is in a dangerouscondition, and a Major Downturn is imminent. Divergences of this particular sortbetween many important issues and the Averages seldom develop at IntermediateTurns. The warning is particularly pointed when stocks of the caliber of Westing-house, DuPont, General Motors, etc., fail to “conﬁrm” new highs in the Averages. Refer back to Figures 12, 15, 18, and 58, for example, and compare the “timing” in those with the trend of the Averages for the same periods. The Saucer-like ReactionPattern of October to January in the above chart analyzes into a ComplexHead-and-Shoulders Consolidation, a formation which will be taken up inChapter 11. Incidentally, “WX” continued on down to 130 in April 1937, made a Rectangle base there, and recovered to 158 (cf. above Descending Triangle) in August, and then fellto 88 in November. Compare this daily chart with the monthly chart of “WX” for1935 to 1938 in Chapter 15. WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC WX 1936–1937 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH160 152144 136 128 120 112 104 50 40302010 310 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 6 13 27 20Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 123 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 65. A series of Triangles, Symmetrical and Descending, which evolved

during the 1929–32 Bear Market in Hudson Motors. Note that at no time during this decline did anything resembling a Major Bottom appear. Note also how each Trian-gle’s measuring implications were carried out before any temporary halt or conse-quential rally developed. Follow your daily charts for the proper timing of yourtrading operations, but keep an eye always on the longer-range pictures which evolveon weekly and monthly projections, so as to maintain your perspective on the MajorTrend.

AU3772_book.fm Page 124 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 125 Triangles on Weekly and Monthly Charts We have seen in preceding studies how Head-and-Shoulders Formations may appear on the long-range (weekly or monthly) charts and will haveimportance commensurate with their size. Triangles also may develop. Onweekly charts, their implications are usually clear and dependable, but thecoarse Triangular Patterns which can be found on graphs of monthly priceranges, especially the great, loose convergences that take years to complete,had better be dismissed as without useful signiﬁcance. FIGURE 66. The curious, and in its early stages confusing, Major Bottom Formation which American Rolling Mills constructed in 1941–43. The recovery from the “Pearl Harbor Panic” of 1941 ran into a large Symmetrical Triangle which broke out on thedownside in April 1942. The subsequent decline satisﬁed the measuring requirementsof that Triangle, but did not carry below the December low. The rally of June andreaction of August–September built the whole area out into another and largerSymmetrical Triangle, out of which prices broke on the upside in September. Thenthe reaction to the apex of the latter, in December 1942, and the following advancebuilt up into a 15-month Ascending Triangle which constituted the ﬁnal Major Bottomfor a trend that carried prices up eventually to 42 in 1946. The low volume on theJune and August–September reactions, the increase on the October markup and, evenmore, the January 1943 rise and breakout in February were unmistakably of MajorBullish implications. It takes time, remember, to build a foundation for a Bull Market. AMERICAN ROLLING MILLS RM 1941–1943 SO N D J FMAM J J A S O N D J FM14 1312 1110 9 125 100 75 5025Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 125 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Other Triangular Formations

There are other patterns of price consolidation or congestion that can be bounded by converging lines and might, therefore, be classiﬁed as Triangles. FIGURE 67. A beautifully compact Ascending Triangle which turned out to be the Major Bear-to-Bull Reversal in Goodrich in 1942. The breakout from this pattern (in April) was not signaled by any extraordinary pickup in activity so far as this weeklyrecord shows (but remember that signiﬁcant volume detail is often hard to see in aweekly plotting). The Triangle’s measuring implications were carried out by the ﬁrstupswing which reached 18 ¼

at the end of May. Supply had to be absorbed in the 18 to 21 range (refer back to this chart when you study Support and Resistance inChapter 13), but a Major Up Signal was given in September when prices eruptedthrough that zone with a conspicuous increase in trading volume. GOODRICH ( B. F.) COMPANY GR 1941–1943 SO N D J FMAM J J A S O N D J FM36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 250 200150 100 50Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 126 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eight: Important Reversal Patterns — The Triangles 127 But they deviate from the true Triangles of this chapter so markedly in one or more important respect that they are best treated under other headingselsewhere. Such are the Flags, Pennants, and Wedges. Still another group ofchart patterns develops between diverging boundary lines, on which account they have sometimes been called Inverted Triangles. But their causes, char-acteristics, and forecasting implications are so radically different that wehave chosen to rename them Broadening Formations and discuss them in alater chapter. FIGURE 67.1. A real time chart from prophet.net. The volume blow out in July 2002 drew attention to Ebay and the sloping line was drawn at that time. Although the lines are sloppy and the pattern is ragged it looked at the time like a DescendingTriangle with all its implications. But when it broke out of the pattern on emphaticvolume in October 2003 the handwriting was on the wall. Ebay was for real. So,what’s for real? It could really make money, not just capture free eyeballs, like itsInternet brothern and sistern. It actually performed a service of economic beneﬁt tomany people. Unlike the Internet fantasy follies. See Figure 104.4 for a longer per-spective on Ebay. Lessons for the attentive: power of trendlines; alarm-clock natureof unusual volume; not believing any forecast. Forecast in this case would have beenfor a downtrend if, as seemed, the pattern was a descending triangle. ebay Inc-(Nasdaq NM) 57.75 0.240 0.417% 63 57 51 45 42 39 36 33 30 27 24 125 100 755025 01998–2003 Porphet Financial Systems, Inc. Terms of use apply. Volume (Millions)

## _02 Apr Jul Oct 03 Apr Jul OctAU3772_book.fm Page 127 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM_
## 128 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The reader may have become dismayed at this point by our frequent recourse to such qualifying adverbs as usually, ordinarily, and the like. It cannot be avoided if one wishes to present a true picture of what actually happens. No two chart patterns are ever precisely alike; no two market trendsdevelop in quite the same way. History repeats itself in the stock market,but never exactly. Nevertheless, the investor who familiarizes himself withthe historical pattern, with the normal market action, and refuses to betempted into a commitment in the belief that “this time will be different,”will be far and away ahead of the fellow who looks for the exception ratherthan the rule. The beginner is proverbially lucky. He will ﬁnd Triangles, Head-and Shoulders, or other signiﬁcant patterns, one after the other, on his charts,watch them develop, and see them carry through with proﬁtable movesaccording to rule. And then the exception will come along — or he willoverlook the larger picture while concentrating on some Minor Patterndevelopment — and suddenly awake to the fact that he is caught in a verybad play. Hence our constant emphasis on the nonconforming movements.Our words of qualiﬁcation are necessary because technical analysis of marketaction is not an exact science and never will be.AU3772_book.fm Page 128 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

129 chapter nine Important Reversal Patterns — Continued The Rectangles, Double and Triple Tops The Triangular Price Formations which we examined in the preceding chapter can be either Reversal or Consolidation Patterns. In the case of the Right-Angle Triangles, we know as soon as they have attained recognizable form in whichdirection the trend will (or should) proceed. With the Symmetrical Triangles,we have no way of knowing whether they point up or down until pricesﬁnally break away from them, although the odds are, as we have seen, thatthe previous trend will be continued rather than reversed. In this respectand in many others, our next class of technical formations, the Rectangles, resemble the Symmetrical Triangles. There are, in fact, so many points of similarity between them that we can forego any long and detailed discussion. A Rectangle consists of a series of sideways price ﬂuctuations, a “trading area,” as it is sometimes called, which can be bounded both top and bottom by horizontal lines. A glance at any one of the examples which illustrate these pages will show how it got its name. On rare occasions, you may discover achart pattern whose upper and lower boundary lines are parallel but eitherslightly down-sloping or up-sloping. So long as their departure from the hor-izontal is trivial, they may be treated as Rectangles. You will also ﬁnd, onoccasion, patterns whose boundaries, while nearly horizontal, tend somewhatto converge. These may be considered Rectangles or Symmetrical Triangles; itdoesn’t matter which, since the “prognosis” will be the same in either case. If you will give a quick mental review also to the Head-and-Shoulders, the Complex and the Rounding types of formations, you will see how, if youdisregard the volume part of their charts, any one of these patterns mightmerge or grade into a Rectangle. As a matter of fact, however, you willseldom be left in doubt as to proper classiﬁcation because the circumstancesof trading, the type of buying and selling, which produce Rectangles aredifferent and that difference is usually apparent. We characterized the Symmetrical Triangle as a “picture of doubt.” The Rectangle might, with even greater propriety, be called a picture of conﬂict.Of course, any fairly compact price formation represents conﬂict in thesupply–demand sense. A Head-and-Shoulders Top, for example, portrays aconﬂict between “strong” sellers and “weak” buyers, with the outcome AU3772_book.fm Page 129 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
already clearly to be seen before the combat has ended. But a Rectangle

deﬁnes a contest between two groups of approximately equal strength —between owners of the stock who wish to dispose of their shares at a certainprice and others who wish to accumulate the stock at a certain lower ﬁgure.They bat the ball back and forth (up and down, that is) between them untilultimately, and usually quite suddenly, one team is exhausted (or changesits mind) and the other then proceeds to knock the ball out of the lot. Nobody(often, not even the contestants themselves) can tell who is going to winuntil one line or the other is decisively broken. We speak of two groups operating in the development of a rectangular trading area because, under present-day conditions, that is what is usuallythe fact behind the scenes. This, it should be noted, does not imply “manip-ulation” in any invidious sense. An investment trust or an estate or, in somecases, an individual heavy stockholder has good and sufﬁcient reasons forselling at the top price (the “Supply Line” of the Rectangle) with no intentto mislead the public. And another investment trust or a group of insidersinterested in the company may have equally good and, from their point ofview, wise reasons for buying at the bottom price (“Demand Line”). Suchare the forces at work in the market at the start of most Rectangular ChartPatterns, but if the “spread” between top and bottom lines is wide enough(say 8–10% of the market value of the stock), the situation may quickly attracta following from quick-turn scalpers and the professional element. Thus, a FIGURE 68. Although its Bottom boundary had a slight tendency to “lift,” the formation which put a Top on Nash–Kelvinator in 1946 was an unmistakable 4-month distribution Rectangle. Long and rather loose Rectangular Patterns of the type shownhere may not evince constantly and noticeably diminishing volume, but note, nev-ertheless, the general, though irregular, downtrend in volume from mid-October tomid-February. NASH – KELVINATOR NK 1945–1946 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH26 24 22 20 250 200 150 100 50 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 2 9 16 23 30Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 130 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter nine: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 131 syndicate holding a large block of U.S. Steel may decide to liquidate at 76, while another group decides to invest heavily in “Steel” at 69. The price ofX will naturally ﬂuctuate for a time between those two levels. Traders, seeingthis, will try to “ride the play,” buying at 69 and selling at 76 (perhaps alsoselling short at 76 and covering at 69). Their operations will tend to accen-tuate or extend the Rectangle, although the number of shares involved insuch “parasitic” trading is seldom great enough to affect the ﬁnal outcome.As a matter of fact, this type of trading inside a Rectangle can be quite proﬁtable at times, especially if protected by judicious stops (see Part Two). Pool Operations In times past, before the SEC outlawed the practice, Rectangles were fre-quently created by the well-organized operations of a single “pool” or syn-dicate. Such a pool might undertake to accumulate a large block of stock ina certain company with a view to marking it up and taking proﬁts whensome piece of good news, of which they had inside knowledge, eventuallybecame public. In order to acquire the desired “line,” they would ﬁnd itnecessary ﬁrst to shake out shares held by other traders and uninformedinvestors. They might start their campaign by suddenly selling short a fewhundred shares in order to quench any current demand and start a reaction.Then, on that reaction to the previously determined accumulation level, theywould start to buy, scattering their orders carefully and avoiding any publicity. FIGURE 69. Consolidation Rectangles in uptrends have been less common in recent years than during the 1920s and early 1930s. The large price gap (G) in this example is of the “last in pattern” type which we shall come to in Chapter 12. When a gapwithin a pattern area is followed by breakout from that pattern, as in this case, thegap is seldom quickly closed. LIMA LOCOMOTIVE WORKS LMW 1944–194556 52 48 44 50 40 30 20 10 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 17 24 31Sales 100’sG AU3772_book.fm Page 131 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Their buying would, sooner or later, engender a rally, but then they would

> “plant” rumors around the boardrooms to the effect that such-and-suchinsiders were selling, or that a projected merger was being called off, or adividend would have to be passed, and, if necessary, they would osten-tatiously let out a few of their own recently purchased shares to give colorto the rumor. The process might be repeated several times, with the “pool”gradually securing more and more shares on balance, until ﬁnally, it hadcompleted its intended line, or could shake out no more of the ﬂoatingsupply. Often, what was going on was fairly evident to the alert chartist backin the 1920s even before the operation was concluded, and perfectly evident,of course, as soon as prices broke out topside from their Rectangle.
But such tactics are no longer permitted. “Wash sales” are strictly con demned. The constant policing of all exchange transactions and promptinvestigation by the SEC of any suspicious news or activity in a stock effec-tually deters the blatant “pool” manipulations of previous years. This prob-ably is the chief reason why Rectangles are nowhere near so common on thecharts of the 1950s as they were in the 1920s. Perhaps we can clear up various details of the Rectangle formation most quickly and easily by comparison with that most nearly related chart pattern,the Symmetrical Triangle, as follows: Volume — Follows the same rules as in the Triangles, gradually dimin ishing as the Rectangle lengthens. Any contrary development, unlessit be a momentary news ﬂurry, is suspect. Breakouts — Here also the same rules apply as with Triangles. Review volume requirements, margin of penetration, etc., thereunder. False Moves — Much less frequent from Rectangles than from Symmet rical Triangles. A clearly deﬁned Rectangle is, in fact, almost as reli-able as a Head-and-Shoulders, although not as powerful in itsimplications. Premature Breakouts — Slightly more frequent, perhaps, from Rectan gles than from Triangles. ( Note : both false moves and premature breakouts, in the sense in which we employ these terms, are indistinguishable at the time they occur from gen-uine breakouts. Following both false and premature breaks, prices returninside the pattern. But, in the case of a false move, the trend ultimately proceeds out of pattern in the opposite direction, while in the case of the premature move, the trend ﬁnally breaks out again and proceeds in the same direction.) Pullbacks — Return of prices to the boundary of the pattern, subsequent to its initial penetration (breakout), takes place more frequently withRectangles than with Symmetrical Triangles. Our estimate would bethat a Pullback or Throwback (the ﬁrst is the common term for a rallyafter a downside breakout, and the second for a reaction following AU3772_book.fm Page 132 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter nine: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 133 an upside breakout) occurs within 3 days to 3 weeks in about 40% of all cases. Directional Tendency — The Rectangle is more often a Consolidation Formation than a Reversal Formation, the ratio being about the same as with Symmetrical Triangles. As Reversal Patterns, Rectangles ap-pear more frequently at Bottoms (either Major or Intermediate) thanat Tops. Long, thin, dull Rectangles are not uncommon at PrimaryBottoms, sometimes grading into the type of Flat-Bottomed Sauceror Dormancy described in Chapter 7. Measuring Implications — A safe minimum measuring formula for the Rectangle is given by its width. Prices should go at least as far inpoints beyond the pattern as the difference in points between the top FIGURE 70. A perfect example of Consolidation Rectangle which formed in Loew’s near the end of the 1932–37 Bull Market. In this case, a large block of “inside” stock was distributed at 64 to 65 but taken over around 62 by other investors who had thesatisfaction of seeing it go on up to 87 the following August. Note Throwbackfollowing breakout in January. 1936–1937 LOEW’S, INC. LW OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH96 80 76 72 68 64 60 56 52 48 44 125 100 7550 25 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 6 13 20 27Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 133 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
and bottom lines of the pattern itself. They may, of course, go much

farther. Generally speaking, the brief, wide-swinging forms, whichappear nearly square in shape on the chart and in which turnover isactive, are more dynamic than the longer and narrower manifesta-tions. Moves out of the latter almost always hesitate or react at the“minimum” point before carrying on. Relation of Rectangle to Dow Line The resemblance of this individual stock chart formation, which we havediscussed under the name of Rectangle, to the Average formation known toDow theorists as a “Line” has doubtless occurred to you. Obviously, theirrationale and forecasting implications are much the same. But true Rectan-gles with sharply delimited Top (Supply) and Bottom (Demand) boundariesare truly characteristic only of trading in individual issues. Line formationsin the Averages are seldom rigorously deﬁned, with successive MinorHeights forming quite precisely at a certain horizontal tangent, and succes-sive Bottoms at a similarly precise horizontal level. If you will examine theseparate charts of the issues composing an Average at a time when the FIGURE 71. Here is a Rectangle in Socony–Vacuum, a low-priced stock character ized by ﬂuctuations within a narrow range. After reaching a high of 18 ¾

in December 1945, it fell back to 15 ¼

and then rallied in mid-1946 as shown above. In late August, prices broke down through an Intermediate Trendline (see Chapter 14) and 4 days later fell out of the Rectangle. This formation, in conjunction with the earlier andhigher Top, implied lower levels for “SOV” for some time to come. See also commentunder Figure 72. SOCONY–VACUUM OIL SOV 1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER19 18 17 16 15 14 13 Sales 100’s 250 200 150 100 50 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 X D 5.25 AU3772_book.fm Page 134 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter nine: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 135 Average is “making a Line,” you are pretty sure to ﬁnd that some of them are showing an irregular uptrend, others an irregular downtrend, still othersmay be forming Triangles, and a few may be constructing Rectangles, orwhat not, but it is the algebraic sum of all these more or less divergentpictures which makes up the Average “Line.” To be sure, there is some tendency on the part of active traders to sell (or buy) stocks when a certain Average reaches a certain ﬁgure, regardlessof the status of individual issues involved. An investment counsel will occa-sionally advise his clients, for example, to “sell all speculative holdings whenthe Dow Industrials reach 500 ( EN: or 5000 or 15000).” But trading commit ments based solely on general Average levels are so seldom followed con-sistently that they have little effect. Rectangles from Right-Angle Triangles In the preceding chapter, we referred to a type of partial “failure” in thedevelopment of a Right-Angle Triangle which necessitates reclassifying theTriangle as a Rectangle. Now that we have examined the latter pattern indetail, we need say little more about this phenomenon, except to note that FIGURE 72. Another long, loose Rectangle of Major Reversal implications, some what similar to that pictured in Figure 68. Both an Intermediate and Major Up Trendline (to be discussed later) were decisively punctured by “YB” in August, justbefore its Rectangle broke down. Under Figure 64, we discussed one sort of warningof a Primary Downturn which may be derived from the comparison of individualstock charts with the Averages. Here is another hint: The better-grade steels and oils(see “SOV,” Figure 71) frequently hold up, or make stronger Secondary Recoveries,after the Averages have turned down at Major Tops. The Street sometimes speaks of“distribution under cover of strength in the steels.” YOUNGSTOWN SHEET & TUBE YB1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER80 76 72 68 64 60 Sales 100’s 50 40302010 6 1 32 02 7 4 1 11 82 5 1 8 1 52 22 9 61 3 2 0 2 731 0 1 7 2431 7142128 AU3772_book.fm Page 135 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
the odds appear to be still somewhat in favor of ultimate breakout in the

direction originally implied by the incipient Triangle. The fact that there isthis slight presumption, however, certainly does not warrant disregard ofan opposite breakout from the rectangular reconstruction. Double and Triple Tops and Bottoms To some of the old hands in the Street, our relegation of that good oldbyword, the Double Top, to a Minor Position in our array of Reversal Forma tions may seem almost sacrilegious. It is referred to by name perhaps moreoften than any other chart pattern by traders who possess a smattering oftechnical “lingo” but little organized knowledge of technical facts. TrueDouble Tops and Double Bottoms are exceedingly rare; Triple Forms areeven rarer. And the true patterns (as distinguished from chart pictures whichmight mistakenly be called such, but are really assignable to some one ofour other Reversal Formations) can seldom be positively detected until priceshave gone quite a long way away from them. They can never be foretold,or identiﬁed as soon as they occur, from chart data alone. FIGURE 73. The Rectangle in early 1945 in “EAL” was actually the ﬁnal stage of a nearly 2-year Consolidation in the rise which started around 17 in 1942 and ended above 125 in December 1945. G, G mark gaps (Chapter 12), the ﬁrst a Breakaway andthe second a Measuring Gap which marked the probable objective of the move as55. When prices reached that level, another Consolidation developed, a SymmetricalTriangle. Neither of these gaps was “closed” during the following 2 years. EASTERN AIRLINES EAL 1945 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE64 60 56 52 48 44 40 50 40302010G G 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 136 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter nine: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 137 FIGURE 74. An extraordinary, ﬁne, long Rectangle which developed after “ZA” had br oken down out of a Head and-Shoulders Top in February 1946. A perfect opportunity to sell this stock short was given by its Pullback of July 17–18 after prices had broken out of the Rectangle on the 15th. The Multiple Head-and-Shoulders Bottom which itsubsequently made from September to November produced a r ecovery to 11, but prices later fell to 6 in early 1947. AMERICAN ZINC, LEAD & SMELTING ZA 1945–1946 DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 250 200 150 100 50SS SSHH NL 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 2 9 16 23 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16S SSS H H H HSales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 137 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
But we are getting ahead of our story. We should ﬁrst deﬁne what we

are talking about. A Double Top is formed when a stock advances to a certain level with, usually, high volume at and approaching the Top ﬁgure, then retreats with diminishing activity, then comes up again to the same (orpractically the same) top price as before with some pickup in turnover, butnot as much as on the ﬁrst peak, and then ﬁnally turns down a second timefor a Major or Consequential Intermediate Decline. A Double Bottom is, of course, the same picture upside down. The Triple types make three Tops (orBottoms) instead of two. It isn’t difﬁcult to skim through a book of several hundred monthly charts and pick out two or three examples of Major Double Tops, perhapsone or two Double Bottoms. One will ﬁnd cases where stocks made twosuccessive Bull Market Peaks, several years apart, at almost identical levels.Such phenomena stand out, in distant retrospect, like the proverbial sorethumb, which undoubtedly accounts for the undue awe with which theamateur chartist regards them. He neglects, for the moment, to consider thefact that a thousand other issues might have done the same thing, butdidn’t — that some of these even acted, for a time, as though they weregoing to Double Top, but then went on through and higher. Is there any practical utility for the trader or investor in the Double Top concept? Yes, there is, but it will be easier for us to formulate it if we ﬁrst FIGURE 75. In this weekly chart showing Sears Roebuck’s 1942 Bear Market Bot tom, a Consolidation Rectangle (June to November) forms the right shoulder of a large “unbalanced” Double Head-and-Shoulders Pattern. SEARS ROEBUCK S 1941–194376 72 68 64 60 56 52 48 50 40 3020 10 SON D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F MSales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 138 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter nine: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 139 consider what is not a Double Top. Refer back for a moment to the Ascending Triangles and the Rectangles previously studied. When these start to evolve, almost their ﬁrst step is the construction of two Tops at an identical levelwith an intervening recession, and with less volume on the second Top thanon the ﬁrst. In the ordinary course of events, a third Top will develop there,and ultimately, prices will break through and move on up to still higherlevels. Thus, we see we must have some rule or criterion to distinguish atrue Double Top Reversal Pattern from the Double Tops which do not implyReversal when they appear as a part of a Consolidation Area in an uptrend. Distinguishing Characteristics No absolute and unqualiﬁed rule can be laid down to ﬁt all cases involvingstocks of different values and market habits, but one relative distinctionquickly suggests itself when we study these different kinds of chart forma-tions. It is: if two Tops appear at the same level but quite close together intime and with only a Minor Reaction between them, the chances are thatthey are part of a Consolidation Area; or, if a Reversal of Trend is to ensue, FIGURE 76. After advancing to 16 in January 1945, “BLL” dropped back to 13 and then constructed a 15-week Rectangle. Note that the down gap (G) on April 30 was caused by a $1.00 dividend going off. The revised bottom line of the pattern, drawn$1.00 lower, was not violated. BELL AIRCRAFT BLL 194522 20 1918 17 16 15 14 13 Sales 100’s 125 100 7550 25 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30G AU3772_book.fm Page 139 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
that there will ﬁrst be more pattern development — more “work” done —

around those top ranges. If, on the other hand, there is a long, dull, deep,and more or less rounding reaction after the initial peak has appeared, andthen an evident lack of vitality when prices come up again to the previoushigh, we can at least be suspicious of a Double Top. How deep is deep, and how long is long? Fair questions, to which, unfortunately, it is impossible to give simple, deﬁnite answers. But we canattempt approximations. Thus, if the two Tops are more than a month apart, they are not likely to belong to the same Consolidation or Congestion For-mation. If, in addition, the reaction between the ﬁrst and second high reducesprices by 20% of their top value, the odds swing toward a Double Top inter-pretation. But both of these criteria are arbitrary, and not without exception. FIGURE 77. A brief and very “high” Rectangle formed in September 1937 in the rapid Bear Market Decline of “KN,” followed by a Descending and then a Symmet rical Triangle Consolidation. KENNECOTT COPPER KN 1937 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER64 60 56 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 250 200 150 100 50 31 0 1 7 2 4 317 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 140 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter nine: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 141 There are cases in which the two peaks have occurred only 2 or 3 weeks apart, and others in which the “valley” between them descended only about15%. Most true Double Tops, however, develop 2 or 3 months or more apart.Generally speaking, the time element is more critical than the depth of thereaction. The greater the time between the two highs, the less the need ofany extensive decline of prices in the interim. Given the conditions we have speciﬁed, viz., two Tops at approximately the same level but more than a month apart on the chart, with somewhatless activity on the second advance than on the ﬁrst, and a rather dull orirregular and rounding type of recession between them, we can then besuspicious that a Double Top Reversal has actually evolved. Should a smallHead-and-Shoulders or Descending Triangle start to develop at the secondTop, as is frequently the case, we can be on guard, to the extent of protectinglong commitments at once with a close stop or switching to something elsewith a more promising chart picture. Yet, even all these signs together are not ﬁnal and conclusive. The situ ation can still be saved, and often is. Let us take a look at what is, presumably,going on behind the scenes to create our chart picture up to this point. Theﬁrst Top on relatively high volume was a normal incident and tells us littleexcept that here, for the moment, demand met with sufﬁcient supply to stop FIGURE 78. This formation, constructed by United Aircraft in 1942, was not com pleted and could not be called a Double Bottom until prices rose above 31 in February 1943. (See following pages.) UNITED AIRCRAFT UR 1941–194340 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 50 40 30 20 10 SON D J F M A M J J A S ON D J FMSales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 141 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
the advance and produce a reaction. That supply may have represented only

traders’ proﬁt-taking, in which event the trend is likely to push on up aftera brief setback. But, when the reaction drifts off lower and lower until it hasgiven up 15% and more of the stock’s peak market value, and ﬂattens outwithout any prompt and vigorous rebound, it becomes evidence that eitherthe demand was pretty well played out on the last advance or that the sellingthere represented something more than short-term proﬁt cashing. The ques-tion then is: did the ﬁrst high give evidence of important distribution, andis there much more to meet at the same price range? Nevertheless, as our chart picture shows, demand did ﬁnally come in and absorb enough of the ﬂoating supply to turn the trend around. Whenprices pushed up and began to run into selling again near the level of theﬁrst Top, that was to be expected on “psychological” grounds; many quick-turn operators naturally would take proﬁts at the old high (perhaps withthe intention of jumping right back in at a still higher price if the old highshould be exceeded). Hence, a Minor Hesitation there was quite in order.But selling in sufﬁcient quantity to produce another extensive reaction wouldbe quite another matter. We have, by now, established a zone of Supply or FIGURE 79. INCO quickly recovered from the Reagan Crash of 1987 and by year’s end, it was nearly back to its 1987 high; the latter was decisively broken in April 1988. The powerful rally continued to carry “N” higher. But the August reaction,followed by a poor rally in September, created a large Head-and-Shoulders Top. Theearly September decline broke the neckline to conﬁrm the Reversal and the subse-quent Throwback, to Neckline Resistance, was an excellent selling point. I N C O C O L T DN1 9 8 8SSH NL APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER38 36 34 32 30 28 26 4000 3200 24001600 800 6 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 31017 24 1 8 15 22 XD.20 XD.20Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 142 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter nine: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 143 FIGURE 80. Because of the long-time-between-Tops requirement for true Double T op Reversals, these formations can seldom be seen to advantage on a daily chart, but here is a good 1946 example in Republic Steel. Note 5 months and 20% decline between Tops. This chart contains many interesting lesser technical formations also. The “Br oadening” Swings (see Chapter 10) in June and July, as the second Top was made, and the r ounding rally in August were extremely Bearish in their implications. REPUBLIC STEEL RS 1945–1946G G GG DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 25020015010050 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 111825 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 4Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 143 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Resistance at the peak levels and a zone of Support or Demand at the Bottom

of the valley between. The ﬁnal and decisive question now is: will the“valley” Support reappear and stop the second decline? The conclusive deﬁnition of a Double Top is given by a negative answer to that last question. If prices, on their recession from the second peak, dropthrough the Bottom level of the valley, a Reversal of Trend from up to downis signaled. And it is usually a signal of major importance. Fully conﬁrmedDouble Tops seldom appear at turns in the Intermediate Trend; they arecharacteristically a Primary Reversal phenomenon. Hence, when you aresure you have one, do not scorn it. Even though prices may have alreadyreceded 20%, the chances are they have very much farther to go before theyreach bottom. As to measuring implications, the Double Top affords no formula com parable with that we have attributed to Head-and-Shoulders and TriangleFormations, but it is safe to assume that the decline will continue at least as far below the valley level as the distance from peak to valley. It may not be so, of course, in one interrupted slide; on the contrary, considerable timemay be required to carry out the full descent in a series of waves. Pullbacksto the “valley” price range, following the ﬁrst breakthrough, are not uncom-mon. (Bear in mind the general rule that a Reversal Formation can be expectedto produce no more than a retracement of the trend which preceded it.) One more point: we have said that the Tops need not form at precisely the same level. Use here the 3% rule we have previously laid down as ameasuring stick for breakouts. A ﬁrst Top at 50, for example, and a secondat 51 ½ would come within this limit. Curiously enough, the second peak often does exceed the ﬁrst by a fraction. The important points are (1) thatbuying cannot push prices up into the clear by a decisive margin, and (2) the Support below is subsequently broken. Double Bottoms In identifying a Double Bottom, we can apply all of the precepts we haveformulated for the Double Top Pattern, but, of course, upside down. Thedifferences between the two pictures are just what you might expect themto be, having in mind the characteristic differences between Head-and-Shoul-ders Tops and Bottoms, for example. Thus, the second Bottom is usuallyconspicuously dull (little trading volume) and is apt to be quite rounded,whereas the second Top in a Double Top is moderately active and nearly assharp and “spiky” in contour as the ﬁrst. The rally up from the secondBottom shows an increase in turnover, and volume should pick up to amarked degree as the valley level, or more properly, in this case, the height between the two Bottoms, is surpassed. Double Bottoms appear just aboutas frequently as do Double Tops at Primary Trend Reversals, and DoubleBottoms also occur sometimes at the end of Intermediate Corrections in aMajor Uptrend. AU3772_book.fm Page 144 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter nine: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 145 If you are familiar with some of the jargon of the Street, it has probably occurred to you that the second low of a Double Bottom is an example of the market action so often referred to as a “test.” In a sense, that is just whatit is — a test or corroboration of the Support (i.e., demand) which stemmedthe ﬁrst decline at the same level. The success of that test is not proved, however — and this is a point to remember — until prices have demonstratedtheir ability to rise on increasing volume above the preceding high (the heightof the rally between the two Bottoms). Until such time as that has happened,there is always the possibility that a second test (third bottom) may benecessary, or even a third, and that one of these will fail, with prices thenbreaking on down into further decline. This thought leads us to our nexttype of Reversal Formation. FIGURE 81. Shares of “AMR,” then selling for around 90, were split 5-for-1 in April 1946, resulting in a quick rally to a new high. But the overall aspect of a Double Top with the high made the previous December was nevertheless apparent, and wasconﬁrmed when prices broke down through the “valley” level on August 28. Popularbuying brought in by “splits” is usually short-lived and only temporarily distortsthe broad picture. AMERICAN AIRLINES AMR 1945–194719 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 50 4030 20 10 A M ND J FM AMJ J ASO N DJ F MSales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 145 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Triple Tops and Bottoms

Logically, if there are Double Tops, then we might expect that there will also be Triple Tops, which will develop in somewhat similar fashion. Fact is thatReversal Formations, which can only be classed as Triple Tops, do occur, butthey are few and far between. Of course, there are many patterns evolvedat an important turn from up to down in the trend which contain three Toppoints, but most of these fall more readily into the category of Rectangles.For that matter, any Head-and-Shoulders Formation, particularly if it berather “ﬂat,” with the head not extending much above the level of the twoshoulders, might be called a sort of Triple Top. The true Triple Top (as distinct, that is, from other types of three-peak formations) carries a recognizable family resemblance to the Double Top. ItsTops are widely spaced and with quite deep and usually rounding reactionsbetween them. Volume is characteristically less on the second advance thanon the ﬁrst, and still less on the third, which often peters out with noappreciable pickup in activity. The three highs need not be spaced quite so FIGURE 82. The Major Reversal Formation in “CNR” at the start of a Primary Advance which reached 54. Note how an attempt at an Ascending Triangle turned into a Double Bottom. CONTAINER CORPORATION CNR 1941–194322 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 25 20 1510 5 S ON D J F MA M J J A S O N D J F MSales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 146 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter nine: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 147 far apart as the two which constitute a Double Top, and they need not be equally spaced. Thus, the second Top may occur only about 3 weeks afterthe ﬁrst, and the third 6 weeks or more after the second. Also, the interveningvalleys need not bottom out at exactly the same level; the ﬁrst may beshallower than the second and vice versa. And the three highs may not comeat precisely the same price; our 3% tolerance rule is again useful here. Yet,despite all these permissible variations, there should be, and generally is,something suspiciously familiar about the overall picture, something whichimmediately suggests the possibility of a Triple Top to the experienced chartist. The conclusive test, however, is a decline from the third Top which breaks prices down through the level of the valley ﬂoor (the lower one, if the twovalleys form at different levels). Not until that has occurred can a Triple Topbe regarded as conﬁrmed and actually in effect, since so long as demandpersists at the valley price range, the trend can be turned up again. Only inthose cases where activity is conspicuously lacking on the third peak andthen begins to show Bearish characteristics by accelerating on the ensuingdecline is one justiﬁed in “jumping the gun.” Triple Bottoms are simply Triple Tops turned upside down, with the same qualiﬁcations we noted when we were discussing Double Bottoms. Thethird low should always be attended by small volume, and the rise therefrommust show a decided increase in turnover and carry prices decisively above FIGURE 83. Although Trinity Industries did not have the well-formed pattern exhibited by our other recommendations, we found the high-volume plunge, with the low of the day the third test of the year’s low, a very beguiling technical situation.Basically, it was a Triple Bottom with a One-Day Reversal to get the uptrend started. TRINITY INDUSTRIES INC. TRN 1985 1 2 3ONE DAY REVERSAL APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER20 1918 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 500 400 300 200 100 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 57 60 X D.125 X D.125Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 147 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
the Tops of the rallies that formed between the Bottoms. One is never justiﬁed

in “jumping the gun” on a presumed Triple Bottom Formation unless nearlyevery other chart in the book is in an unmistakably Bullish position. The riskof premature buying is expressed in a saying one sometimes hears in theboardrooms to the effect that “a Triple Bottom is always broken.” This is nota true saying. Once a Triple Bottom has been established and conﬁrmed bythe necessary up-side breakout, it seldom fails — almost always producesan advance of distinctly worthwhile proportions. But an uncompleted “pos-sible” Triple Bottom chart picture must be regarded as treacherous. Stick tothe breakout rule and you will be safe. Triple Tops are sometimes referred to as “W” Patterns because of their occasional resemblance to that capital letter on the chart. There is a sort ofhybrid between the Double and Triple Top, in which the middle one of thethree Tops does not attain the height of the ﬁrst and third, and thus, evenmore strikingly resembles a “W.” For the same reason, Double Tops aresometimes called “M” Formations. Because the elements in Double and Triple patterns are normally spaced well apart in time, they are often easier to detect and appreciate on a weekly FIGURE 84. Publicker made its Bull Market high only a few weeks after it was listed on the “big board.” Then it started to build a Descending Triangle, but pulled up out of it. Final outcome was a Triple Top, completed in August. (See Figures 60and 82.) PUBLICKER INDUSTRIES PUL1946 UP FROM 24 IN MARCH OVER THE COUNTER APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER64 60 56 52 48 44 40 38 50 40 30 20 10 61320274111825 18152229 6132027 310172431 7142128Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 148 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter nine: Important Reversal Patterns — Continued 149 chart than on a daily. Monthly graphs disclose numbers of widely spread Double and Triple Bottoms but, on the other hand, are too coarse to revealmany good Double and Triple Top Patterns. In our foregoing discussion of the Triple Top, we referred to a sort of intuition which comes with experience and enables a technical analyst to FIGURE 85. In the ordinary course of events, at the time this Bottom Pattern developed in “NG,” consisting, as it did, of ﬂuctuations for 10 long months within a range of only 1 full point, most traders would pay no attention to it. Certainly itsuggested very little opportunity for short-term proﬁts. On an arithmetically scaledchart, the pattern could hardly be seen. Logarithmic price scaling, however, as wehave remarked in an earlier chapter, has the great advantage of bringing to light thepercentage importance of signiﬁcant market action at very low price levels. Note that this formation qualiﬁes in every detail — spacing between Bottoms, extent in percent of intervening rallies, volume — as a Triple Bottom. Of course, itscompletion, in October 1942, did not necessarily forecast that “NG” would climb to33, as it ultimately did. But the fact that many other stocks were making sound MajorBottom Formations at higher price levels at the same time certainly warranted theconclusion that “NG” was on its way up, and that it was a bargain at 5. NATIONAL GYPSUM NG 1941–19438 7 6 5 4 125 100 75 50 25 SO N D J FMAM J J ASOND J FM421 321 Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 149 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
recognize the potentialities for Reversal of a certain chart development,

sometimes long before it has reached a conclusive stage. This is a not uncom-mon talent, but it is one that is seldom attained except through searchingstudy and long experience (in which the latter usually involves a few expen-sive mistakes). The reader of this book need not despair of acquiring “chartsense” and without undue cost — if he will concentrate on his study, watch,check, and double-check every new development on his charts, and “keepscore” on himself. It has been said that chart interpretation is not a science, but an art. It is not an exact science, to be sure, because it has no rules to which there arenot exceptions. Its ﬁner points defy expression in rule or precept. It requiresjudgment in appraisal of many factors, some of which may seem, at times,to conﬂict radically with others. But to call it an art, which implies the needfor genius, or at least for a high degree of native talent, is certainly improper.Say, rather, that it demands skill, but a skill that can be acquired by anyoneof ordinary intelligence. AU3772_book.fm Page 150 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

151 chapter ten Other Reversal Phenomena We have considered so far seven classes of chart patterns which appear at more or less important Reversals of direction in the trend of prices. Theywere: 1. The Head-and-Shoulders2. Multiple or Complex Head-and-Shoulders3. Rounding Turns4. Symmetrical Triangles5. Right-Angle Triangles6. Rectangles7. Double and Triple Tops and Bottoms8. One-Day Reversal Of these, 1, 2, 3, and 7 develop most often at Major Turns, while 4, 5, and 6 occur more frequently at Intermediate Stages. Numbers 1, 2, 3, and 5give indication before they are completed as to which way the price trend is likely to proceed from them. Numbers 4 and 6 give no such indication and,as we have seen, are rather more apt to signal Consolidation or Continuationthan Reversal. But all of them can, and on occasion do, appear at both MajorTops or Bottoms. EN: Number 8 appears typically after out of control moves, up and down. We have yet to take up a few other technical patterns which, because of their limited signiﬁcance, or their rarity, or their doubtful utility to the long-term traders, have been relegated to the end of our Reversal studies. The Broadening Formations In concluding our discussion of Triangles in Chapter 8, we mentioned certaintypes of price congestion or trading areas which have sometimes been called“Inverted Triangles” because, starting with very narrow ﬂuctuations, theywiden out between diverging rather than converging boundary lines. Herein,we have chosen to classify them instead as Broadening Patterns because, except for that inverted resemblance in superﬁcial appearance, they are quitedifferent in nature and trend implications. AU3772_C010.fm Page 151 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
If the Symmetrical Triangle presents a picture of “doubt” awaiting clar

iﬁcation, and the Rectangle a picture of controlled “conﬂict,” the Broadening Formation may be said to suggest a market lacking intelligent sponsorshipand out of control — a situation, usually, in which the “public” is excitedlycommitted and which is being whipped around by wild rumors. Note thatwe say only that it suggests such a market. There are times when it is obviousthat those are precisely the conditions which create a Broadening Pattern inprices, and there are other times when the reasons for it are obscure orundiscoverable. Nevertheless, the very fact that chart pictures of this typemake their appearance, as a rule, only at the end or in the ﬁnal phases of along Bull Market lends credence to our characterization of them. Hence, after studying the charts for some 20 years and watching what market action has followed the appearance of Broadening Price Patterns, wehave come to the conclusion that they are deﬁnitely Bearish in purport —that, while further advance in price is not ruled out, the situation is, never-theless, approaching a dangerous stage. New commitments (purchases)should not be made in a stock which produces a chart of this type, and anyprevious commitments should be switched at once, or cashed in at the ﬁrstgood opportunity. The Broadening Formation may evolve in any one of three forms, com parable, respectively, to inverted Symmetrical, Ascending, or Descending FIGURE 86. The Symmetrical type of Broadening Formation, which develops most frequently in the later and more “excited” stages of a Primary Bull Market, is perfectly exempliﬁed in this Crane Company chart. Note that the Broadening Pattern herestarted to form in December 1945 after a 10% reaction; if it had formed on Top of arally, it would have been suspected as a possible Broadening Top. Nevertheless, itcarried the usual Bearish implications. “CR” topped out at 49 ½

in June. CRANE COMPANY CR 1945–1946 NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL48 44 40 38 36 34 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 50 25 1017241815222951219262916232916233061320274 AU3772_C010.fm Page 152 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 153 Triangles. The “Symmetrical” type, for example, consists of a series of price ﬂuctuations across a horizontal axis, with each Minor Top higher and eachMinor Bottom lower than its predecessor. The pattern may thus be roughlymarked off by two diverging lines, the upper sloping up (from left to right)and the lower sloping down. But these Broadening Patterns are characteris-tically loose and irregular, whereas Symmetrical Triangles are normally reg-ular and compact. The converging boundary lines of a Symmetrical Triangleare clearly deﬁned as a rule, and the Tops and Bottoms within the formationtend to fall with fair precision on those boundary lines. In a BroadeningFormation, the rallies and declines usually do not all stop at clearly markedboundary lines. Volume During Broadening Formations Another distinction between Triangle and Broadening Formation is in thevolume chart. The construction of a true Triangle is attended, as we haveseen, by diminishing activity, starting with high volume on the ﬁrst MinorReversal which initiates the pattern, but growing less and less as pricesﬂuctuate in ever smaller waves out toward the apex. Then activity picks upagain after prices have broken out of the Triangle, immediately and sharplyif the breakout is through the top side. With the Broadening Formation, onthe other hand, trading activity usually remains high and irregular through-out its construction. If it develops after an advance, as is almost always thecase, the ﬁrst Minor Reversal which starts the pattern will occur on largeturnover, but so will the second rally in the pattern, and the third, and highvolume also frequently develops on one or more of its Minor Bottoms. Thewhole picture — both price and volume — is, thus, one of wild and appar-ently “unintelligent” swings. As can easily be seen, under such circumstances, a true breakout from the area may be difﬁcult, if not impossible, to detect at the time it eventuates.The volume part of the chart obviously furnishes no clue, while the verylooseness and lack of deﬁnition of the price pattern prevents the drawing ofany line which surely says, “this far and no farther.” (We are referring nowto the “Symmetrical” type only of Broadening Formation.) Of course, onceprices have run well away, either up or down, from the pattern area, itbecomes plain that a breakout has occurred, but by that time, it may be toolate to risk a trade on the situation; the move may already have gone toofar. What can we do about Broadening Formations then? Well, we havealready noted that, nine times out of ten, they carry Bearish implications.They appear most often at or near an important topping out of the trend.Hence, it is reasonably safe to assume that prices, when they ﬁnally breakaway from the formation, will go down, or if they do go up, will very soonturn around and come back down again. Therein lies one answer to theproblem of what to do about a Broadening Formation. AU3772_C010.fm Page 153 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
In addition, the price action within the formation, in many cases, fur

nishes an advance indication of breakout direction. If the trend is going to break down from the Broadening Area, the last rally within the area may fail to rise as high as its predecessor, thus breaking the sequence of everhigher Tops within the pattern. And, alternatively, if the trend is going toemerge on the top side, the last reaction within the pattern may fail to depressprices as low as the preceding reaction. These “failures” within the patternoccur, as we have stated, in a majority of all Broadening Formations. Butnote that one cannot be sure of such a signiﬁcant development (what wehave referred to above as a failure, for lack of a better descriptive name)until prices go on and out the other side of the formation or, more precisely,have exceeded the last preceding move in that direction by a decisive margin(our 3% rule again). A Typical Example No doubt the foregoing paragraph sounds rather complicated. It will beeasier to visualize the development of a “failure” signal if we cite an exampleusing actual price ﬁgures. Easier yet, perhaps, if the reader will sketch outour example on a scrap of chart paper. Suppose stock XYZ, after advancingsome 30 points on gradually increasing turnover, runs into heavy selling at62 and reacts to 58. But there is still plenty of interest in the issue; it stopsat 58 and then swings up to a new peak at 63. It “churns” there for a day ortwo and drops back again, this time to 56 ½

before it is halted by another burst of buying. Its third rally takes it up to 62, where it hesitates and fallsback to 59, but is then picked up again and carried on to 65. (By this time,of course, a Broadening Formation has become evident on the chart.) At 65,there is a great show of trading, followed by another reaction which dropsquotations quickly back to 60. Support appears there momentarily and pricesﬂuctuate for 3 or 4 days between 60 and 62 and then fall away again, ﬁnallyto close at 56, with volume running high all through this phase. A fourthrally starts, but now the traders who bought in at 60 on the precedingdownswing are frightened and looking for a chance to “get out even,” andthe advance is stiﬂed at that level. Quotations start to slip and soon are downto 55, below the previous pattern Bottom. When this occurs, the “failure” of the preceding rally is conﬁrmed — its failure, that is, to rise above 65 and, thus,carry on the Broadening Movement. The decline below 56, by virtue of thatfailure, may be regarded as a breakout. If you followed the foregoing example closely, you will have noted that there can be (and very often are) Minor Fluctuations inside the pattern thatdo not affect its outcome. Thus, the rise from 56 ½

to 65 really consisted of 3 moves, ﬁrst from 56 ½

to 62, then from 62 back to 59, and, ﬁnally, from 59 up to 65. The reaction from 62 had no signiﬁcance so long as it stopped above 56 ½ and was succeeded by a new rise carrying beyond the previous pattern high, which, in this case, had been 63. AU3772_C010.fm Page 154 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 155 The example just detailed is one of the more common types in which the failure occurs on a rally and the breakout eventuates on the downside. But it could have been converted into the opposite form if the last declinehad stopped at 60, and then, instead of ﬂuctuating for a few days between60 and 62 and breaking down again, had pushed right back up and past 65.That action would have given us a failure on a decline and an upsidebreakout. (The odds would be, however, that the ﬁnal Top was not far away.) The Orthodox Broadening Top There is one particular manifestation — a special case, as the mathematicians might say — of the Broadening Price Formation whose general nature we have discussed in the preceding paragraphs. This particular form appearedat the 1929 Tops of many of the active and popular stocks of that day, butwith less frequency at Bull Market highs since 1929, and rarely at high-volume Tops preceding extensive Intermediate Declines, as in 1933 and 1934.It is known to market technicians under the speciﬁc name of Broadening Top, and although it conforms to our general descriptions for all SymmetricalBroadening Price Patterns, it has been so precisely deﬁned, and so often citedin technical writings, that we may well take some time to examine it. The Orthodox Broadening Top has three peaks at successively higher levels and, between them, two Bottoms with the second Bottom lower thanthe ﬁrst. The assumption has been that it is completed and in effect as animportant Reversal indication just as soon as the reaction from its third peakcarries below the level of its second Bottom. Perhaps we can best see what this formation is like if we examine one of the classic patterns which developed in 1929. Our chart (Figure 87) showsthe daily market action (price and volume) of Air Reduction from July 1 toDecember 31 of that year. We have numbered from 1 to 5 the signiﬁcantturning points within the Broadening Top which ended that stock’s BullMarket in October. A Broadening Price Pattern was not detectable, of course,until prices had started to move up from the second Minor Low (point 4);by then 3 had formed above 1, and 4 below 2. New highs at 5 ( a and b), followed by the deﬁnite downside breakout at B (nearly 6% under 4), completed thepattern and, according to the rules, signaled a Major Reversal Trend. In thiscase, there can be no doubt as to the importance of the Reversal indication,since, as our chart shows, the price of Air Reduction dropped from above220 on October 18 to below 80 on November 14, just 4 weeks later, and theﬁnal Bottom was not seen until nearly 3 years later in 1932! There are some ﬁne points of this classic example which should be noted. First, a new high, i.e., a third and higher Top, was made at 5 a and the subsequent reaction was halted at 195, well above 4, and succeeded byrenewed advance. This looked like one of the advance notices (“failures”)to which we have referred on a preceding page, portending an upside break-out. But the example before us will serve to emphasize the warning which AU3772_C010.fm Page 155 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 87. Although this particular Major Reversal Formation appeared on the

charts over 35 years ago, it is so perfectly developed and on such a large scale that it may well stand as our elementary model for an Orthodox Broadening Top. Thispattern in Air Reduction is discussed in detail on previous pages. Note also theSymmetrical Triangle Consolidation of July–August, and the examples of Runaway,Breakout, and Exhaustion Gaps (RG, BG, and EG), which will be taken up inChapter 12. AIR REDUCTION CO. AN1929 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBERRG 2 4 BP315a5b BG EG Sales 100’s 250 200 150 100 50240 208 192 176 160 152 144136128 120 112 104 96 88 80 76224 61 32 0 2 731 0 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 AU3772_C010.fm Page 156 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 157 we attached thereto — that such an indication is not to be trusted until prices have decisively exceeded the previous Top. At 5 b Air Reduction was traded brieﬂy at 223, 2 points, but less than 3%, higher than 5 a, and the day closed with quotations below 5 a. The break on October 24 (to B) took prices more than 3% under the level of 4. Now occurred a development typical of Broad-ening Tops — a Pullback Rally (to B) retracing about half of the ground lostbetween the last pattern Top (5 b) and the end of the initial breakout move (B). Such a recovery (and failure) will be attempted, according to our expe-rience, in at least four out of ﬁve Broadening Top Patterns, and may not failuntil it has regained two thirds of the preceding decline, although it usuallypeters out around or even below the halfway mark. This, as we have said, is a classic example; there were many others at that time. The very fact that so many did evolve at the 1929 peak, whichwas followed by history’s most disastrous losses, probably accounts for theextremely Bearish implications market technicians have ascribed to theBroadening Top Formation. We regard it now with somewhat less awe; itsmeasuring implications are probably no greater than those of a large, high-volume Head-and-Shoulders, but it is a pattern characteristic of the laststages of a Primary Uptrend. FIGURE 88. A small but perfect 1946 Broadening Top that formed at the end of a 3-month chart pattern which also had overall Broadening (and, hence, Bearish) as pects. The ﬁve critical points of Reversal are numbered on the chart. The “breakout”was registered on August 27. The Pullback Rally that followed immediately wasstrong, but still held within normal bounds. Another interesting Broadening Top of1946 appears in Figure 217. AMERICAN ROLLING MILLS RM1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBERSales 100’s 125 100 75 50 2540 38 36 34 32 30 28 61 3 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 2813 5 24 AU3772_C010.fm Page 157 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The insistence that the third Top (our number 5), when followed by a

decline below the second Bottom (our number 4), completes the Reversal Pattern may be regarded, in the light of experience, as setting too strict a limitation, since Broadening Formations do, on occasion, go on to make afourth and higher Top. Yet this rule may be, and usually is, justiﬁed by thefact that the overall indications are undeniably Bearish and, hence, oneshould not wait too long to get out. On the other hand, the requirement thatthere be a third Top does seem to be justiﬁed on the score that Major Reversalsare seldom completed until at least three attempts have been made to pushprices on in the direction of the previous trend. This is the reason, of course,why pioneer technical students lumped together many formations under theclassiﬁcation “Five-Point Reversals.” The Broadening Top is a Five-PointReversal (our numbers 1 to 5) and, so, obviously is a Head-and-Shoulders.A Broadening Top might, in fact, be called a Head-and-Shoulders with a high right shoulder and a down-sloping neckline. Why No Broadening Bottoms? All of the other types of Reversal Formations we have studied thus far can occur as either Tops or Bottoms. They can develop at the end of a decline toturn the trend up, or at the end of an advance to turn the trend down. Butthis does not seem to be true of the Broadening Formation. It has beenassumed in the past that Broadening Bottoms must exist, but the writer has FIGURE 89. When they appear as plain and as compact as this example, Broadening Tops on weekly charts carry very powerful Reversal indications. The Top of the ﬁfth turn in this formation was capped on the daily chart by a Head-and-Shoulders, whichwas pictured in Figure 16. The dashed lines on the above chart are trendlines — tobe discussed in Chapter 14.

AU3772_C010.fm Page 158 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 159 never found a good one in his examination of the charts of thousands of individual stocks over many years, and only one or two patterns which borea resemblance to it in the charts of the Averages. Apparently, the circum-stances that create Broadening Formations do not exist after a prolongeddecline in prices. This would seem to bear out our earlier characterizationof this sort of pattern as suggesting active, excited trading with much public(and, hence, not too well informed or managed) participation. Such condi-tions are naturally associated with the ﬁnal phases of a Bull Market. Right-Angled Broadening Formations Price patterns of the “Inverted Triangle” shape, having a horizontal Top orBottom boundary, occur about as often as the symmetrical type, which is tosay, not nearly as often as true Triangles, Rectangles, etc. In the mid-20thcentury, there were very few of them ( EN9: Still scarce in the 2000s). While the true Right-Angle Triangle with a horizontal top line and up-slantingbottom line is called an Ascending Triangle, just as its counterpart with ahorizontal bottom boundary and a down-slanting top boundary is called aDescending Triangle, we cannot apply these terms to the Inverted or Broad-ening Forms. Generally speaking, Right-Angled Broadening Formationscarry Bearish implications, regardless of which side is horizontal, in nearlythe same degree as the symmetrical manifestations. FIGURE 90. Broadening tendencies that appear on monthly charts, or very wide spread (with Tops 5 or 6 months apart) like the above on weekly charts, should not be regarded as signiﬁcant technical formations. Reversal points in a true BroadeningTop should not be more than 2 months apart, as in Figure 89. INTERNATIONAL PAPER IP1945–194756 52 48 44 40 38 36 Sales 100’s 5040302010 ND J F S O ND J FM M A MM AJ J A AU3772_C010.fm Page 159 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Obviously, however, they differ essentially from Symmetrical formations

in one respect: a horizontal side indicates either accumulation or distribution at a ﬁxed price, depending, of course, on which side is horizontal. And itfollows, logically, that any decisive break through that horizontal side hasimmediate forceful signiﬁcance. Thus, if a Broadening Price Pattern with a ﬂat

top boundary develops after a good advance, and if prices ﬁnally burst up through that top line on high volume and close above it to a conclusiveextent (roughly 3%), then it is safe to assume that the preceding uptrend willbe resumed and carried on for a worthwhile move. This does happen,although it is rare. The odds favor the opposite, i.e., the eventual victory ofthe forces of distribution which created the horizontal Top and a breakawayinto an extensive decline. Moreover, if an advance is to ensue from a Flat-Topped Broadening Formation, the chances are that the third reaction in the formation will beattended by much diminished trading activity instead of the continued highor irregular volume which is characteristic of Bearish Broadening Move-ments, and that either it or the fourth reaction will be halted and reversed above the low point of the preceding. This turns the formation into a Consol idation Head-and-Shoulders, a Continuation-of-Trend Pattern, which we shall take up in Chapter 11. The message here for the trader owning a stock whosechart begins to develop a Broadening Formation of this type is: watch thethird reaction. If it carries below the second and volume does not fall off toa marked degree, sell out on the next rally. (You can always repurchase thesame stock if you wish, without much “loss of position” should prices ﬁnallyand, improbably, recover and push up through the Top.) Right-Angled Broadening Formations with horizontal lower boundaries (ﬂat Bottoms) almost always break down. Once prices have fallen below thelower boundary line, there is frequently a Pullback Rally to that line, eitherin a few days or in 2 or 3 weeks, similar to the Pullbacks that so often followthe break down from a Head-and-Shoulders Top. (Note that the third or fourth rally in a pattern which starts out as a Flat Bottomed Broadening Formation may fail to carry prices as high as itspredecessor, in which case we have a Head-and-Shoulders to deal with. Inother words, every Head-and-Shoulders begins as a Broadening Formation.And the statement of that relation takes us logically to our next type ofReversal picture.) The Diamond The Diamond Reversal Formation might be described either as a more or less Complex Head-and-Shoulders with a V-shaped neckline, or as a BroadeningFormation which, after two or three “swings,” suddenly reverts into a regularTriangle which is nearly always of the Symmetrical form. So far as theaccompanying volume pattern is concerned, the latter is possibly the betterdescription. Its name derives obviously from its pictorial resemblance to theconventional diamond ﬁgure. AU3772_C010.fm Page 160 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 161 Although it is fairly conspicuous and easily detected when it appears on the charts, the Diamond is not a common pattern. Since its development requires fairly active markets, it rarely occurs at Bottom Reversals. Its “nat-ural habitat” is Major Tops and the High-Volume Tops which precede exten-sive Intermediate Reactions. Many Multiple Head-and-Shoulders Forma-tions are borderline Diamond cases; i.e., they permit the drawing of slightlybent necklines. The reader is cautioned, however, against trying too hard tomake Diamonds out of price patterns of the Head-and-Shoulders type. Thereis a temptation to do so because a V-shaped neckline may promise to givean earlier (and, hence, more proﬁtable) breakout signal than the straightneckline of the Head-and-Shoulders, but it is much safer to stick to the latterunless the second half of the formation consists of a series of clean-cut,converging Minor Fluctuations which plainly demands deﬁnition by con-verging boundary lines, and unless activity shows some tendency to dimin-ish during this period as it would in a Triangle. The Diamond requires little further comment. Our illustrations will suf ﬁce to acquaint you with its typical details. It carries a minimum measuringimplication which, having studied the Head-and-Shoulders and Triangleformulas, you can probably deduce for yourself. Prices should move at least as far from the breakout point as the greatest width in points of the pattern FIGURE 91. Three successive reactions in “DG” in February–March 1945 made successively lower Bottoms, but the intervening rallies came up to the same high (about 21 ¼), thus forming a Right-Angled Broadening Formation with a horizontal Top (Supply) Line. Penetration of this technically important top line on April 16 wasa Bullish signal. The ﬂat-topped type of pattern does not necessarily portray a Bearishsituation. ASSOCIATED DRY GOODS DG 1945 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE28 26 24 22 20 19 18 Sales 100’s 50 40 30 20 10 XD.25 XD.25 61 3 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 AU3772_C010.fm Page 161 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
from its Top (head) to Bottom (V in neckline). This, it must be emphasized,

is a minimum rule and subject only to the usual qualiﬁcation that a ReversalFormation must have something to reverse. Generally, the new trend carriesprices eventually well beyond the minimum measurement. Wedge Formations All of the chart formations we have discussed up to this point can and dodevelop at changes in the Major Trend of prices. A few of them seldom occurat any other than a Major Reversal. We have now to consider three patternswhich are ordinarily Minor, or, at most, only Intermediate in their trendimplications. They are useful, nevertheless, in trading operations. One ofthem, the Wedge, we have already alluded to (in Chapter 8) as having some resemblance to the Triangles. The Wedge is a chart formation in which the price ﬂuctuations are conﬁned within converging straight (or practically straight) lines, but differ-ing from a Triangle in that both boundary lines either slope up or slopedown. In a Symmetrical Triangle, the Top border slants down, while theBottom border slants up. In Right Angle Triangles, one boundary slopeseither up or down, but the other is horizontal. In a Rising Wedge, bothboundary lines slant up from left to right, but since the two lines converge, FIGURE 92. The 1946 Top in Paramount Pictures, from which it fell to 46 a year later, was a Right-Angled Broadening Formation with a horizontal bottom line which was “cracked” the ﬁrst week of June, but not decisively broken until June 20. (Thisstock was later split 2-for-1.) PARAMOUNT PICTURES PX194688 80 76 72 68 64 60 56 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 50 25 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 AU3772_C010.fm Page 162 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 163 the lower must, of course, project at a steeper angle than the upper. In a Falling Wedge, the opposite is true. Superﬁcially, one might think that since an Ascending Triangle, with one horizontal and one up-line, is a Bullish picture, the Rising Wedge, with bothof its pattern lines up, should be even more Bullish. But such is not the case.Remember that the ﬂat top of an Ascending Triangle signiﬁes a supply ofshares being distributed at a ﬁxed price; when that supply has been absorbed(and the rising lower boundary line indicates that it will be absorbed), thepressure is off and prices will leap forward. In a Rising Wedge, on the otherhand, there is no evident barrier of supply to be vaulted, but rather, a gradualpetering out of investment interest. Prices advance, but each new up waveis feebler than the last. Finally, demand fails entirely and the trend reverses.Thus, a Rising Wedge typiﬁes a situation which is growing progressively weaker in the technical sense. Of course, it might be said that any advance in prices, no matter what shape it may take on the chart, weakens the technical status of the market.Prospective buyers are — or, at least, should be — more reluctant to payhigh prices than low, and owners are more willing to sell at high prices thanat low; in other words, any sort of rise tends to increase supply and diminishdemand. (While theoretically true, the preceding statement must be qualiﬁedby the fact that rising prices actually attract rather than discourage public FIGURE 93. Another example of the Flat-Topped type of Broadening Price Pattern that appeared near the end of 1945. “LS” went on up to 63 in 1946. Prices broke out of this formation with a Breakout Gap (G) and another Breakout Gap appeared onDecember 3. G-G marks an “Island.” See Chapter 12 for Gaps. ALLIED STORES LS 1945G GGG JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER48 4440 3836 34 32 30 28 Sales 100’s 125 100 755025 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 AU3772_C010.fm Page 163 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 94. The 1946 Bull Market Top in U.S. Steel was a 3-month Diamond which

might also be construed as a Head-and-Shoulders. FIGURE 95. A Diamond (November) which broke out topside and thus functioned as Consolidation rather than Reversal. U. S. STEEL X 1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER96 88 80 767268 Sales 100’s 250 200 150 100 50 XD 1.00 61 32 0 2 74 1 1 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 AMERICAN BOSCH CORP. BOS 1945 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER24 22 20 19181716 Sales 100’s 50 40 302010 71 42 1 2 841 1 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 AU3772_C010.fm Page 164 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 165 buying.) The difference between a Rising Wedge and what might be called a normal Uptrend Channel (of which we shall have more to say later) is thatthe Wedge sets a sort of limit on the advance. Its converging boundary linesfocus on a point near where the advance will halt and reaction set in. We can state most of the essential facts about the Up-Pointed Wedge Formation in a few short sentences. It can develop either as a sort of Topping-Out Pattern on a previously existing uptrend, or start to form right at theBottom of a preceding downtrend. It (the Wedge) normally takes more than3 weeks to complete; a shorter pattern of this shape is nearly always betterclassiﬁed as a Pennant, which we will discuss in the next chapter. Pricesalmost always ﬂuctuate within the Wedge’s conﬁnes for at least two thirdsof the distance from the base (beginning of convergence) to the apex; in manycases, they rise clear to the apex, and in some, they actually go a shortdistance beyond, pushing on out at the Top in a last-gasp rally before col-lapsing. Once prices break out of the Wedge downside, they usually wastelittle time before declining in earnest. The ensuing drop ordinarily retracesall of the ground gained within the Wedge itself, and sometimes more.Trading volume in a Wedge tends to follow the regular Triangle Pattern,diminishing gradually as prices move up toward the apex of the Wedge. FIGURE 96. Diamond Reversal Formations are often easier to detect on weekly than on daily charts. Trace out the price swings and volume in this May–June 1946 Diamond in Shell. Note also the remarkable Descending Triangle which developedfrom September 1946 to February 1947, and the March Pullback to its apex, anotherideal place to sell short. SHELL UNION OIL SUO1945–194744 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 50 25 ND JF SO N D JF M M A MM AJ JA AU3772_C010.fm Page 165 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The Falling Wedge

Except for the fact that it is pointed down, the Falling Wedge appears in all respects like the rising form we have just described. But the price trend that follows its completion differs in character. When prices break out of a RisingWedge, they usually fall away rapidly, but when they move out of a FallingWedge, they are more apt to drift sideways or in a dull “Saucering-around”movement before they begin to rise. The Rising Wedge may, therefore, callfor quick action to secure proﬁts, while with a Falling Wedge, the traderordinarily can take his time about making his commitment for the ensuingrise. FIGURE 96.1. Technicians in the future will look back with amazement at the top which put the exclamation point on the Bull ’90s. The most amazing thing being that what was going on at the time was recognizable and subject to analysis with a ruler(Cf. Resources). The analysis furthermore indicated that the party was over (or atleast the fat lady was in the process of singing). As Edwards noted the BroadeningTop which had (and has) implications of its own morphed into a Diamond, which threw off a false signal, breaking out on the upside, which developed into another trian-gular-like pattern (could be looked at as ragged triangular or ascending — onlybottom line shown here), which after a head fake broke down made a modiﬁed V-Bottom and returned to the top of what could be looked at as a monster rectangle.The top horizontal line, drawn in August 2000 stops the 2001 rally cold and fromthere it is a slippery slide to the tragedy of September 11, 2001. It was obvious thatthe investor had no business being long, and that trading strategy was in order. Wasthere any prescience in recognizing the mulish sideways trend of the market? Nonewhatsoever. Is all this hindsight? The reader may see for himself by examining therecord of how this market was analyzed at the time by the John Magee Investment Newsletter in Resources. INDU LAST-Daily 10/04/2001 Created with TradeStation www.TradeStation.com Created with TradeStation 2000i by Omega Research ©199911500 11000 10500 10000 9500 9000 8500 4/1999 7/1999 10/1999 00 4/2000 7/2000 10/2000 01 4/2001 7/2001 AU3772_C010.fm Page 166 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 167 Both types should be well deﬁned on the chart. Unless a trend pattern is quite compact with frequent ﬂuctuations, and nicely bounded by lines which clearly converge to a point, and unless their up (or down) slant ismarked, the Wedge construction must be considered doubtful. You will ﬁndborderline cases where one of the pattern lines so nearly approaches thehorizontal in direction that it resembles a Right-Angle Triangle, and the latterwould, of course, carry quite different implications for future trend devel-opment. It is difﬁcult to lay down any hard and fast rules for distinguishingthe two. If one boundary line is nearly horizontal, or if the daily closing prices tend to fall at about the same level, then the formation is more safely con-strued as a Triangle. The reader need not let this problem worry him unduly,as he will rarely be left in doubt for long after he has acquired a little experiencewith charts. One soon gets to recognize the characteristic “symptoms” of thedifferent formations and make correct diagnoses almost instinctively. FIGURE 97. Hudson is another stock that ended its Bull Market in 1946 with a Major Diamond which could also be taken as a Complex Head-and-Shoulders. This formation was plain on the weekly chart but hard to see on the daily. Note how theDiamond gave a sell signal about 2 points higher than the Head-and-Shoulders. The14 ½ to 17 ½ area at the end of the year, when construed as a weak Rectangle, was barely fulﬁlled in February 1947. HUDSON MOTORS HT 1945–194734 323028 26 24 22 20 1918 17 16 15 Sales 100’s 5040302010 ND J F SO N D J FMA MM AJ J A O AU3772_C010.fm Page 167 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Wedges on Weekly and Monthly Charts

Most true Wedges are too short-lived (seldom longer than 3 months) to take on a recognizable deﬁnition on a monthly chart, but they may be spottedoccasionally on the weeklies. Long continued, gradual downtrends, whenplotted on arithmetic scale, sometimes assume the Wedge form. Thus, anentire Major Bear Decline on any arithmetic monthly chart may appear likea giant Falling Wedge. This is due to the fact that the up and down ﬂuctu-ations which compose the Major Swing, while maintaining about the sameextent in percentage, tend to shorten in terms of points (dollars) as prices move from higher to lower levels. Such Major chart patterns are not, ofcourse, the true Wedges we have discussed herein. When plotted on semi-logarithmic scale, these same moves would normally show a Parallel or evenslightly widening, instead of Converging, Channel. Rising Wedges Common in Bear Market Rallies As a ﬁnal note, we might add that the Rising Wedge is a quite characteristicpattern for Bear Market Rallies. It is so typical, in fact, that frequent appearance FIGURE 98. As U.S. Steel approached the Top of its Secondary Recovery in August 1937, its price ﬂuctuations tended to grow narrower, between upward sloping but converging boundaries, while volume diminished. This pattern — a Wedge — carrieda deﬁnitely Bearish message. The entire swing from July to the end of August wasessentially a Rounding Top. The three Gs mark Breakaway Gaps (Chapter 12), thelast (September 7) made as prices broke down through a Support Level (Chapter 13). U. S. STEEL X 1937 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBERG GG120 112 104 96 88 80 76 Sales 100’s 500 400 300200100 31 0 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 AU3772_C010.fm Page 168 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 169 of Wedges at a time when, after an extensive decline, there is some question as to whether a new Bull Trend is in the making may be taken as evidencethat the Primary Trend is still down. When a Major Bear Swing ends in aHead-and-Shoulders Bottom, the last Rising Wedge will often appear asprices rally from the left shoulder to the neckline, and just before they breakdown to the head (ﬁnal low). A Rising Wedge on an arithmetically scaledweekly chart is almost invariably a Bear Market phenomenon, expressing,as it does, the diminishing vigor which is the normal property of any reactionagainst a prevailing Primary Trend. The One-Day Reversal We referred in Chapter 6 to a price pattern known as the One-Day Reversal.This particular technical Reversal indication, when taken alone, can beaccorded only temporary or strong Minor Trend signiﬁcance. True, it mayappear at the very peak of a long advance, forming perhaps on the high dayof the head in a Head-and-Shoulders Pattern which will be followed by along decline, but it can hardly be credited with forecasting that entire decline;all it really signaled was the turn in the “head” itself. A One-Day Reversal FIGURE 99. An “ideal” Falling Wedge that developed in Loew’s in 1936. Note volume trend therein, irregular but generally diminishing. July produced a small Flag (Chapter 11), and at the end of the year, “LW” went into a Rectangle out ofwhich prices “skyrocketed” to 75. LOEW’S, INC. LW JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER193672 68 64 60 56 52 48 44 Sales 100’s 125 100 7550 25 41 1 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 5 1219 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 AU3772_C010.fm Page 169 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 100. Wedges seldom appear at Major Trend Reversals, but Schenley’s Bull

high in 1946 was made at the end of an 8-month Rising Wedge, plain to see on its weekly chart. The dashed line at 60 marks a Support Level (see Chapter 13) whichserved to stem the subsequent decline for 9 weeks. SCHENLEY DISTILLERS SH 1945–194796 8880 76726864 60 56 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 Sales 100’s 125 100 755025 ND J F S O N D J F M M A MM AJ J A AU3772_C010.fm Page 170 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 171 FIGURE 101. There are many interesting and technically signiﬁcant featur es in this 12-month daily chart record of

> “TWA.” Note the extraordinary One-Day Reversal, December 3, which marked its Major T op. Although the next 4 weeks
produced a sort of poorly formed Descending Triangle, the Reversal Day was the only clear -cut and unmistakable signal to sell. When you study pennants, turn back to this chart for its November Pennant. Its long Intermediate Down T rendline was tentatively broken in August 1946 but without conﬁrming volume (see Chapter 14). Note that at no time during the decline did a “Buy” Pattern appear. TRANSCONTINENTAL & WESTERN AIRLINE S TWA1945–1946RD OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST S EPTEMBER76 7268 64 60 5652 4844 40 3836 34 32 Sales 100’s 5040302010 61 3 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 AU3772_C010.fm Page 171 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
may just as well occur, for example, at the beginning (the ﬁrst peak) of a

Symmetrical Triangle which only Consolidates instead of Reversing the pre-vious uptrend. Even so, it serves, as you can see, to warn us of at leasttemporary exhaustion of Bullish forces. On the downside, a One-Day Reversal often appears in magniﬁed and conspicuous form at the end of a Panic Sell-Off, in which case, it usually isreferred to as a Climax Day or Selling Climax. This manifestation of it has special signiﬁcance which we shall take up later. First, however, just whatis a One-Day Reversal? It is, to begin with, a day of unusually high volume, exceeding, as a rule, by a notable margin any trading turnover registered in any one market session for several months past. It comes after a fairly long and steadyadvance (or a similar decline), on which activity has been increasing grad-ually. Prices push right ahead from the opening gong as if nothing couldstop them. Frequently, even the opening sales are so far beyond the previousday’s closing level as to leave a large gap on the chart. (We shall discussgaps later.) The tape runs late, and before the advance (or decline) halts,prices have been carried as far in an hour or two as three or four days wouldordinarily take them. But the halt does come ﬁnally, maybe at the end of theﬁrst hour or perhaps not until late in the day. Then quotations “churn,”registering only fractional changes to and fro, with the tape still “fast” andoften running late by spurts. Suddenly the trend reverses and prices movejust as rapidly in the opposite direction. The session ends with a ﬁnal burstof activity that puts the price at the close right back where it started the day.There has been an enormous amount of activity, and quotations may havetraversed intraday a percentage range of 2 or 3%, but the net change fromthe previous day at the end of trading is very small. One-Day Reversals at Tops appear quite often in the charts of individual stocks which are thin (relatively small ﬂoating supply of shares), which have had an active advance and have attracted a large public following. Theydevelop rarely in the Averages. Selling Climaxes (One-Day Reversals atBottoms), on the other hand, are found conspicuously in the Averages at theend of many abnormal or Panic Declines. One-Day Reversals, as we have already stated, do not carry Major Trend implications. The nimble in-and-out trader can capitalize on them — maybepick up several points if he has funds available and jumps in at the rightmoment. But, as a rule, the new trend (i.e., the trend at the close of the day)does not carry very far right away; prices usually “work” around in thenearby ranges for some time and build some sort of area pattern before theymove away in a swing of Intermediate proportions. However, the One-DayReversal, as a phenomenon that occurs frequently within or at the start ofmore pregnant technical formations, gives an important clue to probabletrend developments. In any event, it is an urgent warning to watch closelythe chart in which it has appeared to see what pattern of price action mayfollow and be prepared for the worthwhile move when it comes. AU3772_C010.fm Page 172 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 173 It is worth noting that the type of false move or shakeout that we described in Chapter 8 as occurring at the apex end of a Symmetrical Triangle often takes the form of a One-Day Reversal. The Selling Climax In the “bad old days” when stocks could be bought by putting up as littleas 10% of their cost in cash, and there were no restrictions on short selling,professional operators could (and tradition says they often did) organizeBear Raids to shake out weakly margined holdings. By selling short inquantity at a favorable moment when the “public” had gotten itself prettywell extended on the long side, they could break prices down. Brokers thenwould send out calls for more margin from their “long” accounts, many ofwhom could not or would not put it up, with the result that their stockswere dumped on the market. That, in turn, produced further declines. Theprofessionals could then step in, cover their shorts with a proﬁt, and securea line of long stock for the next advance. Bear Raids of this sort wereeffectively checked by the imposition of the SEC regulations, but margincalls and forced selling will, of course, always exist as a market factor solong as stocks can be bought on margin, and will come into play wheneverprices drop extensively following a spree of public buying. FIGURE 102. The strong One-Day Reversal which marked Greyhound’s 1946 Bull Market high. Note climax volume. A less conspicuous Reversal Day appeared on August 26. It is suggested that the reader go back over all charts in precedingchapters; he will ﬁnd many Reversal Days of greater or lesser consequence. Manygaps (G) were of measuring type — see Chapter 12. GREYHOUND CORP. G1946RD G G I. U. T. APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER56 52 48 44 40 38 36 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 50 25 61 3 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 AU3772_C010.fm Page 173 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Most true Selling Climaxes, if not all, have been produced by distress

selling of the type referred to in the preceding paragraph. They have come at the end of rapid and comprehensive declines which exhausted the marginreserves of many speculators and necessitated the dumping of their sharesat whatever the market would bring. This process is progressive — feedingupon itself, so to speak — with each wave of forced sales jeopardizinganother lot of margined accounts, until, at last, millions of shares are tossedoverboard, willy-nilly, in a ﬁnal clean-up. Such is a Selling Climax in whichthe total turnover may exceed any single day’s volume during the previousswing up. It is a harvest time for traders who, having avoided the Bullishinfection at the top of the market, have funds in reserve to pick up stocksavailable at panic prices. Obviously, a clean-out day or Selling Climax radically reverses the tech nical condition of the market, for in its process, shares have passed fromweak hands into strong hands at very much lower prices. The ominousweight of potential selling that has been overhanging the market has beenremoved. And usually the Panic has carried quotations (although only FIGURE 102.1. Apple. 1987 Reagan Crash. Does this plunge appear to be out of the blue? Not really. Numerous signs are given: break of major trendline; short-term momentum down before crash in an environment of extreme top psychology; thenthe crash itself, the panic selling exhibiting the typical pattern of short covering, thenfurther decline. APPLE COMPUTER INC-(Nasdaq NM) 62.72 –0.03 –0.05% 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 87 ©1998-2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. Terms of use apply. AU3772_C010.fm Page 174 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 175 temporarily, as a rule) well below even conservative values based on current business conditions. A Selling Climax need not be completed, and the Reversal of Trend actually become evident, within a single day. We have classiﬁed it as a varietyof One-Day Reversal, but some of them have actually spread out over 2 days,with the decline exhausted and coming to a halt late on the ﬁrst day, toonear the end of the session to permit much recovery. The next day sees anextensive rally right from the opening gong, as it is immediately apparentthen, if not late the preceding day, that there are no more distress offerings. The all-time percentage record for Selling Climaxes is held by October 29, 1929. Prices in terms of the Dow–Jones Industrial Average opened that daypractically at their high, 252.38, which was more than 8 points below the FIGURE 103. The “Panic” selling of October 19, 1937, produced a conspicuous Climax Reversal Day in nearly all leading stocks, as well as in the Averages. This New York Central chart shows, beside the Selling Climax (SC), its Head-and-Shoul-ders Recovery Top of July–August and a Consolidation Rectangle which ended as aTriangle in early October. “CN” made a ﬁnal Bear Market low the following Marchat 10 ½. On a logarithmic price scale, its down trendline from August was not broken until June 1938. NEW YORK CENTRAL CN1937 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER40 35 30 25 20 Sales 100’s 400300200100SCNLSSH HSS 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 4 1118 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 AU3772_C010.fm Page 175 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
previous day’s closing level. Panic selling ﬂooded the Exchange from the

start, and before it was over, the Industrial Average had lost 40.05 points!From that low, 212.33, it rallied in the ﬁnal 2 hours to 230.07 for a gain ofnearly 18 points, and went on up another 28 points the following day. This1929 climax set the all-time record also for daily turnover: 16,410,000 shareswere traded in those 5 hours, more than twice as many as in any one dayduring the entire preceding Bull Market. But the low level of October 29 wasbroken a week later, and the bottom of that particular early phase of the1929–32 Bear Market was not reached until November 13. EN: See comments on the following page on the Reagan Crash of 1987. The Panic of 1937 ended with a classic Selling Climax on October 19, another “Black Tuesday” in stock market annals. The Dow Industrials hadclosed at 125.73 the night before. Prices had already fallen without a rallyof consequence from a high of 190 in mid-August, and margin accounts werenearly all in a precarious situation. The telephones had been worked over-time the preceding day by brokers demanding additional margin, most ofwhich was not forthcoming. When the Exchange opened on the 19th, quo-tations hit the toboggan under a ﬂood of offerings. By 11:30 a.m., with theIndustrial Average around 115, the selling was over and offerings disap-peared. An hour later, prices were jumping a point between sales and the FIGURE 103.1. Dow Industrials, 1987 Reagan Crash. Rumors proliferated — iron ically, one that Reagan had Alzheimer’s. Proximate cause: professional panic exac erbated by an ill-considered portfolio insurance scheme propagated by academics.Note that the authoritative (lower) trendline here (75 days) is broken by more than2% (Magee’s suggestion) in early September. The broken upper trendline (25 days)would have pulled the ripcord for the more agile trader. Savvy investors werehedging and liquidating through September, and fund managers panicked in Octo-ber. According to the Brady Report, Hull Trading Co. bought the bottom October 20,thus saving American capitalism. $INDUA LAST-Daily 12/24/1987 C = 1998.67 –9000.74 –81.82% O = 10039.58 H = 10204.03 L = 10029.96 V = 1181488000 Created with TradeStation www.TradeStation.com Volume 108803664.002700.00 2600.002500.00 2400.00 2300.00 2200.00 2100.00 2000.00 1900.00 1800.00 1700.002700.00 2600.00 2500.00 2400.00 2300.00 2200.00 2100.00 2000.00 1900.00 1800.00 1700.00 5500000 4500000 3500000 2500000 150000055000000 45000000 35000000 25000000 15000000 3/1987 4/1987 5/1987 6/1987 7/1987 8/1987 9/1987 10/1987 11/1987 12/1987 AU3772_C010.fm Page 176 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 177 day closed at 126.85, recovering its entire loss. Volume on that climax was 7,290,000 shares, double that of any day at the top of the preceding BullMarket. An intraday high of 141.22 was reached 10 days later, but the PanicLow was subsequently broken on November 20, 1937, and that Bear Marketﬁnally ended at 98.95 (Dow–Jones Industrials’ closing level) on March 31,1938. EN: Compare 1987. No wonder investors have instinctual angst on October 19. In 1987 the Bear returned to create another great Panic — on the very samedate. From a high of 2746.65 on August 25 the Dow bungeed to a low of 1616.21on October 20. The actual full-blown panic took place from October 14 (high2485.15) to October 20 (low 1616.21) with October 19 and 20 traversing a rangeof 547.95 points or 25% of the market at that point. Top to bottom 1130 points werelost comprising a percentage retracement of 41%. The more things change the morethey stay the same, as André Malraux is said to have remarked. Actually he said itin French, which is more elegant, and expresses the same idea: Plus ça change, c’est plus la meme chose. Readers should not assume that similar crashes will not occur in the future. The foregoing were general market climaxes, a phenomenon which, of course, produces (or rather is produced by) simultaneous selling in practi-cally every actively traded individual issue. A Climax Bottom, as a matterof fact, appears in an individual stock chart, as a rule, only as a concomitantof a general market clean-out, although there are cases where some particularand completely unexpected piece of bad news affects one certain companyand causes panicky liquidation of its shares alone, terminating with a One-Day Reversal. The Top Reversal Day, on the other hand, is normally a man ifestation of an individual stock rather than of the general market average. The two outstanding examples of Selling Climaxes that we have cited above, and numbers of others which have appeared at the conclusion ofvarious Panic Sell-offs, obviously offered extraordinary opportunities for aquick turn to the trader who was smart (or lucky) enough to get in at thebottom. He could cash in a few days later with exceptional proﬁts. Profes-sional operators capitalize on such opportunities. The problem is to recog-nize the climactic nature of the selling in time to seize the chance — and thatisn’t as easy as it may have sounded in our discussion. Just to emphasizethe possibilities of error, there was a 30-point drop, followed by a 30-pointrecovery, on a turnover of nearly 13 million shares, on October 24, 1929, butthe trader who didn’t grab his proﬁts within 48 hours never had anotherchance to get out even (in terms of the Averages, that is). But it isn’t impossible to recognize a Selling Climax, if you have friends in the Street to keep you informed on the condition of margin accounts andthe amount of necessitous selling to be expected. EN: This information is now not difﬁcult to come by. It is easily obtainable in the general ﬁnancial press. The climax comes after a decline approaching Panic proportions. The day usually opens with a substantial Downside Gap (opening prices considerably belowthe previous night’s closing); offerings appear too great to be absorbed; pricescollapse; the ticker runs late; the market is exceptionally “broad” with nearly AU3772_C010.fm Page 177 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## 178 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
every listed stock crowding into the record. Then, some time after 11 a.m., perhaps not until afternoon, the selling appears to dry up; a few issuescontinue to decline while others begin to climb. Suddenly prices are jumping.That is the time to act. Buy a stock that has been thoroughly depressed butone which normally has at all times a good following (for example, U.S.Steel). Don’t hang on too long; take a reasonable proﬁt as soon as it isFIGURE 104. The Selling Climax discussed on the preceding pages is typically a 1-day phenomenon, and on only one occasion (April 1939) in history has a general market One-Day Reversal signaled the ﬁnal low of a Primary Bear Trend (althoughmany individual stocks evinced a Selling Climax on their charts in March 1938). Occasionally, a weekly chart will produce a formation which might be called a

> “One-Week Reversal,” in some such conspicuous fashion as is shown above in “NC.”In this instance, the subsequent rise proves that a Major change in its technical balanceoccurred in December 1941. Curiously enough, no other obvious Reversal Patternappeared on the weekly chart at this turn in the Primary Trend of “NC.” (Its dailychart showed an Ascending Triangle.) But this example of a One-Week Reversal isnot shown to give the idea that such phenomena carry important technical indica-tions. On the contrary, most “Reversal weeks” are followed by very disappointingmoves.
NATIONAL CASH REGISTER NC 1941–194324 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 Sales 100’s 50 40302010 ND J F SO N D J F M MM AJ J A OSAU3772_C010.fm Page 178 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Chapter ten: Other Reversal Phenomena 179
available and sell, in any event, whenever the recovery shows signs of bogging down. Remember, a One-Day Reversal is not a dependable Major Trend indi cator. Selling Climaxes do not normally occur at the ﬁnal Bottoms of BearMarkets — weak holdings usually have been shaken out long before thatstage is reached. Only one Primary Downtrend in all the record has, in fact,ended with the ﬁrst Panic Phase, that being the 5-month Bear Market of1938–39 which was followed by an equally short Bull Market. One remaining Reversal Formation, the Island Pattern, involves the whole subject of Gaps which we have not yet had an appropriate occasion to discuss. Gaps will be taken up in detail in Chapter 12, and we will defer the Island Reversal until then.AU3772_C010.fm Page 179 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

AU3772_C010.fm Page 180 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

181chapter 10.1 Short-Term Phenomena of Potential Importance Very short-term phenomena — of a one-day or a few days’ duration — can sometimes be indicative of not only short-term direction, but also give hintsas to longer-term price behavior. Gaps (Chapter 12), and One-Day Reversals(Chapter 10), which have been discussed, belong to this group. Other short-term patterns of interest include Spikes, Key Reversal Days ( sometimes called merely Reversal Days), and Runaway Days (sometimes called Wide-Ranging Days). Spikes On the day it occurs, a Spike is not immediately identiﬁable, for by deﬁnition it protrudes head and shoulders above days before and after if it is at ornear a Top, and plunges much below the surrounding days if it occurs at aBottom. So after a day that exhibits an unusually wide range, the subsequentdays must be observed to discriminate the day from a Runaway Day. Bothare the marks of a far-ranging battle between bulls and bears, with the closegiving a clue as to whom the eventual winner will be. The importance ofthe spike is highlighted by A. The strength and length of the action which preceded it B. The close of the day, whether up on a Bottom or down on a Top C. Its prominence when compared to the days before and after it An extremely wide-range day at the end of a long bull move which closes down after making unusual new highs might even be construed as a one-day signal. Whether one trades on it or not would depend on his par-ticular style and taste and the nature of his trading — long range, scalping,etc. In fact, the Spike might also be a One-Day Reversal — that pattern whereoften an opening gap is followed by avid buying which collapses and closesbelow the opening or at the low of the day. Such action might be comparedto an army pursuing a seemingly defeated enemy only to discover the retreatwas a ruse, then turning and ﬂeeing the other way in a rout.AU3772_C010.fm Page 181 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## 182 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Turn this description on its head and you have a Spike Bottom. It is not infrequent that a Spike will be followed by signiﬁcant price movement in the opposite direction. Figure 104.1 illustrates a modern Spike. Figures 1 and35 show some spikes on Edwards’ and Magee’s charts. Runaway Days A Runaway Day is a day that stands out on the chart as having an unusuallylong range, often opening at the low and closing at the high, or vice versafor bear runaways. Here the enemy has retreated precipitously, or treacher-ously to draw the bulls into a trap. The holders and sellers cannot or willnot satisfy the eager demand of the buyers and so the price transversesperhaps two to three times the daily range. While the agile speculator mayjump on this charging train and realize a nice scalp, it is the following daysthat reveal the true signiﬁcance. Nice consolidation and continued volumewill conﬁrm the day as signiﬁcant while a tapering of volume and roundingor volatile pullback will call into question its validity. While these days maybe taken as hair-trigger buy signals (or sell signals, depending) the returnFIGURE 104.1. A church spire top in Qualcomm. The December gap might be mistaken for a buy signal, as might be the runaway days, but they are actually hand engraved invitations to leave the party with near progressive stops ⅛ off the day’s low. Also valid—exit on the Key Reversal on day 2 after the gap. How does the traderknow this is a blow-off and not a signal to pyramid? By the age, length, state, andslope of the market. When trendlines go vertical, blow-off management must be used.The return to the base of the ﬁrst runaway day is notiﬁcation that it is a bull trap.The ﬁrst bull trap. The second bull trap is the breakout of the triangle in March. Awonderful chart ﬁlled with ﬁn de siècle and ﬁn de millennium lessons. QUALCOMM (58.7500, 62.0625, 58.0000, 59.8750, →1.5625) Created with Meta Stock www.equis.com210 200 190 180 170 160 150 140 130 120 110 100 9080 70 60 50 40 30 10000 9000 8000 7000 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 000 x100 September October November December 2000 February March April May June July AugustAU3772_C010.fm Page 182 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Chapter 10.1: Short-Term Phenomena of Potential Importance 183
of prices to the low of the Runaway Day will probably indicate that the day was a false signal, and that a trade in the opposite direction is shaping up.See Figure 39 for runaways complete with gaps.

## _Figure 104.2 showing Microsoft in 2000 was one such example where a_
bull trap precipitated by a Runaway Day with a subsequent collapse foretoldthe 50% decline in Microsoft stock. Key Reversal Days

The Key Reversal Day pattern occurs when one sees a new high in anupmove and then a close below the close of the previous day. As a short-term trading signal it has much to recommend it, but like every other tech-nical pattern, judgment and timing are required to proﬁt from it. In a BullMarket there will be some if not many such interim highs marked by KeyReversal Days. On the Key Reversal Day at a major or important Top thetrader shorts the stock on the close with a stop at the high of the reversalday, or slightly above. He may then exit on the proﬁt side on the occurrenceof a Key Reversal Day in the opposite direction, or on a proﬁt target, or a chartpattern. Or he may, if adventurous, use the trade as the ﬁrst of accumulatinga position for an anticipated Bear Market, adding other positions as moresigniﬁcant patterns occur and as support levels are broken. This pattern also is useful in trading range markets, as shown in some Internet stocks from 2000, where trading with Key Reversal Days wouldFIGURE 104.2. Microsoft. A Key Reversal Day in March. Department of Justice breakaway gaps: runaway gaps, exhaustion gaps. Selling climax. As usual, further lows are achieved. A cornucopia of chartist’s delights. MSFT(D)Daily NASDAQ L = 27.56 +0.35 +1.29% B = 27.55 A = 27.56 O = 27.67 Hi = 27.73 Lo = 27.44 C = 27.56 V = 571 45012 Bull Trap Runaway Days Runaway Gap Exhasution GapDepartment of Justice Gap48.00 42.00 37.00 32.00 31.33 28.00 25.0044.06 35.30 SO N D 00 FM A M J JA SON Created with TradeStationAU3772_C010.fm Page 183 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## 184 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
have allowed the trader to escape unscathed in the minicrash of the NASDAQ in early 2000. (Cf. Figures 104.3 and 104.4 on the following pages for Ebay and Lucent.) Of all the Very Short-Term Patterns, Gaps, One-Day Reversals, Key Reversal Days, Spikes, and Runaway Days, it should be noted that returnof prices to the origination of the formation marks the formation as a falsesignal and reason to reverse the trade direction and look for perhaps signif-icant proﬁts. Clearly these are the tactics of scalpers and speculators, but it does not hurt the long-term investor to know and understand them.FIGURE 104.3. Ebay. As Ebay broke its trendline and drifted sideways, it became a good subject for Key Reversal Day trading. Note several instances. EBAY INC-(Nasdaq NM) 39.00 –0.29 –0.74% 32 30 28 26 2422 20 1816 14 12 10 8 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 00 Feb Mar Apr 1998–2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. | Terms of use apply.k kkkkk kAU3772_C010.fm Page 184 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Chapter 10.1: Short-Term Phenomena of Potential Importance 185
FIGURE 104.3.1. If you can’t deliver groceries electronically what good is the In ternet? Meg Whitman (a competent, well, more than competent, CEO) and Ebay found a use for it: The biggest ﬂea market ever invented (and growing every day).Every military commander knows the axiom, Exploit Success! and Ebay exploits andexploits and exploits. Is there a fundamental lesson here for the technician? Abso-lutely. Although the technician should be able to take a nameless chart and trade itcompetently (CEO of his own ship) no real information or data should be ignored. In this case the real information – that Ebay was an 800 pound gorilla (or ﬂea) – ﬁtthe chart perfectly. So Ebay separated itself from a bunch of nags to run long andhard. Handicappers know to always keep an eye on winning jockeys: Whitman.Ellison at Oracle. Moore at Intel. Gates at Microsoft. Jobs at Apple (and Pixar andNEXT and etc., etc., etc…). In 2005 what’s to be done with Ebay? Draw a trendline,raise your stops and sell it if it reverses. EBAY(D) -Weekly NASDAQ L = 35.14 –0.24 –0.68% B = 35.14 A = 35.15 O = 35.15 Hi = 35.58 Lo = 34.93 C = 35.14 V = 11216380 35.8347.00 35.14 25.00 18.00 13.00 10.00 7.00 5.00 4.00 3.00 2.00 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005Created with TradeStationAU3772_C010.fm Page 185 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## 186 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 104.4. Lucent. Late 20th and early 21st century schizophrenia. Runaway Days, Br eakaway Gaps. Maalox is to be prescribed for the investor. Ecstasy for the trader. Reversal Days and short-term tactics win the day when the subject is insane. An excellent example of ﬁtting the trader to the stock. Why would a rational investor own such a stock? LU (Lucent Tech Inc) 08/26/2006 3:34 PM EDT © 2002-2006 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. All Rights Reserved.AU3772_C010.fm Page 186 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

## Chapter 10.1: Short-Term Phenomena of Potential Importance 187
FIGURE 104.4.1. In the caption to Figure 104.4, the editor asked, apparently rhe torically why a rational investor would own Lucent. The picture here shows what happens when apparently rational investors do not set a stop to protect themselvesfrom irrational volatility. The market knows things investors do not know. But it willreveal these things to the most basic of investors if he reads the chart. This chart isadded for the 9th Edition to pick up the picture where the 8th left it. LU(D) -Weekly NYSE L = 2.84 –0.02 –0.70% B = 0.00 A = 0.00 O = 2.85 Hi = 2.90 Lo = 2.81 C = 2.84 V = 318648 00 8th Edition Fig. 104.4 3.97 1.9955.00 40.00 29.00 21.00 15.00 11.00 8.00 5.00 4.00 3.00 2.00 2.84 1.00 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Created with TradeStationAU3772_C010.fm Page 187 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

AU3772_C010.fm Page 188 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:30 PM

189 chapter eleven Consolidation Formations An army, which has pushed forward too rapidly, penetrated far into enemy territory, suffered casualties, and outrun its supplies, must halt eventually,perhaps retreat a bit to a more easily defended position and dig in, bring upreplacements, and establish a strong base from which later to launch a newattack. In the military parlance with which we have all become more or lessfamiliar these past few years, that process is known as consolidating one’s gains. Although it will not do to overwork the analogy, there is much in theaction of the stock market which may be compared to a military campaign.When a stock pushes ahead (up or down) too fast, it reaches a point wherethe forces that produced its move are exhausted. Then it either reverses itstrend (in a Major or Intermediate sense), reacts to a good Support Level, or Consolidates its position, in some sort of “sideways” chart pattern composed of Minor Fluctuations, until it has caught up with itself, so to speak, and isready to go on again. We already have had occasion to refer to Consolidation Formations in our study of Symmetrical Triangles and Rectangles. We saw how those twochart formations might either reverse the previous trend or Consolidate itin preparation for its continuation. We noted that about three out of fourSymmetrical Triangles will turn out to be Consolidations rather than Rever-sals — and Rectangles in about the same proportion. Even a Flat-ToppedBroadening Pattern, constructed at the Top of an Intermediate Advance, may,despite its normally Bearish implications, be converted into a Consolidationor Continuation Formation if its Flat Top is decisively penetrated on theupside. A Dow Theory Line in the chart of one of the Averages may be either a Consolidation or Reversal Formation, and is rather more likely to be theformer than the latter. A Dow Line is, of course, a sort of loose Rectangle.The fact is that almost any sort of sideways price pattern, such as is oftentermed a “Congestion” or trading area, provided trading volume tends todiminish during its construction (and provided it does not show deﬁnitebroadening tendencies), usually functions as a Consolidation. But most areasof Trend Consolidation are fairly well deﬁned, taking on a recognizablepattern. AU3772_book.fm Page 189 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Flags and Pennants

We do not need to spend more time here on the Triangles and Rectangles; they have been examined in both their Reversal and Consolidation manifes-tations in previous chapters. Our ﬁrst two formations, which are character-istic of Consolidation only, are the Flags and Pennants, and they are curiously related in certain aspects, as we shall see, to Triangles, Rectangles, andWedges. A Flag looks like a ﬂag on the chart. That is, it does if it appears in an uptrend; the picture is naturally turned upside down in a downtrend. It FIGURE 105. This is a typical and practically perfect Flag, constructed May 12 to June 2, 1945, in Martin–Parry. Daily turnover diminished to a low rate as prices settled down for exactly 3 weeks after their swift advance from 11 to 16 ½, but held up away from the lower boundary line during the third week, and then burst outtopside with high volume in another straight-line push from 15 to 21. Study thischart again when you come to the Flag-measuring formula on page 192. The dashesat 12 indicate the upper range of an old Resistance Level (Chapter 13). MARTIN – PARRY MRT1945 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBERG X D 15024 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 50 25 714212851219262916233071421284111825 1 8152229 AU3772_book.fm Page 190 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eleven: Consolidation Formations 191 might be described as a small, compact parallelogram of price ﬂuctuations, or a tilted Rectangle which slopes back moderately against the prevailingtrend. Let us consider the Uptrend Flag ﬁrst. It usually forms after a rapidand fairly extensive advance which produces a nearly vertical, or at leastquite steep price track on the charts. On such moves, volume normally showsa progressive increase until it reaches a high rate. This volume (since everytransaction signiﬁes a sale, as well as a purchase) is a warning, of course,that many holders of the stock are taking proﬁts. Eventually the pressure ofproﬁt-taking halts the markup. Prices “churn” without further gain and thenreact two or three points on reduced turnover. A new rally occurs, but failsto equal the previous high or attain the previous top volume. Another reac-tion carries quotations slightly below the preceding Bottom with furtherdiminution of activity. Then follows a series of similar Minor Fluctuations,each of whose Tops and Bottoms are successively a triﬂe lower than itspredecessor, and with volume shrinking markedly and constantly as the FIGURE 106. Another typical Flag of 3 weeks’ duration, August 30 to September 18. This National Gypsum chart overlaps that in Figure 49, showing the false move at the apex of the May–June Symmetrical Triangle. A buy signal was given when pricespushed up through the old apex level on August 23 with increased volume. Mostinteresting is the second Symmetrical Triangle which formed in October–November,an almost exact replica of the ﬁrst, but with a downside false move at its apex. Thesharp increase in volume on November 27 left no doubt as to its being a Consolidationrather than Reversal Pattern. “NG” went on up to 33. NATIONAL GYPSUM NG 1945 JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER24 22 20 1918 17 16 15 14 Sales 100’s 125100755025 162330714212841118251815222961320273 10 172418 AU3772_book.fm Page 191 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
pattern develops. On the chart, the initial, steep up-move followed by the

compact, sideways, and slightly down-sloping price Congestion Area, whichcan be roughly bounded, top and bottom, by parallel lines, takes on theappearance of a mast (or halyard) with a ﬂag ﬂying from its peak. Hence,of course, the name of the formation. Sometimes each rally and setback within the Flag takes 3 or 4 days, rarely more. In other cases, prices will skip back and forth between the upperand lower Flag boundaries in a single day or two, in which event the patternon the chart consists of an almost solid block of price range lines. The widerthe pattern (from top to bottom) the longer time, naturally, it should takefor each swing within it to be completed. This process of Minor Fluctuationsmay continue for only 5 days to a week if the Flag is narrow, or go on foras much as 3 weeks. Daily turnover by that time usually will have shrunkto a relatively low ebb. Then suddenly, prices will erupt with a new burstof activity from the end of the Flag and push straight up again in anotheradvance that practically duplicates the original “mast” atop which the Flagwas constructed. We have spoken of the Flag pattern as being moderately down-slanting, but the very short and “solid” ones will frequently develop horizontally andlook like small squares. (On rare occasions a pattern of the Flag type in anuptrend will even slope up a triﬂe.) FIGURE 107. Flags of the “Half-Mast” type appear most often in the later and most active stages of a Primary Advance. The above example (January) was the last Consolidation Formation before “NK’s” 1937 Bull Market Top. Note the RectangleReversal Pattern in March and series of step-down patterns that followed. NASH – KELVINATOR NK 1937 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE24 22 20 19 18 1716 15 Sales 100’s 250 200 150 100 50 29162330613202761320273101724181522 29 5121926 AU3772_book.fm Page 192 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eleven: Consolidation Formations 193 Flags form on steep down moves in much the same manner and with precisely the same implications as they do in uptrends. Down Flags, of course, tend to slope up; i.e., they simply invert the picture presented by an FIGURE 108. Sometimes a stock will make a long series of small Consolidation Patterns in its uptrend, one following right on the heels of another as successive groups of traders buy in while others take their proﬁts on previous purchases. Inthis sequence of step-ups in Vanadium, the Flag Pattern formed in January 1937 rana few days over, but the volume breakout of February 4 left no doubt that the trendwas still up. A ﬁnal Top was made at 39 ½ in March. Note strong buy signal given on December 14. Refer to this record again in connection with Support and Resistancestudies in Chapter 13. VANADIUM CORP. VA 1936–1937 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 5025 31017 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 6 132027 AU3772_book.fm Page 193 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
up Flag. Trading volume diminishes during their formation and increases

again as prices break down away from them. The Pennant — A Pointed Flag The only important difference between a Pennant and a Flag is that the former is bounded by converging boundary lines rather than parallel. The normalPennant, in other words, is a small, compact, sloping Triangle. It slants downwhen it appears in an uptrend, and up in a downtrend. It forms, as a rule,after a rapid advance (or decline), and trading volume shrinks notably dur-ing its construction. In fact, activity tends to diminish even more rapidly ina Pennant than in a Flag (which we naturally would expect on account ofthe progressively shorter ﬂuctuations which compose it), and may dropalmost to nothing before the Pennant is completed and prices break awayfrom it in a new and rapid move. The Pennant might also be described as a short, compact Wedge, char acterized by marked diminution of activity. When, as is usual, it slants backagainst the preceding trend, its forecasting implications are similar to those FIGURE 109. A Bull Flag in February and a Bear Flag in April 1936, in Briggs. The Top between was a Symmetrical Triangle. April 30 was a Reversal Day. Prices recov ered to 64 ½ in November 1936, making there a long-term Major Double Top with this March high. The Support–Resistance Zone at 51–53, indicated by dashed line,was still effective in 1946! (See Chapter 13.) BRIGGS BG1936 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE68 64 6056 52 48 44 40 Sales 100’s 250 200 150 100 50 41118251815222971421284111825291623 306132027 AU3772_book.fm Page 194 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eleven: Consolidation Formations 195 of the Wedge, in that prices break out of it in a direction opposite to its slant. But there are rarer Minor variations of the Pennant, comparable with thosesometimes found in the Flag, in which the price area is very short and “solid”and practically horizontal (like a Symmetrical Triangle), or in which the slopeis actually slightly in the same direction as the preceding trend instead ofagainst it. When prices move out of the last named type, they ordinarily doso not in a sudden straight-line breakaway but rather in an accelerating curvewith volume increasing gradually instead of abruptly at the break. The wholepattern then resembles a curved horn which runs to a long, slender point.Don’t let these variations worry you; there is nothing deceptive about theirappearance; their kinship to the more common, normal form is quite apparent. The Measuring Formula The same approximate measuring formula applies to the Pennant as to the Flag. They are both “Half-Mast” Patterns which ordinarily form after a fairly FIGURE 110. The down-sloping, Converging Price Formation of November 4 through December 9 might be called either a short Wedge or a Pennant. Note small Flag in October; also Runaway Gaps November 4 and February 19, and BreakoutGap December 10. ANACONDA COPPER A 1936–1937 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH72 68 64 60 56 52 48 44 40 38 36 Sales 100’s 500 400 300 200100GGG 310172431714212851219262916233061320 27 6132027 AU3772_book.fm Page 195 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
steady and rapid (steep) price movement. In applying the measuring rule,

go back to the beginning of that immediately preceding move, to the pointwhere it broke away from a previous Consolidation of Reversal Formation(or through a signiﬁcant trendline or Resistance Level, with which laterchapters are concerned), a point recognizable as a rule by a quick spurt inactivity, and measure from there to the Minor Reversal level at which theFlag or Pennant started to form. Then measure the same distance from thepoint where prices break out of the Flag or Pennant, and in the same direc-tion. The level thus arrived at is the minimum expectation of this type ofConsolidation Pattern. As a matter of fact, advances from Flags or Pennantsin an uptrend generally go farther (in terms of points or dollars) than thepreceding move, while declines may not carry quite so far. Hence, the for-mula is best applied on a semilogarithmic chart by measuring actual chartdistance rather than by counting points. You can check this by referring tothe examples illustrating this study. FIGURE 111. An example (in June 1944) of the very brief and compact type of price

> “Congestion” which can be classed as a Flag. The advance here started at 5 from a
13-month Symmetrical Triangle of which only the last 2 months appear above. Themeasuring implication (see below) of this tiny Flag was not fulﬁlled until after priceshad undergone a sort of Triangular Consolidation in July. PACIFIC TIN PTC1944 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER7 6 5 412 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 5025 815222961320273101724181522295121926 2 9162330 AU3772_book.fm Page 196 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eleven: Consolidation Formations 197 Reliability of Flags and Pennants These pretty little patterns of Consolidation are justly regarded as among the most dependable of chart formations, both as to directional and measuring FIGURE 112. Another example of the series of Flag-type Consolidations that may form in a rapid, third-phase Bull Market Advance. Mullins went from 15 to above 39 in 6 months in 1936, dropped back to 31, and then rose again in March l, 1937, toits previous high, making a Major Double Top. (“MNS” was split 2-for-1 in 1937.) The July–August Flag ran for 5 weeks — too long to be trusted without additional technical evidence (see point 3 on page 194). The danger in such prolonged forma-tions is either that the breakout, when it ﬁnally appears, will fail to follow through,or that prices will keep right on drifting down. For the moment — on August 25 —it looked as though this Flag had “gone stale,” but when prices rose above theprevious high on August 27, with a smart pickup in volume, purchases were obvi-ously safe. MULLINS MANUFACTURING B MNS 1936 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBERG28 2624 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 Sales 100’s 50 4030 20 10 41118252916233061320274111825181522 29 5121926 AU3772_book.fm Page 197 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
indications. They do fail occasionally, but almost never without giving warn

ing before the pattern itself is completed. All that is necessary to guardagainst such failures is to strictly apply the tests as to authenticity of patternwhich we already have incorporated in their description. These are 1. The Consolidation (Flag or Pennant) should occur after a “straight line” move. 2. Activity should diminish appreciably and constantly during the pat tern’s construction, and continue to decline until prices break awayfrom it. 3. Prices should break away (in the expected direction) in not more than 4 weeks. A pattern of this type which extends beyond 3 weeks should be watched with suspicion. The matter of practical trading on these particular formations will be taken up in the second section of this book, devoted to tactics. But our second test deserves some further comment here. If a pattern begins to develop onthe chart which, so far as the price picture alone is concerned, qualiﬁes as aFlag or Pennant, but during which trading volume remains high or obviouslyirregular instead of diminishing, the outcome is more apt to be a quickreaction against, rather than continuation of, the previous trend. In otherwords, such high or irregular activity formations are characteristically Minor Reversal Areas rather than true Consolidations. Watch the volume half ofyour chart at all times. Where They May Be Expected Flag and Pennant Consolidations are characteristic of fast moves. Therefore,they show up most frequently in the later, dynamic phase of Bull Markets,after the ﬁrst accumulation and the more orderly early markup stages havepassed. Hence, the appearance of these patterns may be taken as a warningthat an advance is approaching its ﬁnal weeks. The rapid phase of a MajorBear Trend, on the other hand, is its second stage, often characterized byalmost “vertical” Panic Declines. The Flags and Pennants which developtherein are usually short — completed in a matter of 3 or 4 days rather thanweeks. In the late months of a Bear Market, formations that evolve on thecharts in the Flag or Pennant similitude often will run too long (4 weeks ormore), begin to show an increase in volume on the rallies, and be succeededby only dull and limited reactions. In general, it may be said that these particular chart patterns are most common (and most dependable) in uptrends. The appearance, after a Major Decline, of price pictures which, at the start, assume the downtrend Flag orPennant form must be regarded with caution. Unless such developmentshold strictly to the limitations we have stated above under the heading of“reliability,” do not trade on them. AU3772_book.fm Page 198 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eleven: Consolidation Formations 199 Flag Pictures on Weekly and Monthly Charts One of our requisites for a dependable Flag (or Pennant) was that it should not take more than 4 weeks to complete its pattern and break out in a newmove. It stands to reason, therefore, that a true Flag cannot show up at allon a monthly chart and barely appears on a weekly chart. You will ﬁnd priceareas on long-range charts, patterns which have taken 8 or 10 weeks to asmany months, and sometimes a year or two, in their construction, whichassume the shape of a Flag, but do not expect them to function as Flags. FIGURE 113. The vertical lines marked “M” show how the measuring formula is applied to a Flag Pattern. Note that the ﬁrst measurement is taken from the level where the mast leaves the previous “Congestion” up to the peak of the Flag. Thissame distance is then measured up from the Flag breakout. In “WYO,” the formulaworked out exactly. Trading commitments should normally have been cashed inabove 36 on this move. They might then have been reinstated when it becameapparent by April 2 that a Rounding Bottom was completed (note volume) for a newadvance. WYANDOTTE WORSTED WYO1945–1946M M G JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE48 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 50 25 22295121926291623291623306132027411 18 251815 AU3772_book.fm Page 199 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Examined in detail on a daily chart, these same long areas almost always

will be found to contain price formations having entirely different signiﬁ-cance. Frequently, what is really a Major Reversal Area following a long, rapid advance will look something like a Flag when it is condensed on a monthlychart. So, do not trust such pictures on long-range charts; do not take it forgranted that they represent Consolidation for a new rise; ﬁnd out what thedetailed daily plotting for the same period says. Rectangular Consolidations: An Early Phase Phenomenon In contrast with Flags and Pennants, which are typically last stage BullMarket Concomitants, Consolidations of the Rectangle class are found moreoften in the earlier phases of Bull Trend evolution. In Major Bear Moves,Rectangles may develop in the ﬁrst stage just before a Panic Decline, or in FIGURE 114. A 1946 chart that delighted technicians. Contains a perfect “Half Mast” Pattern in January, with measuring gaps (G, G) above and below it; a downside Flag in early February (check measurement); a ﬁne Ascending Triangle at the bottomof this reaction, with a Throwback in April, giving an ideal “buy spot.” AMERICAN WOOLEN WY 1946 GG JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE68 64 60 56 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 30Sales 100’s 125 100 75 5025 51219262916232916233061320274111825 1 8152229 AU3772_book.fm Page 200 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eleven: Consolidation Formations 201 the last stage preceding a strictly limited ﬁnal sell-off. The latter manifesta tion presumably betokens premature accumulation by interests who feel thatprices have already gone low enough to suit their purposes. (They come outall right, of course, if they are able to hold on through the remainder of theBear Swing and long enough for the next Bull Market to put prices back upagain to proﬁtable levels.) Head-and-Shoulders Consolidations All our references to the Head-and-Shoulders Formations up to this point(see Chapters 6 and 7) have considered that pattern as typifying a Reversalof Trend, and, in its normal and common manifestation, that is most deﬁ-nitely the Head-and-Shoulders function. But, occasionally, prices will gothrough a series of ﬂuctuations which construct a sort of inverted Head-and-Shoulders picture, which in turn leads to continuation of the previous trend. There is no danger of confusing such Continuation or Consolidation Formations with regular Head-and-Shoulders Reversals because, as we havesaid, they are inverted or abnormal with respect to the direction of the price FIGURE 114.1. MO. Talk about your technician’s delights. Altria Group throws off some pretty good delights here. A breakaway gap and run days to the downside. A down ﬂagpole with ﬂag. Pattern gaps. But good pattern gaps, really interesting. Then a triangle complete with a breakaway and an up ﬂagpole with ﬂag. Of course thenontechnician probably is suffering from nausea at this point. It’s an ill roller coasterwhich bodes ill for everyone. And note well, a completely tradable situation for thealert short-term technician. MO(D)Daily NYSE L = 65.41 +0.42 +0.65% B = 0.00 A = 0.00 O = 65.65 Hi = 65.65 Lo = 65.05 C = 65.41 V = 4968500 52.5169.00 66.00 65.41 60.00 56.00 52.00 48.00 45.00 42.00 39.00 S O N D 04 F M A M J J A S O N D 05 F M A M Created with TradeStation AU3772_book.fm Page 201 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
trend prior to their appearance. In other words, one of these patterns that

develops in a rising market will take the form of a Head-and-ShouldersBottom. Those that appear in decline assume the appearance of a Head-and-Shoulders Top. By the time these price formations are completed (left shoul-der, head and right shoulder evident), there is no question as to their impli-cations. But at the head stage, before the right shoulder is constructed, theremay be — usually is — considerable doubt as to what is really going on. The volume pattern in Consolidations of this type does not follow the rule for Reversal Head-and-Shoulders. In a downtrend, for example, theConsolidation Formation resembled in its price contour a Head-and-Shoul-ders Top, but the attendant volume will diminish instead of increase on theleft shoulder and head, as well as on the right shoulder. The same holds truefor the “Bottom” Patterns that develop as Consolidation in an advance FIGURE 115. A Flag (end of November) which seemed for several weeks to have failed completely. However, prices rose quickly to 36 ¼

from their December 23 low, thus ﬁnally carrying through according to formula. Note Flat-Topped Broadening Formation which started the move. AMERICAN LOCOMOTIVE LA 1935 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER28 26 24 22 20 1918 17 16 15 14 Sales 100’s 50 40 30 2010 613 22731017243171421285121926291623 30 7142128 AU3772_book.fm Page 202 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eleven: Consolidation Formations 203 market. Breakouts, however, resemble in all respects those arising from Reversal Formations. Head-and-Shoulders Consolidations of the Complex or Multiple-type very seldom appear on the charts. Theoretically, they might, of course, andshould be as easy for the chart technician to handle as the simple forms. The formula for determining the probable minimum price move (beyond the neckline) from a Head-and-Shoulders Reversal Formation was discussedin Chapter 6. To anyone familiar with the verities of stock market trends andthe endless variety of pictures that the charts can present, it is amazing howaccurately that formula works out, how often the ﬁrst consequential moveaway from a Head-and-Shoulders Top or Bottom will carry through to thepoint (or a little beyond) implied by the measurement of the formation. But,the same formula applied to Consolidation Patterns of the Head-and-Shoul-ders form does not work out as well. Such patterns are usually quite “ﬂat,”and the ensuing move generally extends well beyond the measurementimplied thereby, while, in some cases, it may not go quite as far. Conse-quently, the Head-and-Shoulders formula cannot be applied to Consolida-tion Areas with assurance that it sets up a deﬁnite and dependable objective;one has to look, in these cases, to a variety of other chart indications in orderto appraise the probable proportions of the move to follow. FIGURE 116. Typical of the form that Head-and-Shoulders Consolidation Patterns may take, both as to price pattern and volume, was this development in Anaconda. Measuring formula for the small Flag in October should be applied from the pointof breakout through the Head-and-Shoulders neckline. ANACONDA COPPER A 1936SS H JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER52 4844 40 38 36 34 32 Sales 100’s 500 400300 200 100 411182518152229512192631017243171421 28 5121926 AU3772_book.fm Page 203 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Scallops–Repeated Saucers

Our next chart picture differs from the Consolidation Formations previously discussed, in that it does not constitute a more or less deﬁnite area of Con-gestion or ﬂuctuation to which one or more critical boundary lines can beafﬁxed. We could, perhaps, take it up as well in a subsequent chapter underthe general heading of normal trend action. Yet it is a pattern so characteristicof certain types of stocks and certain types of markets, and so nearly relatedto the principle of Consolidation for further advance, that it may better betreated here. When a stock in which there is a large number of shares outstanding, and in which there is, at all times, a fairly active and “close” market emergesfrom a long-time Bottom (as exempliﬁed by the past history of Radio Cor-poration and Socony Vacuum), it will often make a long Major Advance ina series of “Saucers.” These successive patterns, each of which resembles, inboth price and volume action, the Reversal Formation described in Chapter 7as a Rounding Bottom, are slightly uptilted. That is, the rising end alwayscarries price a little higher than the preceding Top at the beginning of theSaucer. The net gain accomplished by each Saucering movement will varyfrom stock to stock, but there seems to be a strong tendency for it to amountto about 10 to l5% of the price of the issue. The total reaction from the left-hand lip of each Saucer to its Bottom level is usually a little greater, from20 to 30%. And the length (duration) of the Saucers is normally 5 to 7 weeks,rarely less than 3. Thus, overall advance is slow but steady, in much the FIGURE 117. A 1945 Head-and-Shoulders Consolidation in which both of the shoulders and the head took a “Saucer” form. Compare price and volume trends. Prices advanced to 31 ½ in July, came back again to 25 ½ in August, and then shot up to 40 in November. AMERICAN & FOREIGN POWER 2d Pfd A FP 2d Pr 1945 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE28 26 24 22 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 50 25 6132027 3101724 310172431 71421285121926 2 9162330 AU3772_book.fm Page 204 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eleven: Consolidation Formations 205 same sense as the progress of the man who eventually got out of the deep well by climbing three steps for each two that he slipped back. The charts of stocks that take this sort of course show a picture of strikingly similar and Symmetrical Rising Scallops, one succeeding another with little orno pause between. Trading activity runs up to a peak at the latter stage of eachScallop, as the previous high is approached and exceeded, then diminishes intodullness as prices curve down and ﬂatten out at the Bottom of the next Saucer,and picks up again as prices curve up into their next rise. The trading opportunities afforded by stocks of the Saucering habit hardly require extended comment (although we shall set down some detailed speci-ﬁcations in the second section of this book). The Bottom level of each Scallopis usually easy to detect by watching price trend and volume, and so is thetopping out at the end. Yet it is curiously a fact that most “tape watchers”handle such stocks in the wrong way, becoming interested in them and buyingwhen they show activity (“make a new high on volume”) and neglecting thementirely when they are in the dull, rounding-out stage of their trends. FIGURE 118. Part of a genuine “Scallop” uptrend, typical except for the short duration and relatively small decline in the October Saucer. The next Scallop, which started in December, dropped prices back to 12 ½

in January, and then carried them to 18 ½

in February. A 4-month Saucer, from February 1945 to June, preceded this chart. Note position traders found themselves in, who bought at 9 on the “new highvolume” in June. MIAMI COPPER MI 1945 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER14 13 12 11 10 9 8 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 50 25 XD.25 ¢ 23307142128411182518152296132027310 17 241815 AU3772_book.fm Page 205 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
(Many boardroom tape watchers scorn charts with unfortunate conse

quences to their capital in the long run. Genuinely expert tape readers — those who are able to show fairly consistent proﬁts in their trades — arereally extremely rare. EN: For “tape readers” substitute “day traders,” 99% of whom are unsuccessful. When you do meet such an individual, you will ﬁnd that he either, in effect, “carries charts in his head” or else takes a carefullook at the record before he buys on a ticker showing activity.) As a stock with the Scalloping habit ﬁnally works up in price to 15 or so, its pattern tends to become less regular; it begins to depart from thesmooth, narrow Saucer-like curve of the lower levels. Above 20, it is apt tobreak away entirely from the Scallop sequence and produce, from there on,more rapid straight-line advances, interspersed with sharp reactions andstandard types of Consolidation Formations, which are characteristic at alltimes of medium- and higher-priced issues. (There are exceptions: Somehigh-priced preferred stocks for which there is always a market, but whosetrends depend almost entirely on the gradual changes in prevailing interestrates and supply of funds for investment, have a persistent Scallop habit intheir Primary Upswings.) We have named rather speciﬁc price levels (15 and 20) in the preceding paragraph, but price is not, of course, the sole factor determining the depar-ture of a stock from a Scallop Trend. The only safe assumption is that, oncesuch a habit is detectable, it will be continued until the chart shows a deﬁnitedivergence from it, and such divergence usually takes ﬁrst the form of agreater-than-wanted advance arising at the end of one of the Saucers. Con-sequently, if you have previously taken a position in it at a favorable point(near the Bottom of a Scallop), you will unlikely be hurt when the stockﬁnally alters its action. FIGURE 119. Although the Scalloping habit characteristically appears in low-priced issues, it is sometimes found in widely held, semi-investment stocks of medium price, such as “CWE.” COMMONWEALTH EDISON CWE 1945 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER36 34 32 30 28 Sales 100’s 125 100 755025 714212841118251815222961320273101724 1 8152229 AU3772_book.fm Page 206 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eleven: Consolidation Formations 207 Very low-priced issues may persist in a Scalloping Trend right up to their Major Bull Tops, and even attempt another Saucer Movement following what turns out to have been the ﬁnal high, which attempt then fails, ofcourse, to carry out the previous successively higher and higher pattern.Such failures are not difﬁcult to detect; the change from previous patternappears before any appreciable damage is done to a properly assumedcommitment. Modern vs. Old-Style Markets We have mentioned in our discussion of Reversal Formations that some of them have appeared less frequently in the charts of the 1960s than they did in prior years, and others more frequently. The same is true of ConsolidationFormations. Patterns of the compact, strictly deﬁned sort such as Rectanglesand Right Angle Triangles are less common now. Symmetrical Triangles areapt to be somewhat looser than they were in the 1920s and 1930s — not asclean-cut and conspicuous on the charts. Typical proﬁt-taking patterns suchas Flags and Pennants seem to be as common as ever, while “normal” trendpictures, including those formations associated with normal trend development(such as Head-and-Shoulders, Rounding Turns, etc.), are more common. The reasons for these changes are fairly apparent. SEC regulations, higher margin requirements, greater public sophistication, and a moreconservative — we might better say more pessimistic — approach to theproblems of investment and stock trading generally have all played a partin this evolution. SEC and Stock Exchange vigilance have done away withthe ﬂagrant pool manipulations designed to take advantage of the “lambs”of former years. Nowadays, there is even very little of the more “legitimate”sort of syndicate operation planned to facilitate large-scale accumulation ordistribution. It is still possible, of course, for “insiders” to hold back for a limited time, or to prematurely release announcements of good or bad portent withregard to the affairs of a particular corporation, in order to serve theirpersonal strategic purposes. But the stock purchase and sales of ofﬁcers,directors, and principal owners are now too closely watched to allow a greatdeal of “skullduggery.” (Nevertheless, the average investor had better stillbe a triﬂe skeptical as to the probability of any great advance in the marketfollowing publication of a good report.) Collusion between investment advisory services and trading pools has been effectively outlawed. (It is safe to say that it never did exist as ﬂagrantly,even in the 1920s, as many amateur traders seem to think.) The SEC (withthe thorough cooperation of the Stock Exchange) polices the investmentcounsel profession thoroughly, constantly, and most effectively. No well-established investment counsel can afford to indulge in deceptive or collu-sive practices even if the desire were there. Most of them go far beyond themost reasonable needs to safeguard themselves against any contacts which,however innocent or useful, might be viewed with suspicion. AU3772_book.fm Page 207 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The old-time “plunger” hasn’t disappeared entirely, but high margins

and regulations preventing “Bear Raiding” have made present-day stock markets relatively difﬁcult and unproﬁtable for him. The out-and-out board-room gamblers (EN: Day Traders — whose rushing to and fro probably exacerbates daily volatility.) still come in, although high margins have cramped them too. In recent years, they have appeared in numbers only in the ﬁnal stages ofBull Markets. EN: Note the Day Trading craze that infected the markets in the late 1990s. Of course, their operations never did affect the charts much except to augment activity. On the other hand, higher taxes and greater regulation have most cer tainly not provided safer, closer, or more stable markets for the small investor.Higher margins have not prevented Panic Collapses. If anything, marketshave been “thinner” on the downside, more vulnerable to rapid and drasticdecline, than they were prior to modern regulation. We still have the verysame sort of Bull and Bear Markets, and much the same sort of market trenddevelopment, that we had 50 years ago. The surprising thing is not that a FIGURE 120. This chart shows the last 5 months of a broad, 13-month Saucer-like Consolidation in “IT,” which followed its rapid run up from 3 to 16 in late 1943 and early 1944. “IT” is an erratic actor, and its volume is apt to be particularly deceptivein day-to-day movements. Major Price Patterns in it, however, are dependable. Thisﬁnal phase of its long Consolidation (distribution and reaccumulation) took ﬁrst theform of a Rectangle (with a premature breakout) and then an Ascending Triangle.Its 1945–46 Bull Market Top was a massive Head-and-Shoulders. INTERNATIONAL TEL. & TEL. IT 1944 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE19 181716 15 14 13 12 11 Sales 100’s 250 200150100 50 815222951219264111825181522296132027 31017241 AU3772_book.fm Page 208 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eleven: Consolidation Formations 209 few types of chart patterns that were, on occasion, produced by unregulated trading are now less common, but that the great majority of technical phe-nomena have been practically unaffected. The chart student of 1907 wouldbe quite at home with the charts of 1966. EN: And with those of 2000. That is FIGURE 121. There are times when a Consolidation Pattern gives the only good technical signal that a Reversal in an issue’s Primary Trend has actually taken place. Although cases of a Major Turn, particularly a Bottom, without some sort of recog-nizable Reversal Formation on the chart are quite rare, they do occur. This weeklychart of Flintkote illustrates such a phenomenon. A Bear Market low, from which itrose to 47 in 1946, was made at 8 ⅝

in December 1941. Without developing any important technical foundation on either a daily or weekly chart, its ﬁrst upswingtook it to 11 ⅞

the following April. From that point, it went into a 6-month Symmetrical Triangle, and then broke out topside at the three-quarters stage on increased volume.This action, plus the fact that it immediately thereafter burst up through an old andhighly signiﬁcant Resistance Level at 12, was sufﬁcient to mark it as being in at leasta strong Intermediate if not a full Primary Uptrend. The combination of technical developments illustrated in this chart — a large Consolidation Pattern forming just under a Major Resistance and then a breakoutupside from both — is something to watch for when it appears that a Reversal froma Bear to Bull Trend is due. Resistance Levels will be discussed in Chapter 13. FLINTKOTE FO 1941–194319 1817 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 Sales 100’s 50 40 3020 10 ND JF SO N D J FM MM A JJ A OS AU3772_book.fm Page 209 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
why so little change has been necessary to bring Edwards’ classic account current

to the third millennium. EN9: A note to a note. Pools and manipulators disappearand are replaced by some new pernicious form of skullduggery. Specialists andmarket makers are hauled before the bar of justice for cheating. In the 21 st century hedge funds proliferate like rabbits in Australia. For any exacerbation of volatilitythey cause they probably make up for in additional market liquidity. The samepatterns keep appearing because, computers to the contrary notwithstanding,humans are eventually responsible for pulling the trigger. It does seem that fre-quently patterns are not so neat as they were “in the old days.” Trend lines, especiallyhorizontal lines seem to be more “zones” than hard and fast lines and more judgmentmight be necessary in interpretation. But everything which Edwards says here mighthave been written in 2005 instead of in the mid-20th century. AU3772_book.fm Page 210 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

211 chapter twelve Gaps A gap, in the language of the chart technician, represents a price range at which (at the time it occurred) no shares changed hands. This is a useful concept to keep in mind, because it helps to explain some of their technicalconsequences. Gaps on daily charts are produced when the lowest price at which a certain stock is traded on any one day is higher than the highest price atwhich it was traded on the preceding day. When the ranges of any two suchdays are plotted, they will not overlap or touch the same horizontal level onthe chart. There will be a price gap between them. For a gap to develop ona weekly chart, it is necessary that the lowest price recorded at any time in one week be higher than the highest recorded during any day of the pre ceding week. This can happen, of course, and does, but for obvious reasonsnot as often as daily gaps. Monthly chart gaps are rare in actively tradedissues; their occurrence is conﬁned almost entirely to those few instanceswhere a Panic Decline commences just before the end of a month and con-tinues through the ﬁrst part of the succeeding month. Which Gaps Are Signiﬁcant? From the earliest days of stock charting, gaps attracted attention. These“holes” in the price trend graph were conspicuous. It was only natural thatobservers should attach importance to them, should try to assign somespecial signiﬁcance to their occurrence. But the result was unfortunate, forthere soon accumulated a welter of “rules” for their interpretation, some ofwhich have acquired an almost religious force and are cited by the superﬁcialchart reader with little understanding as to why they work when they work(and, of course, as is always the case with any superstition, an utter disregardof those instances where they don’t work). We refer to this situation asunfortunate not so much because the gap “rules” are wrong, but ratherbecause their blind acceptance has barred the way to a real understandingof a gap’s implications and the establishment of a more logical basis for itsuses in trading. The most common superstition is that “a gap must be closed.” Some times it is stated more cautiously in such words as: “If a gap isn’t closed inthree days, it will be closed in three weeks, and if it isn’t closed in threeweeks, it will be closed in three months, etc.” There are numerous variations, AU3772_book.fm Page 211 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
but they all add up to the belief that a gap must be closed, and that the trend

is not to be trusted until the gap has been covered. It is the latter inferencewhich leads to error. Closing the Gap But ﬁrst, what is meant by “closing” or “covering” a gap? Suppose a stockin an Advancing Trend moves up day after day, from 20 to 21, 22, 23, 24,and closes one night at the top of its range for that day, at 25. The nextmorning it opens at 26 and keeps right on moving up from there. This actionleaves a 1-point gap, between 25 and 26, on the chart. Then suppose the rise continues to 28, halts there and is followed by a reaction in the course of which prices slip to 28, halts there and is followed by a reaction in the courseof which prices slip back to 27, 26, and ﬁnally to 25. The return move hascarried prices back through the gap area (25–26); the gap has thereby beencovered or closed. In brief, a gap is closed when a subsequent price trendcomes back and retraces the range of the gap. Must a gap be closed before prices move very far away from it? Certainly not! Will it be closed eventually? Probably yes. If it is not closed by the nextMinor Reaction, there is a chance it will be covered by the next IntermediateRetracement, and if not then, pretty surely by the next great Major Swing inthe opposite trend. But that may be years later — hardly a matter of interestto the ordinary trader. The investor who bought Chesapeake and Ohio sharesat 260 on October 21, 1929, counting on the closing of the gap which thatissue had made on the preceding Friday, 2 points down from 266 to 264, hadto wait nearly 7 years to get out even! Not until it neared the Top of the next Major Bull Market did CO attain an equivalent market value (65, since itwas split 4-for-1 in 1930). In the meantime, he saw his investment shrink in1932 to less than a sixth of his purchase price. As a matter of fact, there werehundreds of gaps made in the charts of the 1929 to 1930 markets which neverhave been covered since then, and many of them, it is safe to say, never willbe closed. If you will think the matter over for a moment, you will see that the probabilities we have stated above for a gap’s being closed apply just as wellto a stock’s returning to any price range at which it has once been traded, gap or no gap. Another point: there are thousands of price gaps made in trading — some of them quite wide — which do not appear at all on the standard dailyrange charts because they are made during a single day and not between one day’s closing and the next day’s opening. Such intraday gaps are ordinarilyoverlooked entirely; the gap theorists are oblivious of them, although theirsigniﬁcance is often greater than that of many interday gaps. Practically every emphatic breakout move from a strictly deﬁned Rectangle or Right-AngleTriangle is attended by a gap, but only those few show up on the charts thatoccur at the day’s opening gong. AU3772_book.fm Page 212 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twelve: Gaps 213 If we seem to have “protested too much” in the foregoing, it is only because we want our readers to study this topic with an open mind, free from preconceived notions as to any mystic qualities which gaps may pos-sess. Turning to the other side of the picture, gaps — some gaps — havetechnical import. Some gaps are useful to the chart analyst in appraisingtrend possibilities. Let us see what we can make of them. Ex-Dividend Gaps First, however, we must eliminate from consideration the gaps that do not mean anything. An eighth-point gap obviously has no technical signiﬁcance FIGURE 122. The April–June Rectangle on this 1945 chart of “AW” contained a number of insigniﬁcant Pattern Gaps. The two larger gaps marked “G” are of the Continuation or Runaway class. Note that prices closed at or near the top on eachday that made a gap. Neither of these was closed for 2 years. Also of interest in this chart is the Descending Triangle, which started to form in March, but was never completed — a deceptive and discouraging picture until theApril 7 gap was made. The Flag of mid-April “measured” the move from 9 ½

to 14. The gaps measured the two halves of it, on either side of the Flag. AMERICAN WATER WORKS & ELECTRIC AW 1945 G G JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 Sales 100’s 250 200150 100 50 6132027 3101724 3101724317142128512192629162330 AU3772_book.fm Page 213 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
as it represents only the minimum permitted change in price. By the same

token, a gap of a quarter of a point or even a half point in a high-pricedstock, such as Norfolk & Western (before the split), represents only a normal,in fact close, spread between successive bids. In brief, to carry interest forthe chart technician, a gap must be wider than the usual changes in pricethat occur under normal or prevailing trading conditions. A second class ofgaps that have no forecasting implications are those formed consistently andhabitually by “thin” issues in the medium- and higher-price brackets. Youcan spot them easily. If your chart of a certain issue shows numerous gapsas a regular thing, then no one of them is apt to mean anything special. Finally, gaps that appear on the charts when a stock goes ex-dividend (whether the dividend be in cash, stock, rights, or warrants) possess no trendimplications. They are occasioned not by a change in the Supply–Demandrelation which governs the trend, but by a sudden and irreversible alterationin the actual book value of the issue. Eliminating the technically meaningless types named above, we are left with the gaps which occur infrequently (and which are not occasioned byan ex-dividend change in value) in issues that are so closely and activelytraded as ordinarily to produce “solid” charts. A 1-point gap, for example,in the chart of New York Central would be an unusual event; it woulddemand attention; it would presumably have some forecasting signiﬁcance. Such gaps, for the purposes of our study, may be divided into four classes: Common or Area Gaps, Breakout Gaps, Continuation or RunawayGaps, and Exhaustion Gaps. The Common or Area Gap This type of gap gets its name from its tendency to occur within a tradingarea or Price Congestion Pattern. All of the Congestion Formations that wehave studied in the preceding chapters — both Reversal and Consolidationtypes — are attended by a diminution in trading turnover. The more strictlydeﬁned sorts — the Triangles and Rectangles — show this characteristic mostconspicuously. Moreover, activity in these patterns tends to be concentratedpretty much at or near the top and bottom edges, their Supply and DemandLines, while the area in between is a sort of “no-man’s land.” It is easy tosee, therefore, why gaps develop frequently within such areas. You will ﬁndnumbers of good examples of Pattern Gaps in the charts illustratingChapters 8 and 9. Such Pattern Gaps are usually closed within a few days, and for obvious reasons, before the Congestion Formation in which they have appeared iscompleted and prices break away from it. But not always. Sometimes a gapwill develop in the last traverse of prices across the pattern area just before a breakout, and in such cases, it is not closed for a long time, nor is thereany reason why it should be. AU3772_book.fm Page 214 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twelve: Gaps 215 The forecasting signiﬁcance of Common or Pattern Gaps is practically nil. They have some use to the technician simply because they help him recognize an Area Pattern — that is, their appearance implies that a Con-gestion Formation is in process of construction. If, for example, a stock movesup from 10 to 20, drops back to 17, and then returns to 20, making a gap inthe course of that rally, it is a fair assumption that further pattern develop-ment will take place between approximately 17 and 20. This is a convenientthing to know and may, on occasion, be turned to proﬁt in short-term tradingpolicy. Pattern Gaps are more apt to develop in Consolidation than in Reversal Formations. Thus, the appearance of many gaps within an evolving Rectan gle or Symmetrical Triangle reinforces the normal expectation that the pat-tern in question will turn out to be a Consolidation rather than a ReversalArea. Breakaway Gaps The Breakaway type of gap also appears in connection with a Price Conges tion Formation, but it develops at the completion of the formation in the move which breaks prices away. Any breakout through a horizontal pattern bound ary, such as the Top of an Ascending Triangle, is likely to be attended by agap. In fact, it is safe to say that most of them are. And, if we consider whatgoes on in the market to create a Flat-Topped Price Formation, it is easy tosee why Breakaway Gaps should be expected. An Ascending Triangle, forexample, is produced by persistent demand for a stock meeting a largesupply of it for sale at a ﬁxed price. Suppose that supply is being distributedat 40. Other holders of the stock, who may have intended originally toliquidate at 40 ½

or 41, see quotations come up to 40 time after time, stop there and turn back. They tend, in consequence, either to join the crowdselling at 40, or else to ﬁgure that once through 40, prices will go muchhigher; they may either lower or raise their selling price. The result is a“vacuum” on the books, a dearth of offerings in the price range immediatelyabove the pattern. Hence, when the supply at 40 in our Ascending Triangleexample is ﬁnally all absorbed, the next buyer of the stock ﬁnds none offeredat 40 ⅛

or 40 ¼

and he has to bid up a point or more to get his shares, thus creating a Breakaway Gap. As we remarked earlier in this chapter, gaps of this type actually occur on almost every decisive breakout from a Horizontal Congestion, althoughmany of them do not show on the charts because they occur during a day and not between one day’s close and the following day’s opening. Break-away Gaps also develop at times when prices move out of other types ofReversal or Consolidation Formations; they are not uncommon in connectionwith Head-and-Shoulders Patterns, for instance, and they even occur on thepenetration of trendlines, which we shall discuss in a subsequent chapter. AU3772_book.fm Page 215 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
What forecasting value can we ascribe to them? First, they serve to call

attention to, and emphasize the fact of, a breakout. There can be little doubt that a genuine breakout has eventuated when prices jump out of a patternwith a conspicuous gap. False moves are seldom attended by gaps. Second,they carry the suggestion that the buying demand (or selling pressure, asthe case may be) that produced the gap is stronger than would be indicated by a gapless breakout. Hence, it may be inferred that the ensuing move willcarry prices farther or faster, or both. It does not do to make too much ofthis point; it is a logical inference and one which has been borne out in the FIGURE 123. The large up-gap made on July 5 in this chart was a typical Breakaway Gap, occurring as prices broke out of the complex base for the July–August Secondary Recovery. (Compare this chart with Figure 32 on page 84.) Another type of BreakawayGap — through a trendline — occurred on August 26. That of September 7 wasprimarily due to the “ex-dividend,” while that of September 18 was still another typeof breakaway — through a Support Level. The ﬁrst gap marked, on April 26, must be classiﬁed as a Runaway. It made a sort of “Island” of the whole April/June complex base. BETHLEHEM STEEL BS 1937 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER G G G G 120 112 104 96 88 80 76 72 68 64 60 56 Sales 100’s 250 200 150 100 50G 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 1 9 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 AU3772_book.fm Page 216 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twelve: Gaps 217 majority of cases, but it has its exceptions and may prove most disappointing on occasion. Nevertheless, other things being equal, of two stocks which emerged from Ascending Triangles at the same time, we should choose tobuy the one that gapped out over the one that pushed its way out by smallfractional steps. FIGURE 124. A potent Breakaway Gap that showed on Zenith’s weekly chart when it broke out of a Head-and-Shoulders Bottom in early 1942. Note that high volume developed beyond the gap, suggesting that it would not be quickly closed. The Aprilreaction stopped short of it. In fact, this gap had still not been closed in 1956, morethan 14 years later. ZENITH RADIO ZE 1941–1943 SS HG26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 Sales 100’s 500 400300 200 100 ND J F SON D J F M MM AJ J A OS AU3772_book.fm Page 217 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Except for the presumption of somewhat greater “steam” behind the

move, the Breakaway Gap carries no particular measuring implication, nor any other forecasting signiﬁcance. The next question is: should we expect aBreakaway Gap to be closed within a relatively short time? Or, to put thequestion in more practical and pragmatic terms: should we defer buying inthe expectation that it will be closed before any worthwhile move develops? In order to give a fair answer to that question, it is necessary to scrutinize closely the volume of transactions before and after the gap. If a great many sales were recorded at the takeoff level from which prices jumped the gap,but relatively few as prices moved away from the far side of the gap, thenthere is a chance — perhaps about 50–50 — that the next Minor Reactionwill carry prices back to the edge of the pattern of origin, thus ﬁlling thegap. On the other hand, if high volume developed at the far side of the gap, and a great many transactions took place there as prices moved on awayfrom the gap, then the chances are remote that any near-term Throwbackwill close the gap. In such cases, a Throwback reaction is almost alwaysstopped at the outside of the gap. (One is constantly tempted in a work of this sort to employ the words always or never without qualiﬁcation. Unfortunately, the authors have never been able to discover a rule of techniques to which the market did not, onrare occasion, produce an exception. It is always necessary to be on guard against such exceptional developments. Many of them are caused by general FIGURE 125. As a matter of interest, this monthly chart of Zenith Radio is repro duced for comparison with the weekly chart on the preceding page. The Head-and Shoulders Bottom is easily seen. ZENITH RADIO ZE 40 3020 10 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 AU3772_book.fm Page 218 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twelve: Gaps 219 market conditions which counteract the technical trend in individual issues. Keep an eye on the charts of the “Averages,” as well as the particular issuesin which you are interested.) Where Breakaway Gaps develop intraday, the daily chart cannot, of course, indicate how the day’s volume was distributed. In that event, it maybe necessary to examine the ticker tape or ask your broker to refer to thepublished record of individual transactions to which most brokerage ﬁrmssubscribe. EN: This data may now be easily obtained. See Appendix D, Resources. EN9: Candlestick charts, now much in use, will allow the analyst to see the intradaybreakaway gap. Lacking any clear-cut volume clue, it is safest to ﬁgure that a Breakaway Gap will not be ﬁlled until long after the full move implied by the pattern of origin (usually a move of Intermediate Extent in the Dowsense) has been carried out. Continuation or Runaway Gaps Less frequent in their appearance than either of the two forms we have discussed above, gaps of the Continuation or Runaway type are of far greatertechnical signiﬁcance because they afford a rough indication of the probableextent of the move in which they occur. For that reason they have sometimesbeen called “Measuring” Gaps. Both the Common or Pattern Gap and the Breakout Gap develop in association with Price Formations of the Area or Congestion type, the formerwithin the formation and the latter as prices move out of it. The RunawayGap, on the other hand, as well as the Exhaustion Gap, which we will takeup later, is not associated with Area Patterns, but occurs in the course ofrapid, straight-line advances or declines. When a dynamic move starts from an area of accumulation, the upward trend of prices will seem often to gather “steam,” to accelerate for a fewdays, perhaps a week or more, and then begin to lose momentum as supplyincreases when the very extent of the advance invites more and more proﬁt-taking. Trading volume jumps to a peak on the initial breakout, tapers offsomewhat in the middle of the advance, and then leaps up again to a terriﬁcturnover as the move is ﬁnally halted. In such moves — and in rapid declinesof corresponding character — a wide gap is quite likely to appear at the timewhen the Runaway is at its height, when quotations are moving most rapidlyand easily with relation to the volume of transactions. That period comesnormally at just about the halfway point between the breakout which inau-gurated the move and the Reversal Day or Congestion Pattern which callsan end to it. Hence, a Continuation or Runaway Gap affords an approximatemeasurement of the move in which it develops. Its inference is that prices will go as much farther beyond the gap as they already have gone between the beginning of the move and the gap, as measured directly (and vertically) onthe chart. Since there is a tendency for advances to run, in terms of points, beyond the price levels arithmetically implied by this rule, and for declines to be AU3772_book.fm Page 219 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
more strictly limited, the gap-measuring rule works out particularly well

when applied directly on semilogarithmic scale charts. On arithmetic charts,look for a triﬂe more on the upside and a triﬂe less on the downside. (In anyevent, you will be wise to “bank” on something short of the theoretical goal.) Runaway Gaps are easy to ﬁnd and identify in retrospect, but our task is to recognize them as such at the time they appear. Of course, there is,obviously, no danger of confusing them with Pattern or Breakout Gaps. Withthose aside, any gap which shows up in a fast advance or decline after prices have moved well away from an Area Formation (or the penetration of animportant trendline or break through a potent Support or Resistance Level,which we shall discuss later) may be a Runaway Gap. What then becomes FIGURE 126. The early 1946 daily chart of Blaw–Knox contained a number of interesting technical features. Its spurt from 19 to 25 in December 1945 was followed by a 9-week Rectangle Consolidation, the end of which appears on the chart above.Prices erupted from this Rectangle on February 11 with a typical Breakaway Gap.Four days later, another gap appeared on even greater volume, and prices closed atthe top of the day’s range. This looked like a Runaway Gap, in which case continu-ation to 32 was implied according to the “rule” stated below. (Note that the Rectangle“measurement” called for only 31.) On the following day, however, a One-DayReversal, from 31 back to 30, appeared, and the next session closed the February 15gap, which now had to be relabeled, tentatively, as an Exhaustion Gap (see page 219).Prices subsequently dropped back to the support of the 9-week Rectangle, ralliedgrudgingly along an established Intermediate Up Trendline, and broke that on April24 to return again to the 25 support. In May, another advance took “BK” up oncemore to 30, where it bumped against the previously broken trendline. That was itslast effort; in late July, the “valley” level at 25 was penetrated and a Major DoubleTop had been completed. To return to the February 15 gap, this is fairly typical of many cases in which it is impossible to say whether Continuation or Exhaustion is being signaled until 2 or3 days after the day the gap is made. BLAW – KNOX BX 1946 FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY32 3028 26 24GGRD Sales 100’s 125 100 75 50 25 2916232916233061320274111825181522 29 6132027 AU3772_book.fm Page 220 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twelve: Gaps 221 necessary is to distinguish it from our next type, the Exhaustion Gap. Usually, the price and volume action on the day following the gap furnishes the evidence required for a safe diagnosis. Two or More Runaway Gaps But it will be much easier to bring out the characteristics distinguishingRunaway and Exhaustion Gaps when we take up the latter in detail. Beforedoing so, we must mention those cases where two, and, rarely, even three, FIGURE 127. A good example of a Runaway Gap which performed according to rule. After reacting from 26 ½ in late 1936, “BO” formed a Head-and-Shoulders Bottom (the left shoulder was a Triangle) and broke out of it on February 6, 1937. A small Flag formed immediately thereafter, calling for 28. At that level, another Flagdeveloped which signaled 30 ½ or better. As prices reached this latter goal, however, a gap was made, on March 3, on extraordinary volume. The next two days conﬁrmedthis to be a Runaway or Continuation Gap. As such, it implied further advance(measuring from the Head-and-Shoulders neckline) to 37 plus. “BO” made its BullMarket high at 40 ½ on March 17. The measuring-gap rule should be used for purposes of “getting out” rather than

> “getting in.” It does not guarantee that a move will continue to the implied limit,but it does give assurance that the move is near an end when the rule has beenfulﬁlled.
BALTIMORE & OHIO BO 1936–1937 G SS H OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 Sales 100’s 250 200 150 100 50 310172431714212851219262916233061320 276132027 AU3772_book.fm Page 221 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
gaps intervene in a fast move and are evidently all classiﬁable as of the

Continuation or Runaway breed. It doesn’t happen often, and is particularlyunlikely to appear in the chart of a fairly large and active issue, but one ofthe thinner stocks in the midst of a “skyrocket” move may go skipping alongfor 3 or 4 days making gaps between each successive pair. The only questionof practical importance that arises in such cases is: where should the halfwaymeasuring point be located? No quick and easy rule can be laid down, butstudious inspection of the chart, especially of the volume trend, will usually FIGURE 128. Panic Declines often produce large Runaway Gaps. The September 7 gap in this chart, judged by its size, volume, subsequent action, and the fact that it was made in “new low ground,” marked it as of the measuring type. Implied goalwas 26 or below. All other gaps in this chart were obviously of the “common” variety. SOUTHERN PACIFIC SX 1937 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBERDECEMBERSSH G RD S S H48 4440 38363432 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 Sales 100’s 250 200 150 100 50 310172431714212841118252916233061320 274111825 AU3772_book.fm Page 222 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twelve: Gaps 223 afford an answer. Remember that halfway in these fast moves tends to come at the stage where prices are moving most easily and rapidly with respectto number of transactions recorded (whence the tendency to gap). If thereare two gaps, the halfway stage may very likely have been reached some where between them. Inspect your chart carefully and try to “average” thepicture mentally; look for what appears to be the center of “thinness” anduse that for your measuring level. But remember also that each successivegap brings the move inevitably nearer to Exhaustion, so let your judgmentlean to the conservative side; do not expect too much of the second or thirdgap. Exhaustion Gaps The Breakout Gap signals the start of a move; the Runaway Gap marks itsrapid continuation at or near its halfway point; the Exhaustion Gap comesat the end. The ﬁrst two of these are easily distinguished as to type by theirlocation with respect to the preceding price pattern, but the last is not alwaysimmediately distinguishable from the second. Exhaustion Gaps, like Runaway Gaps, are associated with rapid, exten sive advances or declines. We have described the Runaway type as the sortthat occurs in the midst of a move that accelerates to high velocity, thenslows down again and ﬁnally stops as increasing Resistance overcomes itsmomentum. Sometimes, however, “skyrocket” trends evidence no suchgradual increase of Resistance as they proceed, showing no tendency to losemomentum, but rather continue to speed up until, suddenly, they hit a stonewall of supply (or, in cases of a decline, demand) and are brought to anabrupt end by a day of terriﬁc trading volume. In such moves, a wide gapmay appear at the very end, i.e., between the next to the last and the lastday of the move. This gets the name of Exhaustion Gap because the trendseems thereby to have exhausted itself in one ﬁnal leaping spurt. The best test of whether a gap formed in a rapid, straight-line advance or decline is of the Continuation or Exhaustion type comes on the day afterthe gap (more precisely, the day which makes the gap), although there arefrequently other clues in the preceding chart picture. If trading activitymounts to an extraordinary height during the session following the gap, andparticularly if the previous trend in prices does not appear to be carriedalong at a pace commensurate with that day’s activity, the gap is probablyof the Exhaustion class. This interpretation is reinforced, in fact, made avirtual certainty, if the day after, the gap develops into a Reversal Day (asdescribed in Chapter 10) with the closing price registered back near the edgeof the gap. Evidence that may be derived from the chart anteceding the gap may be enumerated as follows. If the trend has already carried out the full impli-cations of the price formation or Congestion Area from which it emerged,Exhaustion is more likely than Continuation. By the same token, if thereasonable measuring implications of the pattern of origin are still far short AU3772_book.fm Page 223 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
of attainment, the gap is probably of the Continuation type. An Exhaustion

Gap is seldom the ﬁrst gap in a runaway move; it is usually preceded by atleast one Continuation Gap. Thus, you may ordinarily assume (unless thecontrary appears from other and more weighty indications) that the ﬁrst gap FIGURE 129. The “skyrocket” run-up of Willys–Overland in June 1944 was marked by a number of small gaps. The ﬁrst two were too small to have much technical signiﬁcance. The larger gap made June 16 was marked by the “stickiness” of priceson that day as Exhaustion. A small Flag Consolidation ensued. The June 27 gap alsoacted like an Exhaustion Gap insofar as price action was concerned, but volume haddeclined instead of climbing to a new peak. On June 28, prices jumped away again,so the June 27 gap was now marked as another Runaway with an implied objectiveof 18 ½ plus, which had already been reached. Note the Head-and-Shoulders Reversal that then formed and subsequent Intermediate Reaction. WILLYS – OVERLAND WO1944NL G G G G APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 Sales 100’s 500 400 300200100 815222961320273101724181522295121926 2 9162330 AU3772_book.fm Page 224 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twelve: Gaps 225 in a rapid advance or decline is a Continuation Gap. But each succeeding gap must be regarded with more and more suspicion, especially if it is widerthan its predecessor. We have referred to Exhaustion Gaps as wide gaps. Width is, of necessity, relative in this study; it is impossible to lay down any exact rules to deﬁnewide or narrow. Do not let this bother you too much. Recognition of whatconstitutes an unusually wide gap for the particular stock you have underobservation soon comes with a little charting experience. Runaway Gaps are usually not covered for a considerable length of time, not, as a rule, until the market stages a swing of Major or full Intermediateproportions in the opposite direction. But Exhaustion Gaps are quicklyclosed, most often within 2 to 5 days, a fact which furnishes a ﬁnal clue to FIGURE 130.

> “SMC” is a thin stock whose daily chart is usually “full of holes,”
but this large gap that appeared on its weekly chart in September 1946 evidently possessed technical signiﬁcance. Treated as a Runaway, and measuring from the8-week Congestion at 68, it called for a downside objective of 44 or below, whichwas duly fulﬁlled. A. O. SMITH CORPORATION SMC 1945–1947G96 88 80 76 72 68 64 60 56 52 48 44 40 38 Sales 100’s 50 40 30 2010 N DJ F SO N DJ FM MM AJ J A M A AU3772_book.fm Page 225 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
distinguish Exhaustion from Continuation, if it should still be needed at that

stage. (This, incidentally, upsets the common superstition that all gaps mustbe closed before the trend can be trusted to continue very far. In the case of FIGURE 131. A small Island in the right shoulder of the Head-and-Shoulders Top that marked this issue’s Major Reversal. The Island served only to emphasize the chart’s Bearish implications. FIGURE 132. Island “shakeouts” are not uncommon in “thin” stocks. Why they should develop as they do is hard to explain, but their forecasting implications areobvious. BALTIMORE & OHIO PFD. BO Pr1946 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE48 44 40 38 36SSH Sales 100’s 50 40 302010S S HGG 512192629162329162330 6132027411182518152229 LION OIL COMPANY LNO 1947 MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUSTGG28 26 24 22 20 19 Sales 100’s 50 4030 2010 815222951219263101724317142128 5121926 2 9162330 AU3772_book.fm Page 226 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twelve: Gaps 227 the Runaway Gap, it is not closed, but the trend moves right along never theless, and often for a surprising distance. In the case of the ExhaustionGap, the closing of it actually contributes to the signal that the trend has runout.) An Exhaustion Gap, taken by itself, should not be read as a sign of Reversal, nor even, necessarily, of Reversal at all. It calls “stop,” but the haltis ordinarily followed by some sort of area pattern development which may,in turn, lead to either Reversal or Continuation of the move prior to the gap.However, in practically every case, enough of a Minor Reaction or delayensues from the formation of an Exhaustion Gap, before a new trend isestablished, to warrant closing out commitments at once. (One can alwaysreenter if it subsequently appears that the previous trend is to be resumed.) The Island Reversal We mentioned (at the end of Chapter 10) a Reversal Pattern, the Island, whichwas to be taken up under the general study of gaps. The Island Pattern isnot common, and it is not, in itself, of major signiﬁcance, in the sense ofdenoting a long-term Top or Bottom, but it does, as a rule, send prices backfor a complete retracement of the Minor Move which preceded it. An Island Reversal might be described as a compact trading range sep arated from the move which led to it (and which was usually fast) by anExhaustion Gap, and from the move in the opposite direction which followsit (and which is also equally fast, as a rule) by a Breakaway Gap. The tradingrange may consist of only a single day, in which event it normally developsas a One-Day Reversal, or it may be made up of from several days to a weekor so of Minor Fluctuations within a compact price zone. It is characterized,as might be expected, by relatively high volume. The gaps at either end occurat approximately the same level (they should overlap to some extent) so thatthe whole area stands out as an Island on the chart, isolated by the gapsfrom the rest of the price path. We have said that an Island does not, of itself, appear as a Major Reversal Formation, but Islands frequently develop within the larger patterns at turn-ing points of Primary or important Intermediate consequence, as for examplein the head of a dynamic Head-and-Shoulders Top. By the same token, theyappear occasionally at the extremes of the Minor Swings which compose aTriangle or a Rectangle (in which event, of course, the gaps that set them offare really better classiﬁed as Common or Pattern Gaps). The reasons why Islands can and do develop — in other words, why gaps can and do repeat at the same price level — will be more apparentwhen we take up the general subject of Support and Resistance in a laterchapter. Sufﬁce it to repeat at this point that prices can move most rapidlyand easily, either up or down, through a range where little or no stockchanged hands in the past, where, in other words, previous owners have no“vested interest.” AU3772_book.fm Page 227 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Sometimes the second gap — the Breakaway that completes the Island —

is closed a few days later by a quick Pullback or reaction. More often it is not. Rarely, the ﬁrst gap — the Exhaustion Gap that starts the Island — iscovered in a few days before the second gap appears, in which event theIsland Congestion takes on a sort of V-Shape (if it is a Top), and there is no FIGURE 133. This Island Reversal Pattern at Bethlehem Steel’s Major Top in 1937 is a “classic,” yet it was followed by a curious and disturbing abnormality in the strong rally that developed on March 30. Those who sold out on the Island’s signalaround 95 on March 19 or 20 were startled, and, if they had also sold short, justiﬁablyalarmed when prices jumped up a week later, not only through the second gap level,but well above it. But eventually, as can be seen, everything worked out accordingto the original forecast. This incident will serve to illustrate a general principle: when a clear-cut technical pattern of unquestionable signiﬁcance has been completed on your charts, do not letsome apparently contrary development that occurs shortly thereafter lead you toforget or neglect the previous plain signal. Give such situations time to work out.

## _Figure 123 on page 212 shows the sequel to the above chart and, incidentally,_
another Island. Compare the volume. BETHLEHEM STEEL BS

1937G G JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE128 120 112 104 96 88 80 76 72 68 64 60 56 Sales 100’s 250 200 150100 50 29162330613202761320273101724181522 295121926 AU3772_book.fm Page 228 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twelve: Gaps 229 clear “open water” across the chart horizontally between the Island and the trends preceding and following it. In any of these variations, however, theinterpretation remains the same: the preceding Minor Move should be prac-tically retraced. An Island Pattern is not easy to trade on, unless it be for a short-term

> “scalp,” as, obviously, a good share of the retracement may already havebeen accomplished by the time the Island is charted and an order to buy orsell on its indications can be executed. Of course, if the entering gap isrecognized as an Exhaustion Gap, the trader who is interested in the stockpresumably will take action before the second gap forms and before theIsland is in evidence. Perhaps, the greatest utility that Islands have for thechart analyst is that of calling attention to a situation, of putting him on thealert as to its potentialities.
Gaps in the Averages Gaps appear also in nearly all Averages but, for obvious reasons, with ratherless frequency than in the charts of individual issues. While it is not necessaryfor all of the stocks composing an average to make a gap simultaneously in FIGURE 134. This looked like an Island in “PA,” but the second gap was actually attributable to a 50-cent dividend which went ex on November 20, and had, therefore, to be discounted technically. Because of this dividend, it was necessary to lower theSupport Line at 40 (see Chapter 13) by half a point. That Support, therefore, was notviolated in December, and prices subsequently advanced to above 50 the followingMarch. PENNSYLVANIA RAILROAD PA1936 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBERDECEMBER44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 50 25 XD.50GG 411182518152229512192631017243171421285121926 AU3772_book.fm Page 229 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
order to produce a gap in the Average ﬁgures, a majority of them must. As

might therefore be expected, Common or Pattern Gaps are particularly rarein Average charts, but Breakaway and Runaway types are not uncommon,although small as compared with the size of such gaps in single stocks.Exhaustion Gaps, and, in consequence, Islands, again are rare. The conditionsthat create an Exhaustion Gap seldom develop in a sufﬁcient number ofindividual issues at any one time to produce a counterpart in the Averages. The technical interpretation of gaps in Averages is, in the main, the same as in single stocks. The authors have not found that an Average gap possessesany peculiar potency or signiﬁcance over and above that attributable to agap in the chart of any actively and closely traded single issue. The broader, and hence, most representative market indexes show the fewest and smallest gaps. EN: On the other hand, the NASDAQ is quite volatile and a good gap producer. (It is suggested that the reader review this chapter after he has ﬁnished studying the principles of Support and Resistance in Chapter 13.) EN9: The truth is there is nothing more that need be said about gaps, and the truth also is that no modern examples need be added. But gaps are fun, so see Figure114.1 and Chapter 16.1 for modern examples. AU3772_book.fm Page 230 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

231 chapter thirteen Support and Resistance The phenomena that we shall study in this chapter are markedly different in kind from those discussed in preceding sections. We shall look now at thestock market from a new angle, and in so doing may ﬁnd it possible todevelop some very practical additional rules to guide us in selecting stocksfor purchase or sale, in estimating their potential moves, in foreseeing wherethey are likely to “run into trouble.” As a matter of fact, some experiencedtraders have built their “systems” almost entirely on the principles of whatwe here call Support and Resistance, paying no attention to the speciﬁcpictorial patterns of price and volume action we have been investigating inpreceding pages. But Support and Resistance phenomena are not, by any means, unrelated to the various patterns and formations previously studied. We have alreadyhad occasion to hint at a basic principle of Support and Resistance in ourexplanation of gaps, and, as you read on, you will ﬁnd that a number of theother patterns of price behavior are explained thereby, or at least becomemore readily understood. The term Support is commonly used in the Street. In one or more of its connotations, it must be fairly familiar to the reader. For example, we hearthat such-and-such a crowd is supporting XYZ at 50, or is prepared tosupport the market by buying all stock offered on any 5-point concession.For the purposes of this chapter, we may deﬁne Support as buying, actual or potential, sufﬁcient in volume to halt a downtrend in prices for an appre-ciable period. Resistance is the antithesis of Support; it is selling, actual or potential, sufﬁcient in volume to satisfy all bids and, hence, stop prices fromgoing higher for a time. Support and Resistance, as thus deﬁned, are nearlybut not quite synonymous with demand and supply, respectively. A Support Level is a price level at which sufﬁcient demand for a stock appears to hold a downtrend temporarily at least, and possibly reverse it,i.e., start prices moving up again. A Resistance Zone, by the same token, is a price level at which sufﬁcient supply of a stock is forthcoming to stop, andpossibly turn back, its uptrend. There is, theoretically, a certain amount ofsupply and a certain amount of demand at any given price level. (The relativeamount of each will vary according to circumstances and determine thetrend.) But a Support Range represents a concentration of demand, and a Resistance Range represents a concentration of supply. AU3772_book.fm Page 231 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
According to the foregoing deﬁnitions, you can see that the top boundary

of a Horizontal Congestion Pattern such as a Rectangle is a Resistance Level, and its bottom edge a Support Level; the top line of an Ascending Triangleis unmistakably a Resistance Level, etc. But we are more interested now inthe reasons why Support or Resistance, as the case may be, can be anticipated to appear at certain price ranges. Within reasonable limits, and with a certainfew exceptions which we will examine later, it is quite possible to do this.Expert chart readers are able frequently to make some amazingly accuratepredictions as to where an advance will encounter Resistance (supply) orwhere a declining trend will meet Support. The basis for such predictions — the elementary data from which Sup port and Resistance theories are derived — is that turnover in any givenissue tends to be concentrated at the several price levels where a largenumber of shares changed hands in times past. Since any level at which agreat volume of transactions takes place usually becomes a Reversal point(Major, Intermediate, or Minor) in that stock’s trend, it follows naturally thatReversal Levels tend to “repeat.” But, here is the interesting and the impor-tant fact which, curiously enough, many casual chart observers appear neverto grasp: these critical price levels constantly switch their roles from Supportto Resistance and from Resistance to Support. A former Top, once it has beensurpassed, becomes a Bottom zone in a subsequent downtrend; and an oldBottom, once it has been penetrated, becomes a Top zone in a later advancingphase. Normal Trend Development Perhaps we can make this plainer by citing a typical example of normaltrend development. Suppose a stock in a Bull Trend moves up from 12 to24, and there runs into a large volume of selling. The result is a reaction thatmay take the form of a full Intermediate Correction to, say, 18, or a series ofMinor Fluctuations forming a Consolidation Pattern between, say, 24 and21, the effect being the same in either case. Following this Correction orConsolidation, a new advance gets under way and carries price on up to 30before running again into supply in sufﬁcient concentration to stiﬂe themove. Now another reaction is evidently due. Again, it may take the formof a sideways Consolidation Pattern or an Intermediate Correction. If thelatter, where will that corrective setback be reversed; where, in other words,will it meet Support? The answer is at 24, the level of the ﬁrst Top in thetrend. That is the level (below current quotations) where a large turnoverhad previously occurred. Then it functioned as Resistance, producing a haltor Reversal in the ﬁrst upswing; now it functions as Support, stemming andreversing, at least in a Minor sense, the latest downswing. Why should this be? It will be easier to suggest an answer to that question if we ﬁrst go on with a similar example of typical action in adowntrend. This time, suppose our stock makes a Major Top and declinesfrom, say, 70 to 50. There, at 50, a temporary Selling Climax occurs; there is AU3772_book.fm Page 232 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen: Support and Resistance 233 a large turnover, prices rally, perhaps slip back for a “test” of 50, and then stage a good recovery to 60. At 60, buying peters out, the trend rounds over,turns down, and accelerates in renewed decline which carries to a new lowat 42. Again a wave of buying comes in, and a second recovery swing getsunder way. We can conﬁdently expect that this recovery (from 42) will runinto strong Resistance at 50. The price level which functioned as a Support for the ﬁrst phase of decline, now that it has been broken through downsideby the second phase, will reverse its role and function as Resistance to the second recovery move. The former Bottom level will now become a Top level. Here, we may ask again why this should be so, and now we can suggest an answer. In the example of downtrend action cited in the preceding para graph, our stock ﬁrst dropped to 50, ran into considerable volume there,reversed its trend and rallied to 60 with activity dwindling on the rise. A lotof shares changed hands at 50, and for every seller, there was, of course, abuyer. A few of those buyers may have been covering short positions and,having done so, had no further interest in the issue. Others, short-termtraders and professionals, may have purchased simply because they senseda temporary Bottom in the making and hoped to scalp a few points on theensuing rally; presumably, they (or at least some of them) took their proﬁtsand were out before prices broke very far on the next decline But a majorityof those who acquired shares at 50, it is safe to say, did so because theythought the stock was cheap at that price, because they ﬁgured it had gonelow enough. Only a few months ago, it was selling above 70; surely it wasa bargain at 50 and could be picked up and put away “for the long term.” The Explanation Imagine yourself, for the moment, in the place of those new owners. They see prices turn up, reach 55, 58, 60. Their judgment appears to have beenvindicated. They hang on. Then the rally peters out, and prices start to driftoff again, slipping to 57, 55, 52, ﬁnally 50. They are mildly concerned butstill convinced that the stock is a bargain at that price. Probably there ismomentary hesitation in the decline at 50, and then prices break on down.Brieﬂy, there is hope that the break is only a shakeout to be recovered quickly,but that hope vanishes as the downtrend continues. Now our new ownersbegin to worry. Something has gone wrong. When the stock gets down below45, the former bargain doesn’t look so good. “Well, I guess I picked a lemonthat time, but I won’t take a loss in it. I’ll just wait until it gets back up to50 some day where I can get out even (except for expenses), and then theycan have it.” (Does it sound familiar, by any chance?) Take the opposite side of the picture — the uptrend process. You, along with many others, bought XYZ at 12, carried it up to 24, decided that wasplenty high for it, and cashed in. Thereupon XYZ reacted to 20, and youcongratulate yourself on your astuteness. But then, unexpectedly, it turnsaround and rushes up to 30. Now you don’t feel so smart; that was a betterstock than you gave it credit for being. You wish you had it back. You will AU3772_book.fm Page 233 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 135. Why now was so much time spent, so much “work” done during

mid-1945 under 33–34? We cannot see it on this chart, but the previous monthly history shows that the Bottoms of long Congestion Areas were made in this zone inlate 1939 and late 1940. These old Bottoms, representing Support, originally, wereable to produce some supply (Resistance) 5 years later. Once prices had workedthrough that supply, however, they were able to rise quickly to 44, and then theirsubsequent reaction found Support just where you might have expected — at 33–34.Support had turned to Resistance and then to Support again. We can skip over the next few swings which “followed the rules” and go on to the change in the picture which came with the ﬁrst notable violation of a SupportLevel in 1946. Prices had pushed up the ﬁrst of February nearly to 54, well out abovethe Tops around 46, formed the previous November. The late February reactionshould have “caught Support” around 46 — but it didn’t; it crashed on down to the“round ﬁgure” 40. This was an ominous (although not necessarily “fatal”) develop-ment. Thereafter, a massive Symmetrical Triangle was formed and broke downsidein September. The ﬁrst Panic Decline in the Bear Market is no respecter of Support Levels. This one was no exception, although it is noteworthy that prices “bounced” several timesfrom the important old 33–34 zone. By November, the Top Triangle’s measurementhad been exactly fulﬁlled. You should turn back to this record and study it again after you have read the next 10 or 11 pages. JONES & LAUGHLIN JL 1944–1947 1944 1945 1946 194752 4844 40 38 36 34 32 3028 26 24 22 20 Sales 100’s500400300200100 AU3772_book.fm Page 234 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen: Support and Resistance 235 not pay more for it, but if it comes back down to 24, the price at which you sold, you’ll “reinstate your position.” Perhaps you have never been in either of these situations. Perhaps your own reactions wouldn’t, in such cases, have been the same as those we haveindicated. But, if you have had a fair amount of experience in the market —have some knowledge of the psychology of the “average investor” — youknow that the pictures we have described are typical. At this point you may not be satisﬁed that we have succeeded in giving an adequate explanation for our basic principle of Support and ResistanceLevels. Remember, however, that the supply and demand balance in themarket is nearly always a delicate thing. Only a moderate oversupply at anyone price will sufﬁce to stiﬂe an advance; only a little extra demand concen-trated at a certain level will stem a decline. And remember, further, that othertraders are watching the tape — will be quick to sense any change in thesituation, and quick to join the parade whenever a change in trend appearsto be developing. Consequently, orders to buy or sell a few hundred sharesmay induce the transfer of several thousand. Another point worth bearing in mind is that the traders and investors who (because, as we have presumed, of their previous mistakes in eitherselling or buying prematurely) created Support and Resistance Levels arenot necessarily ignorant or inexperienced. On the contrary, we must list themamong the wiser and more alert of those who operate in the market. To makeone more use of our previous theoretical example of typical downtrendaction, those who bought at 50 were certainly smarter than those who boughtat the top (70) or on the way down to 50, even though the latter price wasbroken later on. Giving them credit for somewhat superior judgment, itfollows that they may be expected to appraise later developments prettycarefully and display something better than a wooden and stubborn deter-mination to “get out even” when it comes to selling on a Recovery Move.Hence, in a marked Bear Trend “overhanging supply”; i.e., stock boughtat higher levels by holders now waiting for a good chance to unload, willbegin to come on the market below the theoretical Resistance Level. Wise owners will be willing to sacriﬁce a point or so to avoid getting caught ina worse loss. By the same token, “sold-out Bulls,” when a Major Uptrend is under way, may be willing to pay a point or two more in order to replace the sharesthey had previously cashed in too soon. Thus, it is characteristic of reactionsin well-established (second phase) Bull Markets to drop back only to thevery uppermost limits of a Support Range — and for recoveries in estab-lished Bear Markets to reach only the lowest edges of Resistance Zones, orperhaps even fail of that by an appreciable margin. We shall have more ofthis sort of thing to point out later on, but ﬁrst we must take up two othermatters — how to estimate the potential importance of Support and Resis-tance Zones, and how to locate, more exactly, the centers of axes of suchzones. AU3772_book.fm Page 235 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Estimating Support–Resistance Potential

To go back to ﬁrst principles, we have seen that the Resistance that an upward move may meet at any given level depends on the quantity of stock over-hanging there — the number of shares previously bought at that price byowners who now would like to get out without loss. Obviously then, volume is our ﬁrst criterion in estimating the power of a Resistance Range. An oldMinor Bottom level at which only four or ﬁve hundred shares changed handscannot set up much Resistance to a subsequent advance, but a Selling ClimaxBottom where several thousand shares were bought will provide a lot ofpotential supply after prices, at some later date, have dropped well belowit, and then attempt to rise up through it again. A long Rectangle or a Descending Triangle has a number of Bottoms at the same level. We can get a crude approximation of the amount of Resistancethere by summing up the volume of trading on all its Bottoms, but thensome discount must be taken for the shares that may have been bought atthe Bottom of the pattern in its early stages and then sold near the Top beforeit was completed. In brief, a single, sharp, high-volume Bottom offers some-what more Resistance than a series of Bottoms with the same volume spreadout in time and with intervening rallies. Another criterion is the extent of the subsequent decline. Or, to put it another way, how far prices will have to climb before they encounter the oldBottom zone whose Resistance potential we are attempting to appraise.Generally speaking, the greater the distance, the greater the Resistance.Suppose PDQ sells off from 30 to 20, “churns” at that level for several days,rallies to 24, and then drifts back down to 19. Investors who picked it up at20 will not be greatly concerned at that stage. If a rally now develops from19, there will be little or no disappointed selling at 20. Should prices dipto 18 before the rally starts, there may be some supply forthcoming at 20,but still not a formidable quantity. From 17, Resistance will become evident.In brief, prices have to break far enough below the price at which a traderbought his stock to convince him that he made a bad investment and,hence, that he should sell when he gets a chance to do so without too greata loss. It is impossible to formulate any precise rule or equation to deﬁne how far a decline must proceed to set up Resistance above it. However, do notlook for much supply to come out of a Bottom level in the low-middle priceranges (20 to 35) unless the trend later takes quotations more than 10% underit. This 10% rule cannot be applied to very low-priced issues. A man maybuy a stock at 5 and see it drop to 4 or 3 ½ with considerable equanimity despite the fact that he stands a loss of 30% at the latter ﬁgure. His “dollar”loss looks small, and he still thinks it will be easy for his stock to get backup to 6 or 7; he is willing to wait. Another factor enters into and reinforces the “extent of decline” criterion. If our PDQ rallies, as before, from 20 to 24 and then drops rapidly to 12, not AU3772_book.fm Page 236 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen: Support and Resistance 237 only will many of the old owners at 20 be thoroughly disgusted and glad to get out at that price, given an opportunity, but the new owners at 12 willalso be pleased to take 20 (66 ⅔ % proﬁt) and quick to do so if they detect any signs of trouble there. New buyers at 18, needless to say, would not bequite so ready to sell at 20. A third criterion for appraising the Resistance potential at an old Bottom level is the length of time that has elapsed since it was formed and the natureof general market developments in the interim. You will, no doubt, ﬁnd itreasonable to suppose that an Intermediate Bottom formed in the early stagesof a Bear Market will offer relatively little Resistance after prices have fallenfar below it, have taken perhaps the better part of a year to make a Majorbase, and then have gradually climbed up to it again 4 or 5 years later. Tosome small extent, this is true. A supply only a year or two old is apt to be more effective than one that is 4 or 5 years old, but the latter does not lose all of its potency by any means. In fact, it is often surprising how effectivethe Resistance will be at a very old Bottom zone, provided it has not been“attacked” in the interim, and provided no changes have been made in thecapitalization of the company which might obscure, in the mind of the owner,the original cost of his stock. Under the latter heading, we would put split-ups and large stock dividends, or even an unusually generous cash “melon.” FIGURE 136. Support–Resistance Levels in a long Intermediate Uptrend. The read er will need no guidance in applying the principles stated in this chapter to the Bendix weekly chart reproduced above. Observe that when prices broke down in1945 through a long trendline, their decline stopped, nevertheless, at the Support setup by the previous November’s Top. BENDIX AVIATION BX 1944–194556 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 Sales 100’s 50 40 30 20 10 JF S O NDJF M MM A JJ A M AJ AU3772_book.fm Page 237 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
We do not mean to imply that an investor is ever actually deceived as to the

actual cost of his shares, no matter how they may have been split, or whatdividend distribution has been made, but his disappointment (and desire toget out even) may be abated. If, however, a Resistance Zone has once been attacked — if prices have come back up to it, hit it, and then retreated — some of its power hasobviously been removed. Some of its overhanging supply has been used upin repelling the ﬁrst attack. The next advance, therefore, will have less stockto absorb at that level. Here again, the volume chart may be looked to forsome approximation of the amount of Resistance consumed. In any event,it is an odds-on assumption that a third attack at a Resistance Level willsucceed in penetrating it. FIGURE 137. For Major Support–Resistance Level study, monthly charts are most useful. This one presents many points of interest. Observe how important levels are formed and how, once formed, they appear again, and reverse their roles. The pricescale shows 1947 values with previous years adjusted for the splits of 1933 and 1946. NATIONAL DISTILLERS DR30 25 20 1510 5 3 for 1 3 for 1 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1947 1948 AU3772_book.fm Page 238 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen: Support and Resistance 239 We have named three criteria — volume, distance away, and time elapsed — to be used in assessing the amount of Resistance to be expected at any given level. At this point, it must be apparent to the reader (andperhaps disappointing) that his own judgment must play a large role inapplying them. This cannot be helped. It is impossible to set up an exactmathematical formula for any of them. But, after all, the problem is not too complicated. The general principles are simple enough and, we believe, easy to understand. We can look backat the charted history and see where, in the last preceding downtrend, aBottom formed that may produce more or less Resistance when the currentadvance reaches back up to its range. We have to estimate how much supplyresides there, how many shares were bought originally at that price and arestill held by owners who may welcome a chance to get out even. The greatest danger in applying judgment to the measuring of these factors lies in underestimating the amount of Resistance to be expected.Guard against that effort; it is safer always to overestimate it. You may beBullishly disposed yourself; you may say, “Those fellows who were hungup there in this stock must realize that conditions have improved, and theywill not be so anxious now to sell.” Don’t count on it. Remember that theyhave been “hung up” for a long time. Even if they are mildly Bullish on themarket in general, they may be so disappointed with this particular stockthat they want to switch out of it and try something else. (The stubborn andoften costly refusal of the average American investor to “take a loss” operateseven against timely switching.) Everything we have said in the foregoing paragraphs about estimating potential Resistance applies as well — but in a reverse direction, of course —to estimating potential Support. The principles are precisely the same, eventhough the underlying rationale may be less easy to grasp. Locating Precise Levels Our next problem to consider is how, in practical day-to-day chart analysis,we can locate as exactly as possible the limits of a Support or ResistanceRange, and in many cases, the speciﬁc price ﬁgure representing the core oraxis of such a range. In the theoretical examples we have made up so far toillustrate basic principles, we have used even ﬁgures, but in actual trading,the levels are seldom so nicely marked. Even the sharp and relatively pat-ternless Bottom of a Recession may consist of a week of price ﬂuctuationswithin a narrow range. Perhaps the lowest day of that week’s Congestionwill appear on the chart as a One-Day Reversal, or there will be 2 or 3 dayswhich “spike” down below the general mass. Here again, although no math-ematical rule can be laid down, it is easy to relate the price and volumepatterns visually, and by simple inspection, arrive at a near estimate of theﬁgure at which supply in quantity is likely to be forthcoming. Look partic-ularly at the closing levels of the days making up the Bottom Congestion, AU3772_book.fm Page 239 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
and average them mentally; this ﬁgure is apt to be pretty close to the “center

of gravity” of the entire Resistance Area. Of course, some supply is likely to start coming in as soon as a subse quent advance reaches the bottommost fraction of the Resistance Zone, andmore and more will appear as the move pushes up into it. Sometimes, it ispossible to predict “to a hair” just how far prices will penetrate a ResistanceRange by carefully comparing the vigor (volume of trading) on the advancewith the volume registered at various levels in the original formation of theResistance. This takes experience, but it is experience which you will ﬁndquite easy and not at all costly to gain. However, in most cases, it is neithernecessary nor particularly desirable to be so exacting. Nearly every chart in this book shows some example of Support and Resistance phenomena, and the reader should make it a point, when he hasﬁnished this chapter, to go back over them and study them all in detail. Thepractical application of the rules we have been discussing will be greatlyclariﬁed. Equally instructive, if you can manage to obtain such a collection, FIGURE 138. Particularly noteworthy in this monthly record is the Resistance met in 1939, 1940, 1941, and even in 1944, at the Bottom level (just above 26), the 3-month Congestion of 1936. Also, the appearance 8 years later (!) in 1945 of Resistance at theBottom level (28) of the High-Volume Top Congestion of 1936–37. Prices were able to “skyrocket” when that Resistance was ﬁnally overcome. You will ﬁnd that several additional Support–Resistance Lines might have been drawnon this chart. Note Major Bottom Formations of 1937–38 and 1942. KRESGE (S.S.) CO. KG50 4030 20 10 Sales 100’s 800 400 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 AU3772_book.fm Page 240 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen: Support and Resistance 241 is a study of the Support and Resistance Levels appearing in the monthly charts of all actively traded stocks over a period of 10 years or more. EN: Easily generated by most currently available software and on the Internet atprophet.net and stockcharts.com. You will undoubtedly be amazed to see how Tops, Bottoms, and Sideways Congestions tend to form at the same approx-imate levels in successive Major Swings, while prices move freely and rap-idly, up or down, through the ranges between such levels. It is hardlynecessary to dwell on the practical dollars-and-cents value of such informa-tion which may be derived from the chart history. And that brings up a matter that we may as well pause to consider here — the kind of charts most useful for locating and appraising Support and Resistance Levels. For near-term Minor Moves, the daily chart is natu-rally the only source of information, and a daily chart record that extendsback for a year or more may, if necessary, be used in the location of levelsof Intermediate Trend importance. The writers have found, however, that adaily chart does not give the perspective on the long range which one reallyneeds to determine Major and Intermediate Support and Resistance Zones.It is apt to overemphasize the potential of a recently set up Minor Support(or Resistance) Zone and obscure the importance of a true IntermediateLevel. For true perspective, a weekly chart, showing volume as well as priceranges, and covering at least the whole previous Major Bull and Bear cycle,is most desirable. Also, very good results can be obtained with a little studyand experience from monthly charts. To return to our study of Support phenomena, we have had several occasions to refer in previous chapters to a “normal” trend. What we have had in mind might perhaps be better called an “ideal” trend, since, like somany other so-called normal things, it represents a pattern from which thefacts of experience frequently deviate. In stock trends, nevertheless, thisnormal or ideal appears as a fairly common pattern. If it is an uptrend, itconsists of a series of zigzags, each “zig” carrying prices to a new high andeach “zag” taking them back to the approximate top of the preceding “zig.”To illustrate with ﬁgures, up to 10, back to 6, up to 15, back to 10, up to 20,back to 15, up to 26, back to 20, etc. Such a move is what technicians referto as “self-correction” and regard as particularly sound and, hence, likely tobe continued. You can see that what it really represents is reaction to thenearest Minor Support Level following each step forward. If you becomeinterested in an issue with such a trend pattern, the normal return to aSupport produces a good place to buy. Signiﬁcance of Support Failure Sooner or later, however, a normal Minor Wave Pattern is bound to be brokenup. This generally occurs in one of two ways (although there is an inﬁnityof possible variations). In one, prices spurt away in an advance out of allproportion to the previous succession of up waves. Such a move is seldom AU3772_book.fm Page 241 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
followed by a reaction to the Support now left far behind, but rather, by the

construction of some sort of Area Pattern — which may be either Consoli-dation or Reversal. The other type of disruption appears when a reaction does not halt and reverse at the level of the previous Minor Top, but sifts on down throughthat zone, perhaps to the level of the preceding Minor Bottom. This movehas “broken its Support,” and any such action carries a distinct warning ofa change in trend, a particularly emphatic warning if activity shows a ten-dency to increase as or after the Support is violated. Note that we said change in trend rather than Reversal, since the puncturing of a Minor Support Levelmay signify only a halt for sideways Consolidation. But it may also foretokenan impending Reversal. Either of these is a change. If you will now call to mind the picture of a typical Head-and-Shoulders Top, you will see that the decline from the head constitutes just such a breakin Minor Support since it comes down through the level of the top of theleft shoulder, and you will recall that this decline is often the ﬁrst intimationwe have that something in the nature of a Reversal Formation is developing. Thus, even the violation of a nearby Support Level has a practical mean ing in technical chart analysis. The breaking of a Minor Support shouldalways be regarded as the ﬁrst step in the Reversal of the Intermediate Trend.(If it turns out to be Consolidation only, there will be an opportunity laterto reenter an abandoned commitment if desired.) By the same token, thebreaking of an Intermediate Support Range is frequently the ﬁrst sign of a Reversal in the Major Trend. We do not believe it is necessary to expatiate further on this principle. Recommended trading tactics based thereon arediscussed in the second part of this book; Support and Resistance Levels areparticularly useful as basing points for stop-loss orders which are discussedthere. FIGURE 139. A monthly chart of Jewel Tea Company with its Major Support–Re sistance Levels marked. Note reversal of roles. JEWEL TEA CO. JWT 2 for 160 52443628 Sales 100’s 80 40 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 AU3772_book.fm Page 242 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen: Support and Resistance 243 Popular Misconceptions The reader will understand, of course, that all we have said here about the breaking of Supports applies, as well, but in reverse direction, to the pene-tration of Resistance Levels. One more point may well be mentioned beforewe leave this subject. If you happen to have spent much time in boardrooms,you will have noticed that the concepts of Support and Resistance that areprevalent there are somewhat different from those outlined in this chapter.For example, if X has advanced to 62, reacted to 57, then pushed on to 68,many traders will speak of 57 as being the Support Level, presumablybecause that was the last price at which X was supported in sufﬁcientstrength to turn its trend from down to up. We, however, as you have seen,would name the vicinity of 62 as the Support Range. The distinction isimportant to grasp, and sometimes extremely important in practical results. Admittedly, it does not come easy to think of a former Top as denoting the level at which a later Bottom should form, or vice versa; it would seemsuperﬁcially to be much more logical to relate Top to Top and Bottom to FIGURE 140. When prices broke down out of the large Descending Triangle which formed on Remington Rand’s weekly chart in 1946, the decline might have halted, at least temporarily, around 37 at the level of the 4-week Congestion made in April,and should have “caught Support” at 35–36, the level of the February top. Failure ofthe latter carried Major Trend signiﬁcance (see next page). Note later Resistance at40 ½. REMINGTON RAND RR 1945–194748 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 Sales 100’s50 40 30 20 10 N DJ F SO N DJ FM MM AJ J A MA AU3772_book.fm Page 243 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Bottom. Moreover, it is perfectly true, to use our X example again, that some

of the investors who wanted to buy it at 57 might not have succeeded ingetting it before the second advance to 68 took it away, and that their buyorders might still stand at 57 or might be reentered on any return to thatprice. Nevertheless, there is certainly no assurance that such is the case; thereis no “vested interest” in X at 57 that will “automatically” bring in newbuying. On the other hand, we have seen how there is a sort of vested interestset up at an old Bottom which produces selling (Resistance), and therebycreates a new Top, and at an old Top which produces buying (Support) andthereby creates a new Bottom. The reader is urged to keep this concept well in mind. Any analytical study of the chart records will quickly show that it is much easier for pricesto push up through a former Top level than through the Resistance set upat a previous volume Bottom (and vice versa, of course, with respect todeclines). You will ﬁnd that a little selling may come in at a former high, butusually only enough to cause a brief halt rather than the more or less exten-sive reactions or Consolidations that develop when the trend comes upagainst a real Resistance Zone. FIGURE 141. York is a relatively thin stock, which normally makes many small, technically meaningless gaps, but its large, high-volume gap of October 8, 1945, demanded attention. It looked like a Runaway Gap, and as such implied continuationto 26 ½ plus. But prices halted their advance at 24 ½ and went into a 3-month Rect angle. An upside breakout on January 10, 1946, carried out the minimum measure-ment of the Rectangle (and October gap); prices then reacted. See sequel in Figure 142. YORK CORPORATION YOK 1945–1946 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH26 2422 20 19 18 17 16 Sales 100’s 125 100 7550 25 6132027310172418152229 5121926291623 29162330 AU3772_book.fm Page 244 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen: Support and Resistance 245 The Round Figures There are certain other levels that may, at times, evidently produce consid erable Resistance or Support without any reference to a previous “vestedinterest.” We have in mind the “round” Figures 20, 30, 50, 75, 100, etc. Insetting a goal for taking proﬁts when we buy a stock, it is natural for us tothink in terms of such round prices. If a low-priced stock has advancedsteadily from around 10, it is pretty certain on this account to meet withproﬁt-taking sales at 20, especially if that ﬁgure represents a new high for it for several years. In fact, any time an issue gets out into new all-time high ground, where there is nothing in its chart history to indicate otherwise, it is a fairlysafe bet that Resistance will appear at the round ﬁgures. In old and activelytraded stocks, such as U.S. Steel (EN: Or IBM and GE), the round ﬁgures diminish in importance. Repeating Historical Levels If, once they had been set up, important Support and Resistance Levelsalways “worked,” we should see Intermediate Tops and Bottoms form at FIGURE 142. The February reaction in Figure 141 met momentary Support at 24; prices bounced far enough to close the February 7 gap, and then broke down through the Rectangle Top-Line Support — technically a distinct warning. Then a SymmetricalTriangle formed, but the breakout came too near the apex, produced only a rally tothe former high, and then an “end run.” One did not need to wait for the DoubleTop signal on August 22 to forecast a decline of more than Minor consequence. YORK CORPORATION YOK 1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER26 2422 20 19 18 17 16 Sales 100’s 50 40 302010 613202741118251815222961320273101724 31 7142128 AU3772_book.fm Page 245 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
exactly the same ranges year after year in one Bull and Bear cycle after

another. As a matter of fact, there is a well-marked tendency for this to occurin old-line, actively traded stock. In General Electric, for example, the 22–24,34–35, 40–42, and 48–50 zones have been characterized by large turnover(and, consequently, by many Intermediate Reversals of trend), throughoutthe 1920s to 1950s. In Southern Paciﬁc, there are historical Support andResistance Zones at 21–22, 28–30, 38–40, and 55–56. In U.S. Steel, 42–45,55–58, 69–72, 78–80, and 93–96 are conspicuously marked as ReversalRanges. And many other stocks might be cited. EN9: While the particular stocks are dead or transmogriﬁed the principle is alive and well. Over long periods, however, such Support and Resistance Levels do tend to be gradually modiﬁed, broadened, or “blurred,” and new ones created.One source of many important new Supply Zones is a Bear Market Panic.For this is the one type of decline that can be counted on to pay no heedwhatever to previous underlying Support Zones. Panics (which, as we haveseen in our earlier study of Primary Swings in connection with Dow Theory,typify the second phase of Bear Markets), once they get under way, seem tosweep away all potential Support in their calamitous plunges until theyexhaust themselves in a general market Selling Climax. And that climax mayor may not come at a level that bears a relation to some previously estab-lished Support. To use U.S. Steel again as an example, the 1937 Panic Declinetook the stock down through its 93–96 range, hesitated brieﬂy at the 78–80level, and then plunged through 69–72 and 55–58 to stop just above 50. Inthe 1946 Panic, X again broke swiftly through 78–80 and 69–72 to halt at 66. When there is a large turnover at a Panic Bottom in any given stock, that level acquires a strong “vested interest” for the future, and will usuallyfurnish conspicuous Resistance to a subsequent advance (after another BearMarket Decline has taken quotations below the Panic Level). This discussion of Panics brings us back to a consideration of Support and Resistance performance at other stages of the Primary Trend — a matteron which we stated early in this chapter we should have more to say. Bearingin mind the relation of Resistance to volume, it is easy to see why in a longdrawn out, but otherwise typical Bear Swing, in which trading interestdiminishes to a very low ebb as the ﬁnal low is approached, the next to thelast Intermediate Bottom may produce relatively little supply, and conse-quently, only a small reaction when the new uptrend reaches its level. Addto this the fact that many of the buyers in the last stages of a Major Declineare deliberate scale-down investors who fully expect prices will go lowerand, hence, are not easily shaken out. The slow progress so often seen in theﬁrst part of a new Primary Bull Market is due not so much to overheadResistance as to lack of impatient public bidding. The Recovery Trends that follow precipitous Bear Market Panics usually exhaust themselves, for obvious reasons, long before they get back up to thelast Resistance Level left behind in that Primary Downswing (which is usu-ally the Bottom of the ﬁrst Intermediate Decline from the extreme Top of the AU3772_book.fm Page 246 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen: Support and Resistance 247 cycle), but they often meet supply at a lower Resistance Zone set up in the preceding Bull Market. Look way back on your charts, therefore, when sizing up the prospective advance in such situations. A further thought along that line is: there is no law that requires an advancing trend to keep right on climbing until it reaches a distant overhead Supply Zone. It is true, as a corollary which we have already mentioned toour Support and Resistance Theory, that prices can and do rise easily througha price range where no Bottoms or Congestion Areas have formed in previ-ous downtrends, but if the ﬁrst established Resistance Level is a long waysabove, the advance may exhaust itself before it gets there. Heavy supply may come in for other reasons at a lower level. Think, then, of a distant ResistanceLevel as a maximum possibility rather than as a certain goal. However,between two stocks whose purchase you are considering, you should selectthe one which, other things being equal, has the “thinner” track overhead,can rise farther before it encounters a charted Supply Zone. Pattern Resistance We can revert now to some of the Minor phenomena discussed in connectionwith Reversal and Consolidation Patterns in earlier chapters. Take gaps, forinstance. You will now see why it is easy and, hence, quite in order for areaction that comes soon after a gap has been made to slip back and closethat gap. There is no “vested interest” whatever in the range through whichprices skipped to form the gap on the chart. You will also see why such areaction may stop short and reverse as soon as it has closed the gap, provided there was a high-volume turnover in the price range immediately precedingthe gap. Such is usually the case with a Breakaway Gap. Any gap, for the same reason, is easy to close once a reaction starts prices moving back in that direction, if it is not too far away and if there are nointervening Resistance Levels to stop the reaction before it gets there. In thecase of a Runaway Gap, however, there is no reason why a reaction shouldhalt as soon as it has covered the gap range; on the contrary, it will probablycontinue on through the “thin” price track that preceded the gap. Pullbacks and Throwbacks — the quick return moves which we noted as developing so often shortly after a breakout from a Head-and-Shouldersor other Area Pattern — exemplify the principles of Support and Resistance.When prices break down, for example, out of a Descending Triangle, thehorizontal lower boundary of the formation, which was originally a DemandLine, promptly reverses its role and becomes a Resistance Level. Any attemptto put prices back up through it, therefore, after a decisive breakout, isstopped by supply at or near the line. By the same token, the neckline of aHead-and-Shoulders Top, which was a Demand Line, becomes a ResistanceLevel after it has been broken. The Top or Supply Line of a Rectangle becomesa Support after prices have pushed above it on volume and by a decisivemargin. AU3772_book.fm Page 247 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Earlier in this chapter, in our discussion of the three criteria for apprais

ing the amount of Resistance to be expected at a former Bottom level, we named “distance away” as one of them and stated as a general rule thatprices should have gone at least 10% beyond that level in a medium-pricedstock before much Resistance would be set up. This 10%-away rule does notapply, however, in the case of a Throwback to a well-deﬁned area formation,when it follows shortly after a breakout. All that is necessary to establishstrong Resistance to such moves at the pattern boundary is a conclusivebreakout. The Symmetrical Triangle has a different sort of Support and Resistance

> “ﬁeld.” You will recall that the ﬁrst Reversal point in the formation of aSymmetrical Triangle (a Top, if it forms on a rising trend, or a Bottom if ona decline) is normally accompanied by high trading volume, but that activity
FIGURE 143. We ﬁrst discussed Pullbacks in connection with the Head-and-Shoul ders in Chapter 6 and refer to them again in this chapter (page 243) as Support–Re sistance phenomena. At least one Pullback to the neckline (after the breakout) occursin the great majority of cases. Many Head-and-Shoulders Formations produce two,the ﬁrst within a few days after the breakout and before prices have gotten very faraway, and the second weeks later, sometimes after the minimum measurement ofthe Head-and-Shoulders has been fulﬁlled. Goodyear saw the unusual number offour Pullbacks to its 1946 neckline — the ﬁrst two weeks after the August breakout,another in October, a third in November, and a fourth in February 1947, which metthe Double Resistance of the neckline and the down trendline (Chapter 14) projectedfrom the 1946 April head and August right shoulder. GOODYEAR TIRE GT 1945–194776 7268 64 60 56 52 48 44 Sales 100’s 50 40 302010 NDJ F SON D J FM M M AJ J A MA AU3772_book.fm Page 248 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen: Support and Resistance 249 diminishes rapidly on succeeding ﬂuctuations within its converging bound aries. Consequently, once prices have broken out of the Triangle and haveproceeded well beyond the level of the pattern’s ﬁrst Reversal point, thatlevel, because of the volume of shares traded there, becomes a Support (orResistance) against a subsequent reaction. But, if the breakout move doesnot carry beyond the Triangle’s ﬁrst Reversal Level by a clear margin, anyThrowback will probably bring quotations back to the extended (sloping)pattern boundary, and if the reaction does not occur until the trend hasworked out to or beyond the Triangle’s apex, then the Throwback usuallywill not meet Support (or Resistance) until it has carried back to the level ofthe apex. The apex, in brief, represents the concentration level or axis of the Triangle’s Support and Resistance. FIGURE 144. Several examples of the support “ﬁeld” of the Symmetrical Triangle appear in this 1945 daily chart of “IT.” Following the belated February 5 breakout from the ﬁrst Triangle, prices returned on the 9th to the level of the mid-January Top,but then suffered a more extensive reaction, which came down on February 26 tothe Triangle’s apex level. This was a critical juncture. The apex point itself is a strongSupport (or Resistance), but its level becomes weaker as time passes. In this case an“end run” might have been developing. Stop-loss orders should always be enteredunder an apex level (see Chapter 27). Here the apex held, however, and prices wentinto another “Coil,” breaking out topside on March 10. Their next reaction wassupported, as was to be expected after an early breakout like this, at the Top PatternLine. The price track from mid-March to the end of April fell into an Ascending Triangle Pattern, the top boundary of which functioned as Support in June but was brokenin July. Refer back to Figure 120, page 204. INTERNATIONAL TEL. & TEL. IT1945 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE30 28 26 2422 20 19 Sales 100’s 500 400 300 200 100 6132027310172431017243171421285121926 29162330 AU3772_book.fm Page 249 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The intersection of the two converting boundary lines of a Symmetrical

Triangle has sometimes been called a “cradle.” The axis Support (or Resis tance) is strongest near the cradle point and gets weaker as the axis line(apex level) is extended out to the right on the chart (i.e., as time passes).Thus, if a late breakout move fails to carry prices very far from the Trianglearea, and the trend then peters out, ﬂattens, and begins to react after the cradle point has been passed in terms of time, its action, as it reaches theaxis line, must be closely watched. (A stop-loss order may be indicated here.)Should the axis Support fail to hold, the reaction may plunge through andaccelerate in a more extensive swing, which has aptly been termed an “endrun around the line.” Volume on Breaks Through Support On those occasions when prices fail to retreat when they hit a Resistance (orSupport) Range, but, after perhaps holding there for several days, push onthrough, there is nearly always a sudden acceleration and a marked pickupin volume. This may be taken as conﬁrmatory evidence of a decisive breakand, consequently, an indication that the move will carry on. The reasonsfor this volume increase are obscure. Some say, “It takes volume to overcomeResistance,” which is true enough, but the volume usually comes after the Resistance has been penetrated. Therefore, others say, “The volume is evi-dence that technicians see what has happened and are now jumping in.” Butthat line of thought, in the authors’ opinions, also has little to substantiateit. (We shall have more to say about the questionable inﬂuence of technicianson the trend later on.) Many of the arguments over volume change vs. price FIGURE 145. In this instance, a belated upside breakout (August 10) from a Sym metrical Triangle failed quickly and the subsequent reaction, after holding for several days at the apex level, ﬁnally broke down for an “end run.” Thereafter, note that theapex level turned into a Resistance against Recovery Moves. INTERLAKE IRON IK 1944 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER10 9 8 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 50 25 18152229512192629162330714212841118 25 291623 AU3772_book.fm Page 250 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen: Support and Resistance 251 change savor of the old hen-or-egg riddle. In any event, causes for many technical phenomena, such as this one, may be left to the academicians,provided the practical implications are clear. Support and Resistance in the Averages As has been the case with nearly every other technical phenomenon we havestudied, the principles of Support and Resistance apply, with suitable allow-ances, to Averages as well as to individual stocks. Since an Average reﬂectsthe combined charts of the majority of the issues that compose it, but witha minority of them frequently evincing quite divergent patterns, it followsnaturally that Support and Resistance Zones in the Averages cannot be assharply and narrowly construed. Minor Tops and Bottoms in the Averages,particularly, are less dependable as Resistance Levels. Clearly deﬁned and FIGURE 146. Here is a typical case of two Pullbacks to a Head-and-Shoulders neckline, the ﬁrst immediately after the breakout and the second 3 weeks later. Note that the initial breakthrough “bounced” from the early April Top Support, and thelate July decline met Support at the general April–May Congestion Area. But whatthis chart illustrates, particularly, is how volume increases when a good SupportRange is penetrated. Note the decided pickup on August 27, when the April–Mayarea was left behind. SOUTHERN RAILWAY SR 1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER XD 75C XD 75CNLH S S HSS64 60 56 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 Sales 100’s 125 100 7550 25 613202741118251815222961320273101724 31 7142128 AU3772_book.fm Page 251 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
important Intermediate Reversals, however, since they nearly always repre

sent Reversals in the entire market (practically all stocks), will normallyproduce strong Resistance (or Support, as the case may be) in the subsequentAverage Trend. When the Averages break down through a Support Level, but one or more stocks, at the same time, hold ﬁrm at or above their correspondingindividual Supports, there is a presumption that those particular stocks arein a stronger position than others to participate in the next recovery. Thephrase “other things being equal” should be added, however, for there arequaliﬁcations to this presumption which must be considered. For instance,it may be that the stock that has resisted decline will, for that very reason,be less attractive to new buyers than one which broke drastically and is,therefore, now purchasable at a more “attractive” price. Many of the claims made regarding future prospects for stocks that have, by one criterion or other, previously evinced “better-than-Average” or“worse-than-Average” market performance permit argument either way. Itis safest to treat all such relative performance indications as only one minorfactor to be appraised in the overall chart picture. AU3772_book.fm Page 252 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

253 chapter fourteen Trendlines and Channels One of our basic tenets in this system of technical stock chart analysis — indeed, a fact which any neophyte can quickly verify for himself by inspec-tion of the market records for whatever period he chooses — is that prices move in trends. The market in general, and the many stocks which compose it, do not jump up and down in an altogether random fashion; on thecontrary, they show deﬁnite organization and pattern in their charted course. Prices move in trends. These trends may be either up or down or side ways (horizontal). They may be brief or of long duration. They may beclassiﬁed as Major (Primary), Intermediate (Secondary), or Minor, accordingto the rules of Dow Theory, or as Horizontal Line Formations. (The distinc tion between a short Intermediate and an extended Minor Trend is often more difﬁcult to make with individual stocks than it is with the Averages,but it is not so important.) But sooner or later, trends change; they maychange by reversing from up to down or down to up, and they may alsochange direction without reversing as, for example, from up to sidewaysand then perhaps to up again, or from a moderate slope to a steep slope,and vice versa. Proﬁts are made by capitalizing on up or downtrends, by following them until they are reversed. The investor’s problem is to recognize a proﬁtabletrend at the earliest possible stage of its development and then later to detect,again as quickly as possible, its end and Reversal. The Reversal of anyimportant trend is usually characterized, as we have already seen, by theconstruction of some sort of joint price and volume pattern — in brief, of aReversal Formation. The Trendline All of the foregoing statements regarding trends have been expressed orimplied in earlier chapters of this text. It is our purpose now to examinetrends, as such, more closely, to see how they may be plotted most effectivelyon the charts, and determine to what extent they can be used to reinforce orsupplement the technical forecasts derived from our other chart formationand Support–Resistance studies — sometimes to furnish even earlier fore-casts or warnings of change. AU3772_book.fm Page 253 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
One of the ﬁrst discoveries a new student is likely to make when he

begins to inspect stock charts with a critical eye is that nearly all Minor and most Intermediate Trends follow nearly straight lines. A few readers will,perhaps, dismiss this as perfectly natural, something to be taken for granted.But the majority become increasingly amazed and excited as they delvedeeper. Not only the smaller ﬂuctuations, but, frequently, also the greatPrimary Swings of several years’ duration appear on the charts as thoughtheir courses had been plotted with a straight-edge ruler. This phenomenonis, in truth, the most fascinating, impressive, and mysterious of all that thestock charts exhibit. If we actually apply a ruler to a number of charted price trends, we quickly discover that the line which most often is really straight in an uptrendis a line connecting the lower extremes of the Minor Recessions within thosetrends. In other words, an advancing wave in the stock market is composedof a series of ripples, and the Bottoms of each of these ripples tend to formon, or very close to, an upward slanting straight line. The Tops of the ripplesare usually less even; sometimes, they also can be deﬁned by a straight line,but more often, they vary slightly in amplitude, and so any line connectingtheir upper tips would be more or less crooked. On a Descending Price Trend, the line most likely to be straight is the one that connects the Tops of the Minor Rallies within it, while the Minor Bottoms may or may not fall along a straight edge. These two lines — the one that slants up along the successive wave Bottoms within a broad up-move and the one that slants down across suc-cessive wave Tops within a broad down-move — are the basic trendlines. It is unfortunate that a more distinctive name for them has never been devised than the threadbare word “line,” which has so many other uses andconnotations. A few analysts have called them “tangents,” a term that hasthe advantage of novelty, but, because it is a distinct perversion of the truemeaning of the word tangent, confuses many readers even more. Perhaps tangent will eventually become established in this new sense. However, weshall be satisﬁed herein with the overworked “line,” but can give it somedistinctiveness in its present context by joining it to trend in the one word“trendline.” Trendlines, you may have heard it said, “are made to be broken,” but that is one of those exasperatingly sententious remarks which fails to clarifyanything. Of course they are broken; they are all always broken, ultimately,and some very shortly after they are set up. The problem is to decide whichbreaks (i.e., penetrations by a price movement) are of important technicalsigniﬁcance and which are of no practical consequence, requiring possiblyonly a Minor Correction in the drawing of the original trendline. There areno 100% certain, quick answers to this problem; the signiﬁcance of somepenetrations cannot be determined as soon as they appear, but must awaitconﬁrmatory indications from other chart developments. In a great majorityof instances, however, an important break — one that requires a promptreview and possibly a revision of trading policy — is easy to recognize. AU3772_book.fm Page 254 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen: Trendlines and Channels 255 How Trendlines Are Drawn But ﬁrst, how are trendlines drawn? A straight line is mathematically deter mined by any two points along it. In order to draw a trendline, therefore,we require two determining points — two established Top Reversal pointsto ﬁx a Down Trendline and two established Bottom Reversal points to ﬁxan Up Trendline. The principle here is the same as the one we laid down inour speciﬁcations for drawing Triangle boundary lines in Chapter 8. The factis that boundary lines of Triangles and Rectangles, as well as necklines ofHead-and-Shoulders Formations, are simply special types of trendlines. FIGURE 147. A series of Intermediate Trendlines drawn to illustrate the “basic” principle (see below) on a weekly chart of Atlantic Reﬁning, extending from January 1944 through August 1947. Observe that each up trendline required two distinctBottom points to determine it, and each down trendline, two Tops. In some cases,the two determining points were formed only a few weeks apart, as in August andSeptember 1945. The Bottom points that ﬁxed the early 1946 up trendline, on theother hand, were months apart — February and June. Many other experimental lines might have been drawn on this chart originally, including several uptrends whose Intermediate authority was questionable becausethey were “too steep” — as in early 1944, late 1945, and early 1946. Only ﬁnal trendlines are shown here.There are here also some interesting examples of Pullbacks (after trendline pene tration) which are discussed on the following pages. Note July 1944, April 1945,September 1945, and May 1947. ATLANTIC REFINING AFI 1944 1945 1946 194752 4844 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 Sales 100’s 25020015010050 AU3772_book.fm Page 255 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Suppose we start with a Major Bottom point and describe how a series

of Up Trendlines might develop therefrom. To make this ﬁrst illustration simple, let us assume that the Bear Market Bottom in our stock consisted ofa Rectangle area between 6 ½ and 8, and that the last move in this formation arose from the 6 ½ level, broke through the pattern’s Top at 8, and proceeded to 9. From 9, prices reacted to 8 and then headed back up again. As soon asthis last rally had gone far enough to leave the dip to 8 showing in the clearas a Minor Bottom, we could draw our ﬁrst Up Trendline because we thenhad two Bottom points, the second (8) higher than the ﬁrst (6 ½), to ﬁx its slope. This would be a Minor Up Trendline. We would rule it in lightly onour chart in pencil, and extend it on up and ahead for, perhaps, a week ormore. (It will help you to visualize our example if you sketch it on a scrapof chart paper.) To proceed, suppose prices push up to 10, then move sideways for a few days, or dip slightly, until they have approached and touched, once more,our extended Minor Trendline. Then they start to move up in a third advance,but run into supply again without making much progress, quickly make afourth contact with the trendline, hesitate, and then break down through it.If prices now close clearly below the line, and if, in addition, there has beensome pickup in trading volume evident on the penetration, we may concludethat our ﬁrst Minor Trend is completed, and that our stock either will buildsome sort of Consolidation Pattern before it stages another advance, or willsuffer a more extensive “Correction” than any of the brief dips it registeredduring its ﬁrst Minor Upswing. The whole Minor Uptrend we have described as an example in the foregoing paragraphs might well have run its course in 2 weeks, and ourﬁrst trendline would then have been very steep — too steep, obviously, tohold for any very long period of time. Now, let us assume that a series ofdownward ﬂuctuations produces the more extensive correction which wehave foreseen as one probability following the trendline break, and that thiscarries prices back to the Support Level set up at the Top of the originalRectangle, i.e., at 8. (From our previous Support–Resistance studies, wewould recognize this as a prime “buy spot.”) Assuming that subsequentdevelopments pursue a normal course, prices should not linger long at 8,but should start promptly on a new series of advancing ﬂuctuations. As soonas this becomes evident and the new Bottom at 8 is “in the clear,” we canrule in a new trendline across the original base point at 6 ½ and the new point at 8. This should be, and probably is, an Intermediate Up Trendline which will not be penetrated for several weeks, and maybe for severalmonths, until the Intermediate Advance tops out. Then, if that Intermediate Top takes the form of a Head-and-Shoulders Reversal Pattern, our Intermediate Up Trendline may be broken by therecession from the top of the head to the neckline. As a rule, however, theﬁnal advance in a strong Intermediate Move accelerates far enough awayfrom the extended trendline to leave room (to the right on the chart) for AU3772_book.fm Page 256 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen: Trendlines and Channels 257 considerable pattern construction before the line is again touched and pen etrated. Hence, the actual puncturing of the trendline is more apt to occureither on the decline from the right shoulder to the neckline, or at about thesame time as prices break down through the neckline to complete the Head-and-Shoulders signal. It is surprising to see how often the two lines, necklineand trendline, are broken simultaneously. In other instances, and there are many of them also, in which the trendline is the ﬁrst to be punctured, perhapsshortly after prices turn down from the right shoulder, we do not have towait for a neckline break but can take action at once. Here is one type oftrendline indication which produces a working signal a little earlier, andoften at a much more favorable price level, than is given by the completionof a Reversal Formation. Arithmetic vs. Logarithmic Scale By this time, the more mathematically inclined among our readers must havebegun to ponder the difference between trendlines projected on the ordinary FIGURE 148. This 1935–36 daily chart of Atchison illustrates how the latter part of a long, strong Intermediate Advance may accelerate away from its trendline. (Notice the action in late January and early February.) Prices dropped back to 66 in April1936 after this Up Trendline was broken at the end of March. Note also that at thepoint where the December 1935 reaction met Support, the trendline coincided witha Triangle apex level. Such “coincidences” appear frequently in technical studies. ATCHINSON, TOPEKA, & SANTA FE SF1935–1936 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH80 7672 68 64 60 56 52 48 Sales 100’s 50 40 30 2010 51219262916233071421284111825181522 29 7142128 AU3772_book.fm Page 257 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
or arithmetic scale and on the logarithmic or ratio scale. A series of points

which fall on a perfectly straight, up-sloping line on arithmetic chart paperwill, when transferred to a semilogarithmic sheet, produce a curved line thatrises sharply at ﬁrst and then gradually rounds over. And points which fallon a straight line on a semilogarithmic sheet will produce an acceleratingcurve on an arithmetic sheet, a line which slants up more and more steeplythe farther it is projected. As a matter of fact, this variance is of little or no importance in deﬁning Minor Trends, since they seldom run far enough for the dissimilar charac-teristics of the two types of scales to become effective. And the same holdstrue for average Intermediate Moves of normal slope. But when it comes tovery long and strong Intermediates, the divergence may become marked,may make a considerable difference in the time and level of ultimatetrendline penetration. Therein lies one of the strongest reasons for usingsemilogarithmic paper in charting stocks for technical analysis. But let uspostpone further discussion of this point until we take up Major Trends, andgo on now with the Intermediate Lines which are much the same on eithertype of scale. And, for the present, let us concentrate on Intermediate Uptrends. (Intermediate Moves are emphasized rather than Minor for the obvious reason that the latter are of little practical importance in eithertrading or investing.) To go back to ﬁrst principles, and granting that price advances trend up in more or less straight lines, it follows that if we can ﬁnd and draw the linesthat accurately deﬁne those trends, they will serve two purposes, as follows: 1. When the trendline is broken (i.e., when prices drop down through it in decisive fashion), it signals that the advance has run out. It callstime for the intermediate-term trader to sell out that issue, and lookfor reinvestment opportunities elsewhere. 2. When a small Top Reversal Pattern forms on the chart of an issue well up and away from that issue’s Intermediate Up Trendline, sothat there apparently is room for the downside implications of theReversal Formations to be carried out before the trendline is violated, then the intermediate-trend trader may well decide to ignore thesmall Reversal Pattern. He can hold on so long as the trendline holds. The advantages of the ﬁrst-named trendline function are obvious. Those of the second, though less obvious to the inexperienced, are equally impor-tant to the investor who has learned that it is an expensive practice to switchout of every holding as soon as it shows evidence of a Minor Setback,provided the chance of further Intermediate Advance still exists. To accomplish these purposes it is necessary, as we have said, to ﬁnd and draw the line that accurately deﬁnes the Intermediate Trend, and thento recognize when that line has been broken in decisive fashion. Our earlier AU3772_book.fm Page 258 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen: Trendlines and Channels 259 quick review of how a trendline is constructed did not attempt to cover these points thoroughly. Tests of Authority Here are some of the tests which may be applied to judge the technicalvalidity, the authority, of an Up Trendline: A. The greater the number of Bottoms that have developed at (or very near) a trendline in the course of a series of Minor Up Waves, thegreater the importance of that line in the technical sense. With eachsuccessive “test,” the signiﬁcance of the line is increased. A ﬁrst andtentative Up Trendline can be drawn as soon as two Bottoms haveformed, the second higher than the ﬁrst, but if prices move back to FIGURE 149. Trendlines which deﬁned the short-term swings in Crane Company in 1945. Note that three Bottoms formed on the ﬁrst up-line and that the third rally (late February) in this advance failed to reach a line drawn across the earlier Topsparallel to the Basic Trendline. A failure of this sort frequently precedes a break inthe trend. The same thing happened at the end of the second uptrend in late May.“Failures” and the use of parallel or “Return” Lines will be discussed later in thischapter. The downtrend in March assumed Wedge form. Observe how the April 6 reaction met Support at its previously penetrated Top line. In June, a rally met Resistance atthe previously broken Up Trendline. Such Pullbacks are common. The small ComplexHead-and-Shoulders in June was never completed, since prices did not break downout of it by the required margin. CRANE COMPANY CR 1945 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNEXD.25 XD.25S SH36 34 32 30 28 26 Sales 100’s 125 100 755025 613 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 91 6 2 3 3 0 AU3772_book.fm Page 259 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
that line a third time, make a third Bottom there and start a renewed

advance, then the validity of that line as a true deﬁnition of the trendhas been conﬁrmed by the action of the market. Should a fourth Bottom later form on it, and prices move up away from it again, itsvalue as a trend criterion is very considerably enhanced, etc. B. The length of the line, i.e., the longer it has held without being penetrated downside by prices, the greater its technical signiﬁcance.This principle, however, requires some qualiﬁcation. If your trendlineis drawn from two original Bottoms which are very close together intime — say, less than a week apart — it is subject to error; it may betoo steep or (more often) too ﬂat. If the latter, prices may move awayfrom it and stay high above it for a long time; they may then turndown and have declined well along in an Intermediate Correctionbefore the trendline thus drawn is reached. But if the trendline hasbeen drawn from Bottoms which are far enough apart to have devel-oped as independent wave components of the trend you are tryingto deﬁne, with a good rally and “open water” between them, then itis more apt to be the true trendline. Greater weight should be givento the number of Bottoms that have formed on a trendline (Test 1)than to its length alone (Test 2). C. The angle of the trendline (to the horizontal) is also, to some degree, a criterion of its validity as a true delimiter of Intermediate Trend. Avery steep line can easily be broken by a brief sideways Consolidationmove — as, for example, by a compact Flag forming on an advanceof the “mast” type — only to have prices shoot up again in anotherextensive advance. Such steep lines are of little forecasting value tothe technician. The ﬂatter, more nearly horizontal the trendline, themore important it is technically and, in consequence, the greater thesigniﬁcance of any downside break through it. But “steep,” as applied to stock trends, is a relative term, and one which, we must frankly confess, deﬁes exact deﬁnition. Experience, which can onlybe gained by studying many charts and by actually building and workingwith them over a period of many months, brings an almost intuitive abilityto distinguish between a trendline which is “too steep to hold” and onewhose angle of rise is reasonable and should be maintained until such timeas the trend is actually reversed from Intermediate Up to Intermediate Down.Trend slopes will vary from stock to stock according to their characteristicmarket habits. They will vary also according to the stages of the PrimaryCycle — tending to become somewhat steeper in its later phases. The morechart history you have on any particular issue in which you are interested,the better able you will be to judge its present trend. (The foregoing statement, we might remark, applies to the interpretation of most other technical patterns and phenomena as well as to trendlines.) AU3772_book.fm Page 260 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen: Trendlines and Channels 261 One clue to relative steepness is afforded to those who employ the TEKNIPLAT semilogarithmic chart sheet, which has been used for most of the illustrations in this book. When projected on this scale, IntermediateUptrends on the daily charts, in the great majority of issues selling in the10 to 50 range, rise at an angle of approximately 30 degrees to the horizontal.Some will be a triﬂe ﬂatter, some a triﬂe steeper, but it is surprising to seehow often the trendline falls very close to the 30-degree slope in stocks ofaverage volatility and activity. Thin, highly speculative issues and heavyinvestment stocks offer exceptions, the former usually steeper and the latterﬂatter. The semilogarithmic scale has the virtue, of course, of reducing allmovements, regardless of price level, to a ratio or percentage basis. On astraight arithmetic scale, the trendline will ordinarily be steeper on a stocktrading in the 50 range, for example, than on an issue selling around 15. On weekly charts employing the same price scale, the angle of Interme diate Advance will, of course, be much steeper than on the daily plotting.Different scaling will produce different angles. It is pure happenstance thatthe TEKNIPLAT sheets tend to produce the 30-degree ascending line. FIGURE 150. Intermediate Downtrend and Uptrend in Commercial Solvents in 1946. Note the increased volume on the March 30 penetration of the basic Down Trendline (and, at the same time, a breakout from a small Head-and-ShouldersBottom). The drop through the lower parallel at the end of February had no technicalsigniﬁcance. The Up Trendline from the March low was broken on June 14, simulta-neously with a breakout from a Descending Triangle which, as it turned out, wasthe ﬁnal Bull Market Top. COMMERCIAL SOLVENTS CV 1946 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE32 30 28 26 24 22 20 Sales 100’s 250 200 150 100 50 51 21 9 2 62 9 16 23 2 91 6 2330 6 13 20 27 41 1 1 8 2 5 1 81 5 2229 AU3772_book.fm Page 261 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Validity of Penetration

We have these three criteria, then, for appraising the authority or accuracy of an Intermediate Up Trendline: (1) the number of times it has been “tested”or contacted without breaking, (2) its length or duration, and (3) its angle ofascent. Given a trendline which, by the application of one or more of thesecriteria (preferably by at least two of them), appears to be a reasonablyaccurate delimiter of the trend, our next problem is to determine when ithas been ﬁnally and deﬁnitely broken. Again, we can set up three tests or criteria, two of which are practically identical with the rules laid down in earlier chapters for determining decisivebreakouts from Reversal or Consolidation Formations. The ﬁrst is extent of penetration. To be decisive, prices must not only push through the line, but close beyond it by a margin equal to about 3% of the stock’s price. This doesnot need to be accomplished in a single day, although it often is. The 3%penetration may come as a result of 2 or 3 days of gradual decline. The second is volume of trading. We saw how activity should always be expected to rise notably on a genuine upside breakout from an Area Pattern,but need not increase to conﬁrm a downside break. We have seen how, inmany cases, volume does not show much increase on the ﬁrst day of down-break from Descending Triangles, for example, but usually picks up rapidlyas the decline proceeds. In our present discussion, we are dealing with Up Trendlines, and their penetration is, therefore, analogous to a downsidebreakout. We should expect the same rules to apply, and in general, they do.Given a close beyond the line by a price margin of 3%, it is not necessaryfor volume to have expanded much at that point to conﬁrm the validity ofthe penetration. The fact is, however, that the breaking of an Intermediate Up Trendline, much more often than not, is attended by some visible intensiﬁcation oftrading activity. To that extent, then, an increase in volume may be regardedas conﬁrmation of a decisive penetration. It is a particularly useful adjunctin borderline cases. If, for example, prices start to decline from a pointsomewhat above the trendline, move down through it on conspicuously expanding turnover, and close beyond it, say, only 2% of the price but at or near the bottom of the day’s range, our 3% margin rule has not been satisﬁed,but the lesser margin plus the volume action may be construed as decisive. Beware, however, and do not be stampeded into a hasty commitment by the shakeout move which cracks down through a trendline with a greatﬂurry of activity — perhaps several minutes of late tape — and then turnsup again to close the day back above the trend or at least very close to it.This may very well be — in fact, usually is — a false move so far as thatparticular moment is concerned. But watch the next few days’ performancevery closely; the technical situation is evidently critical, else a shakeout couldnot have been easily staged. AU3772_book.fm Page 262 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen: Trendlines and Channels 263 The third test is also one that applies particularly to breaks which are borderline so far as margin of penetration is concerned. Suppose a stock which is quoted in the neighborhood of 40 declines through a well-estab-lished Intermediate Up Trendline and closes 1 or 1 ⅛

points below it — a margin which is only slightly less than our speciﬁed 3% — without much,if any, enlargement in trading volume. Suppose it ﬂuctuates there for a dayor two in a dull and narrow market, and then starts to rally. If there is nopickup in activity on this recovery move — if prices simply edge up feebly FIGURE 151. Valid trendline penetration and its normal consequences — Reaction or Consolidation — is illustrated on nearly every chart in this chapter and on many others throughout the book. The above weekly chart of Phillips Petroleum, however,is reproduced here to show an outstanding exception. The Intermediate Up Trendlineprojected from “P’s” September 1936 low up across its early October and late No-vember Bottoms was penetrated downside decisively the third week of May 1937.Moreover, a Multiple Head-and-Shoulders Top Reversal Pattern had been formingsince February, with a critical neckline at 52. And the then current Bull Market hadalready run for 4 years; “P” had come all the way up from 2! Cover up the chartfrom July 1, 1937 on, and you will agree that there was plenty of reason for anytechnician to sell at once without waiting for the 52 neckline to be broken. But this,as we have said, was one of the exceptions which occur to all technical patterns andrules. “P” turned right around and shot up to 64 before it was ﬁnished. Nevertheless,developments such as this carry a valuable warning. They very seldom appear unlessthe Major Trend has almost run out; any further rise is dangerous to follow. PHILLIPS PETROLEUM P 1935–193864 60 56 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 Sales 100’s 1000800600400200 NDJ F S ON DJFM MMA JJA SO ND J F JJ A SO JA MAM MA 1935 1936 1937 1938 AU3772_book.fm Page 263 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
to the underside of the trendline and tend to “round over” there without

being able to close clearly above it — then the situation is indeed critical,and the slightest sign of renewed selling pressure may be taken as a signalthat the uptrend has been decisively broken. Such a return move as we have described in the preceding paragraph is known as a Throwback or Pullback. We have previously described analogousdevelopments which follow breakouts from Head-and-Shoulders and otherpatterns, and will have more to say about them in connection with trendlineslater on. The three tests we have been discussing, which help to establish the validity of a trendline penetration, cannot, unfortunately, be applied inﬂex ibly and without a modicum of judgment. The majority of IntermediateTrendlines can hardly be said to possess the precision of pattern boundarylines, and even in the latter, some leeway must be allowed. There are excep-tions, as we have taken occasion to remark several times before, to everytechnical rule of price action. But judgment in the establishing of signiﬁcanttrendlines and in interpreting their penetrations does come with experience. Amendment of Trendlines When a trendline is broken by a margin less than decisive, and prices sub sequently rally back up through it again, doubt naturally arises as to thecontinued authority of the original line. Should it be discarded, revised, orallowed to stand as is? Here again, judgment and experience must be called into play, but a few general principles are helpful in deciding. If the original trendlines dependedon only two points, i.e., on the ﬁrst two Bottoms across which it was pro-jected, and the indecisive penetration occurred when prices returned to itfor the third time, the line had better be redrawn across the original ﬁrst andthe new third Bottoms. (Of course, you will not do this until prices havemoved up from the third Bottom point and it has become clearly establishedas a Minor Bottom.) Or, you may ﬁnd in such cases that a new line drawnacross the second and third Bottoms works better; if the ﬁrst Bottom was a Reversal Day with its closing level well above the low of its range, you may ﬁnd that this new line, when extended back, strikes just about at that closinglevel. If, on the other hand, the original trendline has been “tested” one or more times after it was drawn — if, that is, a third and perhaps a fourthBottom have formed on it without penetrating it and have thus “conﬁrmed”it — then the subsequent indecisive penetration may be disregarded and theoriginal line considered to be still in effect. An intraday break through an established trendline that, however, does not result in prices closing beyond the line may be disregarded and the lineleft as is. In fact, as has already been suggested, the closing prices frequentlymake a better trendline than the extreme intraday lows of successive AU3772_book.fm Page 264 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen: Trendlines and Channels 265 Bottoms, and this is most apt to be true with “thin” stocks subject to erratic swings. A bit of experimenting with different lines often pays. A thin, trans-parent ruler is especially useful for trendline study. There is another type of price action that may require redrawing a trendline. Sometimes, after a line has been projected up across the ﬁrst twoMinor Bottoms in an advancing trend, a third Minor Bottom will form, noton that line, but well above it. In such cases, let the original line stand, butdraw in a new one across the second and third Bottom points, and watchdevelopments. If the rally from the third Bottom peters out quickly, and thenew trendline, as a consequence, is soon broken, then the original trendlineis probably the correct one. But, if the third Bottom turns out to be a “strong”one, and the new line stands up well for several weeks (and if it was not,patently, too steep to begin with), then the old line may be abandoned andthe new one regarded as the better trend deﬁner. FIGURE 152. Double Trendlines (see next page) usually are not evident until after a trend has run for several months. In Paramount’s accelerated phase of Intermediate Uptrend which began in October 1945, the double nature of the basic trendline wasnot detectable until January 1946. The inner (upper) line was broken again in April,but the outer (lower) line was not decisively penetrated downside until May, at theBull Market Top. PARAMOUNT PICTURES PX 1945–1946 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCHXD.50C76 72 68 64 60 56 52 48 44 40 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 50 25 613202731 0 17 24 18152229 5 121926291 6 23 2 9162330 AU3772_book.fm Page 265 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Double Trendlines and Trend Ranges

In the course of your “cutting and trying” in an effort to ﬁt a good line to an Intermediate Uptrend, you may ﬁnd that two parallel

lines, perhaps a point or so apart in a stock selling in the thirties, will deﬁne the true trend patternmuch better than any single line that can be drawn. Sharp Bottoms andshakeout thrusts in such cases will often fall along the outer or lower line,while the duller, more rounded reactions will stop at or near the upper orinner line. Or the two lines will mark off a range somewhere within which successive Minor Down Waves tend to halt and reverse. Such Double Trendlines are really plentiful, although the majority of chart technicians seem to be quite unaware of them. It pays to develop aneye for them — to watch constantly for trends to which they can be applied.They will clear up many situations in which attempts to ﬁnd a single criticalline lead only to frustration and in ﬁnally giving up in disgust. Trends that you ﬁnd are best deﬁned by Double Trendlines (or by a very Broad Trendline, if you prefer) cannot be regarded as ended until the outer,lower line has been decisively penetrated. In that connection, note what wesaid at the beginning of this topic: sharp, shakeout Bottoms tend to fall onthe outer line. The recoveries from such Bottoms are usually just as sharp,and prices, therefore, rally back above the upper, inner line quickly. Warningof an impending break in the trend is given when prices come down to theouter line steadily, rather than by the quick “shake” type of reaction, and FIGURE 153. Trend Channels in Bethlehem Steel in 1945. Prices burst out of the 92–98 Horizontal Channel (Rectangle) on the upside in January 1946, and went on to 114. A short-term trader might have sold around 94–96 in early November (becauseof the uptrend break) and rebought at 99 in January on the Rectangle breakout. Seediscussion of Channels. BETHLEHEM STEEL BS1945 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER96 88 80 76 Sales 100’s 125 100 7550 25 714212841 1 18 25 18 15 22 2961 3 2027 3 101724 1 815 22 29 AU3772_book.fm Page 266 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen: Trendlines and Channels 267 FIGURE 154. A 10-month downtrend, extraordinarily long and straight, which was nicely deﬁned by Double Basic Trendlines above the Price Channel, and also by a double set of Return Lines below it. The Major T op started with a strong One-Day Reversal on December 3, 1945, and worked out into a Descending T riangle which broke February 19, 1946. The Symmetrical Triangle beginning to appear in September 1946 also br oke out downside. PAN AMERICAN AIRWAYS PN 1945–1946 DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JUL Y AUGUST SEPTEMBER30 28 26 24 22 20 1918 17 16 15 14 Sales 100’s 500400300200100G 24 181 522 2951 219 262916 232916 2330 613 2027 411 18251815 2229 613 20275 310 1724 3171 421 28 AU3772_book.fm Page 267 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
then have difﬁculty rallying back through the inner line. Watch such devel

opments closely. A break down may not follow; the situation may still be“saved,” but the chances are that the trend is near its end. Trend Channels At the start of this trend study, we applied the term Basic Trendline to theline which slopes up across the Wave Bottoms in an advance, and to the linewhich slopes down across the Wave Tops in a decline. And we noted that the opposite Reversal Points, i.e., the wave crests in an advance and the wavetroughs in a decline, were, as a rule, less clearly delimited. That is one of the reasons why all of our discussion up to this point has been devoted to Basic Trendlines. Another reason is, of course, that the technician’s most urgenttask is to determine when a trend has run out, and for that purpose, theBasic Line is all important. In a fair share of normal trends, however, the Minor Waves are sufﬁ ciently regular to be deﬁned at their other extremes by another line. That is,the Tops of the rallies composing an Intermediate Advance sometimes develop along a line which is approximately parallel to the Basic Trendlineprojected along their Bottoms. This parallel might be called the Return Line, since it marks the zone where reactions (return moves against the prevailingtrend) originate. The area between Basic Trendline and Return Line is the Trend Channel. Nicely deﬁned Trend Channels appear most often in actively traded stocks of large outstanding issue — least often in the less popular and therelatively thin equities which receive only sporadic attention from investors.The value of the Trend Channel concept for the technical trader would hardlyseem to require extended comment here; its tactical utilization is discussedin the second half of this book. Its greatest utility, however, is not what usually appeals to the beginner when he ﬁrst makes its acquaintance, viz., the determination of good proﬁt-taking levels. Experienced technicians ﬁnd it more helpful in a negativesense. Thus, once a Trend Channel appears to have become well established,any failure of a rally to reach the Return Line (top parallel of the channel inan Intermediate Advance) is taken as a sign of deterioration in the trend.Further, the margin by which a rally fails to reach the Return Line (beforeturning down) frequently equals the margin by which the Basic Trendlineis penetrated by the ensuing decline before a halt or Throwback in the latteroccurs. By the same token, given an established Trend Channel, when a reaction from the Return Line fails to carry prices all the way back to the BasicTrendline but bottoms out somewhere above it, the advance from that Bot-tom will usually push up out of the channel on the top side (through theReturn Line) by a margin approximately equal to the margin by which thereaction failed to reach the bottom of the channel (Basic Trendline). AU3772_book.fm Page 268 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen: Trendlines and Channels 269 FIGURE 155. Well-marked Intermediate Basic Trendline and Return Lines in South ern Paciﬁc, 1945. Note Flags within Trend Channels — an up Flag in June and a down Flag in August. The Uptrend Channel, which began August 22, ran untilFebruary 1946. FIGURE 156. Note that the extent by which prices failed to come down to their Return Line in late November measured the distance by which they advancedthrough and above the Basic Down Trendline in early December. This rule is statedon the preceding page. SOUTHERN PACIFIC SX1945 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBERRL RL IUTIDT56 52 48 44 40 Sales 100’s 250 200 150 100 50 71421 28 512192629162330714212841 1 18 25 1 8152229 HUDSON MOTORS HT1945 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER34 32 30 28 26 Sales 100’s 125 100 7550 25 714 21 28411 18 25 1 81 5 22 29 613 20 27310 17 24 1 8152229 AU3772_book.fm Page 269 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Experimental Lines

Your experienced technician, in fact, is constantly drawing trendlines of all sorts — Minor, Intermediate, and Major — on his charts. He will put themin at ﬁrst very lightly penciled wherever he can ﬁnd an excuse to draw one.Many will quickly prove to be of no signiﬁcance, and those he may erase.Others will “stand up” — will show evidence of technical authority — andthose he will make heavier, or color as suggested later on. He will be con-stantly on the watch for Double Trendlines and will draw tentative ReturnLines to mark off possible channels at every opportunity. As soon as he haswhat appears to be a Basic Up Trendline projected from two Bottoms, forexample, he will go back to the Top of the rally between those two Bottomsand draw from that parallel to the Bottom Trendline. If the next rally comesup to that parallel, stops there and turns down, he has a probable ReturnLine and channel established. This practice of drawing in and experimenting with every trendline, which the price action permits or suggests, is earnestly recommended to thereader of this book, particularly if the technical approach is new to him. Itis the quickest way — in fact, the only way — of acquiring the experiencewe have stressed as essential to recognition, judgment, and utilization oftrendline implications in trading. Perhaps we should add here one “don’t” for the beginner. You will have noted that nowhere have we mentioned a line projected from a Bottom to aTop, or vice versa. Trendlines are always drawn across two or more Bottoms, or two or more Tops. They should never be drawn to cross through the pricetrack. (Prices may cross their extensions later, but this should not havehappened at the time the lines are ﬁrst drawn.) If you did not know better,you might, for example, put in a line from the Top of the left shoulder tothe Top of the right shoulder of a Head-and-Shoulders Formation, thuscutting through the head, but such a line would have no technical validity. Consequences of Trendline Penetration — Throwbacks At the beginning of this chapter, we mentioned the probable consequencesof a break down through an Intermediate Up Trendline. To repeat, if anIntermediate Up Trendline has been constructed, has qualiﬁed as technicallysigniﬁcant by the tests previously discussed, and has then been decisivelybroken, the inference is that uptrend is ﬁnished. And the consequences tobe expected are either a full Intermediate Recession or a period of Consoli-dation (usually becoming a recognizable Area Formation). Technical indica-tions of other sorts may be seen on the chart, which will suggest to youwhich of these two consequences is the more likely. In either event, theIntermediate Trend trader will certainly look twice before attempting to ﬁndfurther proﬁt in that particular situation at that time. AU3772_book.fm Page 270 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen: Trendlines and Channels 271 A more immediate but less important probable consequence of trendline penetration has also been mentioned — the “Pullback.” This deserves further discussion. Pullbacks that follow breakouts from Reversal and ConsolidationFormations have been described in our earlier studies of those price patterns.It is easy to understand why a rally which develops after prices break outthrough the lower boundary of a Rectangle, for example, will be stoppedwhen it gets back to that boundary by the Resistance (supply) now residingthere. Support–Resistance Theory enables us to rationalize most of theThrowback moves which occur after prices have broken out of other typesof Reversal or Consolidation Areas. The Pullbacks which follow trendlinepenetrations cannot be thus rationalized; yet they occur much more fre-quently, and they appear to be stopped much more exactly at the oldtrendline level than is the case with Area Formations. Why should prices,after they have thrust down through a rising trendline, perhaps for severalpoints, turn back up and ascend to or very near the old trendline, stop thereand then go off in renewed decline? The Top of that Pullback Rally may be2 or 3 points above the original penetration level, since the trendline issloping up all the time; nevertheless, there it stops, falters, gives up. No oneknows why supply should overcome demand, why Resistance should be soplainly evident at that particular point whose level is determined by two variants, the slope of the line and the time it is reached. Of course, you cannot reasonably expect a Pullback Rally to climb all the way back to a trendline that is ascending at a very steep angle, whichmay mean the attainment of a new high price for the entire Intermediate FIGURE 157. Six months of an Uptrend Channel which actually started to form in December 1943! It was broken downside in August 1945. CONSOLIDATED VULTEE F 1945 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE26 24 22 20 19 18 Sales 100’s 250 200150 100 50 61320 27 31 0 172431017243171421 28 512 19 26 29162330 AU3772_book.fm Page 271 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Uptrend; yet even that happens in more than just a few cases. What can be

counted on in the great majority of typical Up Trendlines (those which slantup at a normal or fairly ﬂat angle) is that after the line has been broken, aPullback Rally will develop, either in a few days or in the usual Minor Wavetempo, and will carry prices back up to the projected trendline. Throwbacks do not occur, it should be noted, when prices erupt through a Return Line, i.e., break out of the top side of an Uptrend Channel. Or, more correctly stated, the Return Line does not function as a Support against aThrowback after prices have gone through it. An unusually strong upswingin a Rising Trend Channel may carry beyond the top of the channel as deﬁnedby its Return Line, but the next reaction may go right back down throughit without evidencing any hesitation at its level. The Throwback is one of the mysteries in trendline price action to which we alluded at the outset. The technical analyst who studies trends andtrendlines over any considerable period will discover many other even moremysterious phenomena which cannot ﬁnd space in this treatise, because noway has yet been found to put them to practical use in trading and investing. FIGURE 158. The downtrend which started in June 1946 in Nash–Kelvinator, sig naled by the break of both its Intermediate and Major Up Trendlines (MUT) on July 15, made a nice channel until September. An Intermediate Down Trendline,drawn across the June 17 and July 1 highs, held for the August rally. The ReturnLine, drawn parallel to it across the June 20 low, held in late July but remained intactfor only a few days at the end of August. The August rally in both price and volumepattern showed Bear Market characteristics. Compare this chart with Figure 68 andyou will see that a Major Double Top was signaled on July 23. NASH – KELVINATOR NK 1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBERMUTIDT RL24 22 20 19 18 17 16 Sales 100’s 125 100 7550 25 61 3 2 0 2 74 111825181 5 22 29 6 1 32 02 7 3 1 01 72 4 31 71 4 2 1 28 AU3772_book.fm Page 272 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen: Trendlines and Channels 273 They are extraordinarily interesting in retrospect, but are not subject to forecast. Intermediate Downtrends In all of the foregoing discussion of trends and trendlines we have concen-trated on uptrends ; we have, in fact, had in mind speciﬁcally Intermediate Advances in the direction of the Primary Trend, i.e., within a Major BullMarket. Those particular trends are most apt to develop “normally,” are mostamenable to trendline deﬁnition. Intermediate Down Moves in a Major Bear Market may well be taken up next. Before we discuss the respects in whichthey differ from Primary Advances, we should recall that the Basic Trendline on a down-move is the line projected across the Tops of the rallies within it. The Trend Channel will be to the left of that trendline and below it on thechart. The Return Line (if any) will deﬁne the Bottom of the channel. Intermediate (Bear Market) Downtrends are far less regular and uniform in their development than Bull Market Advances. Their angles of decline arecharacteristically steeper, and this is particularly true, of course, of the PanicMoves which are typical of the second phase of a Bear Market, as we saw FIGURE 159. The decline that took Macy down through an Intermediate Up Trendline (IUT) in June 1946 turned out to be also the drop from the head of a “Flat Shouldered” Head-and-Shoulders Top, which was, in turn, part of a larger Complex.The upper neckline was broken June 19 and the lower on July 16. Note Pullbacks toeach. F1, F2, and F3 are tentative Fan Lines. Prices were ﬁnally able to clear F3 inDecember, but by that time a Primary Bear Market had been signaled; so, the FanRule no longer applied. Fans call the turn only on Secondary (Corrective) Moves. R. H. MACY MZ 1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUSTNL–2 F– 1F–2 F–3S SRL IUTH 64 6056 52 48 44 Sales 100’s 50 40302010 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 81 5 2 2 2 96 1 3 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 AU3772_book.fm Page 273 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
in our discussion of Major Trends in Chapter 3. Moreover, prices have a

tendency to drop away from any trendline which is drawn across the ﬁrsttwo Rally Tops; in other words, to curve down or accelerate as the moveproceeds. This shows plainly on an arithmetically scaled chart and, evenmore conspicuously on a semilogarithmic sheet. FIGURE 160.

> “ABZ” dropped sharply following its late January high, capped off
a nearly uninterrupted 2-year rally. But despite the rapidity and severity of the Pullback, it was, in fact, a picture-perfect reaction, which stopped just above excellentlong-term Support at the 1983 high after retracing almost exactly 50% from its Januarypeak. Not only is the reaction a classic, but so, too, is the Fan Line developmentwhich, when coupled with the recently completed Head-and-Shoulders Bottom,suggests “ABZ” has reversed its short-term downtrend. ARKANSAS BEST ABZ 1987 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUSTS H F1F2F3 SNL36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 1413 12 11 Sales 100’s 1000800600400200 7 24 31 7 14 21 28 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 916 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 81 5 XD.09 XD.09ARKANSAS BEST 30 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 8725 20 15 10 5 AU3772_book.fm Page 274 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen: Trendlines and Channels 275 The practical results of this down-curving tendency are not so important, insofar as it delays the penetration of the original trendline and, hence, the giving of a signal of trend change. The fact is that prices tend to thrasharound for some time, making a base at the Bottom of one of these precipitousdeclines. In so doing, they work out sideways on the chart, and the trendfrequently does not turn up visibly until after the trendline has ﬁnally beenreached and broken through on the upside after all. Thus, there is justiﬁcationfor drawing down trendlines and keeping them in view even though theymay seem, for some time, simply to travel off into space with no apparentrelevance to the actual trend of prices. It naturally follows from the above that Return Lines on most Bear Market Declines have little practical utility; they are, more often than not,very quickly broken downside. Good channels are hard to ﬁnd. However, and this is of considerable practical importance, the very last Intermediate Downswing in a Major Bear Market, i.e., the last Primary Movewhich leads to the ﬁnal, long-term Bottom, is usually cleaner, more regular,less precipitous — in other words, a more nearly normal trend of the sortwe expect to ﬁnd in most Intermediate Advances in a Bull Market (except,of course, that it slants down instead of up). This interesting habit is, as wesaid, of practical importance. Knowing it, we have an additional and veryuseful clue to the end of a Bear Market. When, after a Major Bear Trend has proceeded for some time and dis tance, and has experienced at least one Panic Sell-Off, it then goes off inanother but less active and more orderly decline, and this decline developsand follows a good trendline. Watch it closely. If this Intermediate holds toits steady and not-too-steep downward course — if its trendline is contactedseveral times by Minor Rallies — if it produces a fairly consistent channel,and prices do not “fall out of bed” down through its parallel Return Line,then the eventual upside penetration of this trendline may well signal a Major Turn, the inception of a new Bull Market. Corrective Trends — The Fan Principle In this study of Intermediate Trendlines, we have left to be taken up last thesubject of Secondary or Corrective Trends. These are the Intermediate Declineswhich interrupt the Primary Advances in a Bull Market, and the IntermediateRecoveries which alternate with Primary Declines in Bear Markets. Intermediate Reactions against the Major Direction of the market take a variety of forms. Sometimes, as we have seen in our earlier study of chartpatterns, they run out into Consolidation Formations — Triangles, Rectan-gles, etc. — in which the net price reaction is of minor consequence, but timeis consumed in backing and ﬁlling before the Primary Trend can be resumed.In such cases, of course, there is no basis for drawing an IntermediateTrendline, nor is one needed for any practical purpose. At the other extreme, so to speak, we ﬁnd Corrective Swings which develop as a more or less orderly straight-line return of moderate slope to AU3772_book.fm Page 275 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
the nearest good Intermediate Support or Resistance Level, retracing perhaps

a third to a half of the preceding Primary Swing. These reactions producegood trendlines, as a rule, and the eventual penetration of their trendlinesis a good technical signal of Reversal. Intermediate Corrections clearly ofthis type, it may be added, are relatively rare. A third form taken by Intermediate Corrections is nearly as common as the ﬁrst named above (Consolidation Pattern) and much more common onthe charts than the second. In a Bull Market, it starts with a sharp reactionwhich proceeds for several days — perhaps for as much as 2 weeks —producing a steep Minor Trendline. This line is broken upside by a quickMinor Rally, after which prices slide off again in a duller and less precipitatetrend. A second Minor Trendline may now be drawn from the original highpoint across the Top of the upthrust that broke the ﬁrst trend. This secondtrendline is broken by another partial recovery thrust, and a third and stillduller and ﬂatter sell-off ensues. A third trendline can now be drawn fromthe original high across the Top of the second upthrust. The whole move,by this time, has taken roughly and irregularly a “Saucering-out” form. Thethree trendlines drawn from the original Reversal points from which the FIGURE 161. A valid application of the Three-Fan Principle. Note that prices, after they pushed up through F1 in March, fell back to it but did not repenetrate it. When F2 was broken in late March, prices came back to it at the end of April but did notgo below it. F3 was surmounted in May. This was a Bull Market Reaction; “AS” madeits ﬁnal Top above 64 in August. The March–May pattern might be called a weakDouble Bottom. BARBER ASPHALT AS 1946 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNEXD.25C XD.25CF 2F 1F 356 52 48 44 40 38 36 Sales 100’s 50 40 30 20 10 5121926 2 91623291 6 2330 6 1320 27 411 18 25 1 8152229 AU3772_book.fm Page 276 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen: Trendlines and Channels 277 Corrective Decline started, each at a ﬂatter angle than its predecessor, are known as Fan Lines. And the rule is that when the third Fan Line is broken upside, the low of the Intermediate Correction has been seen. There are exceptions to this rule — as there are to every so-called rule of technical chart analysis. Rarely, a correction of this type will go on to makeanother dip to a new low for the whole corrective move before prices reallystart to round up again. But the Three-Fan Principle works in the greatmajority of cases. Moreover, it offers the trader an opportunity to take aposition at a point where he can logically employ a very near stop orderand, thus, limit his loss to a controlled amount if the rule does not work out. It is interesting to note that prices consistently Throwback in these move ments to the preceding Fan Line after each upthrust. The new Primary Swing,once the low has been passed, usually starts slowly and carries out for atime the Saucer picture. The Three-Fan Rule works just as well in calling the turn on Intermediate Recoveries in a Bear Market, the majority of which take the rounding formwhich is adapted to its use. Note, however, that the Fan Principle is normally applied only to cor rective moves, i.e., to determine the end of Intermediate Reactions in a BullMarket and of Intermediate Recoveries in a Bear Market. FIGURE 162. Try the Three-Fan Principle on this chart of the late 1944 Bull Market Reaction out of a Symmetrical Triangle in “DH.” F1 should be drawn from the August 30 high down across the September 12 closing. F2 is already marked on thechart but not labeled. F3 would extend from August 30 across the Rally Top ofNovember 9. It was surmounted on increased volume November 21. The mid-Sep-tember to November price pattern looked at ﬁrst like a Descending Triangle butvolume began to rise in October. DELAWARE & HUDSON DH 1944 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER38 36 34 32 30 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 5025 8152229512 19 26 2 9162330714 21 28 4 11 18 25 291623 30 AU3772_book.fm Page 277 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 163. In a downtrend throughout the ﬁrst half, “BY” gave back a large part

of its 1983 rally by mid-summer. But the 1982 low held the Bears in check and over the following several months, this issue etched out an excellent Fan Pattern. Fan Line1 gave way in mid-September on a high-volume penetration. The advance quicklylost its momentum, but old Resistance/new Support contained the Pullback perfectly,setting the stage for a rally through Fan Line 2. This occurred in mid-November ongood volume. Following a 5-week correction, “BY” charged through Fan Line 3 onthe best volume of the 3 breakouts. BUCYRUS ERIE CO. BY 1984 MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBERF1F2F330 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 Sales 100’s 1000800600400200 104797621 172431714212851219262 916233071421284 11182518152229613 202731017241 8152229 XD. 11 XD. 11 AU3772_book.fm Page 278 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen: Trendlines and Channels 279 We shall take up Major Trendlines in the following chapter, but, before we leave this study of Intermediate Trends, it will be well to state again that the practical application of trendlines in actual trading requires experience,and the good judgment to be attained only therefrom. Some technical ana-lysts depend largely on trendline studies; a few attempt to use trendlinesalmost exclusively; but the majority have found that they are best employedas an adjunct to other technical data. Technical analysis of a stock chart is something like putting together a jigsaw puzzle. There are many items to be considered, among them volume,pattern, and the measurements derived therefrom, Support and ResistanceLevels, trendlines, general market prospects — and all ﬁtted into place toget the complete picture. AU3772_book.fm Page 279 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 280 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

281 chapter ﬁfteen Major Trendlines In the preceding chapter on Intermediate Trendlines, mention was made of the distinctive effects produced by arithmetic and semilogarithmic plotting,but it was noted that these differences were unimportant in connection withMinor Trends or Intermediate Trends of average duration. When we cometo Major Trends, however, we ﬁnd the difference does become important. If you will examine a large collection of arithmetically scaled monthly charts covering 10 years or more of market history, you will quickly see thatBull Trends, in the great majority of actively traded, more or less speculativecommon stocks, tend to accelerate. They start slowly and push up at a steeper and steeper angle as they approach a Major Top. This up-curving path takes them farther and farther away from any straight trendline drawn from two Bottom points in the ﬁrst, slow-moving stage of advance. As a consequence,they top out and have gone down a long way in a recession which may beof Major consequence before their straight trendline is again touched. Many of the stocks that show such typical accelerating curves in their advance (Major) Trends on arithmetic paper produce straight trends on a logarithmic scale. As a consequence, their logarithmic Major Trendlines arebroken more quickly, and usually at a higher price level, when at last theirtrends do top out and turn down. In the case of such stocks, then, thelogarithmic scale gives a better trend signal. But there are other stocks — mostly of the more substantial investment or semi-investment type — which tend to advance in straight arithmetictrends. Consolidated Edison, General Motors, and Libbey–Owens–FordGlass are examples. (The trends of these on a logarithmic scale show adecelerating curve, of course.) Still a third class, made up largely of high-grade preferred stocks, produces a rounding over or decelerating BullTrendline even on the arithmetic scale. And, ﬁnally, there are a number ofissues whose normal Bull Market Trendlines fall somewhere between ourﬁrst two types; that is, they curve up away from a straight path on thearithmetic scale, but curve over to the right (breaking through a straight line)on the logarithmic scale. EN: Fortunately, in this age of computers and easily processed data, there is analytical software which allows the analyst to instanta-neously switch between the scales. Desktop packages are available (see Appendix D,Resources) and a number of Internet sites have these capabilities. AU3772_book.fm Page 281 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
All of which, the reader, at this point, no doubt ﬁnds most discouraging. Some stocks do this and some stocks do that, and what help is there for us

in such a mix-up? The answer lies in studying the history of each issue inwhich you may be interested. Stocks — most of them, at least — do notchange their habits and their technical characteristics much from one Bulland Bear cycle to the next. An issue which, like General Motors, producesa straight-line Bull Trend on an arithmetic chart in one Primary Upswing islikely to repeat that performance in the next. As a matter of interest, stocks do sometimes change, of course, over a long period of years. Companies which were regarded as extremely specu-lative when their shares were ﬁrst listed may attain a more and more impor-tant and stable position in the general economy, with the result that, even-tually, their stock acquires a solid investment rating. Their Bull MarketTrends will then gradually change from an up-curve to a straight-line and,ﬁnally, to a decelerating curve. Other old, established corporations may loseposition and rating, shift from the investment type of trendline to the spec-ulative. But, it is true in general, nevertheless, that Major Patterns do repeat. If you are keeping your own set of manual monthly charts, you can choose whichever scale you please. But most technical chart followers preferto buy their long-range pictures ready made, thereby getting a much moreextensive history of many more issues than they could hope to chart them-selves. Since the only comprehensive portfolios of monthly charts that areavailable at reasonable cost are arithmetically scaled, you will possibly haveto make these serve all purposes. EN: No longer necessary because of availability of good software and also Internet chart sites. See Appendix D, Resources. You will ﬁnd with a little experimentation that an architect’s French curve can beused to plot good Major Uptrend Lines on many of the issues whose normalBull Trends accelerate away from a straight line. The tests for the technical signiﬁcance of a Major Trendline are substan tially the same as those speciﬁed for Intermediate Lines in the precedingchapter. A little more leeway must be allowed on penetrations — again, amatter of judgment — but you are dealing with coarse data and long swingshere, and what you want from your monthly charts, primarily, is perspectiveon the broad picture. One more point regarding the construction of Major Bull Trendlines: the best lines — the most useful — are drawn, as a rule, not from the absolute lowof the preceding Bear Market, but starting, rather, from the next IntermediateBottom. The accumulation area at the beginning of a Bull Market is usuallylong and drawn out in time, and relatively ﬂat. The ﬁrst trendline that can bedrawn from the extreme low point may, therefore, be too nearly horizontal toexpress the genuine Bull Trend which starts with the markup phase. The severalcharts showing Major Trendlines which illustrate this chapter will demonstratethis point. EN: Especially Figure 177. It applies as well, we might add, to many Intermediate Moves which start from Area Formations. Take theHead-and-Shoulders Pattern for example: the true Intermediate Trendline usu-ally starts from the right shoulder rather than from the head. AU3772_book.fm Page 282 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter ﬁfteen: Major Trendlines 283 FIGURE 164. The straight-line Bull Market Trend of General Motors on an arith metic monthly chart. 1941 low, 28 ⅝ ; 1946 high, 80 ⅜. FIGURE 165. The up-curving trend of a speculative motors stock, Hudson Motors. Compare this with “GM.” 1941 low, 2 ⅝ ; 1946 high, 34 ½. GENERAL MOTORS GM 80 60 40 20 Sales 100’s 4000 2000 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 HUDSON MOTORS HT40 30 2010 Sales 100’s 1000 500 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 AU3772_book.fm Page 283 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 166. Typical decurving Major Bull Trend of a high-grade preferred stock. This is Curtis Publishing $7 Preferred. 1942 low, 12; 1945 high, 154. FIGURE 167. The accelerating uptrend of the common stock of the same publishing

company. 1942 low, ⅜ ; 1946 high, 26. CURTIS PUBLISHING $ 7 PFD. CPC Pr 160 120 80 40 Sales 100’s 100 50 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 CURTIS PUBLISHING COM. CPC 30 20 10 Sales 100’s 1200 1000 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 AU3772_book.fm Page 284 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter ﬁfteen: Major Trendlines 285 FIGURE 168. A conservative investment-type utility stock makes a straight-line Major Bull Trend. This is Commonwealth Edison. 1942 low, 17 ⅜ ; 1946 high, 36 ⅛. Leverage is an important factor in trends. FIGURE 169. The up-curving trend of a low-priced “junior” utility, International Hydro-Electric. 1942 low, ¼ ; 1946 high, 15 ½. COMMONWEALTH EDISON CWE 40 30 20 Sales 100’s 800 400 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 INTERNATIONAL HYDRO-ELECTRIC IH 15 10 5 Sales 100’s 400 200 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 AU3772_book.fm Page 285 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 170. A speculative oil stock, Houston Oil. 1942 low, 2

¼ ; 1946 high, 30. Compare this picture with “SOH” in Figure 171. FIGURE 171. Straight-line uptrends in an investment oil, Standard Oil of Ohio. 1942 low, 10 ⅛ ; 1946 high, 30. Note: trendline unbroken until 1948. HOUSTON OIL HO 30 20 10 Sales 100’s 1000 500 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 STANDARD OIL OF OHIO SOH 30 20 10 Sales 100’s 200 100 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 AU3772_book.fm Page 286 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter ﬁfteen: Major Trendlines 287 FIGURE 172. Steel stocks have the speculative or accelerating type of Primary Uptrend. Republic Steel. 1942 low, 13 ⅜ ; 1946 high, 40 ⅞. FIGURE 173. The normal Major Bull Trend of heavy industrial issues is up-curving. American Car & Foundry. 1942 low, 20; 1946 high, 72 ⅜. REPUBLIC STEEL RS 40 30 2010 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 AMERICAN CAR & FOUNDRY AF80 604020 Sales 100’s 400 200 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 AU3772_book.fm Page 287 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 174. A low-priced building stock, Celotex Corporation. 1942 low, 6

⅛ ; 1946 high, 38 ⅛. FIGURE 175. A highly speculative, low-priced issue, traded on the Curb Exchange, Claude Neon Lights. 1942 low, ⅛ ; 1946 high, 9. CELOTEX CORP. CLO 2 for 140 30 20 10 Sales 100’s 400 200 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 CLAUDE NEON LIGHTS CEO10 8 64 2 Sales 100’s 1000 500 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 AU3772_book.fm Page 288 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter ﬁfteen: Major Trendlines 289 FIGURE 176. The tobacco stocks follow the investment type of trend. This is Liggett & Myers. Note Double Trendline. 1942 low, 50 ½ ; 1946 high, 103 ½. FIGURE 177. High-grade food issues (Corn Products Reﬁning) resemble the tobac cos. 1940 low, 40 ¼ ; 1946 high, 75 ¾. LIGGETT & MYERS LM–B 135 105 7545 Sales 100’s 200 100 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 CORN PRODUCTS REFINING CFG 70 60 50 40 Sales 100’s 400 200 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 AU3772_book.fm Page 289 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Major Downtrends

From the technical analyst’s point of view, it is to be regretted that few Bear Markets have produced Major Trendlines of any practical signiﬁcance on thecharts of individual stocks. A notable exception was the long Bear Marketof 1929–32 which produced magniﬁcently straight trendlines on the arith-metic plotting of a host of issues (as well as in the Averages, to which weshall refer later). But it is almost impossible to ﬁnd other instances where aBear Trendline having any forecasting value can be drawn on either arith-metic or semilogarithmic scale. The normal Major Bear Market Trend is not only steeper than the normal Bull Trend (because Bear Markets last, on the average, only about half aslong as Bull Markets), but it is also accelerating or down-curving in its course.This feature is accentuated and, hence, particularly difﬁcult to project effec-tively on the semilogarithmic scale. The net of it is that the technician cannot expect to obtain much, if any, help from his Major Trendlines in determining the change from a Primary Down to a Primary Upswing. This should not be taken, however, as advice to draw no trendlines on a Major Down Move, or to disregard entirely anytrendlines which may develop with some appearance of authority. If you donot expect too much of them, they may, nevertheless, afford some usefulclue as to the way in which conditions are tending to change. The student of stock market action who is not altogether concerned with dollars and cents results from his researches will ﬁnd Bear Market Trendlinesa fascinating ﬁeld of inquiry. They do some strange things. Even though theyfail in the practical function of calling the actual Major Turn, and go shootingoff into space, they sometimes produce curious reactions (or, at least, appearto produce what would be otherwise inexplicable market action) when thereal price trend catches up with them months or years later. But such effects,interesting as they may be, are, in our present state of knowledge, uncertainand unpredictable. EN: This fact may persist into the mists of the future and be thought of like Fermat’s Last Theorem. Our present state of knowledge in the 21 st century is no further advanced than it was in Magee’s time. We must dismiss this rather unfruitful topic with the reminder that one clue to the end of a Primary Bear Market is afforded by the IntermediateTrendline of its ﬁnal phase, which we cited in the preceding chapter. Major Trend Channels We run into another difﬁculty when we try to draw Return Lines and con-struct channels for Major Trends on an arithmetic chart. Owing to the markedtendency for prices to ﬂuctuate in ever wider swings (both Intermediate andMinor) as they work upward in a Primary Bull Market, their channel growsprogressively broader. The Return Line does not run parallel to the BasicTrendline (assuming that we have a good Basic Trendline to begin with) but AU3772_book.fm Page 290 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter ﬁfteen: Major Trendlines 291 diverges from it. Occasionally, a stock produces a clear-cut Major Channel Pattern, but the majority do not. Semilogarithmic scaling will, in many cases, correct for the Widening Channel effect in Bull Trends, but then we run into the opposite tendencyin Primary Bear Markets, and for that, neither type of scaling will compen-sate. Trendlines in the Averages Practically everything stated in the preceding chapter regarding Intermedi-ate Trendline development in individual stocks applies, as well, to the var-ious Averages. The broad Averages or Indexes, in fact, produce more regulartrends and, in consequence, more exactly applicable trendlines. This may bedue, in part, to the fact that most Averages are composed of active, well-pub-licized, and widely owned issues whose market action individually is “nor-mal” in the technical sense. Another reason is that the process of averagingsmooths out vagaries of component stocks, and the result, thus, more trulyreﬂects the deep and relatively steady economic trends and tides. In any event, it is a fact that such averages as the Dow–Jones Rails, Industrials and 65-Stock Composite, The New York Times 50, and Standard & Poor’s Average of 90 stocks (the last two named being probably the mostscientiﬁcally composed to typify the entire broad market) (EN: As the reader will note most of these are obsolete. In the modern age, the S&P; 500 probably bestfulﬁlls this function) do propagate excellent trendlines on their charts. The very accuracy of their trends, particularly their Intermediate Moves, permits us to construe their trendlines more tightly. Less leeway need beallowed for doubtful penetrations. Thus, while we ask for a 3% penetrationin the case of an individual stock of medium range, 2% is ample in theAverages to give a dependable break signal. Experienced traders know that it pays to heed the Broad Market Trend. It is still easier to swim with the tide than against it. EN: Trendlines in the Averages, and Trading in the Averages Numerous averages and indexes have come online since the 5th edition: S&P; 100, S&P; 500, Russell 2000, and so on. It would be an exercise in daily journalism toattempt to list all the indexes now available. New ones spring up like weeds afterthe spring rain. This is because the invention of a widely adopted index can be verylucrative for its creator. S&P; and Dow–Jones collect licensing fees from the “use”of their indexes by the exchanges. The constant addition of new trading instrumentsrequires that current lists be kept in Resources, and the reader may also consult The Wall Street Journal, Barron’s, and The Investor’s Business Daily where prices of indexes and averages are reported. Online brokerages and ﬁnancial news sites AU3772_book.fm Page 291 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
also offer up-to-the-minute lists and quotes on virtually all trading instruments. A

list and links to these sites may also be found in Resources (Appendix D) and atedwards-magee.com. FIGURE 178. In the process of “pulling back” to a very steep Up Trendline, prices may easily go to a new high. Note the Pullback of August 1936 in this weekly chart of Westinghouse Electric. The second, less steep line turned out to be the true MajorBull Trend. Note that the February–April price pattern in 1936 could not be consid-ered a true Double Top Reversal of Primary import because the recession betweenthe two highs was only about 10% of the Top’s value (around 122). Figure 64 on page119 shows on a daily chart the ﬁnal Top Reversal Formation which “WX” made in1937. A large Rectangle base was made on this weekly chart in April, May, and June 1937, but observe the poor volume which accompanied the breakout and rise fromthat formation — an extremely Bearish indication for the Major Trend. The “mea-surement” of the Rectangle was carried out by August, but that was all. As is usually the case, it was impossible to draw a Major Down Trendline which had any forecasting value on this chart. The beautiful straight trendlines whichappeared in the 1929–32 Primary Bear Market led many chart students to expectsimilar developments in every Bear Market, but the fact is that 1929–32 was uniquein that respect.

AU3772_book.fm Page 292 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter ﬁfteen: Major Trendlines 293 As of the turn of the century, the most important of these indexes, joining the Dow, are probably the S&P; 500, the S&P; 100, and the NASDAQ. In fact these are probably sufﬁcient for economic analysis and forecasting purposes, and certainly FIGURE 179. The 1929–32 Primary Bear Market was the only one in all stock market records which produced a Straight-Line Major Downtrend. Trace also the Support and Resistance Levels throughout this 14-year history of the Dow Industrials. Eachrally in the great Bear Move stopped at or near a previous Bottom level. Each declinestopped near the level of a Congestion in the 1924–29 Bull Market. See also level of1937 Top. Chart courtesy of Market Research, Inc. (Internet: barchart.com). DOW – JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE ABCDE F GH400 360 320 280 240 200 160 120 80 40 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 AU3772_book.fm Page 293 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
good trading vehicles by means of surrogate instruments, options, and futures. Some

would include the Russell 2000 in this list. These indexes and averages have beencreated to ﬁll needs not ﬁlled adequately by the Dow–Jones Averages.

With this proliferation of measures of the market and various parts of it a different question arises. That is, the value of the Dow alone in indicating the BroadMarket Trend is now questionable. Limited research has been done on this question.It is, however, my opinion that the Broad Market Trend must now be determinedby examining the Dow Industrials, the S&P; 500, and the NASDAQ Composite.

AU3772_book.fm Page 294 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

295 chapter 15.1 Trading the Averages in the 21st Century As I have pointed out in other new chapters and notes in the eighth edition, the ability to trade the Averages instead of individual stocks is a powerfulchoice offered by modern markets. Magee was of the opinion that the Aver-ages offered technical smoothness often lacking in individual issues. Thiswould seem to be true intuitively. After all, just as a moving average smoothsdata, the average of a basket of stocks should dampen price volatility. Ofcourse, as Mandelbrot pointed out, in a 10-sigma market storm everythingsinks. Illustrated in this chapter are several detailed cases following Magee’s suggestion of Average trading. I attempt to demonstrate here two perspec tives: one, the horror of the immediate, that is, what the crash and paniclook like as they occur, and two, what the crash and panic look like in retrospect. Of course we all live in the present, except for the great billion-aires, who can afford to doze through horriﬁc Bear Markets. Bill Gates’ networth varied by $16B (billion) or $17B in early 2000. This, of course, wouldput the ordinary investor out of business. So the ordinary investor, you and I, have to respect the great yawning Bear Market. We must step to the sidelines and let the bear eat the foolishvirgins, to borrow a Biblical metaphor. You will remember that Magee opined that a trendline break of 2% was sufﬁcient to cause liquidation of longs when analyzing the Averages. In theaccompanying ﬁgures, this hypothesis is examined. EN9: In respect to the breaking of trendlines (by 2% or 5%) I should note that the breaking of a trendline is as much a warning as a signal to act. The break, instead of a change of trend to the reverse, may indicate a change of trend to thesideways – into a reversal or continuation pattern. AU3772_book.fm Page 295 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 179.1. S&P; Reagan Crash. As can be clearly seen this crash sent numer ous signals, starting with

the breaking of a major trendline by more than 2% in late August. Once this occurs extr eme caution and watchfulness must be exercised. The darker and darker complexion of things is br ought out by the “smart selling,” which shows many “downthrust days” toward the end (October 10–20). The April trendline breaks (by more than 2%) would have ejected the trend trader also to be put back long in June. Observance of the 2–3% trendline-break rule and/or use of Basing Points and pr ogressive stops (Chapters 27 and 28) would have avoided much needless grief. NOTE: Figures 180–197 have been moved to Appendix C. SPX LAST-Daily Created with TradeStation www.TradeS tation.com339.99 329.99 319.99 309.99 299.99 289.99 279.99 269.99 259.99 249.99 239.99 229.99 219.99 3/1986 4/1986 5/1986 6/1986 7/1986 8/1986 9/1986 10/1986 11/1986 7/1987 8/1987 9/1987 10/1987 11/1987 12/1987 12/1986 2/1987 87 3/1987 4/1987 5/1987 6/1987 AU3772_book.fm Page 296 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 15.1: Trading the Averages in the 21st Century 297 FIGURE 179.2. S&P; Long-Term Perspective. Viewed from afar it seems an exer cise in futility to attempt to

> “time the market.” One must keep in perspective the crashes in market prices which ar e timed to coincide
with personal and business needs for short-term liquidity, or, in a word, cash. One must also remember the market behavior from 1965–82, as well as the chart of Dow Theory Performance in Chapter 5.1. SPX LAST-Monthly 02/29/2000 C = 1366.42 O = 1357.56 H = 1369.63 L = 1356.05 V =1181488000 Created with TradeStation www.TradeS tation. com1400.00 1200.00 1000.00 800.00 600.00 400.00 200.00 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 AU3772_book.fm Page 297 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 179.3. Three Bull Market Tops, 1929, 1987, 1998. Notice here that in each

case the crash occurred after the nearest important trendline had been decisively broken — usually trendlines of approximately 3 months by 2% or more, and some-times accompanied by reversal formations. All historic tops will show evidence ofattempts to resume the trend after a break of this kind. Belief dies hard. Nonetheless,hedging or exiting on these trend breaks proves to be the best strategy over and overagain.2700 2600 2500 2400 2300 2200 2100 2000 1900 1800 1700 5/1987 6/1987 7/1987 8/1987 9/1987$INDUA LAST-Daily 10/26/1987 380 360 340320 300 280 260 240 220 Created with TradeStation 4/1929 5/1929 6/1929 7/1929 8/1929 9/1929 10/1929$INDUA LAST-Daily 10/31/1929 9400 9200 9000 8800 8600 8400 8200 8000 7800 7600 7400 12/1997 98 2/1998 3/1998 4/1998 5/1998 6/1998 7/1998 8/1998www.TradeStation$INDUA LAST-Daily 09/01/1998 AU3772_book.fm Page 298 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 15.1: Trading the Averages in the 21st Century 299 FIGURE 179.3.1. The bull ’90s top in the S&P; gave much clearer readings than the Dow top, the br oken trendlines being paramount. But while the Dow ﬂirted with the emotions of bulls who wanted to believe in Dow 36,000 the S&P; broke its trendlines and went south for the winter. Potentially a very long winter. This might have started of f as a rounding top and then became a complex-complex top, an d you can even see traces of Head-and-Shoulders top in it. It is the editor ’s opinion that we may never see such unruly tops again in this generation. The pent up greed and lust and naiveté as even the bootblacks (they still have those don’t they?) r ushed to get the latest tulip bulbs. Tulips are like century plants. They only bloom once each hundr ed years. A little old lady with a ruler could have saved her portfolio here. All it takes is not believing the hype (Dow 36,000 indeed!) and making an unemotional analysis and honoring the stops. $INXWeekly US L = 1297.28 –0.20 –0.02% B = 0.00 A = 0.00 O = 1297.71 Hi = 1298.69 L o = 1294.97 C = 1297.28 V = 0 1174.35 952.301,496.00 1,372.00 1,259.00 1,154.00 1,059.00 971.00 890.00 817.00 749.00 1,295.68 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Created with TradeStation AU3772_book.fm Page 299 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 179.3.2. Dow Jones Industrials 1999-2000. Illustrating that patterns can be found within patterns, the Dow made a br oadening top

which resolved into a diamond, then a couple of triangles. (Not drawn her e.) All of which could be looked at as a gnarly messy rectangle. It is not so important to identify triangles in this situation as to recognize the general natur e of the market — sideways to down. In general one of the more unruly situations in market history, as beﬁtted the incr edible (truly incredible, as in unbelievable) bull market it e nded. INDU LAST-Daily 10/04/2001 AB C 99 4/1999 7/1999 10/1999 00 4/2000 7/2000 10/2000 01 4/2001 7/2001 Created with TradeStation 2000i by Omega Resear ch AU3772_book.fm Page 300 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

301 chapter sixteen Technical Analysis of Commodity Charts (EN9: Following the practice of allowing the reader to discriminate between the work of Edwards and Magee and that of the Editor, a chapter on commodity trading,Chapter 16.1, has been added to the 9th Edition. See same.) A little thought suggests that the variously interesting and signiﬁcant pat-terns which we have examined in the foregoing chapters on stock chartsshould logically appear as well in the charts of any other equities andcommodities that are freely, constantly, and actively bought and sold onorganized public exchanges. And this, in general, is true. The price trendsof anything where market value is determined solely (or for all practicalpurposes within very wide limits) by the free interplay of supply and demand will, when graphically projected, show the same pictorial phenom ena of rise and fall, accumulation and distribution, congestion, consolidation,and reversal that we have seen in stock market trends. Speculative aims andspeculators’ psychology are the same whether the goods dealt in be corporateshares or contracts for the future delivery of cotton bales. It should be possible in theory, therefore, to apply our principles of technical analysis to any of the active commodity futures (wheat, corn, oats, cotton, cocoa,hides, eggs, etc.) for which accurate daily price and volume data are published.It should be, that is, if proper allowance is made for the intrinsic differencesbetween commodity futures contracts and stocks and bonds. In previous editions of this book (EN9: Up to the 8th), traders who cast longing eyes on the big, quick proﬁts apparently available in wheat, for exam-ple, were warned that commodity charts were “of very little help,” as of 1947. It was pointed out that successful technical analysis of commodity futures charts had been possible up to about 1941 or 1942. But that thedomination of these markets thereafter by government regulations, loans,and purchases completely subject to the changing (and often conﬂicting)policies and acts of the several governmental agencies concerned with grainsand other commodities had seriously distorted the normal evaluativemachinery of the market. At that time, radical reversals of trend could anddid happen overnight without any warning so far as the action of the marketcould show. The ordinary and orderly ﬂuctuations in supply–demand bal-ance, which create signiﬁcant deﬁnite patterns for the technician to read, did AU3772_book.fm Page 301 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
not exist. And while fortunes were made (and lost) in wheat, corn, and cotton

futures during the World War II period, it is safe to say they were not madefrom the charts. However, during the past 5 or 6 years the application of technical meth ods to commodity trading has been reexamined. Under 1956 conditions, itappears that charts can be a most valuable tool for the commodity trader.The effects of present government regulation have apparently resulted in“more orderly” markets without destroying their evaluative function. Andallowing for the various essential differences between commodities andstocks, the basic technical methods can be applied. It may be in order here to discuss brieﬂy some of the intrinsic differences between commodity futures and stocks referred to above, and some of thespecial traits of commodity charts. To begin with, the most important differ-ence is that the contracts for future delivery, which are the stock-in-trade ofthe commodity exchange, have a limited life. For example, the October cottoncontract for any given year has a trading life of about 18 months. It comes“on the board” as a “new issue,” is traded with volume increasing more orless steadily during that period, and then vanishes. Theoretically, it is adistinct and separate commodity from all other cotton deliveries. Practically,of course, it seldom gets far out of line with such other deliveries as arebeing bought and sold during the same period, or with the “cash” price ofthe physical cotton in warehouses. Nevertheless, it has this special qualityof a limited independent life, as a consequence of which long-term Supportand Resistance Levels have no meaning whatever. Second, a very large share of the transactions in commodity futures — as much as 80% certainly in normal times — represents commercial hedgingrather than speculation. (It is, in fact, entered into to obviate risk, to avoidspeculation.) Hence, even near-term Support and Resistance Levels haverelatively less potency than with stocks. Also, since hedging is to a consid-erable degree subject to seasonal factors, there are deﬁnite seasonal inﬂu-ences on the commodity price trends which the commodity speculator mustkeep in mind, even if only to weigh the meaning of their apparent absenceat any given period. A third difference is in the matter of volume. The interpretation of volume with respect to trading in stocks is relatively simple. But it is greatlycomplicated in commodities by the fact that there is, in theory, no limit tothe number of contracts for a certain future delivery which may be sold inadvance of the delivery date. In the case of any given stock, the number ofshares outstanding is always known. As this is written, there are in the handsof stockholders 13,700,203 common shares of Consolidated Edison, and thatquantity has not varied for many years nor is it likely to change for severalyears to come. Every transaction in Consolidated Edison involves an actualtransfer of one or more of those existing shares. In the case of commodityfuture contracts, however — say, September wheat — trading begins longbefore anyone knows how many bushels of wheat will exist to be deliveredthat coming September, and the open interest at some time during the life AU3772_book.fm Page 302 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter sixteen: Technical Analysis of Commodity Charts 303 of the contract may exceed the potential supply many times over — and all quite legitimately. EN9: Appendix C contains some material on the interpretation of futures volume data. As always volume data is a supplementary indicator to price.No one makes a proﬁt on it. One more important difference may be mentioned. Certain kinds of news — news about weather, drought, ﬂoods, etc., that affect the growingcrop, if we are dealing with an agricultural commodity — can change thetrend of the futures market immediately and drastically and are not foresee-able given the present stage of our weather knowledge. Analogous devel-opments in the stock market are extremely rare. EN: Except for acts of God and Alan Greenspan. Under what might be called normal market conditions, those chart pat terns which reﬂect trend changes in most simple and logical fashion workjust as well with commodities as with stocks. Among these we would listHead-and-Shoulders formations, Rounding Tops and Bottoms, and basictrendlines. Trendlines, in fact, are somewhat better deﬁned and more usefulin commodities than in stocks. Other types of chart formations which areassociated with stocks with short-term trading or with group distributionand accumulation, such as the Triangles, Rectangles, Flags, etc., appear lessfrequently in commodities and are far less reliable as to either direction orextent of the ensuing move. Support and Resistance Levels, as we havealready noted, are less potent in commodities than in stocks; sometimes theyseem to work to perfection, but just as often they don’t. For similar reasons,gaps have relatively less technical signiﬁcance. It is not the purpose of this book to explain the operation of commodity futures markets, nor to offer instruction to those who wish to trade therein.This brief chapter is included only as a starter for readers who may want topursue the study further. They should be advised that successful speculationin commodities requires far more specialized knowledge, demands moreconstant daily and hourly attention. The ordinary individual can hope toattain a fair degree of success in investing in securities by devoting only hisspare moments to his charts, but he might better shun commodity specula-tion entirely unless he is prepared to make a career of it. EN: The Editor has been, during his checkered career, a registered Commodity Trading Advisor. At the beginning of that career, I discussed these subjects withMagee and received essentially the above comments which are here reproduced fromthe ﬁfth edition. Subsequently, I observed among my associates and partners, andon my own, that futures are eminently tradable with the adaptation of techniques and methods described in this book. It is also true, as Magee says, that futurestrading is so different in tempo, leverage, and character that the novice risks life,limb, and capital in entering the area unescorted. Resource references are essentialreading but the beginner is urged to educate himself before beginning trading with extensive study and paper trading. Note that Figures 180-197 as well as Chapter 16 from the 7th edition are now found in Appendix C. AU3772_book.fm Page 303 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 179.4. (Fig. 180, 5th edition). Oats. Oats, for obvious reasons, traced more

> “normal” patterns than Wheat during the 1940s. This chart contains an H & S bottom,
a Symmetrical Triangle which merged into the Ascending form, a gap through aformer top level, and an interesting trendline. The Island shake-out through thetrendline was an extremely deceptive development. SEPTEMBER OATS Chicago 1947 GGG JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULYHS S104 96 88 80 76 72 68 64 60 Sales 100’s 125100755025 41118 25 1 8 15 22 1 8 1522 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 1724 31 7 1421 28 5 1219 26 2 9 AU3772_book.fm Page 304 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter sixteen: Technical Analysis of Commodity Charts 305 FIGURE 179.5. (Fig. 181, 5th edition). Cotton. In contrast with the grains, the tech nical action of the Cotton futures markets has been fairly consistent with normal supply–demand functioning ever since prices rose well above government supportlevels. In this daily chart of the 1947 October delivery (New York Cotton Exchange),the reader will ﬁnd a variety of familiar technical formations, including criticaltrendlines, a Head-and-Shoulders top that was never completed (no breakout), andSupport–Resistance phenomena much the same as appear in stock charts. Doubletrendlines are not at all unusual in Cotton charts. OCTOBER COTTON 1947 FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBERS7S7H735.00 34.00 33.0032.00 31.0030.00 29.00 28.00 27.00 81 52 21 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20???? AU3772_book.fm Page 305 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 306 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

307 chapter 16.1 Technical Analysis of Commodity Charts, Part 2 A 21st Century Perspective In the search for the Philosopher’s Stone more sweat and money have been put into the area of commodities and futures than were ever expended inthe securities arena. There is a simple reason for this. Great fortunes aremade and lost with much greater rapidity in the futures area than in secu-rities. Of all the great dramatic moments in stock market history few are somemorable as the great Hunt silver market, or Soros facing off against theBank of England, or of gold soaring to $1000 an ounce. And the saga con-tinues in 2005. $50 oil? $60? $70? $100? And the effects, economic and psy-chological! In dimly lit garrets and brightly lit computer rooms thousandsof researchers concoct systems to trade these markets — corn, soybeans,silver, copper... Rocket Scientists At times individual traders and groups of traders have plundered (har-vested?) these markets for fairy tale proﬁts. I know whereof I speak, havingbeen a principal in California’s ﬁrst licensed commodity trading advisorwhich was founded by the NASA rocket scientist R.T. Wieckowicz. Duringthe 1970s as the stock markets ground futilely around the 1000 level on theDow the futures markets returned yearly gains in the 100% range. Consis-tently. For years. Those were the years of the California systems traders andthe beginning of computerized trading. From the primeval slime of NASAthe rocket scientists emerged to create a renaissance in market technology.At the time it seemed clear that science and genius had at last conqueredthe markets and that clients would come buzzing from the world over likebees to a honey pot and that the rivers of proﬁts would last forever. Theydid last for some time, and then the markets changed. Mechanical systemswhich cut through the markets like a reaper in a wheat ﬁeld in bull marketsgrind up capital like sausage in sideways markets. Science and genius wererevealed as the happy combination of man, moment, system, and market. AU3772_book.fm Page 307 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Turtles? During the 1980s from the sea came crawling the Turtles. Progeny of the

protean trading wizard, Richard Dennis, the Turtles again harvested outsizeproﬁts from the markets, running it is said in the 80% yearly range. The so-called Turtles got their name from a comment that Dennis is reported tohave made that traders were made not born and he was going to raise traderslike turtles. Additional reading about the Turtles is available in Jack Schwa-ger’s fascinating book and books, Market Wizards, et al. Schwager’s books are required reading for aspiring traders. And, the trading manual of theTurtles will be found in Appendix E of this ninth edition. This workbook,written by Curtis Faith, an original Turtle, contains virtually all of the ele-ments necessary in a trader’s systems and procedures manual. The manualwas prepared according to the training Dennis gave his Turtles. Serioustraders do not operate without some such document. Certainly all of theserious traders I have known (a considerable number) have had fully devel-oped manuals like the Turtle workbook. I have attached the Turtle workbookas an appendix rather than others in my possession because it is publiclyavailable at originalturtles.org and because it is beautifully articulated. In the late ’90s the Turtles were made into turtle soup in the futures markets as the majority of systems traders wound up as hamburger meat. Is there a moral? Yes. The markets giveth and the markets taketh away. Science andgenius are again revealed to be the happy combination of man, method, moment,and market. The Turtle system is basically an adaptation of Richard Donchian’s chan nel breakout system. In the Donchian system the trader goes long when the20 day high is broken and sells and goes short when the 20 day low is broken.In the 1970s Dunn and Hargitt evaluated a number of mechanical tradingsystems and found that Donchian’s system was superior to the others eval-uated at that time. Will Donchian’s system still work? Yes, in broadly trend-ing markets. Will the Turtle system still work? Yes, in broadly trendingmarkets. And, like virtually all mechanical systems they don’t know whetherthey are in a broadly trending market or not. They are blind. All they seeare ones and zeros. The addition to these systems of prudently applied chartanalysis will immeasurably improve their performance and risk characteristics. The Application of Edwards and Magee’s Methods to 21st Century Futures Markets During my career as a Commodity Trading Advisor I have known a number of successful traders and advisors who used what I would describe as Mageetype chart analysis to make their trades. Often there were other elementsinput into their decision making process, but manual charting was a keyfactor in their operations. Some of these traders used simple trendline anal-ysis with price or volume ﬁlters and some used a combination of trendlinesand support and resistance. All were trend followers. AU3772_book.fm Page 308 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 16.1: A 21st Century Perspective 309 Having looked at the futures markets with some attention over the past several years it seems to me that there is no reason why chart analysis should not work as well now as it has always worked. Essentially the questionsraised by securities trading are the same as those presented by futurestrading in the analysis of a chart. Is there a trend? Where are support andresistance? Is there a breakout? Are there waves and wavelets? How do youenter and how do you exit? The great bug-a-boo of securities traders coming to the futures trading is the speed of the game. Like college football players stepping up to theNFL there is a brutal learning curve and rookies are the most likely to getkilled. I am not going to make any effort here to present a primer for newfutures traders. Rather I will look at some futures charts at the end of thischapter in order to show the journeyman that chart analysis can be used asa decision making method in these dramatic markets. Again, chart analysishas the weakness (or strength) of being a qualitative process. It will not makedecisions for the average trader, as a mechanical system will. On the other hand a breakout is a breakout. A gap is a gap, leaving aside the question of limit move gaps for the moment. A trend is a trend. And hereis the great advantage that a ﬁrm grasp of charting methods can give thepractitioner. It can give him the perspective to recognize the essential nature of the market at hand and choose to wait or to enter. Mechanical methods not having the qualitative discrimination of an experienced chartist will blindly take everytrade until they are out of money. The experienced chart analyst can sit backand say, this market has not yet made a bottom and the time to begin tradingit long has not yet come. Or, he can recognize the essential differences betweena trading and a trending market and adjust his tactics accordingly. As Magee noted in Chapter 16: Under what might be called normal market conditions, thosechart patterns which reﬂect trend changes in most simple andlogical fashion work just as well with commodities as with stocks.Among these we would list Head-and-Shoulders formations,Rounding Tops and Bottoms, and basic trendlines. Trendlines, infact, are somewhat better deﬁned and more useful in commoditiesthan in stocks. Other types of chart formations which are associ-ated with stocks with short-term trading or with group distribu-tion and accumulation, such as the Triangles, Rectangles, Flags,etc., appear less frequently in commodities and are far less reliableas to either direction or extent of the ensuing move. Support andResistance Levels, as we have already noted, are less potent incommodities than in stocks; sometimes they seem to work toperfection, but just as often they don’t. For similar reasons, gapshave relatively less technical signiﬁcance. These words remain true today, as do virtually all the principles enun ciated in this book by Edwards and Magee and myself. In fact most futures AU3772_book.fm Page 309 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
charts if given to an analyst without issue identiﬁcation and dates would

not be identiﬁable as commodity charts. Of course when limit moves appearthe difference slaps one in the face. And on this point I might differ fromMagee slightly as regards gaps. Obviously limit move gaps have breathtaking signiﬁcance. But all in all it seems to me that gaps often say the samething to futures analysts that they say to stock analysts. Another mathematical reason might be adduced for the practicality of using simple chart analysis to trade futures. That is the tautalogical nature ofthe method. A trend is a trend, and a trendline is a trendline. If you enter asuspected trend (setting a protective stop at a technically analyzed place) andfollow the trend using Basing Points or observing the trendline and exiting ona break and reversal there will be no difference from doing the same with astock. Well, some difference. Due to the leverage you will be required to behyper aware of risk. In futures the penalty for holding a position through “anormal reaction” can be extremely harsh. That is why stops are so important. Stops Some traders set their stops using money management rules rather thantechnically identiﬁed points. I believe it is always better to ﬁnd the technicalpoint using a basing point, or support and resistance. To me it makes bettersense to adjust position size to control risk as I described in Chapter 26. Andthe use of money management stops has been very successful for manytraders. If some logical and disciplined method of setting and observing stops is not installed the trader is assured of failure. A money management stop is, simply enough, a stop calculated by deciding to risk 2% (or 3 or 4 or x%) of capital on a trade. For example,William O’Neil says that when a stock trader enters a position he should seta stop 8% under his entry price. This is a little crude, and not strictly speakinga money management stop, but is better than no risk calculation at all. In astricter sense, if we said that we wanted to limit the risk of the trade to 3%of capital we would use the 8% rule to set the stop and the Scott Procedurein Chapter 26 to determine the number of shares or contracts. The Turtlesystem in Appendix E contains similar procedures. Numerous studies haveproven that the size of the risk per trade — 1%, 2%, 3% — is directlycorrelated to equity volatility. A Variety of Methods As noted above a competent chart analyst may, in my opinion (and in Magee’sopinion), perform proﬁtably in the futures markets. There are other questions,of course, namely of character, temperament, intelligence, judgment, etc…, Letus leave those questions to Dr. Elder and conﬁne ourselves to the methodquestion. Chart analysts proved their abilities in the futures markets long beforecomputers existed. In fact long before in the case of Japanese rice traders,enlightening their efforts with candlesticks in the 18th century. AU3772_book.fm Page 310 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 16.1: A 21st Century Perspective 311 In the 1970s I saw point and ﬁgure chartists enjoy great success at Dean Witter and Merrill Lynch and other major ﬁrms in futures. I have seen least squares curve ﬁtters, moving average calculators and abstruse statisticalanalysts all enjoy proﬁtable outings in commodities. Not to speak of theTurtles who, using naturalistic high low systems, harvested good proﬁts inthe markets. As the saying goes, gateless is the gate and many are the waysto the great Dow. Although I have enjoyed great success myself usingmechanical number-driven systems over the years I have become more andmore attracted to “natural” systems. Chart analysis is essentially natural, asis the Turtle system. The Dow Theory is a natural system. In a natural systemno mathematical algorithm comes between the analyst and the data. Theessential, more, quintessential, weakness of all number-driven systems istheir blindness. They do not have the ability to discriminate between theforest and the trees. The experienced human chartist can see (and hear) the changing rhythms of the market and respond to them, responding to factorstoo subtle (and even subconscious) to program. But even natural systems,like the Turtle systems, can fall into this trap. When the markets learn thata lot of capital is waiting just above the 20 day high they will set a trap forit. For “markets” you may read “they.” If you apply the knowledge of thisbook to such situations you may avoid the trap. Everything You Need to Know as a Chart Analyst Trading Futures Jack be nimble. Jack be quick. Jack jump over the Candlestick. Yes, it is true,as the leverage is 10 times greater the speed is 10 times faster. I have illus-trated in Figure 179.5.3 the combination of a very tight trendline with a runday which it seems to me is a good current (21st century) combination.Otherwise the same qualities which make a good security trader make agood futures trader once the great leap to leveraged quick-ﬁre markets ismade. If you have been successful trading stocks you will probably besuccessful trading futures. And you probably should practice on stocks whilestudying futures. A sobering fact which I often recount to my graduatestudents is that Richard Wyckoff worked in the securities business for 8 yearsbefore making his ﬁrst investment. He studied the markets an additional 6years before trading. The Magee methodology will serve as a valuable cornerstone of your futures operations, and you must never cease studying. Mechanical systemshave their attractions, especially when seasoned with experienced chartanalysis. And no method will survive unless practiced with diligence, per-sistence, judgment, and patience. Time and again you will hear famoustraders say, when asked the secret of their success, “discipline.” What theymean by discipline is their ability to measure and contain the risk, set a stopbased on technical or money management procedures and then honor the stop.

The most important lesson the futures trader has to learn from Edwards and Magee is the ability to see the character of the market, trading ortrending, and then to

adjust his tactics accordingly. AU3772_book.fm Page 311 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The Return of the Great Markets of the ’70s

In the next great bull market in commodities, which may be about to occur as this book goes to press in 2006 (cf. following charts this chapter), thesemethods and systems derived from them will once again reap windfallproﬁts. I have attempted in this ninth edition of this classic book to show the book’s usefulness to the intelligent futures trader. Simple classical chartanalysis alone can be successful in the futures markets in the hands of anexperienced competent analyst. Natural mechanical systems such as theTurtle system have been effective and will be again, perhaps with sometweaking (such as imposing a chart analysis super-structure). Wave analysismethods such as the Basing Points procedure of Chapter 28 can be used.Even number driven systems, such as moving averages, can be successfulespecially if combined with chart analysis. FIGURE 179.5.1. A Rounding Bottom in Gold 1997-2004. “These patterns, when they occur after an extensive decline, are of outstanding importance, for they nearly always denote a change in Primary Trend and an extensive advance yet to come. That advance, however, seldom carries in a “skyrocket” effect which completes theentire Major Move in a few weeks. On the contrary, the uptrend that follows thecompletion of the pattern itself is apt to be slow and subject to frequent interruptions,tiring out the impatient trader, but yielding eventually a substantial proﬁt.” So saidRobert Edwards in remarking on Rounding Bottoms in stock charts. As may be seenhere this Rounding Bottom consists of a downtrend, a false signal off the DoubleBottom (upon which a pretty penny might have been made by the agile trader), anda handsome uptrend. And it all looks like a huge Rounding Bottom. @GC.C(D)Weekly COMEX L = 419.30 –0.70 –0.17% O = 419.80 C = 419.30 419.30 397.00 377.00359.00341.00325.00309.00394.00 279.00 266.00 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Created with TradeStation380.30 AU3772_book.fm Page 312 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 16.1: A 21st Century Perspective 313 FIGURE 179.5.2. A Rounding Bottom in Silver 1998-2005. The apparent Rounding Bottom in silver, combined with the same pattern in gold, would seem to cast a pall over the economic situation for some time to come in 2005. This coincides with theapparent long-term patterns setting up in the securities markets. If the best whichcan be hoped for in securities is a 1965-1982 kind of widely whipping market com-modities may react as they did in the 1970s. With tidal wave markets. These marketscan be traded by the well capitalized chart analyst who is well seasoned. Tyros ofcourse will lose money learning the game whatever markets they trade. Their chanceswill be immeasurably improved by applying the techniques taught in this book. Inaddition to the technical pattern pictured here there is every reason to suspect thata large fundamental shortage of silver bullion exists and will worsen. Ted Butler, atdoomgloom.com, is a long-term silver analyst (and associate of the editor) whoanticipates that a new silver blow off is coming. One wonders what Nelson andBunker Hunt are doing at present. A very cautious investor (like Warren Buffet whois reported to be long $1B (billion) silver bullion) may defeat futures silver volatilityby buying the bullion. @SI.P(D)Weekly COMEX L = 7.035 +0.077 +1.11% B = 0.000 A = 0.000 O = 6.985 Hi = 7.085 Lo = 6.980 C = 7.045 V = 14 5 8.000 7.045 6.000 5.000 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Created with TradeStation6.00 AU3772_book.fm Page 313 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 179.5.3. Silver May 2005. While the long-term silver outlook may be bull

ish, the short term will be very volatile, especially for the thinly capitalized trader. Then short-term tactics must be adopted. The island top here at 1 is a gentle invitationto the trader to take his proﬁts and be gone. Even to short, with a stop just abovethe high. The run day after 1 adds a note of urgency to the invitation. The gap ispunishment for the hard of hearing and a bonus for the quick witted (everybodywho survives in futures is either quick witted or extremely well ﬁnanced). The stopmoves down to the top of the gap day, then to the top of the next gap day and forthe very apt proﬁts are taken on the next run day down. On the principle of sellweakness, buy weakness. The tight trendline at 2 crossed by the heavy run day is abuy signal with the stop moving to the bottom of the gap at 3 where it is taken outa few days later by the long range day down. The run day at 4 is a short signal withthe stop being at the day’s high. Is it necessary to say that short-term futures tradingcan be quite rapid? Or, there is always bullion. Or associated stock plays. SIK05(D) -Daily COMEX L = 6.900 –0.003 –0.04% B = 6.920 A = 6.935 O = 6.900 Hi = 6.905 Lo = 6.900 C = 6.900 V = 6 8.000 7.500 7.000 6.903 6.500 6.000 AM J JA SO N D 0 5 F M AM Created with TradeStation2341 AU3772_book.fm Page 314 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 16.1: A 21st Century Perspective 315 FIGURE 179.5.4. Treasury Bonds. The double pump triple nod head fake is a specialty of futures markets. The fear and greed factor is multiplied by 10, like the leverage. But here in September 2004 Bonds we can see how simple chart analysiscan serve the trader. The downtrend from March (1) is completely manageable witha simple trendline and trend analysis. The end of the downtrend in May is markedby two strong run days. At any rate the stop would have been at May 1st, using aBasing Point kind of analysis. If we were going to trade it long here this would havebeen traded for a scalp (because we don’t know whether there is a bottom or not).The break of the trendline at 2 is an engraved invitation to get long and the trendlineat 3 keeps us long until broken by the signal day at the end of July. Which wouldput us short again, a two-day trade as the signal day on the trendline at 4 puts uslong again. Obviously we are using very tight, very short trendlines and long rangedays (or run days) as signals. The use of the run day as a signal, combined withother indicators, is common in my experience among traders. USU04(D) -Daily CBOT L = 110 24/32 +1 24/32 +1.61% 0 = 109 1/32 C = 110 24/32 114 16/32115 108 107 106 105 102113 16/32 112 16/32111 16/32 109 16/32 108 16/32 104 16/32 103 16/32 102 16/32110 16/32110 24/32 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Created with TradeStation AU3772_book.fm Page 315 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 179.5.5. Commodity Research Bureau Index. April 2005 Futures. Just as

triangles often work in securities they often work in futures. Breakaway gap. Second breakaway gap. Runaway gap. Second runaway gap. The formation before the secondrunaway gap is somewhat quizzical — it might be considered a ﬂag, but it has thesame effect, and depending on the trader’s operating methods the stop would be justunder the gap/runday anyway. It will not take much study for the reader to see thatthe principles of chart analysis used in this entire book are validated here. The maindifference is in the setting of stops, and in fact, the same stop methods may be usedif the trader is sufﬁciently well ﬁnanced. CR0504-CRB Index (Apr 2005) 306.00 2.25 0.74% 306 303 300 297 294 291 288 285 282279276273270 Sep Oct Nov Dec 05 Feb Mar 1998–2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. Terms of use apply. AU3772_book.fm Page 316 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 16.1: A 21st Century Perspective 317 FIGURE 179.5.6. Commodity Research Bureau. Long-term view. It does not take much analysis of this 10 year CRB chart to see a huge double bottom, and to consider its implications. If China and India are going to compete with us for natural resourceswe could see an entirely new economic paradigm, if the reader will excuse the term.Clearly there is a bull market in commodities. In Chapter 42, Pragmatic PortfolioManagement, it is suggested that capital should ﬂow to markets that are moving,rather than remaining committed to markets which are mired in mulish trends.Furthermore it is suggested in that chapter that a good natural hedge is to go longthe uptrend of an index and short the components of it which are in downtrends.The CRB is somewhat thin but might lend itself to this strategy. $CRY0(D) -Weekly NYBOT L = 294.09 +1.03 +0.35% B = 0.00 A = 0.00 O = 293.08 Hi = 294.12 Lo = 292.96 C = 294.09 V = 0 307.00 294.09 288.00270.00253.00237.00222.00208.00195.00 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Created with TradeStation 234.65 AU3772_book.fm Page 317 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 318 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

319 chapter seventeen A Summary and Some Concluding Comments We began our study of technical stock chart analysis in Chapter 1 with a discussion of the philosophy underlying the technical approach to the prob lems of trading and investing. We could ask that the reader turn back nowand review those few pages to recapture a perspective on the subject whichmust have been dimmed by the many pages of more or less arduous readingthat have intervened. It is easy, in a detailed study of the many and fascinating phenomena which stock charts exhibit, to lose sight of the fact that they are only therather imperfect instruments by which we hope to gauge the relative strengthof supply and demand, which, in turn, exclusively determines what way, how fast, and how far a stock will go. Remember that, in this work, it doesn’t matter what creates the supply and the demand. The fact of their existence and the balance between them are all that count. No man, no organization (and we mean this verbatim et literatim) can hope to know and accurately appraise the inﬁnity of factual data, mass moods, individual necessities, hopes, fears, estimates, andguesses which, with the subtle alterations ever proceeding in the generaleconomic framework, combine to generate supply and demand. But thesummation of all these factors is reﬂected virtually instantaneously in themarket. The technical analyst’s task, then, is to interpret the action of the market itself — to read the ﬂux in supply and demand mirrored therein. For thistask, charts are the most satisfactory tools thus far devised. Lest you becomeenrapt, however, with the mechanics of the chart — the minutiae of dailyﬂuctuations — ask yourself constantly, “What does this action really meanin terms of supply and demand?” Judgment is required, and perspective, and a constant reversion to ﬁrst principles. A chart, as we have said and should never forget, is not a perfecttool; it is not a robot; it does not give all the answers quickly, easily, andpositively, in terms that anyone can read and translate at once into certainproﬁt. We have examined and tested exhaustively many technical theories, systems, indexes, and devices which have not been discussed in this book, AU3772_book.fm Page 319 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
chieﬂy because they tend to short-circuit judgment, to see the impossible by

a purely mechanical approach to what is far from a purely mechanicalproblem. The methods of chart analysis that have been presented are thosewhich have proved most useful, because they are relatively simple and, forthe most part, easily rationalized; because they stick closely to ﬁrst principles;because they are of a nature that does not lead us to expect too much ofthem; because they supplement each other and work well together. Let us review these methods brieﬂy. They fall roughly into four categories. 1. The Area Patterns or formations of price ﬂuctuation which, with their concomitant volume, indicate an important change in the supply–de-mand balance. They can signify Consolidation, a recuperation orgathering of strength for renewed drive in the same direction as the trend which preceded them. Or they can indicate Reversal, the play-ing out of the force formerly prevailing, and the victory of the op-posing force, resulting in a new drive in the reverse direction. In either case, they may be described as periods during which energy isbrewed or pressure built up to propel prices in a move (up or down)which can be turned to proﬁt. Some of them provide an indicationas to how far their pressure will push prices. These chart formations,together with volume, furnish the technician with most of his “getin” and many of his “get out” signals. Volume, which has not been discussed in this book as a feature apart from price action, and which cannot, in fact, be utilized as atechnical guide by itself, deserves some further comment. Rememberthat it is relative, that it tends to naturally run higher near the top of a Bull Market than near the bottom of a Bear Market. Volume “followsthe trend,” i.e., it increases on rallies and decreases on reactions inan overall uptrend, and vice versa. But use this rule judiciously; donot place too much dependence on the showing of a few days, andbear in mind that even in a Bear Market (except during Panic Moves),there is always a slight tendency for activity to pick up on rises.(“Prices can fall of their own weight, but it takes buying to put themup.”) A notable increase in activity, as compared with previous days or weeks, may signify either the beginning (breakout) or the end (cli-max) of a move, temporary or ﬁnal. (More rarely, it may signify a“shakeout.”) Its meaning, in any given case, can be determined byits relation to the price pattern. 2. Trend and trendline studies supplement Area Patterns as a means of determining the general direction in which prices are moving and ofdetecting changes in direction. Although lacking, in many cases, thenice deﬁnition of Area Formations, they may frequently be used for“get in” and “get out” purposes in short-term trading, and theyprovide a defense against premature relinquishment of proﬁtablelong-term positions. AU3772_book.fm Page 320 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seventeen: A Summary and Some Concluding Comments 321 FIGURE 198. Spiegel’s Bear Market started in April 1946 from a Symmetrical T riangle which changed into a Descending Triangle. Note the Pullback in June, and two Flags. This history is carried on in Figur e 199. SPIEGEL, INCORPORATED SM 1946–1947 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 1716 15 14 Sales 100’s 12510075502561320274111825181522296132027310 172431714212851219 26 291623307 1421284 111825181522 18152229G AU3772_book.fm Page 321 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 199. Overlapping Figure 198, this chart shows the move which ensued fr om the wide Descending Triangle

of early 1947, culminating in a Reversal Day on May 19. Note various Minor and Intermediate Resistance Levels. SPIEGEL, INC. SM 1946–1947 G G OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 Sales 100’s 125 100 7550255121926291623307142128411182518 15221815222951219 26 31017247 142128 51219262916 233061320 31 AU3772_book.fm Page 322 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seventeen: A Summary and Some Concluding Comments 323 3. Support and Resistance Levels are created by the previous trading and investment commitments of others. They may serve to indicate where it should pay to take a position, but their more importanttechnical function is to show where a move is likely to slow downor end, and at what level it should encounter a sudden and importantincrease in supply or demand. Before entering a trade, look both to the pattern of origin for an indication of the power behind the move, and to the history of Sup-port–Resistance for an indication as to whether it can proceed with-out difﬁculty for a proﬁtable distance. Support–Resistance studiesare especially useful in providing “cash-in” or “switch” signals. 4. Broad market background, including the Dow Theory, should not be scorned. This time-tested device designates the (presumed) prevail-ing Major Trend of the market. Its signals are “late,” but, with all itsfaults (and one of these is the greatly augmented following it hasacquired in recent years, resulting in a considerable artiﬁcial stimu-lation of activity at certain periods), it is still an invaluable adjunctto the technical trader’s Toolkit. The general characteristics of the various stages in the stock market’s great Primary Bull and Bear cycles, which were discussed in our Dow Theorychapters, should never be lost to view. This brings us back to the idea of perspective, which we emphasized as essential to successful technical analysis at the beginning of our summary. That stock which does not, to some degree,follow the Major Trend of the market as a whole is an extraordinary excep-tion. More money has been lost by buying perfectly good stocks in the laterand most exciting phases of a Bull Market, and then selling them, perhapsfrom necessity, in the discouraging conditions prevailing in a Bear Market,than from all other causes combined! So keep your perspective on the broad market picture. The basic eco nomic tide is one of the most important elements in the supply–demandequation for each individual stock. It may pay to buck “the public,” but itdoes not ever pay to buck the real underlying trend. Major Bull and Bear Markets have recurred in fairly regular patterns throughout all recorded economic history, and there is no reason to supposethat they will not continue to recur for as long as our present system exists.It is well to keep in mind that caution is in order whenever stock prices areat historically high levels, and that purchases will usually work out welleventually when they are at historically low levels. If you make known your interest in your charts, you will be told that the chart analyst (like the Dow theorist) is always late — that he buys afterprices have already started up, maybe not until long after the “smart money”has completed its accumulation, and that he sells after the trend has unmis-takably turned down. Partly true, as you have no doubt already discoveredfor yourself. But the secret of success lies not in buying at the very lowestpossible price and selling at the absolute top. It is in the avoidance of large AU3772_book.fm Page 323 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
losses

. (Small losses you will have to take, and as quickly as possible as warranted by the situation.) One of the most successful “operators” Wall Street has ever seen, a multimillionaire and a nationally respected citizen today, is reputed to have said that never in his entire career had he succeeded in buying within5 points of the bottom or selling within 5 points of the top! EN: Bernard Baruch, if I am not mistaken.

And for perspective, the 5 points mentioned constituted roughly 10% of the market at that time. Before we leave this treatise on theory and proceed to the more practical matters of application and market tactics which are the province of thesecond part of this book, the reader will, we hope, forgive one more admo-nition. There is nothing in the science of technical analysis that requires onealways to have a position in the market. There is nothing that dictates thatsomething must happen every day. There are periods — sometimes longmonths — when the conservative trader’s best policy is to stay out entirely.And there is nothing in technical analysis to compel the market to go aheadand complete (in a few days) a move that the charts have foretold; it willtake its own good time. Patience is as much a virtue in stock trading as inany other human activity. AU3772_book.fm Page 324 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

325 chapter 17.1 Technical Analysis and Technology in the 21st Century: The Computer and the Internet, Tools of the Investment/ Information Revolution The purpose of this chapter is to put computer and information technology into proper context and perspective for chart-oriented technical analysts. In John Magee’s time, in his ofﬁce in Springﬁeld, MA, there was a chart room — a room ﬁlled with all-age chartists from teenagers to senior citizens.These people spent all their time keeping charts and assisting Magee ininterpretation. These were wonderful and intelligent people who developedmarvelous insights into the stocks they charted. They created the manualcharts which adorn this book. Today that room and all those technicians have been replaced by a beige (sometimes lime) box which sits crowded on our desktops and which is often worshipped as a fount of insight and wisdom: “Computer, analyze my stocks.” Unfortunately the computer does not have the discrimination and pat tern recognition ability of the people in that chart room. Undeterred by thisweakness in computer technology, traders and investors have poured incal-culable money and effort into computer-aided research attempting to dis-cover the keys to market success. More money has been spent in this effortthan was ever put into the search for the philosopher’s stone. Much of itwas wasted, but it has not all been spent in vain. In some areas it has beenquite productive. But no fail-safe algorithm has, in spite of all this effort,been found for investment success, and certainly not for stock trading. Theresearch has demonstrated that even the algorithm of “buy low sell high” has fatal ﬂaws in it. In order to fully understand the importance of the computer, the reader should appreciate some basic differences in participants’ approach to themarkets. Or, we might say, schools of analysts/investors. We will not botherwith fundamental analysts here, as they are of a different religious persua-sion. Chart analysts, or we could say, Magee-type technical analysts, pretty AU3772_book.fm Page 325 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
much conﬁne their analysis of the market to the interpretation of bar charts. (This does not mean that their minds must be closed to other inputs. On thecontrary — anything which works.) Another chart analyst school uses pointand ﬁgure charts, and another candlestick charts. Another breed of technicalanalysts takes basic market data, price and volume, and uses them as theinput to statistical routines which calculate everything from moving aver-ages to mystically designated indicators like %R or Bollinger Bands(cf. Appendix C). These are called statistical or number-driven technicalanalysts. All these

analysts, or what have you, attempt to invest or trade stocks and other ﬁnancial instruments (not including options) using someform of what is called technical analysis — that is they all take, as input totheir analysis, hard data, data which people cannot lie about, misrepresent,and manipulate, unlike the data which are input to fundamental analysis(earnings, cash ﬂow, sales, etc.). Using number-driven or, if you will, statistical technical analysis, these latter schools attempt, just as chart analysts do, to predict market trends andtrading opportunities. This can be more than a little difﬁcult since the stockand bond markets are behavioral markets. That is, the stock markets aredriven by human emotion, as perhaps the most important of many variablesinﬂuencing price. And human emotion and behavior, its manic and itsdepressive elements, have not yet been quantiﬁed. But some chart analystsbelieve that they can recognize it when they see it on the charts. In another area, the computer has yielded much more dramatic and proﬁtable results. But that is in a model-driven market, namely the optionsmarkets. Quantitative analysts, those who investigate and trade the optionsmarkets, are a breed apart from technical analysts. In an interesting irony,emotion-driven markets, the stock markets, are used as the basis for deriv-atives, or options whose price is determined largely by the operation ofalgorithms called models.

Quantitative analysts believe, as does this editor, that the options markets can be successfully gamed through quantitativeanalysis. Results of skilled practitioners indicate this belief is accurate. Alas, life is not so simple for the simple stock trader. Stock prices having nothing to do with mathematics, except for being expressed as natural num-bers, are not susceptible to easy prediction as to their future direction. Noteven with Magee chart analysis or any other form of analysis — technical,fundamental, or psychic. (From a theoretical point of view each trade madebased on a chart analysis should be looked at as an experiment made toconﬁrm a probability. The experiment is ended quickly if the trend does notdevelop.) The fact that chart analysis is not mechanizable is important. It isone reason chart analysis continues to be effective in the hands of a skilledpractitioner. Not being susceptible to mechanization, counter-strategies can-not be brought against it, except in situations whose meaning is obvious toeveryone, for instance, a large important Support or Resistance Level or aglaringly obvious chart formation. These days everyone looks at charts totrade even if they don’t believe in their use. In these obvious cases somemarket participants will attempt to push prices through these levels in order AU3772_book.fm Page 326 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.1: Technical Analysis and Technology in the 21st Century 327 to proﬁt from volatility and confusion. Indeed, human nature has not changed much since Jay Gould and Big Jim Fisk. When these manipulations of price occur, they create false signals — bull and bear traps. Interestingly, the failure of these signals may constitutea reliable signal in itself — but in the direction opposite to the original signal. The Importance of Computer Technology Of what use and importance then is this marvelous tool — the most inter-esting tool man ( homo) has acquired since papyrus? (Numerous computer software packages are available which are capable of executing the functionsdescribed in the following discussion.) If the computer can’t deﬁnitivelyidentify proﬁtable opportunities, what good is it? Probably the most important function the computer has for the Magee Analyst is the automation of rote detail work. Data can be gathered bydownloading from database servers. Charts can be called up in an instant.Portfolio accounting and maintenance and tax preparation can be disposedof with one hand while drinking coffee with the other. All in all this mightmake it sound as though the computer is a great tool, but with a pretty dulledge. Not strictly true. There is at least one great leap forward for MageeAnalysts with this tool, leaving aside the rote drudgery it saves. This greatadvantage is portfolio analysis. In Resources (Appendix D), a complex portfolio analysis of the kind used by professional traders (Blair Hull and OptionsResearch Inc.) is illustrated. Even simpler portfolios of the average investorcan beneﬁt from the facilities afforded by most portfolio programs, either onthe net or in commercial software packages (locations and software identiﬁedin Resources). Another advantage is the ability to see basic data displayed in many different forms: point and ﬁgure charts, candlestick charts, close-onlycharts — these are prepared in the ﬂick of an eyelash, and may indeedcontribute to understanding the particular situation under the magnifyingglass. The effortless quantiﬁcation of some aspects of analysis may beuseful — volume studies, for instance, and given the popularity of movingaverages, seeing the 50- and 200-day moving averages can be interesting.These moving averages are considered signiﬁcant by many market partici-pants — even fundamental analysts. The analysis of any of these should beconsidered in relation to the current state of the market as understood bythe careful chart analyst. But what about (the strangely named) stochastics, Bollinger Bands, %R, MACD, Moving Averages (plain vanilla, exponential, crossover, etc.),price/volume divergence, RSI (plain vanilla and Wilder), VP Trend, TCI,OBV, Upper/Lower Trading Bands, ESA Trading Bands, and AcmDis? Well,there is a certain whiff of alchemy to some of them, and some have someusefulness sometimes. And, all systems work beautifully at least twice intheir lives: in research, and in huge monumental Bull Markets. These numberdriven indicators are also the times when trading genius is most likely to be AU3772_book.fm Page 327 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
discovered. These are brieﬂy explored by a former editor in Appendix C. EN9: It is also true, as I have said, that you can drive a nail with a screwdriver. And the inventor of a tool may be fabulously successful with it while its adopterslose their assets. It is also possible that the excess of technical information created by these

indicators may be like the excess of fundamental information — anothershell to hide the pea under, another magician’s trick to keep the investorfrom seeing what is truly important, and what is necessary and sufﬁcient toknow to trade well. Perhaps the investor would be better off with a behav-ioral model, since the markets are behavioral. Number-driven technical anal-ysis can do many things, some like Dr. Johnson’s dog which walked on itshind legs, but they cannot put the market in perspective. Only the humanmind can do that. Number-driven models after all do not consider skirtlengths, moon cycles, sun spots, the length of the economic cycle, the bullishor bearish state of the market (if Bear Markets still exist) EN9: A wry ironical comment written before the market crash of the 2000s. In the end, the human brain is still the only organ capable of synthesizing all this quantitative andqualitative information and assessing those elements which cannot bereduced to ones and zeros. The educated mind is still the best discriminatorof patterns and their contexts. Summary 1 The computer is a tool, a powerful tool, but a tool nonetheless. It is not anintelligent problem solver or decision maker. We use a mechanical ditchdigger to dig a ditch, but not to ﬁgure out where the ditch should be. The multitude of indicators and systems should be viewed with a skep tical eye and evaluated within the context of informed chart analysis. Some-times an indicator or technique will work for one user or its inventor butstrangely mislead the chart analyst who tries to use it — or buys it, evenbased on a veriﬁed track record. So the experienced investor keeps his methods and analysis simple until he has deﬁnitive knowledge of any technique, method, or indicator he wouldlike to add to his repertoire. And, most of all, he depends on his ownobservations and experience to evaluate his own and others trading tech-niques. Other Technological Developments of Importance to the Technical Magee Analyst and All Investors The computer is not the only technological development of interest to the technical investor. A number of information revolution technologies need tobe put in perspective. These are, in broad categories, the Internet and all itsfacilities, developments in electronic markets, and advances in ﬁnance andinvestment theory and practice. This last is treated in Chapter 17.2. AU3772_book.fm Page 328 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.1: Technical Analysis and Technology in the 21st Century 329 Due to the enormous body of material on these subjects, no attempt will be made to explore these subjects exhaustively, but the general investor will be given the information he needs to know to put these subjects in theirproper perspective. Resources will point the analyst to avenues for furtherinvestigation if the need is felt. But ﬁrst of all, are there any technological developments of whatever sort which have made charting obsolete? No. Are there any developmentswhich have made trading a guaranteed success? No. The only sure thing isthat some huckster will claim to have a sure thing. Those who believe suchclaims are the victims of their own naivete. The Internet — the Eighth Wonder of the Modern World (EN9: Resources Appendix for the 9th Edition has been enormously expanded and is of paramount importance to modern investors.) The Internet has been called the most complex project ever built by man. And that is probably true. Complex, sprawling, idiosyncratic, it has some-thing for everyone, especially the investor. Every form of investment creatureknown to man has set up a site on the Internet, and waits like the hungryarachnid for the casual surfer. Brokers. Advisors — technical and fundamen-tal. Newspapers. News magazines. Newsgroups. Touts. Mutual funds.Mutual fund advisories. Critics and evaluators of all the above. Databasevendors. Chat rooms. Electronic marketplaces and exchanges. ECNs. Theonly unﬁlled niche that seems to exist is investment pornography. Perhapsnaked options will be able to satisfy this need. This is a bewildering array of resources. How does one sort them out? The implications of all this for the electronic or cyberinvestor may be furtherexpanded to indicate the services and facilities available: quotes and data;portfolio management and accounting; online interactive charting; automaticalerts to PBDAs (personal body digital assistants or gizmos carried on thebody, e.g., cell phone and handheld computer, etc.); analysis and advice;electronic boardrooms; electronic exchanges where trading takes place with-out intermediaries. Resources (Appendix D) supplies speciﬁcs on these cate gories. This chapter supplies perspective. It is one thing to contemplate thiscornucopia of facilities and another thing to appreciate the importance andpriority of its elements. What good are real time quotes if you are onlyinterested in reviewing your portfolio once a week, except for special occa-sions? What good are satellite alerts and virtual reality glasses to a long-terminvestor? It is easy for the investor with no philosophy or method to bedrawn into the maelstrom of electronic wonders and stagger out of it littlewiser and much poorer. Observe then the goods and services of all this which are of importance to the level-headed investor with his feet on the ground and his head out of AU3772_book.fm Page 329 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
the clouds. This hopefully not abstract investor, object of our attention here,

needs what? He needs data, charts, and a connection to a trading place. Data are available at the click of a mouse. A chart occupies the screen in anotherclick. Another click and a trade is placed. In the Internet Age it would betautological to attempt to describe this process in prose when live demon-strations are as close as the desktop computer and an Internet connection.A demonstration of this rather simple process (easy to say when one doesit without thinking) may be seen at locations linked in Resources (Appendix D). The trade will be made, of necessity, through a broker of some sort. Perhapsan electronic broker, or even a nonvirtual broker who communicates viatelephone. And shortly, if not already, an electronic pit where one matcheswits with a computer instead of a market maker or specialist. How long brokers will be necessary is a question that is up in the air in the new century. (The broker who earns his keep will always be with us,and welcome, too.) Electronic marketplaces where investors meet withoutthe necessity of a broker or specialist are already proliferating (see Resources), and will continue to gain the advantage for the investor over the trading pit,which is one of the last remaining edges the professionals hold over off-ﬂoortraders. Sufﬁce it to say that their initial phases will undoubtedly be periodsof dislocation, of risk and opportunity as their glitches are ironed out. Placing electronic orders, whether to an electronic exchange or to the NYSE, has certain inherent advantages over oral orders. No one can quarrelabout a trade registered electronically as opposed to orally where the poten-tial for disagreement exists. In addition, the trader has only handled the dataonce — rather than making an analysis, calling a broker, recording the trade,passing it to the portfolio. If he just hits the trade button and the transactionis routed through his software package, no one will have any doubt as towhere an error might lie. The manual method presents an opportunity forerror at each step. And rest assured, errors occur and can be disastrous totrading. The efﬁciency and ease of the process with a computer has much to recommend it — automation of trade processing, elimination of confusionand ambiguities, audit tracks, automation of portfolio maintenance, and,perhaps most important of all, automatic mark-to-market of the portfolio.(Marking-to-market is the practice of valuing a portfolio at its present marketvalue whether trades are open or closed.) Marking-to-Market This book might have been entitled Zen and the Art of Technical Analysis if that title were not so hackneyed and threadbare. It conveys, nonetheless, themessage of Zen in the art of archery, that of direct attachment to reality andthe importance of the present moment. In his seminal book The General Semantics of Wall Street (now Winning the Mental Game on Wall Street) John Magee inveighed at some length against the very human tendency to keep AU3772_book.fm Page 330 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.1: Technical Analysis and Technology in the 21st Century 331 two sets of books in the head — one recording proﬁts, open and closed, and another recording losses, but only closed losses. Open losses were not lossesuntil booked. Having an electronic portfolio accountant which refuses toparticipate in such self-deception has much to recommend it. If the portfoliois always marked to the market when the computer communicates with thedata vendor, or the trade broker, it is difﬁcult not to see red ink, and to seethat the equity of the account reﬂects all trades, open and closed. Separating the Wheat from the Chaff It requires a gimlet-eyed investor to pick his way through the mineﬁeld of temptations in electronic investing and number-driven technical analysis. Playing with the toys, seeing what the pundits have to say, and ﬁddling with“research” can subtly replace proﬁtable trading as the activity. Actually,almost all the research the Magee Analyst must do is addressed in this book. Chaff Chat rooms. Touts. News. Predictions. Punditry. Brokerage House buy, sell,hold, strong hold, weak buy, strong buy, and any other species of BrokerageHouse recommendation taken at face value. Remember brokerage ﬁrmssurvive by selling securities and make their money in general on activity.Actually, much of their money is made servicing their institutional clientsand distributing their clients’ shares to their retail cleintele – a blatant conﬂictof interest which blew up in their faces in the early 2000s resulting in manyﬁnes and some jail terms ( plus ça change...).

In the surging Clinton–Gore Bull Markets of the 1990s, all of these worked. In a serious Bear Market none ofthem will work. (EN9: A serious bear market started in earnest in 2000 and was correctly identiﬁed with Magee chart analysis as may be seen from the John MageeLetters at the edwards-magee.com web site. Summary 2 Never in the history of the markets have so many facilities for privateinvestors been available. The computer is necessary to take advantage ofthose facilities. Data may be acquired automatically via Internet or dial-up sites at little or no cost. A (as they say) plethora of web sites offer cyberinvestors everything from portfolio accounting to alerts sent to their personal body-carrieddevices (pagers, handheld PDAs, etc.). Some of these even offer real-time data, which is a way for the unso phisticated trader to go broke in real time. Many of these sites offer every kind of analysis from respectable tech nical analysis (usually too complicated) to extraterrestrial channeling. AU3772_book.fm Page 331 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Internet chat rooms will provide real-time touting and numerous rumors

to send the lemmings and impressionable scurrying hither and yon. But, one expects, not the readers of this book. Of more importance, the info-revolution and the computer will: 1. Relieve the analyst of manual drudgery, accelerate all the steps of analysis: data gathering, chart preparation, portfolio accounting, andanalysis and tax preparation. 2. Give the analyst virtually effortless portfolio accounting and mark to-market prices — a valuable device to have to keep the investorfrom mixing his cash and accrual accounting, as Magee says. 3. Enable processing of a hitherto unimaginable degree. An unlimited number of stocks may be analyzed. Choosing those to trade with acomputer will be dealt with in Chapter 21, Selection of Stocks to Chart. 4. Allow the investor to trade on ECNs or in electronic marketplaces where there are no pit traders or locals to ﬁddle with prices. AU3772_book.fm Page 332 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

333 chapter 17.2 Advancements in Investment Technology Part 1. Developments in Finance Theory and Practice Numerous pernicious and useless inventions, services, and products litter the Internet and the ﬁnancial industry marketplace; but modern ﬁnancetheory and technology is important and must be taken into considerationby the general investor. This chapter will explore the minimum the moder-ately advanced investor needs to know about advances in theory and prac-tice. And it will point the reader to further resources if he desires to continuemore advanced study. Instruments of limited (or non-) availability during the time of Edwards and Magee included exchange traded options on stocks, futures on averages and indices, options on futures and indices, securitized indices and averages, as the most important and as a partial list only. Undoubtedly one of the mostimportant developments of the modern era is the creation of trading instru-ments which allow the investor to trade and hedge the major indexes. Ofthese, the instruments created by the Chicago Board of Trade are of singularimportance. These are the CBOT ® DJIA SM Futures and the CBOT ® DJIA SM Futures Options, which are discussed in greater detail in Part 2 of thischapter. (EN9: Not so singular, perhaps. Probably of greater importance to readers of this book are the AMEX ishares, particularly DIA, SPY and QQQQ, instrumentswhich offer the investor direct participation in the major indices as though they werestocks.) General developments of great importance in ﬁnance theory and practice are found in the following sections. Options From the pivotal moment in 1973 when Fischer Black and his partner, MyronScholes, published their — excuse the usage — paradigm-setting Model tothe third millennium, the options/derivatives markets have grown fromnegligible to trillions of dollars a year. The investor who is not informedabout options is playing with half a deck. The subject, however, is beyondthe scope of this book, which hopes only to offer some perspective on thesubject and guides to the further study necessary for most traders and manyinvestors. AU3772_book.fm Page 333 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Something in the neighborhood of 30% or more of options expire worth

less. This is probably the most important fact to know about options. (There is a rule of thumb about options called the 60–30–10 rule: 60% are closed outbefore expiration, 10% are exercised, and 30% are “long at expiration,” mean-ing they are worthless.) Another fact to know about options is: in the ReaganCrash of 1987, out of the money puts bought at $.625 on October 16 wereworth hundreds of dollars on October 19 — if you could get the broker topick up the telephone and trade them. (The editor had a client at OptionsResearch, Inc. during that time who lost $57MM in 3 days and almostbrought down a major Chicago bank. He had sold too many naked puts.) The most sophisticated and skilled traders in the world make their livings (quite sumptuous livings, thank you) trading options. Educated estimates havebeen made that as many as 90% of retail options traders lose money. Thatcombined with the fact that by far it is the general public which buys (ratherthan sells) options should suggest some syllogistic reasoning to the reader. With these facts ﬁrmly ﬁxed in mind, let us put options in their proper perspective for the general investor. Options have a number of useful func-tions. They offer the trader powerful leverage. With an option he can controlmuch more stock than by the direct purchase of stock — his capital stretchesmuch further. So options are an ideal speculative instrument. (Exaggeratedleverage is almost always a characteristic of speculative instruments.) Butthey can also be used in a most conservative way — that is, as an insurancepolicy. For example, a position on the long security side may be hedged bythe purchase of a put on the option side. (This is not a speciﬁc recommen-dation to do this. Every speciﬁc situation should be evaluated by the prudentinvestor as to its monetary consequences.) The experienced investor may also use options to increase yield on his portfolio of securities. He may write covered calls, or write naked puts ona stock in order to acquire it at a lower cost (e.g., he sells out of the moneyoptions. This is a way of being long with the stock. If the stock comes backto the exercise price, he acquires the stock. If not, he pockets the premium.) There are numerous tactics of this sort which may be played with options. Note, played. Played because, for the general investor, the options game can be disastrous, as professionals are not playing. They are seriouslypracticing skills the amateur can never hope to master. Many ﬂoor traders,indeed, would qualify as idiot savants — they can compute the “fair value”of options in their heads and make money on price anomalies of $.625, or,as they call it, a “teenie.” For perspective, the reader may contemplate aconversation the editor had with one of the most important options tradersin the world. This market maker remarked casually that his fortune wasbuilt on teenies. The reader may imagine at some length what would benecessary for the general investor to make a proﬁt on $.625. This does not mean the general investor should never touch options. It just means he should be thoroughly prepared before he goes down to playthat game. In options trading traders speak of bull spreads, bear spreads, AU3772_book.fm Page 334 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.2: Advancements in Investment Technology 335 and alligator spreads. The alligator spread is an options strategy which eats the customer’s capital in toto. Among these strategies is covered call writing. This is a strategy which is touted as being an income producer on a stock portfolio. There is nopurpose in writing a call on a stock in which the investor is long — unlessthat stock is stuck in a clear congestion phase which is not due to expirebefore the option expires. And if the stock is in a downtrend it should beliquidated. But to write a call on a stock in a clear uptrend is to make oneselfbeloved of the broker, whose good humor improves markedly with accountactivity and commission income. The outcome of a covered call on an ascendingstock, of course, is that the writer (you, dear reader) has the stock called at theexercise price, losing his position and future appreciation, not to mention costs.The income is actually small consolation, a sort of booby prize — a way of cutting your proﬁts while increasing your costs. Quantitative Analysis The investor should be aware of another area of computer and investmenttechnology that has yielded much more dramatic and proﬁtable results, butthat is in a model-driven market — namely the options markets. Quantitativeanalysts, those who investigate and trade the options markets, are a breedapart from technical analysts. In an interesting irony, behavioral markets,the stock markets, are used as the basis for derivatives, or options whoseprice is determined largely by the operation of algorithms called models.The original model which for all intents and purposes created the modernworld of options trading was the Black–Scholes options analysis model,which assumed that the “fair value” of an option could be determined byentering ﬁve parameters into the formula: the strike price of the option; theprice of the stock; the “risk free” interest rate; the time to expiration; and thevolatility of the stock. The eventual universal acceptance of this model resulted in the deriva tives industry we have today. To list all the forms of derivatives availablefor trading today would be to expand this book by many pages, and it isnot the purpose of this book anyway. The purpose of this paragraph of thebook is to sternly warn general investors who are thinking of “beating thederivatives markets” that they should undergo rigorous training ﬁrst. Thealternative could be extremely expensive. At ﬁrst the traders who saw the importance of this model and used it to price options virtually skinned older options traders and the public, whotraded pretty much by the seat of the pants or the strength of their convic-tions, meaning human emotion. But professional losers learn fast, and nowall competent options traders use some sort of model or antimodel, or anti-antimodel to trade. And true to form, options sellers, who are largely pro-fessionals, take most of the public’s (who are buyers) money. This is the wayof the world. AU3772_book.fm Page 335 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Options Pricing Models and Their Importance

After the introduction of the Black–Scholes Model numerous other models followed, among them the Cox–Ross–Rubinstein, the Black Futures, etc. Forthe general investor, the message is this: he must be acquainted with thesemodels and what their functions are if he intends to use options. Rememberthat the model computes the “fair value” of the option. One way profession-als make money off amateurs is by selling overpriced options and buyingunderpriced options to create a relatively lower risk spread (for themselves).Not knowing what these values are for the private investor is like notknowing where the present price is for a stock. It is a piece of ignorance forwhich the professional will charge him a premium to be educated about.Unfortunately, many private options traders never get educated in spite ofpaying tuition over and over again. But ignorance is not bliss. It is expensive. Technology and knowledge works its way from innovators and creative geniuses through the ranks of professionals and sooner or later is dissemi-nated to the general public. Of course by that time the innovators have devel-oped new technology. Nonetheless, even assuming that professionals havesuperior tools and technology, the general investor must thoroughly educatehimself before using options. As it is not the province of this book to dissectoptions trading, the reader may ﬁnd references in Resources (Appendix D). Here it would not be untoward to mention one of the better books on options as a starting point for the moderately advanced and motivatedtrader. Lawrence McMillan’s Options as a Strategic Investment is necessary reading. In addition the newcomer may contact the Chicago Board OptionsExchange, the CBOE, at www.cboe.com, which has tutorial software. Futures on Indexes Futures, like options, offer the speculator intense leverage — the ability tocontrol a comparatively large position with much less capital than the pur-chase of the underlying commodity or index. Futures salesmen are fond ofpointing out the fact that, if you are margined at 5% or 10% of the contractvalue, a similar move in the price of the index will double your money. Theyare often not so conscientious about pointing out that a similar move againstyour position will wipe out your margin (actually earnest money). Unlike(long) options, a mishap in the market can result in more than the loss ofmargin. It can result in a deﬁcit account and debts to the broker — in otherwords, losses of more than 100%. For this among other reasons, it is wisenot to plunge into futures without considerable preparation. This preparation might well begin, for the adroit investor, with the reading of Schwager’s Technical Analysis, Schwager on Futures, currently one of the better books on the subject. But let us say that instead of using futures to speculate that we want to use them as a hedge for our portfolio of Dow–Jones DIAMONDS orportfolio of Dow–Jones stocks. Now we are purchasing insurance, rather AU3772_book.fm Page 336 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.2: Advancements in Investment Technology 337 than speculating. As an oversimpliﬁed example, the investor might see the failure of the DJIA to break through a top as the beginning of a congestion zone (a consolidation or reversal pattern). He could then hedge his positionby shorting the Dow–Jones futures. Now he is both long and short — longthe cash, short the futures. He would place a stop on the futures above hispurchase price to close the trade if the market continued rising. If the marketfell, he would maintain the futures position until he calculated that thereaction had passed its worst point, or until it were deﬁnitely analyzed tohave reversed. He would then take his proﬁts on the futures position (tax-able) but his cash position would be intact, and presumably the greatercapital gains on those positions would be safe from taxation, and also safefrom the costs and slippage and difﬁculties of reestablishing the stock position. Options on Futures and Indexes Conservative as well as speculative use may be made of options. For exam-ple, the investor might, after a vigorous spike upwards, feel that the S&P500;, or the SPDRs which he is long, were overbought. He might then buyan index put on the S&P; as a hedge against the expected decline. If it occurs,he collects his proﬁt on the option and his cash position in the S&P; isundisturbed. If the Index continues to climb he loses the option premium —an insurance policy he took out to protect his stock portfolio. Note well: The tactics described here are for the reader’s conceptual education. Before executing tactics of this kind, or any other unfamiliarprocedure, the investor should thoroughly inform himself and rehearse theprocedure, testing outcomes through paper trading before committing realcapital. He must, in short, ﬁgure out how you lose. A number of web sites offer facilities of this kind, and the investor may also build on his own computera research or paper trading portfolio segregated from his actual transactions. The trader might also choose to buy an option on a future. At the CBOT, the trader can trade both options and futures on the DJIA. These can be usedas the above examples for speculating or hedging, except in this case thesuccessful option buyer might wind up owning a futures contract insteadof the cash position. This could be disconcerting to one not accustomed tothe futures market, especially if large price anomalies between futures andcash occurred, as happened in 1987 and 1989 when futures prices went tohuge discounts to cash. A primary reason for employing the futures wouldbe for leverage. And the reason for using the options on futures would bethe analysis that uncertainty was in store and the wish to only risk theamount of the options premium. Obviously, a speculator can choose to forget the stock or futures part of the portfolio and trade only options. Before taking such a step the tradershould pass a postgraduate course. The proportion of successful amateuroption traders to successful professional traders is extremely skewed. In factone might say that all successful options traders are professionals. AU3772_book.fm Page 337 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT)

MPT is a procedure and process whereby a portfolio manager may classify and analyze the components of his portfolio in such a way as to, hopefully, be awareof and control risk and return. It attempts to quantify the relationship betweenrisk and return. Rather than analyzing only the individual instruments withina portfolio, MPT attempts to determine the statistical relationships among themembers of the portfolio and their relationships to the market. The processes involved in MPT analysis are (1) portfolio valuation, or describing the portfolio in terms of expected risk and expected return;(2) asset allocation, determining how capital is to be allocated among theclasses of instruments (bonds, stocks, etc.); (3) optimization, or ﬁnding thetrade-offs between risk and return in selecting the components of the port-folio; and (4) performance measurement, or the division of each stock’s riskinto systematic and security-related classes. How important is this for the general investor? Not very. And there is a large question among pragmatic analysts, such as the editor, as to itspragmatic usefulness for professionals, although they cling to it as to a lifering in a shipwreck. Mandelbrot observed in articles (“A Multifractal WalkDown Wall Street”) and letters in the Scientiﬁc American (February 1999 and June 1999) that MPT discards about 5% of statistical experience as if it didn’texist. (Although it [the experience] does.) And he observed that the ignoredexperience includes “10 sigma” market storms which are blamed for portfoliofailures as though it is the fault of the data instead of the fault of the process. The Wonders and Joys of Investment Technology Are there any other innovations in ﬁnance and investment theory of whichthe general investor should be aware? (See Chapter 42 for discussion ofVAR.) Well, it never hurts to know everything, and the very best profession-als not only are aware of everything, but are in the constant process of ﬁndingnew wrinkles and glitches and anomalies. But, as Magee would say, whatis necessary and sufﬁcient to know (see Winning the Mental Game on Wall Street)? Absolute certainty is the hallmark of religious extremists and the naive, who do not know what they do not know. So I will remark that probably this book contains either what is necessary and sufﬁcient for the investor toknow about these matters, and/or guides the reader to further study. And, nota bene, any number of little old ladies with a chart, a pencil, and previous editions of this book have beaten the pants off professional stockpickers with supercomputers and MPT and Nobel Laureates and who knowswhat other resources. I personally know investment groups which have thrownenormous resources into the development of real-time systems which were inresearch 100% successful in beating the market. The only reality glitch was thatthe systems required so much computer power they could not be run quicklyenough in real time to actually trade in the markets. Philosopher’s stone redux. AU3772_book.fm Page 338 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.2: Advancements in Investment Technology 339 Part 2. Futures and Options on Futures on the Dow–Jones Industrial Index at the Chicago Board of Trade (EN9: The general investor MUST be aware that the methods and techniques described in this chapter are for advanced practitioners. Careless use of the described instruments can be extremely damaging to a portfolio.) Investment and Hedging Strategies Using the Chicago Board of Trade DJIA SM Futures Contract A futures contract is the obligation to buy or sell a speciﬁc commodity on or by some speciﬁed date in the future. For example, if one went long cornfutures he would be obligated to accept delivery of corn on the deliverydate, unless he sold the contract prior to the settlement date. Shorting thecontract would obligate the seller to deliver corn unless he offset (by repur-chase) the contract. The “commodity” in our present case is the basket ofstocks represented by the DJIA Futures index. All futures contracts specifythe date by which the transaction must conclude, known as the “settlementdate,” and how the transaction will be implemented, known as “delivery.”The DJIA futures contract price closely tracks the price of the Dow JonesIndustrials as computed from stock market values. The value of the future is found by multiplying the index price of the futures contract by $10. For example, if the futures index price is 10000, thevalue of the contract is 10000 ⋅ $10 = $100,000. So the buyer or seller of the futures contract is trading approximately $100,000 worth of stocks at thatDow Futures level. The value may be higher or lower owing to severalfactors, for example, cost of carry, which I will discuss below. Settlement of Futures Contracts All futures contracts must be “settled.” Some futures are settled by delivery.This is the famous nightmare of ﬁnding 5000 bushels of soybeans deliveredon your front lawn. Dow Index futures “settle” (are delivered) in cash. Theshort does not dump a basket of Dow stocks on the yard of the long. Thuson the settlement date of the contract the settlement price is $10 times aﬁgure called the “Special Opening Quotation,” a value calculated from theopening prices of the member stocks of the Dow Future following the lastday of trading in the futures contract. This value is compared to the pricepaid for the contract when the trade initiated. For example, if the Dow Futureis 10000 at expiration, a long who bought the contract at 9000 receives $10,000($10 ⋅ 1000) from the short. AU3772_book.fm Page 339 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Marking to Market

This $10,000, however, is paid daily over the life of the contract, rather than in one payment upon expiration of the contract. It is paid as successive daily“margin” payments. These payments are not really margin, but are in effect“earnest money” or a performance bond. And the practice of squaring upaccounts at the end of every day’s trading is called “marking to market.”These daily payments are determined based on the difference between theprevious day’s settlement price and the contract settlement price at the closeof trading each day. As a practical example, if the settlement price of June Dow Index futures increases from 9800 to 9840 from May 17 to May 18, the short pays $400($10 ⋅ 40) and the long’s account is credited $400. If the futures settlement price decreases 10 points the following day, the long pays $100 to the short’saccount — and so on each day until expiration of the contract, when thefutures price and the index price achieve parity. At any time the trader can close his position by offsetting the contract, that is, by selling to close an open long, or buying to close an open short.At the expiration date open contracts are settled in cash at the ﬁnal settlementprice. Fungibility One of the great contributions of the great established exchanges like theChicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange is their insti-tutionalization of contract terms and relationships. This, of course, is “fun-gibility.” Any one futures contract for corn, or an Index, or any other com-modity is substitutable for another of the same commodity. Similarly, theExchange has negated counterparty risk by placing a Clearing Corporationbetween all parties to trades. So even if the other party to a trade went broke,the Clearing Corporation would assume his liability. And, using the mech-anism of daily settlement, whereby losers pay winners daily, the danger ofmajor default is avoided. Futures “margins” (or “earnest money”) are deposited with the broker on opening a trade. The leverage obtainable is quite extreme for a stocktrader. Initial margin is usually 3–5% of the total value of the contract. Eachday thereafter margins vary according to the process described above ofmarking to market. As the reader can easily see, the purchase or sale of a Dow Future is the equivalent of a fairly large portfolio transaction, with the understanding thatit is a transaction which must be closed in the future, unlike a stock purchasewhich may be held indeﬁnitely. Differences between Cash and Futures The main two differences between the cash and the futures transactions are AU3772_book.fm Page 340 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.2: Advancements in Investment Technology 341 1. In cash, the value of the portfolio must be paid up front, or ﬁnanced in a stock margin account. 2. The owner of the cash portfolio receives cash dividends. These are not the only differences of course. The leverage employed in the futures transaction is a two-edged sword. If the trader has no reserves, a minor move in the index wipes him out. Such a minor move would bebarely noticed by the owner of a cash portfolio. Dow Index Future The price of the future and the price of the index are closely linked (cf.Figure 199.1). Any price anomaly is quickly corrected by arbitragers. On anysigniﬁcant price difference, arbitragers will buy the underpriced and sell theoverpriced, bringing the relationship back in line. Their prices are not exactlythe same because the futures contract value must reﬂect the costs of short-term ﬁnancing of stocks and the dividends paid by index stocks until futuresexpiration. This is known as the “cost of carry.” The “theoretical value” ofthe future should equal the price of the index plus the carrying cost. This iswhat is called the “fair” or “theoretical” value. Using Stock Index Futures to Control Exposure to the Market The owner of a cash portfolio in the Dow, or of DIAMONDS, can controlhis exposure, his risk, by using futures to hedge. If, for example, he ispessimistic about the market, or more to the point, a lot of uptrend lineshave been broken and the technical situation seems to be deteriorating, hecan sell a futures contract equivalent to his portfolio and be ﬂat the market. Readers will immediately recognize the advantages of this strategy. Tax consequences on the cash portfolio are avoided, as are the other negativeconsequences of trading — slippage, errors, etc. Long-term positions arebetter left alone. By ﬂattening his position the investor has now insured thefuture value of his portfolio and the capital involved is now earning the money market rate of return. What happens if the forecast market decline occurs? The portfolio is protected from loss, and the capital earns the market rate of return. And the investor should monitor his hedge closely, lifting it when he calculates thatthe correction has run its course. Taxes will, of course, then be due on theproﬁts on the hedge. In monitoring the hedge, the possibility must be considered that the market rises instead of falling. In planning the hedge in the ﬁrst place, theinvestor must plan for this eventuality and determine where he will lift thehedge on the losing side. At worst, of course, the investor has surrenderedportfolio appreciation. Not considering cash ﬂow implications, of course. It is worth emphasizing, in fact strongly emphasizing, that these tech niques require knowledge, expertise, and study. Careless use of techniques AU3772_book.fm Page 341 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
of this nature can bloody the amateur investor. So it is probably best to have

a professional guide for the ﬁrst several of these expeditions, and to executea number of paper transactions ﬁrst. The canny investor can increase his exposure to the market and the risk to his capital by buying index futures. But the canny investor must be carefulnot to turn into a burned speculator. Futures trading, because of the extremeleverage, is an area for dedicated and experienced speculators. A Dow Futures transaction costs less than if you had to buy or sell a whole basket of stocks. Professional fund managers — as well as otherprofessionals — regularly use futures for asset allocation and reallocation.In all likelihood, they are not using the extreme leverage afforded by futures.In other words, if they have a million dollar cash portfolio, they don’t buy10 million dollars worth of futures. It is not the leverage they are interestedin, but the extreme convenience and agility offered by doing short-termallocations in futures. The ability to almost instantaneously move in and outof the market without disturbing the underlying portfolio is a powerfulfeature of these “proxy markets.” Investment Uses of Dow Index Futures In the following examples, I describe the basic mechanics of using DowFutures contracts. These can be used to adjust equity exposure in anticipationof volatile market cycles and to rebalance portfolios among different asset FIGURE 199.1. Diamonds and Futures. The 2% plus break at the arrow of an 11 month trendline is an unmistakable invitation to hedge the DIAMONDS by shorting the futures. Proﬁts on the short would have offset losses in the DIAMONDS. Thisconvenient drill would have preserved liquidity, postponed capital gains taxes andavoided loss of equity. Notice the return to the trendline after the break. More of thefoolish virgin syndrome?118 116 114 112 110 108 106104 102 100 12000 11600 11200 10800 10400 9/1999 10/1999 11/1999 12/1999 2/2000 001040010800112001160012000100102104106108110112114116118 /DI200006 LAST-Daily 02/24/2000 Created with TradeStation www.TradeStation.comDIA LAST-Daily 02/24/2000 AU3772_book.fm Page 342 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.2: Advancements in Investment Technology 343 classes. The futures may also be used for other purposes not illustrated here. The following examples are not intended to be absolutely precise, but onlyto illustrate the mechanics involved. For the sake of simplicity, mark-to-market payments and cost of carry have been eliminated from the examples. Situation 1: Portfolio Protection You are a long-term Magee-type investor and you have old and proﬁtablepositions with which you are satisﬁed. But you have seen the broadeningtop of the Dow Jones ( circa anno 2000) and it is almost October and you would not be surprised to see a little bloodshed. You have $400,000 in theDow and $100,000 in money market instruments. You decide to reverse thisratio. But you don’t want to liquidate the Dow portfolio, as there is no signof a conﬁrmed downtrend, only that of consolidation. So you sell $300,000of index futures, leaving yourself with a $100,000 kicker in case you arewrong about the market’s declining. At the time, the market is 10000 andthe futures are 10500, meaning the cost of carry is approximately 0.5%(10,500/10,000 – 1). You sell three futures contracts ($300,000/($10 ⋅ 10,000)). You now have reversed your position and are long $100,000 Dow stocks and long $400,000money market equivalents. Validating your technical analysis, the market has begun to swing in broad undulations and, at the expiration of the futures, the Dow is at 10000.On your stocks you have a return of –0.5%, and the money market positionhas a rate of return of 0.5%. What would have been the situation had you not hedged? How the futures position affects the portfolio: Value of portfolio with reallocation of assets in cash market: By hedging in the futures market, you now have the equivalent of a $100,000 investment in Dow Future stocks and a $400,000 investment in the money market instrument. The stock market decline now affects only$100,000 of your stock portfolio rather than $400,000; in addition, you earna money market rate of return of 0.5% on the $300,000 difference. Stock Portfolio: $400,000 ⋅ 0.95 $380,000 Money Market + 100,000 ⋅ 1.005 $100,500 Total $480,500 Short 3 futures 3 ⋅ $10 ⋅ (10,000 – 9500) +$15,000 Total $495,000 Stocks $100,000 ⋅ 0.95 $95,000 Money market + $400,000 ⋅ 1.005 $402,000 Total $497,000AU3772_book.fm Page 343 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 344 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Without the futures transaction, the portfolio is worth $480,500. The $15,000 proﬁt on the short futures position offsets the loss on the $300,000 of the portfolio that was moved out of equities by the short futures position.In brief, by selling futures, you are able to protect $300,000 of your initialportfolio value from a stock price decline, nearly breaking even, an achieve-ment given these market conditions. Of course, had you been more conﬁdentof the market decline, you might have completely neutralized the equity riskon the portfolio by selling more futures contracts. This would have convertedthe entire stock position to a $400,000 investment in the money market. Theamount of protection you should obtain depends on your assessment of themarket and your tolerance for risk. Situation 2: Increasing Exposure with Futures Now let us look at the other side of the coin. The market has come off itshighs in a predictable and controlled secondary reaction and your technicalanalysis is that the Bull Market will continue. At 10000, it appears headedfor 11000 and you want to increase your commitment. Your portfolio is aspreviously described, split 80/20 between Dow stocks and money markets.It is time to go whole hog, you decide. You are acutely aware of the marketmaxim that bulls make money and bears make money and hogs wind upslaughtered, but there is also a market maxim that no market maxim is true100% of the time, which is also true of this maxim. Rather than liquidate your money market holdings, you buy one futures contract, which puts you long another $100,000 of stocks. The rate of returnon the money markets in your portfolio is 0.5%. To get a $500,000 exposurein blue chips, you buy the following number of contracts: $100,000/($10 ⋅ 10000) = 1 contract. Results: Your technical analysis of the direction of the market is correct, and the Dow Future rises to 11000 at the September expiration, or by 10%. Value of portfolio with passive management: Value of portfolio with futures position: Value of portfolio with reallocation of assets in cash market: Stocks $400,000 × 1.10 $440,000 Money market + $100,000 × 1.005 $100,500 Total $540,500 Long DJIA futures 1 ⋅ $10 × (11000 – 10000) $10,000 Total $550,500Stocks $500,000 × 1.10 $550,000 Money market $0 Total $550,000AU3772_book.fm Page 344 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter 17.2: Advancements in Investment Technology 345
In buying Dow Index futures, you are able to “equitize” $100,000 of your money market investment, effectively increasing your return from the money market rate of 0.5% to 10%. If you had not bought futures, the total valueof your portfolio at the September expiration would have been $540,500instead of $550,500. Not only do you have a $10,000 extra gain in yourportfolio, but you have taken advantage of the market’s continuing upwardclimb without having to adjust your portfolio. Situation 3: Using Bond and Index Futures for Asset Allocation Speculation in bonds can be quite proﬁtable notwithstanding David Dreman’s assertion that long-term investments in bonds are net losers. ( EN9: An oversimpliﬁcation of a sophisticated thesis by an important ﬁgure.) So it is not unusual for an investor to have both bonds and stocks in his portfolio. In this event, the portfolio can be managed with facility by using both Indexfutures and Treasury bond futures. Many investors consider it prudent to reallocate their capital commit ments based on inﬂation rates, interest rates, and the reported expression onAlan Greenspan’s face before Congressional testimony. An efﬁcient and inexpensive way to reallocate assets between stocks and bonds is to put on spreads of Treasury bond futures and Dow Index futures. Analysis of recent long- and medium-term trends in the market, how ever, has led you to consider increasing your equity portfolio and decreasingyour bond portfolio. You have $200,000 invested in Dow stocks and $200,000invested in Treasury bonds. You would like to take advantage of the sus-tained market rally by increasing your equities exposure to 75% and decreas-ing your bond holdings to 25%. As for tactics, you can reallocate both sides of your portfolio — buying $100,000 of stocks and selling $100,000 of bonds — with the sale of Treasurybond futures and the purchase of Dow Index futures. The Treasury bonds in your portfolio have a market price of 103-20. The price of September Treasury bond futures is 102-20 per $100 of face value,and $100,000 of face value must be delivered against each contract. The valueof the Dow Future is 10000, and the price of the Dow Index futures contractis 10000 (ignoring the cost of carry, of course). The number of T-bond futures to sell is: short T-bond futures: $100,000/(102-20 ⋅ $1,000) = 1 (number of futures is rounded to the nearest whole number). The number of stock index futures to buy is: long stockindex futures: $100,000/($10 ⋅ 10000) = 1 (number of futures is rounded to the nearest whole number). Results: at the September futures expiration, the value of the Dow Future is 11000, a rate of return of 10%, and the market value of the bonds is 101-08, a rate of return of –1%. Portfolio value with no market action taken: Stocks $200,000 × 1.10 $220,000 Money market $200,000 × 0.99 $198,000 Total $418,000AU3772_book.fm Page 345 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 346 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Value of futures positions: Value of portfolio had transaction been done in cash market: By this simple maneuver you have quickly and easily changed your market posture to add an additional $100,000 exposure to stocks and subtract $100,000 exposure to bonds. Having correctly analyzed market trends, youraction results in an increase in portfolio value from $418,000 to $429,375. Youcould have accomplished the same result by buying and selling bonds andstocks, but not without tax consequences and the attendant transaction head-aches. The use of futures to accomplish your goals allowed you to implementyour trading plan without disturbing your existing portfolio.FIGURE 199.2. Dow Jones Futures and Options. A put purchased at the arrow on the break would have protected patiently won gains over the previous 11 months. Increase in value of put can be seen as futures track declining Dow cash. A theoreticaldrill, but theoretical drills precede actual tactics in the market. Long Dow futures $10 × 1 × (11000 – 10000) $10,000 Short bond futures +$1000 × 1 × (102-20 – 101-08) $1375 Total $11,375Grand total $429,375 Stocks $300,000 × 1.10 $330,000 Bonds + $100,000 × 0.99 $99,000 Total $429,00012000 11800 11600 11400 11200 11000 10800 10600 10400 10200 1600 1200 800 400 11/1999 12/1999 00 2/2000/DI200006 LAST-Daily 02/24/2000 Created with TradeStation www.TradeStation.comAU3772_book.fm Page 346 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter 17.2: Advancements in Investment Technology 347
Perspective While there can be no argument about the importance of CBOT® DJIASM Index futures — they are markets of enormous usefulness and importance — there can also be no doubt that the futures novice should thoroughly preparehimself before venturing into these pits. In such a highly leveraged environ-ment, mistakes will be punished much more severely than an error in thestock market. By the same token, ignorance of this vital tool is the mark ofan investor who is not serious about his portfolio, or who is less intense inhis investment goals. “They” (the infamous “they”) use all the weapons attheir disposal. So should “we.” Options on Dow Index Futures The buyer of this instrument has the choice, or the right, to assume a position. It is his option to do so — unlike a futures contract in which he has an obligation once entered. There are two kinds of options: calls (the right to buy the underlying instrument) and puts (the right to sell). And options can be bought (long) or sold (short) like futures contracts. A long call option on Dow Index futures gives the buyer the right to buy one futures contract at a speciﬁed price which is called the “exercise,”or “strike” price. A long put option on Dow Index futures gives the buyerthe right to sell one futures contract at the strike price. For example, a callat a strike price of 10000 entitles the buyer to be long one futures contractat a price of 10000 when he exercises the option. A put at the same strikeprice entitles the buyer to be short one futures contract at 10000. The strikeprices of Dow Index futures options are listed in increments of 100 indexpoints, giving the trader the ﬂexibility to express his opinions about upwardor downward movement of the market. The seller, or writer, of a call or put is short the option. Effectively selling a call makes the writer short the market, just as selling a put makes the writerlong the market. As in a futures contract, the seller is obligated to fulﬁll theterms of the option if the buyer exercises. If you are short a call, and the longexercises, you become short one futures contract at 10000. If you are short oneput and the long exercises, you become long one futures contract at 10000. Buyers of options enjoy ﬁxed risk. They can lose no more than the premium they pay to go long an option. On the other hand, sellers of optionshave potentially unlimited risk. Catastrophic moves in the markets oftenbankrupt imprudent option sellers. Option Premiums The purchase price of the option is called the option premium. The optionpremium is quoted in points, each point being worth $100. The premiumfor a Dow Index option is paid by the buyer at initiation of the transaction. The underlying instrument for one CBOT futures option is one CBOT DJIA SM futures contract; so the option contract and the futures contract areAU3772_book.fm Page 347 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 348 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
essentially different expressions of the same instrument, and both are based on the Dow–Jones Index. Options premiums consist of two elements: intrinsic value and time value. The difference between the futures price and strike price is the intrinsicvalue of the option. If the futures price is greater than the strike price of acall, the call is said to be “in-the-money.” In fact, you can be long the futurescontract at less than its current price. For example, if the futures price is10020 and the strike price is 10000, the call is in-the-money and immediateexercise of the call pays $10 times the difference between the futures andstrike price, or $10 ⋅ 20 = $200. If the futures price is smaller than the strike price, the call is “out-of-the-money.” If the two are equal, the call is “at-the money.” A put is in-the-money if the futures price is less than the strike priceand out-of-the-money if the futures price is greater than the strike price. Itis at-the-money when these two prices are equal. Because a Dow Index futures option can be exercised at any date until expiration, and exercise results in a cash payment equal to the intrinsic value, the value of the option must be at least as great as its intrinsic value. Thedifference between the option price and the intrinsic value represents thetime value of the option. The time value reﬂects the possibility that exercisewill become more proﬁtable if the futures price moves farther away fromthe strike price. Generally, the more time until expiration, the greater thetime value of the option, because the likelihood of the option becomingproﬁtable to exercise is greater. At expiration, the time value is zero and theoption price equals the intrinsic value. Volatility The degree of ﬂuctuation in the price of the underlying futures contract isknown as “volatility” (cf. Resources, Appendix D, for formula). The greater the volatility of the futures, the higher the option premium. The price of afutures option is a function of the futures price, the strike price, the time left to expiration, the money market rate, and the volatility of the futures price. Of these variables, volatility is the only one that cannot be observed directly. Sinceall the other variables are known, however, it is possible to infer from optionprices an estimate of how the market is gauging volatility. This estimate iscalled the “implied volatility” of the option. It measures the market’s averageexpectation of what the volatility of the underlying futures return will beuntil the expiration of the option. Implied volatility is usually expressed inannualized terms. Implied volatility is suggested as an input to stop calcu-lation in Chapter 27. The signiﬁcance and use of implied volatility is poten-tially complex and confusing for the general investor, professionals havinga decided edge in this area. Their edge can be removed by serious study. Exercising the Option At expiration, the rules of optimal exercise are clear. The call owner shouldexercise the option if the strike price is less than the underlying futures price.AU3772_book.fm Page 348 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter 17.2: Advancements in Investment Technology 349
The value of the exercised call is the difference between the futures price and the strike price. Conversely, the put owner should exercise the optionif the strike price is greater than the futures price. The value of the exercisedput is the difference between the strike price and the futures price. To illustrate, if the price of the expiring futures contract is 7600, a call struck at 7500 should be exercised, but a put at the same or lower strikeprice should not. The value of the exercised call is $1000. The value of theunexercised put is $0. If the price of the expiring futures contract is 7500, a7600 put should be exercised but not a call at 7600 or a higher strike. Thevalue of the exercised put is $1000 and that of the unexercised call is $0. The proﬁt on long options is the difference between the expiration value and the option premium. The proﬁt on short options is the expiration valueplus the option premium. The expiration values and proﬁts on call and putoptions can often be an important tool in an investment strategy. Their payoffpatterns and risk parameters make options quite different from futures. Theirversatility makes them good instruments to adjust a portfolio to changingexpectations about stock market conditions. Moreover, these expectationscan range from very general to very speciﬁc predictions about the futuredirection and volatility of stock prices. Effectively, there is an option strategysuited to virtually every set of market conditions. Using Futures Options to Participate in Market Movements Traders must often react to rapid and surprising events in the market. Thetransaction costs and price impact of buying or selling a portfolio’s stockson short notice inhibit many investors from reacting to short-term marketdevelopments. Shorting stocks is an even less palatable option for averageinvestors because of the margin and risks involved and semantical pre-judices. The ﬂexibility that options provide can allow one to take advantage of the proﬁts from market cycles quickly and conveniently. A long call optionon Dow Index futures proﬁts at all levels above its strike price. A long putoption similarly proﬁts at all levels below its strike price. Let us examineboth strategies. Proﬁts in Rising Markets In August, the Dow Index is 10000 and the Dow Index September future is10050. You expect the current Bull Market to continue, and you would liketo take advantage of the trend without tying up too much capital and alsoundertake only limited risk. You buy a September call option on Dow Index futures. These options will expire simultaneously with September futures, and the futures pricewill be the same as the cash index at expiration. Your analysis is bullish, so the 10500 call (out-of-the-money strike price) is a reasonable alternative at a quoted premium of 10.10. You pay $1,010 forthe call ($100 ⋅ 10.10).AU3772_book.fm Page 349 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 350 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The payoff: at the September expiration, the value of the Dow Future is 10610. Now, your call is in-the-money, and you exercise it and garner the exercise value less the premium, or $90 = $10 ⋅ (10610 – 10500) – $100 ⋅ (10.10) = $1,100 – $1,010. If the Dow Future stays at or below 10500, you let the callexpire worthless and simply lose the premium. This is the maximum possibleloss on the call. If the Dow Future increases by 101 points above the strikeprice, you break even. Instead of buying the call option, the trader could have invested $100,500 directly in the Dow stocks. Given a value of the Dow Future of 10110 inSeptember, he would have had a gain of $3,030. If he had invested directly inthe stocks, however, an unexpected market decline would have led to a loss. Exploiting Market Reversals The trader expects a reversal of the Bull Market now at 7800 and would likesome downside protection. He buys a put with a strike price of 7700 (out-of-the-money). The put premium is 9.80, for a total cost of $980 = $100 ⋅ 9.80. If the Index decreases to 7600, with a corresponding decrease in the futures contract in September,the put is worth $1,000. The maximum loss is the premium cost, which islost if the Dow Future is above 7700 at expiration. The trader breaks even ifthe Dow Future decreases by 98 points below the strike price. Using Puts to Protect Proﬁts in an Appreciated Portfolio During a sustained Bull Market, investors often search for ways of protectingtheir paper proﬁts from a possible market break. Even when fundamentaleconomic factors tend to support a continued market upside, investors haveto guard against unpredictable “technical market corrections” and marketover-reactions to news. Selling stocks to reduce downside risk is costly in fees and taxwise and sacriﬁces potential price gains. What is desirable in a sideways market envi-ronment is an instrument that protects the value of a portfolio against amarket drop but does not constrain upside participation. This is preciselywhat put options are designed to do. Situation 1 The market is in an uptrend in August. And the market lives in anxiety thatthe Federal Reserve will tighten short-term interest rates further in the com-ing months. The trader has $78,000 invested in the Dow portfolio, and theDow Future is at 7800. In order to hedge his portfolio, he purchases a put option on September futures against a possible market downturn. He buys a 7600 put at a pre-mium of 6.60, cost $100 ⋅ 6.60 = $660. Buying the put places a ﬂoor on the value of the portfolio at the strike price. Buying a put with a strike price of 7600 effectively locks in the valueAU3772_book.fm Page 350 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter 17.2: Advancements in Investment Technology 351
of the portfolio at $76,000. Above its strike price, a put is not exercised and the portfolio value is unconstrained. If the trader is wrong, and the marketgoes up, he loses the premium paid for the put. Depending on which strikeprice he chooses, he increases or decreases downside risk. He breaks evenwhen the Dow Future reaches a value of 7534 = 7600 – 66, the strike priceless the put premium. At this level, the unprotected and put-protected port-folio are equally proﬁtable. The similarity to life insurance is striking. If you don’t die, the premium is wasted. But if you do…. Improving Portfolio Yields Situation 2 All markets, as the reader is perhaps aware, are not trending. Days, weeks,months (sometimes years) can pass while the markets grind up and downin what are euphemistically known as trading range markets. When theastute technician identiﬁes one of these market doldrums and judges that itwill continue so he can reap other returns on his portfolio by selling putsand calls on Dow Index futures. For example, when the Dow Index is 10000 and the trader calculates that it will not break out for the next month above 10200, he sells calls at a strikeprice of 10200. The quoted premium of the 10200 call is, say, 10.10; selling a10200 call generates $1010 income. The trader pockets the entire premium as a proﬁt if the index remains below 10200 at the September expiration. The downside of this trade is thatthe trader gives up price appreciation above 10200. Above 10200, the combinedvalue of the portfolio and short call premium is $101,010. The break-evenpoint is 10301, where the Dow Future is equal to the sum of the strike priceand call premium. Above this point the covered call portfolio becomes lessproﬁtable than the original portfolio. Since the short call is covered by theportfolio, this strategy is not exposed to the risk represented by a naked call.The main risk is that the trader gives up the proﬁt potential above the strikeprice of the call. As is obvious to the technician, this is a bad strategy intrending markets. Only in clearly range-bound markets would an enlight-ened trader want to write covered calls. The call premium collected is somecompensation for this risk, but cold comfort when the trader has misana-lyzed the market. The best strike price of the call depends on the probabilitiesyou have assigned to future increases and behavior of the Dow. Using Option Spreads in High- or Low-Volatility Markets Long and short stock positions reﬂect deﬁnite market opinions or analyses.The market will go up or the market will go down and the moderatelycompetent technician should be right about this more often than theunwashed general public. In markets of coiling volatility (i.e., lower thanAU3772_book.fm Page 351 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 352 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
average volatility and declining), it is sometimes possible to exploit uncer tainty by putting on a long straddle. The long straddle combines a long putand a long call at the same strike price. This spread generates a return overtwo ranges of market values: values below the strike price of the put andvalues above the strike price of the call. It is a proﬁtable strategy givensufﬁcient volatility. The Editor’s company used such a strategy immediatelybefore the crash of 1987 for managed accounts and collected disproportionateproﬁts on a very low risk position. Experienced speculators and tradersgenerally sell high-volatility markets and try to backspread (go long) inchosen less volatile markets, expecting volatility to return to the mean.Sometimes they do this by writing a short straddle, a position with a shortput and a short call at the same strike price. Situation 3 In August, a technical analysis predicts that volatility will increase, and themarket is in a coiling process. The direction of prices is uncertain but poten-tially explosive. The trader buys a straddle of a long put at 7800 and a longcall at 7800. The quoted call premium is 18.90 and the quoted put premiumis 13.90. The total cost of the straddle is $3280 = $100 ⋅ 32.80. This is the maximum loss if the Dow Future stalls at 7800. The straddle makes a proﬁt when the Dow Future moves enough to recover the cost of the straddle, either below 7472 = 7800 – 328 or above8128 = 7800 + 328. The potential upside proﬁt is unlimited. The maximumproﬁt on the downside is $10 ⋅ (7800 – 328), or $74,720, if the Dow Future goes to zero (somewhat unlikely, but one never knows what Chicken Littlethe investor will do if he thinks the sky is falling). Situation 4 In August, the investor calculates that options are overvalued and that vol-atility will be lower than implied volatility. He expects a dormant market tocontinue through the end of the summer. He decides to sell the Septemberput and call at 7800, collecting $3280. The return on this short straddle willturn negative if the Dow Future in September goes below 7472 or above8128. The maximum loss on the downside is $10 ⋅ (7800 – 328), or $74,720, and the loss on the upside is unlimited. The investor, however, perceives therisk as limited, because he believes that the Dow Future will neither increasenor decrease to these levels within the next month when the options expire.Of course, in these cases, the trader must also consider catastrophic risk —as, for example, the Editor’s client who was short puts in the crash of 1987and lost $57MM.AU3772_book.fm Page 352 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter 17.2: Advancements in Investment Technology 353
Perspective (EN9: Once again, do not practice the methods and techniques described in this chapter without complete conﬁdence in their use. A course in futures and options is recommended, or professional consultation.) I like to tell these stories so that prospective options traders and general investors are made dramatically aware of the potential dangers, as well asthe potential proﬁts. As I have said elsewhere in this book, the novice shouldwork to achieve competence and experience before attempting advancedtricks in futures and options. On the other hand, the investment use of theseinstruments for prudent hedging and insurance is recommended to theinvestor willing to do his homework, acquire competence, and grow ininvestment skills. Dow Index futures and futures options present new techniques of port folio protection and proﬁt-making for the general investor. Numerous strat egies can be practiced by the moderately competent investor using theseinstruments. Keep in mind always that all the methods of analytical investing espoused in this book are the base discipline: that is, knowledge of theinstruments and their use; prudent trade management; and stop loss disci-pline; and close attention to the dynamics of the situation. Above all, the existence of these instruments allows the most conserva tive of investors insurance and hedging techniques not previously available. In sum, knowledge of the DJIA Futures and Options on Futures is absolutely essential for the competent technical investor and trader. Recommended Further Study In view of the importance of this chapter, I note here references to advancedmaterial, which will also be found in Resources (Appendix D). For more information: Options as a Strategic Investment by Lawrence Macmillan. (www.optionstrategist.com) Chicago Board Options Exchange: www.cboe.comChicago Board of Trade, 312-435-3558 or 800-THE-CBOT. Fax: 312-341-3168; http://www.cbot.comAU3772_book.fm Page 353 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 354 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

355 part two Trading Tactics Midword As a kind of foreword to the second part of this book, we might mention a commentary, “On Understanding Science: An Historical Approach,” byJames Bryant Conant, president emeritus of Harvard. Dr. Conant points out that, in school, we learn that science is a systematic collection of facts, which are then classiﬁed in orderly array, broken down,analyzed, examined, synthesized, and pondered; and then lo! a Great Prin-ciple emerges, pat, perfect, and ready for use in industry, medicine, orwhat-have-you. He further points out that all of this is a mistaken point of view which is held by most laymen. Discovery takes form little by little, shrouded inquestioning, and only gradually assumes the substance of a clear, precise,well-supported theory. The neat tabulation of basic data, forming a series ofproofs and checks, does not come at the start, but much later. In fact, it maybe the work of other men entirely, men who, being furnished with theconclusions, are then able to construct a complete, integrated body of evi-dence. Theories of market action are not conceived in a ﬂash of inspiration;they are built, step by step, out of the experience of traders and students, toexplain the typical phenomena that appear over and over again through theyears. In market operations, the practical trader is not concerned with theory as such. The neophyte’s question, “What is the method?” probably means,actually, “What can I buy to make a lot of money easily and quickly?” Ifsuch a trader reads this book, he may feel that there is “something in it.” Hemay feel “It’s worth a try” (a statement, incidentally, that reﬂects little crediton his own previous tries). And he may start out quite optimistically, withoutany understanding of theory, without any experience in these methods, andwithout any basis for real conﬁdence in the method. AU3772_book.fm Page 355 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
In such cases, the chances are great that he will not immediately enjoy

the easy success he hopes for. His very inexperience in a new approach will result in mistakes and failures. But even with the most careful applicationof these methods, in correctly entered commitments, he may encounter aseries of difﬁcult market moves which may give him a succession of losses.Whereupon, having no solid conﬁdence in what he is doing, he may sigh,put the book back on the shelf, and say, “Just as I thought. It’s no damngood.” Now if you were about to go into farming for the ﬁrst time, you might be told (and it would be true) that the shade tobacco business offers spec-tacular proﬁts. But you would not expect to gain these proﬁts without invest-ing capital, without studying how shade tobacco is grown, in what kinds ofsoils, in what localities, nor without some experience with the crop. Furthermore, you would need conﬁdence — faith in the opportunity and also in the methods you were using. If your ﬁrst season’s crop wereblighted (and these things do happen), you would naturally be disappointed.If it should happen that your second year’s crop were destroyed by a hail-storm, you would be hurt and understandably despondent. And if your thirdseason’s crop were to be a total loss due to drought, you would probably bevery gloomy indeed (and who could blame you?). But you would not say,“There’s nothing to it. It’s no damn good.” You would know (if you had studied the industry and the approved cultivation methods) that you were right, regardless of any combination ofunfavorable circumstances, and you would know that the ultimate rewardswould justify your continuation no matter how hard the road, rather thanturn to some easier but less potentially proﬁtable crop. So it is with technical methods in the stock market. Anyone may encoun ter bad seasons. The Major Turns inevitably will produce a succession oflosses to Minor Trend operators using the methods suggested in this book.And there will be times when a man who has no understanding of basictheory will be tempted to give up the method entirely and look for a “sys-tem” that will ﬁt into the pattern of recent market action nicely, so that hecan say, “If I had only averaged my trades…. If I had followed the DreamBook…. If I had taken Charlie’s tip on XYZ…. If I had done it this way orthat way, I would have come out with a neat proﬁt.” It would be better, and safer, to understand at the start that no method that has ever been devised will unfailingly protect you against a loss, orsometimes even a painful succession of losses. You should realize that whatwe are looking for is the probability inherent in any situation. And just asyou would be justiﬁed in expecting to draw a white bean from a bag whichyou knew contained 700 white beans and 300 black beans (even though youhad just drawn out 10 black beans in succession!), so you are justiﬁed incontinuing to follow the methods which, over long periods, seem most surelyand most frequently to coincide with the mechanism of the market. So this book should not be given a quick “once-over” and adopted straightaway as a sure and easy road to riches. It should be read over and AU3772_book.fm Page 356 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Part two: Trading Tactics 357 over, a number of times, and it should be consulted as a reference work. Furthermore, and most important, you will need the experience of your ownsuccesses and failures so that you will know that what you are doing is theonly logical thing you can do under a given set of circumstances. In such aframe of mind, you will have your portion of successes; and your failures,which you can take in stride as part of the business, will not ruin either yourpocketbook or your morale. In short, the problem stated and analyzed through this whole volume is not so much a matter of “systems” as it is a matter of philosophy. The endresult of your work in technical analysis is a deep understanding of what isgoing on in the competitive free auction, what is the mechanism of thisauction, and what is the meaning of it all. And this philosophy does notgrow on trees. It does not spring full-bodied from the sea foam. It comesgradually from experience and from sincere, intelligent, hard work. The second section of this book, which follows, is concerned with tactics. Up to this point, we have been studying the technical formations and theirconsequences. We should have a good general understanding of what islikely to happen after certain manifestations on the charts. Knowing that,however, we will still need a more deﬁnite set of guides as to when and howit is best to execute this or that sale. This section is based on one man’s experience and his analysis of thou sands of speciﬁc cases. It takes up questions of method, of detail, and ofapplication, and should provide you with a workable basis for your actualmarket operations. As time goes on, you will very likely adopt reﬁnementsof your own, or modify some of the suggested methods according to yourown experience. But the authors feel that the suggestions made here willenable you to use technical analysis in an intelligent and orderly way thatshould help to protect you from losses and increase your proﬁts. John Magee AU3772_book.fm Page 357 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 358 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

359 chapter eighteen The Tactical Problem EN: Magee in this chapter addresses the question of tactics for the “speculator” who follows short- and medium-term trends. Chapter 18.1 addresses the question ofstrategy and tactics for the long-term investor. See Chapter 18.1 for a discussion ofthe term “speculator.”

It is possible (as many traders have discovered) to lose money in a Bull Market — and, likewise, to lose money trading short in a Bear Market. Youmay be perfectly correct in judging the Major Trend; your long-term strategy,let us say, may be 100% right. But without tactics, without the ability to shapethe details of the campaign on the ﬁeld, it is not possible to put your knowl-edge to work to your best advantage. There are several reasons why traders, especially inexperienced traders, so often do so poorly. At the time of buying a stock, if it should go up, theyhave no objectives and no idea of what policy to use in deciding when tosell and take a proﬁt. If it should go down, they have no way of decidingwhen to sell and take a loss. Result: they often lose their proﬁts; and theirlosses, instead of being nipped off quickly, run heavily against them. Also,there is this psychological handicap: the moment a stock is bought (or soldshort), commissions and costs are charged against the transaction. The traderknows that the moment he closes the trade, there will be another set ofcharges. Also, since he is not likely to catch the extreme top of a rally or theextreme bottom of a reaction, he is bound, in most cases, to see the stockrunning perhaps several points against him after he has made his commit-ment. Even on a perfectly sound, wise trade, he may see a 10% or morepaper loss, before the expected favorable move gets under way. Obviously,if he weakens and runs for cover without sufﬁcient reason before the stockhas made the proﬁtable move he looked for, he is taking an unnecessary lossand forfeiting entirely his chance to register a gain. The long-term investor who buys in near the bottom and remains in the market to a point near the top, and then liquidates and remains in cash orbonds until (perhaps several years later) there is another opportunity to buyin at the bottom, does not face the continual problem of when to buy andwhen to sell. This assumes that one can tell precisely when such a bottomhas been reached, and that one can also tell when the trend has reached itsultimate top (and those are very broad assumptions indeed). The long-terminvestment problem for large gains over the Major Trends is by no means AU3772_book.fm Page 359 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
as simple as it sounds when you say, “Buy them when they’re low, and sell

them near the top.” However, such large gains have been made over thelong pull, and they are very impressive. EN: Note the record of the Dow Theory in Chapters 5 and 5.1. This section of the book is concerned more particularly with the specu lative purchase and sale of securities. There are some basic differences between the “investment” point of view and the “speculative.” It is a good thing to know these differences and makesure that you know exactly where you stand. Either viewpoint is tenableand workable, but you can create serious problems for yourself, and sustainheavy losses, if you confuse them. One difference is that, as a speculator, you are dealing with stocks as such. A stock, to be sure, represents ownership in a company. But the stockis not the same thing as the company. The securities of a strong companyare often weak; and sometimes the securities of a very weak concern are FIGURE 200. It is possible to lose money owning stocks in a Bull Market. Notice that this Major Top Formation did not occur in 1929, but in the summer of 1928. For more than a year after this, a majority of stocks and the Averages continued the BullMarket Advance. But Cudahy declined steadily, reaching a price below 50 well beforethe 1929 Panic, and continued in its Bearish course for over 4 years, ultimately sellingat 20. Except for the somewhat unusual volume on the head on August 21, this is atypical Head-and-Shoulders Pattern with a perfect Pullback Rally in mid-November.It underscores what we have mentioned before; that a Head-and-Shoulders Top ina stock, even when other stocks look strong, cannot safely be disregarded. The Head-and-Shoulders Pattern, either in its simple form or with multiple heads or shoulders, is likely to occur at Major and Intermediate Tops, and in reverse positionat Major and Intermediate Bottoms. It has the same general characteristics as tovolume, duration, and breakout as the Rectangles, and the Ascending and Descend-ing Triangles. In conservative stocks, it tends to resemble the Rounding Turns. CUDAHY PACKING CUX1928 SSSSH H JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER76 72 68 64 60 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 5025 71 4 21 28 4111825 1815 22 29 6 13 20 27 310 17 24 1815 22 29 AU3772_book.fm Page 360 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eighteen: The Tactical Problem 361 exceedingly strong. It is important to realize that the company and the stock are not precisely identical. The technical method is concerned only with thevalue of the stock as perceived by those who buy, sell, or own it. FIGURE 201. What would you have done with Hudson Motors? The great Panic Move of October–November 1929 carried the Dow–Jones Industrial Average down from its September all-time high of 386.10 to a November low of 198.69. A rally,bringing the Average back to 294.07 in April 1930, recovered 95 points or 51% of theground lost, a perfectly normal correction. Suppose you had bought HT after the decline from its 1929 high of 93 ½, say at 56, in the belief that the 37 point drop had brought it into a “bargain” range. On yourdaily chart, you would have seen the pattern shown above (which you will nowrecognize as a Descending Triangle) taking shape in the early months of 1930. Wouldyou have had a protective stop at 51? Would you have sold at the market the dayafter HT broke and closed below 54? Or would you have hoped for a rally, perhapseven bought more “bargains” at 50, at 48, at 40? Would you still have been holdingonto your “good long-term investment” when HT reached 25 ½ in June? Would you still have been holding HT when it reached its ultimate 1932 bottom at less than 3?(See Figure 65.) EN:

See Figure 201.1 for a recaptiulation of the lesson from the 2000s.

HUDSON MOTORS HT 1930 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE60 56 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 Sales 100’s 50 4030 20 10 41 1 1 8 25 1 81 5 221815 22 29 5 12 19 26310 17 24 31 7142128 AU3772_book.fm Page 361 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
A second difference is in the matter of dividends. The “pure investor,”

who, by the way, is a very rare person, is supposed to consider only the

> “income” or potential income from stocks — the return on his investmentin cash dividends.
EN: This rara avis is largely extinct now. But there are many cases of stocks which have maintained a steady dividend while losing asmuch as 75% or more of their capital value. There are other cases wherestocks have made huge capital gains while paying only nominal dividendsor none at all. If the dividend rate were as important as some investorsconsider it, the only research tool one would need would be a calculator todetermine the percentage yields of the various issues, and hence their“value.” And, on this basis, stocks paying no dividends would have no valueat all. From the technical standpoint, “income,” as separate from capital gains and losses, ceases to have any meaning. The amount realized in the sale ofa stock, less the price paid and plus total dividends received, is the totalgain. Whether the gain is made entirely in capital increase, or entirely individends, or in some combination of these, makes no difference. In the caseof short sales, the short seller must pay the dividends. But, here again, thisis simply one factor to be lumped with the capital gain or loss in determiningthe net result of the transaction. There is a third source of confusion. Very often, the “pure investor” will insist that he has no loss in the stock he paid $30 for, which is now sellingat $22, because he has not sold it. Usually he will tell you that he hasconﬁdence in the company and that he will hold the stock until it recovers.Sometimes he will state emphatically that he never takes losses. How such an investor would justify his position if he had bought Stude baker at over $40 in 1953 and still held Studebaker Packard at around $5 in1956 (EN: Or Osborne at $25 and $0 in the 1980s or Visacalc at similar prices in the same decade. EN9: Or Enron and WorldCom in the 2000s.) is hard to say. But for him, the loss does not exist until it becomes a “realized” loss. Actually, his faith that the stock will eventually be worth what he paid for it may be no more than a speculative hope; and a forlorn one at that. Furthermore, one may question whether his reasoning is always consis tent. For example, suppose another stock this investor had bought at $30was now selling at $45. Would he tell you that he did not consider a proﬁtor loss until the stock was sold? Or would he be tempted to speak of the“proﬁt” he had in this purchase? It is all right to consider gains or losses either on the basis of “realized” or completed transactions, or on the basis of the market values “accrued” ata particular time. But it is not being honest with yourself to use one methodto conceal your mistakes and the other method to accentuate your successes.The confusion of these concepts is responsible for many ﬁnancial tragedies. EN: One might almost say, in the modern context, that such confusion amounts towillful or neurotic behavior. Given the easy availability of portfolio software which“marks to market” positions, avoidance of this knowledge can only be regarded asself-defeating. AU3772_book.fm Page 362 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eighteen: The Tactical Problem 363 As a trader using technical methods, you will probably ﬁnd the most realistic view is to consider your gains and losses “as accrued.” In other words, your gain or loss at a given time will be measured with reference tothe closing pricing of the stock on that day. Recapitulating, it is important: (1) to avoid regarding a stock and the company it represents as identical or equivalent; (2) to avoid the consciousor unconscious attribution of “value” to a stock on the basis of dividendyield, without regard to market prices; and (3) to avoid confusing “realized”and “accrued” gains or losses.* The technical trader is not committed to a “buy and hold” policy. There are times when it is clearly advantageous to retain a position for many months or for years. But there are also times when it will pay to get out ofa stock, either with a proﬁt or with a loss. The successful technician willnever, for emotional causes, remain in a situation which, on the evidence athand, is no longer tenable. An experienced trader using technical methods can take advantage of the shorter Intermediate Trends, and it can be shown that the possible net gains are larger than the entire net gains on the Major Trend, even afterallowing for the greater costs in commissions and allowing for the greaterincome tax liability on short-term operations. But it should be understood that any such additional proﬁts are not easily won. They can be obtained only by continual alertness and adherenceto systematic tactical methods. For the market, regarded as a gamblingmachine, compares very poorly with stud poker or roulette, and it is notpossible to “beat the market” by the application of any simple mathematicalsystem. If you doubt this, it would be best to stop at this point and make acareful study of any such “system” that may appeal to you, checking itagainst a long record of actual market moves. Or ask yourself whether youhave ever known anyone who followed such a system alone, as a guide tomarket operations, and was successful. EN: After Magee wrote this, many successful traders, aided by computer technology and advances in ﬁnance theory,have created objective systems which have been successful in the ﬁnancial markets.However, the markets usually become aware of the success of these systems anddevelop counterstrategies to defeat them. So there is a tendency for the performanceof mechanical systems to degenerate or totally fail over time. In ﬁne it is the happycombination of the system with markets hospitable to it which makes mechanical systems successful over deﬁned periods of time. The practice of technical analysis, on the other hand, is not a mathemat ical process, although it does, of course, involve mathematics. It is intendedto search out the signiﬁcance of market moves in the light of past experiencein similar cases, by means of charts, with a full recognition of the fact that * Some of the most serious and dangerous “traps and pitfalls” of the market are tied up with difﬁculties of perception on the part of the investor, and consequent misevaluations and faultyidentiﬁcations. For a particular study of these psychological problems, see The General Semantics of Wall Street by John Magee. EN: Now in its second edition as Winning the Mental Game on Wall Street, a title chosen by a computer, as edited by the present Editor. AU3772_book.fm Page 363 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
the market is a sensitive mechanism by which all of the opinions of all

interested persons are reduced by a competitive democratic auction to asingle ﬁgure, representing the price of the security at any particular moment.The various formations and patterns we have studied are not meaninglessor arbitrary. They signify changes in real values, the expectations, hopes,fears, developments in the industry, and all other factors that are known toanyone. It is not necessary that we know, in each case, what particular hopes,fears, or developments are represented by a certain pattern. It is importantthat we recognize the pattern and understand what results may be expectedto emerge from it. The shorter-term proﬁts are, you might say, payment for service in the

> “smoothing out” of inequalities of trends, and for providing liquidity in themarket. As compared to the long-term investor, you will be quicker to makecommitments, and quicker to take either proﬁts or (if necessary) losses. Youwill not concern yourself with maintaining “position” in a market on anyparticular stocks (although, as you will see, we will try to maintain a certain“total Composite Leverage” [or risk and proﬁt exposure] according to thestate of the market, which accomplishes the same result). You will havesmaller gains on each transaction than the longer-term investor, but you willhave the advantage of being able to frequently step aside and review theentire situation before making a new commitment.
Most particularly, you will be protected against Panic Markets. There are times (and 1929 was by no means the only time) (EN: 1987 and 1989 also come to mind. EN9: Add 2001-2, if you please: 5/21/01, Dow 11350; 9/17/01, 8062;and 3/18/02, 10673; 7/22/02, 7532), when the long-term investor stands to see a large part of his slowly accumulated gains wiped out in a few days. Theshort-term trader, in such catastrophes, will be taken out by his stop–lossorders, or his market orders, with only moderate losses, and will still havehis capital largely intact to use in the new trend as it develops. EN: The best technical analysts’ opinion in “modern times” is that even long-term investorsshould not grin and bear a Bear Market. This is a necessity only for bank trustdepartments and large Wall Street ﬁrms which cannot afford to offend their invest-ment banking clients by suggesting that their retail clients should sell their holdings. Finally, before we get on with the subject of tactics, the operations we are speaking of are those of the small- and medium-sized trader. The meth-ods suggested here, either for getting into a market or getting out of it, willapply to the purchase or sale of odd lots, 100 shares, 200 shares, and some-times up to lots of thousands of shares or more of a stock, depending on theactivity and the market for the particular issue. The same methods wouldnot work for the trader who was dealing in 10,000-share blocks (except inthe largest issues), since in such cases, his own purchases or sales wouldseriously affect the price of the stock. Such large-scale operations are in aspecial ﬁeld which is governed by the same basic trends and strategy, butwhich requires a different type of market tactics. EN: Or, put another way, as Magee said to me one time, a mouse can go where an elephant can’t. AU3772_book.fm Page 364 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eighteen: The Tactical Problem 365 FIGURE 201.0. If an investor only learned one thing from this book, and it were this one thing, that one thing might be the salvation of his portfolio, or his retirement plan (if all his assets in the investment plan were shares of Enron). Instead, theemployees of Enron made a major mistake in not having a diversiﬁed retirementportfolio – they had all their eggs in one basket, their income and savings came fromone source. But diversiﬁcation is not even the crucial lesson here. The lesson is getout of the stock when it reverses. The corollary of that lesson is, never buy a stockin a downtrend. And there is even a more important lesson: Never buy a stock whenit is in a swan dive. So obvious you say. Not so obvious at the time for portfoliomanagers for the University of Miami who continued to accumulate Enron stockeven as it neared earth at 100 miles an hour. Of course they had sophisticated (?)company. The Motley Fools had a death grip on the stock all the way to the bottom. ENE LAST-Weekly 01/11/200290 7050 40 30 20 10 1998 1999 2000 2001 Created with TradeStation 2000i by Omega Research 1999 AU3772_book.fm Page 365 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 366 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

367 chapter 18.1 Strategy and Tactics for the Long-Term Investor What’s a Speculator, What’s an Investor? In the years since Magee wrote Chapter 18, some different connotations have attached themselves to the terms “speculator” and “investor.” A great cul-tural shift has also occurred. The days when the New Haven (New York,New Haven and Hartford Railroad) was a beacon of respectability (and lentluster to its investor) and paid good dividends are gone forever. And so isthe New Haven. In fact, after the turn of the century, corporations saw achange in investor sentiment about dividends. Investors wanted capitalappreciation and cared less for dividends. In fact it has lately been considered the mark of a “growth stock” not to pay dividends. Evidently, the days ofthe New Haven are gone forever, when an “investor” was one who bought, held, and collected dividends, and “speculators” were slightly suspect menlike Magee who played the medium-term trends and bought “unchic,”“speculative” stocks. It all has a sepia tone to it. Yesterday’s speculator might be called a medium-term investor today.While the term “speculator” could still be applied to anyone who

> “trades” the market, today that old-time speculator and his kind would morelikely be called traders than speculators. Commodity traders who have nobusiness interest in the contracts they exchange are always referred to as
speculators, as opposed to commercials, who are hedgers and users of the commodities they trade. Now “day traders” might be considered the equiv-alent of the old-time speculators. And only the passive, in the opinion ofthis editor, never trade at all and sit on their holdings during Bear Markets. On the spectrum of investors, from investor to gambler, the old “New Haven Investor” who “wants his dividends” is pretty rare these days, and,again, may be one of those trust departments which doesn’t want to get suedand so stays out of stocks which go up. After all, prudent men don’t “tradein volatile stocks” but “invest in safe issues, like bonds,” which only loseabout 1.5–2.0% of their purchasing value per year, but preserve the illusionof having “preserved principal.” AU3772_book.fm Page 367 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
One Deﬁnition of the Long-Term Investor

Let us take as a long-term investor now one who expects to at least track market returns, for it has been demonstrated over a relatively long periodof time that this can be done by passive indexing. At the turn of the century,as this is written, it would seem neither long-term nor medium-term norshort-term investors think about the risks involved in matching the marketsince, entering the third millennium, it has been so many years since wehave had a really vicious Bear Market. Dow 36000? This is a passing phase.As each Bull Market reaches higher and higher, the odds are lower and lowerthat it will continue — historic Bull Markets of the 1990s notwithstanding. What then are the strategy and tactics for the long-term investor to achieve a goal of matching the market? (EN9: Is it necessary to remind the reader of Chapter 5.1 and the Dow Theory?) Let us remark immediately that the tactics Magee described for the speculator — or trader if you will — are not at all in conﬂict with theshort-term tactics used occasionally by the long-term investor. As buying orselling time approaches the stops of the long-term investor, that investorbecomes a trader. Then he can and should adopt the trader’s tactics. Sooneror later the focus even narrows to real time at the moment of trade execution.Interestingly, the charting techniques we have described here work ontick-by-tick data in real time also. So if the trader wants to enter into thereal-time environment, he can attempt to time his trade right down to thereal-time chart formations. Of course, only the really active and skilledlong-term investor will be concerned with squeezing the last half point orpoints out of his position. But this illustration of the time focus is addressedto any investor or trader or speculator to demonstrate the fractal nature ofboth price data and the applicability of Magee-type technical analysis to it. The Strategy of the Long-Term Investor The strategy of the long-term investor is to catch the long trends — toparticipate in trades which last months and years. But this strategy does notintend to be sucked into long Bear Markets. Rather, portfolios are liquidatedor hedged when Bear Market signals are received. As has been previouslyseen in examples of the performance of (more or less) mechanical DowTheory (Chapter 5), this kind of performance can be quite satisfactory —better indeed than buy-and-hold strategies which have come much intovogue because of the Clinton–Gore Bull Markets of the 1990s. If the goal is to beat not only the markets but the mutual funds (only 20% of which outperform the market over the long term anyway), thenpassive indexing is the most likely strategy. This may be done in a numberof ways — index funds, buying the basket, buying the futures, etc. But themost attractive method might be the use of the SPDRs and DIAMONDS andthe like. The tactics may be calibrated to the risk tolerance and character ofthe investor. He might hedge or sell on Dow Theory signals, or on breaks AU3772_book.fm Page 368 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 18.1: Strategy and Tactics for the Long-Term Investor 369 of the 200-day moving average, or on breaks of the long-term or intermediate trends lines with a ﬁlter (Magee recommended 2%, and this might be cali-brated to the character of the markets, and increased to 3% or a factor relevantto actual market volatility). Instruments we have previously discussed —SPDRs, DIAMONDS, index futures, and options — can be used to executethese tactics. Sufﬁce it to say that every strategy must provide for the plan gone wrong, in other words the dreaded Bear Market. Bear Markets would not be sofearsome if the average investor did not insist on seeing only the long sideof the market. Long-term strategies go out the window quickly when bloodruns on the ﬂoor of the NYSE. The well-prepared technical investor has aplan which provides for the liquidation of positions gone bad and presum-ably the discipline to execute it. This involves the regular recomputation of stops as markets go in the planned direction, and ruthless liquidation of losers which do not perform.One may think of a portfolio as a fruit tree. Weak branches must be prunedto improve the yield. Stop computation is treated in a number of places inthis book (cf. Chapter 27). For the investor trading long term, this may be,as an example only and not as a recommendation, the breaking of the 200-daymoving average and/or the breaking of a long-term trendline. The 200-daymoving average is widely believed to be the long-term trend indicator, andbelieving will sometimes make it come true. EN9: Let me emphasize here that

> “200”
is a parameter and an example. Personal research may ﬁt a better parameter to the actual market. In reality, more than the 200-day or a manually drawn trendline should be looked at. The chart patterns comprising the portfolio should be consideredalso, as well as charts of major indexes and averages. Also consider the condi-tion of the averages and their components — their technical state — whetherthey are topping, consolidating, trending as indicated by their charts. Rhythmic Investing In addition, if Chapter 31 on “Not All in One Basket” is weighed seriously,one might be rolling a portfolio from long to short gradually in naturalrhythm with the markets and in harmony with the Magee Evaluative Indexdescribed there. That is the preferred strategy of the authors and editor ofthis book. These things all depend on the goals, temperament, and character of the investor. If he is going to spend full time on the markets, he is probably nota long-term investor. Such men eat well and sleep soundly at night. Thetrader is lean and hungry — not necessarily for money, but for activity. Itbehooves one to know his type as a trader or investor. And knowing one’stype or character is best established before ﬁnding it out in the markets, asthe markets can be an expensive place to search for self-knowledge. There is no inherent conﬂict in holding long-term positions and also attempting to proﬁt from intermediate trends, depending on the amount of AU3772_book.fm Page 369 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
capital in hand. It depends on how much time and energy and capital the

investor wants to put into trading. A long-term strategy can be imple-mented with a modicum of time and energy, as follows. Pay attention tothe major indexes and averages and buy on breakouts, at the bottoms ofconsolidations and on pullbacks. Sell or hedge on the breaking oftrendlines, calculated on basing points (see Chapter 28) and the penetrationof support zones. The long-term investor will accept greater swings against his position than the intermediate-term trader or speculator. As an example with themethod of using basing points in Chapter 28, the speculator is using a“3-day-away rule,” whereas a long-term investor might be using a 4-weekbasing point or some such analogy. And, if interested, when he suspects oranalyzes that a long Bull Market is approaching a climax, he might adoptthe 3-day rule also, or even begin following his stock with a daily stop justunder the market. Beware though. Professionals look for stops just underthe close of the previous day in situations such as these. It would be wise not to confuse long term investing with “buy and hold” or as it was expressed in one investment fad in the 1970s, “one decisioninvesting.” As an example of this misguided thinking, in 1972, the “best andbrightest” investment analysts (fundamental) on the Street picked a portfolioof stocks for the generation, or twenty years. The companies would bedifﬁcult to argue with as the crème de la crème of American business. Afterall who could qvetch at Avon, Eastman Kodak, IBM, Polaroid (unless hehappened to look at Figure 253), Sears Roebuck, and Xerox? Even today ifyou didn’t have a close eye on the market, you would immediately respond,“blue chips.” Here is a table showing the stocks and the results achievedover the long term. Charts showing activity for IBM and Xerox appear on the following pages. Price Price Percent Stock 4/14/72 12/31/92 Change Avon Products 61.00 27.69 (54.6)% Eastman Kodak 42.47 32.26 (24.0)%IBM 39.50 25.19 (36.2)%Polaroid 65.75 31.13 (52.7)%Sears Roebuck 21.67 17.13 (21.0)%Xerox 47.37 26.42 (44.2)% AU3772_book.fm Page 370 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 18.1: Strategy and Tactics for the Long-Term Investor 371 FIGURE 201.1. The questionable—even bizarre—results of “one-decision invest ing” are amply illustrated by this chart. First of all, the “best and brightest” recom mended IBM at a decade high to see it decline by more than 50%. It subsequentlyrecovered to double from their original recommendation. Ah, sweet justiﬁcation!Only, unfortunately, at the end of 20 years to see it rest approximately 40% beneaththe recommendation. The analytical lines give some hint of how a technician mighthave traded the issue. I like to say that there are bulls, bears, and ostriches, andanyone who followed this one-decision investment proves my case.45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990IBM LAST-Monthly 02/26/1993 AU3772_book.fm Page 371 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Summary

The long-term investor attempts to catch major market moves — those lasting hundreds, if not thousands of Dow points and stay in trades for manymonths if not years. Within this time frame he expects to take secondary trends against his position. Depending on his temperament and inclination, he may attemptto hedge his portfolio upon recognizing secondary market moves againsthis primary direction. His preference for stocks and portfolio will be for market leaders, for baskets that reproduce the major indexes (or Index Shares) as the ballast forhis portfolio, and he may choose some speculative stocks to add spice to hisportfolio.

## _Figure 201.1.1_
Like IBM in the previous ﬁgure, Xerox was recommended at a place

where it should have been sold instead of bought. The comments there might apply to the chart here. The foolishness of “buy and hold” or “one decision investing” isamply illustrated by observing the long term swings of the stock and thus of theinvestor's equity. Technical analysis is intended to be an antidote to such foolishness.

AU3772_book.fm Page 372 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 18.1: Strategy and Tactics for the Long-Term Investor 373 In spite of his penchant for long-lasting trades he will not tolerate weak, losing, or underperforming stocks. They are the shortest of his trades. He will cut losses and let proﬁts run, the truest of the market maxims and theleast understood by unsuccessful investors. The other maxim least under-stood by investors is “buy strength, sell weakness.” Truly sophisticated investors attempt to participate in Bear Market trends also. This is the greatest difference between professional and generalinvestors — professionals have no bias against the short side. For the convenience of day traders, the URL of Gamblers Anonymous is noted: www.gamblersanonymous.org. AU3772_book.fm Page 373 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 374 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

375 chapter nineteen The All-Important Details In this chapter and the one following, we take up a number of elementary suggestions which are intended largely for the beneﬁt of those who havenever kept charts before. Much of this will seem obvious and repetitive tothe advanced student, although even he may ﬁnd some thoughts that willsimplify his work. The beginner should read these chapters carefully anduse them for later reference. The details of how and when you keep the charts will not guarantee you proﬁts. But if you fail to work out these details in such a way as to makeyour work easy, as part of a regular systematic routine, you cannot expectto keep up your charts properly, or to make any proﬁts either. Charting, and analyzing your charts, is not a difﬁcult process, nor will it take too much of your time if you have determined on a reasonable numberof charts, and if you have arranged for doing the work regularly, meaningevery day without fail. You will need a source of data — the day’s market prices and volume. If you live in a big city, your evening paper will carry the complete list, andyou can plan to set aside a certain period before dinner, or after dinner, orduring the evening. If you cannot allot such a period and keep it sacredagainst all other social or business obligations, then plan to do the chartingin the morning. But set a deﬁnite time and let nothing interfere, ever, or youare lost. EN: Of course, this process is radically simpliﬁed by automated computer downloading procedures and access to data sources and Internet sites. But the principle is the same. You should have a suitable place to work and keep your charts. If it is at home, in the dining room or living room, other members of the familyshould understand that what you are doing is important. You should be ableto shut the door and work without interruption. The light should be brightand as free from shadows as possible. (It makes a big difference, especiallyif you are keeping a large number of charts.) The ordinary desk lamp throwsa reﬂected glare directly across the paper and into the eyes. It can be a strainif you are doing much of this close work. Better to have an overhead light,placed just a few inches in front of your head and a convenient distanceabove; and if this light can be a ﬂuorescent ﬁxture using two 40-watt lamps,you will get almost perfect shadowless lighting. These suggestions apply, ofcourse, in case you are not working by daylight. AU3772_book.fm Page 375 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Have plenty of room. A big desk top, a dining room table, with a large

clear space for chart books, extra sheets, pencils, scratch paper, ruler, calcu lator, computer equipment, and anything else you need. If your workingsurface is fairly low, say 28 or 29 inches from the ﬂoor, it will be less tiringthan the usual 30-inch desk height. Whether you are working in ink or in pencil, pick out the writing tool that is easiest for you to use. If you are using pencils, try several differentmakes and degrees of hardness. Find one that is hard enough not to smudgetoo easily, and yet is not so hard that you have to bear down to make a cleanblack mark. The wrong kind of pencil can tire you and irritate you morethan you realize. Also, have plenty of pencils, a dozen at least, well-sharp-ened, so that as soon as one becomes a triﬂe dull and you are not getting aclean, ﬁne line, you can simply lay it aside and continue at once with anotherfresh-sharpened pencil. Keep your charts in loose-leaf books, with big enough rings to make turning the pages easy. Don’t overcrowd the books. Get new books if avolume is too crowded. Finished charts may be kept in ﬁle folders. The onlyones that need to be in the books are the current sheets and the sheets forthe immediately preceding period. If possible, use a seven-ring binder. Pagesare easily torn loose from two- and three-ring binders, but seven rings willhold the pages safely and you will seldom have one tear out. The charts you keep will become increasingly valuable to you as the chart history builds up. The old chart sheets will be very helpful to you forreference. Provide a ﬁle or space where they can be indexed and kept inchronological order, and also ﬁle folders for brokers’ slips, dividend notices,corporate reports, clippings and articles, notes on your own methods, andanalyses and special studies of the work you are doing. In this connection you will, of course, keep a simple but complete record of each purchase, sale, dividend, etc., on stocks you have bought or sold.This record will make your work much easier when the time comes to ﬁgureout income taxes. It will also give you all the statistical information you needto judge the results of your trading operations. EN: At the beginning of my investment career, and often in the middle of it, I thought the above was cracker-barrel wisdom. The longer I last the more I think thathomespun wisdom might be the best kind to have in investing — somewhat likeMark Twain, who was astounded at how much his father increased in wisdom theolder Twain himself got.

We may restate the modest homilies above: Be serious. Be methodical. Be dis ciplined. Be business-like. Anyone who succeeds in investing without these qualitiesis the recipient of blind luck and will be fortunate not to fall into a hole before hiscareer is over.

These thoughts occur when one is wondering how Magee would have viewed the advent of the microcomputer and its impact on technical analysis and investing. Might he have said, “What hath this tool wrought?! — Wonders and abominations!!”

Given the possibilities for complicating analysis and operations when confronted with all the bells and whistles of the average computer software package, the investor AU3772_book.fm Page 376 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter nineteen: The All-Important Details 377 must maintain perspective. What, then, are the all-important details in practicing technical analysis with the aid of a computer?

The Simplest and Most Direct Way to Use a Computer for Charting Analysis In reality, the computer can be used as a simple tool to do a simple job. There is nothing inherently complicated about keeping a chart on a computer. All computersoftware packages enable bar charting. And many, if not most, enable many otherkinds of charting, from candlesticks to oscillator charting. The process, in almost allcommercially available packages, is so simple that explaining it here would besuperﬂuous (cf. Resources, Appendix D, for demonstrations), except to say, ingeneral, it consists of retrieving data, updating the program’s price database, andclicking an icon to run a chart. The software packages themselves explain theirfeatures better than can be done here. What is important here is to give perspective.

In this respect, charting can be done with quite expensive programs and also on publicly available free programs, or freeware. Charting can also be done withinteractive charting programs on many Internet sites. The basic bar chart can beenhanced with an unending number of technical studies — moving averages, oscil-lators, etc., etc. Therein lies the danger. Chart analysis in itself is a qualitativeprocess. Decorating graphic charts with number-driven information and studies canlead the general investor astray — and into confusion and indecision.

So the ﬁrst preference of this analyst is to keep the process as simple as possible. Get the data. Draw a chart. Analyze the patterns. Consider the volume. Draw theappropriate analytical lines. This can usually be done by the program on the screen.Often a better graphic picture may be obtained by printing the chart and hand-drawing the analytical lines. And this brings to the fore one of the main problemsof almost all the software packages — that screen graphics are poor and, at least toold chartists, disorienting. They are especially disorienting to analysts who areaccustomed to working on Tekniplat chart paper. With passing editions of Resources,this problem will be dealt with. (EN9: In the intervening years since the 8th Edition two things have occurred: the Editor adjusted to modern technologyand the technology achieved a level of excellence acceptable to a carpinganalyst. Internet technical analysis sites such as stockcharts.com andprophet.net improved to be surprisingly valuable resources at unbelievablylow prices – even free.) The question of graphic representation of the facts is worth noting as a persistent one. To a certain extent, the individual analyst will solve this conundrum byadapting his eye and mind to a graphic environment, using one graphic methodconsistently and seeing how it relates to the facts in the market. John Magee-orientedsolutions to this problem will be available on the web site, www.edwards-magee.com.

In Resources, the reader may see some examples of very simple and inexpensive software packages and Internet sites which are quite adequate to the required tasksof charting technical analysis, as well as more complex number-driven analysis.

AU3772_book.fm Page 377 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Summary

The computer is an invaluable tool for analysis. Use of it will enable the following: • Data may be acquired automatically via Internet or dial-up sites at little orno cost. Some of these even offer real-time data, which is a way for theunsophisticated trader to go broke in real time; but which the generalinvestor may desire on the day of executing a trade. Many of these sitesoffer every kind of analysis from respectable technical analysis (usually toocomplicated) to extraterrestrial channeling.

• A computer package and Internet portfolio sites will give the analyst vir-tually effortless portfolio accounting and mark to the market prices — avaluable device to have to keep the investor from mixing his cash and accrualaccounting, as Magee says.

• The computer will enable processing of a hitherto unimaginable degree. Anunlimited number of stocks may be analyzed. Choosing those to trade witha computer will be dealt with in Chapters 20 and 21.

• Resources (Appendix D) contains information on software packages whichthe reader may try and purchase at quite reasonable prices. In all likelihood,the least expensive of these will be adequate to the needs of most generalinvestors.

In addition, I present a brief discussion of Internet sites and resources. AU3772_book.fm Page 378 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

379 chapter twenty The Kind of Stocks We Want — The Speculator’s Viewpoint The speciﬁcations of the kind of stock we want to chart are fairly simple, and they are few. We want a stock which will enable us to make a proﬁtthrough trading operations. That means a stock whose price will move overa wide enough range to make trading worthwhile. There are those who areconcerned mainly with safety of principal and the assurance of income froma stock. For them, there are (EN9: Or were.) stocks which afford a very considerable degree of stability. You may (and probably will) want to keepa substantial part of your total capital in stocks of this type. They move ina narrow price range. They are extremely resistant to downside breaks inthe market. They are also (and necessarily) unresponsive to fast upsidemoves in the market as a whole. These stocks are highly desirable for theconservative investor. However, they are not the most suitable issues fortrading operations, since their swings are small, and commissions wouldtend to diminish the narrow trading proﬁts that could be taken. Also, theydo not make the sharp, clear chart patterns of the more speculative issues,but move in rounding, sluggish undulations. (EN9: These remarks reﬂect a bygone time. The described stocks by and large went the way of the Dodo. When Tcan disappear from the market as a factor there is no place to hide, except in bonds,which, when stagnant, only lose real value at the rate of inﬂation and loss ofpurchasing power of the dollar. And even bonds should be subject to frequentreevaluation using the tools described in this book.) To amplify this comment and explain a bit about what underlies what we are doing, let us assume a certain company has two issues of stock, apreferred and a common. Since (we will assume) the concern has a certainsteady minimum proﬁt which it has earned for years, sufﬁcient to pay thepreferred dividend, the continuance of these dividends seems practicallyassured. But the dividends on the preferred are ﬁxed at, let us say, 6%. Nowthe common stock gets all that is left. In one year, there may be 50 cents ashare for the common stockholders. The next year, there may be $2.00 a shareor four times as much. In a case like this, if there are no other factors, youwould expect the preferred stock to sell at a fairly steady price without muchchange, whereas the common stock is subject to a “leverage” and mightshoot up to four times its former value. The more speculative issues represent AU3772_book.fm Page 379 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
either a business which is, by its nature, uncertain as to net proﬁt from year

to year, where the volume of business or the proﬁt margin ﬂuctuates widely,or one in which the majority of the “sure” net proﬁt has been sheared offfor the beneﬁt of senior obligations. There are also other factors that affectthe speculative swing of a stock, and, as a result, one issue may be verysensitive and another extremely conservative; and between them therewould be all shades and degrees of sensitivity or risk. It is enough here tonote brieﬂy that the nature of the business itself does not always account forthe habits of the stock, since the other factors may be very important. Butmost stocks have a fairly well-deﬁned “swing” power, and you can usuallydetermine by past performance how a stock will behave in the future as tothe extent of its swing. (EN9: Or we might say, short-term volatility and long-term range.) Incidentally, for short-term trading (EN9: Amusing in the modern context. By short-term trading Magee means trading of trends of shorter length than DowWaves), we are thinking about the habits of the stock which are only partly determined by the business it represents. Purchase of stock in one companywhich has a somewhat uncertain or ﬂuctuating proﬁt record may be moreconservative than purchase of a highly leveraged stock of another companywhose basic business is steadier and more conservative. We will take up thematter of determining these risk constants a little later. One should also understand that the short sale of a stock does not imply any feeling that the country is going to the dogs or even that the concernrepresented is going to the dogs. Such a sale merely indicates your beliefthat the stock may be temporarily overpriced; that earnings or dividendsmay have been abnormal in recent years and are likely to be reduced; orthat for one reason or another, the stock of the company may be worth a bitless than it has been worth. For technical trading, we want a fairly speculative stock, one which will make sizable swings up in a Bullish Trend, and down in a Bearish Trend.The very factors which tend to make a stock safe and desirable to the investormay make it entirely unsuitable for trading. And with certain reservations,which we will take up, the more speculative the stock the better it is for ourpurposes. EN: Entering the third millennium (since we Anglo-Saxons started counting — the fourth or ﬁfth by other measures) the distinctions between “speculative” stocksand every other kind of stock has grown increasingly blurry. Rather than apply aperhaps pejorative (in the minds of some readers) term like “speculative” to otherwiseinnocent stocks, we would do better to describe stocks as wide ranging or narrowranging, as volatile or nonvolatile. Stocks may then be evaluated one against anotherby their betas and historical volatilities, statistical data easy to obtain. “Betas” and“volatilities” are dealt with in Chapters 24 and 42.

In line with this more current thinking, there is another question for readers of this book and that is the choice of trading (or investment) instruments for the long-term investor. That question is taken up by the editor in Chapter 20.1. AU3772_book.fm Page 380 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty: The Speculator’s Viewpoint 381 FIGURES 202 and 203. Opportunity vs. security. Here (at left) is Goodyear Com mon, representing the residual interest in all proﬁts after senior obligations have been met, compared (at right) with the Goodyear $5.00 Preferred, which carries a highdegree of assurance that the $5.00 dividend will be met, but no promise of furtherparticipation in proﬁts. Monthly range of each stock for the same 54-month periodis shown on a ratio scale. As the Common makes an advance of over 300%, thePreferred advances about 25%, leveling off at a point which represents the maximumprice investors are willing to pay for the sure $5.00 dividend. GOOD YEAR TIRE COMMON 1943 1944 1945 1946 194776 7268 64 60 56 52 48 44 40 36 32 28 GOOD YEAR TIRE 1ST PREFERRED 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947120 112 104 96 88 80 AU3772_book.fm Page 381 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 382 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

383 chapter 20.1 The Kind of Stocks We Want — The Long-Term Investor’s Viewpoint Changing Opinions About Conservative Investing Virtually no one invests like the conservative investor described above in Chapter 20 — except perhaps trust departments of antediluvian banks. Theremay be some investors still out there who are so risk averse that they stillfollow the method described. Bank trust departments may be still doing it.They used to do it so the trust beneﬁciaries couldn’t sue them. Of course,they should be sued for incompetence. But that is the reason trust depart-ments exist, in order to give legal cover (the so-called “prudent man rule”)to trustees in case of suit by beneﬁciaries. Most enlightened trust depart ments and trustees now probably follow indexing or other more productive strategies in order to cater to new understandings of the prudent man rule.A beneﬁciary of a trust which has been mismanaged or has radically under-performed the market should certainly seek redress.

> “Indexing” refers to the practice of constructing a portfolio so as to
replicate or closely reproduce the behavior of a widely followed index suchas the S&P; 500 or the Dow–Jones Industrials. These portfolios never trackthe Indexes exactly because the advisors and funds who manage them takemanagement fees and expenses. These fees are generally less than fees andexpenses on actively managed funds, but in fact are not necessary for theprivate investor to pay. Unnecessary because even the tyro investor can nowuse “Index Shares” (e.g., DIA, SPY, QQQQ, etc....) or other proxy instrumentsto do what the funds and professionals do. Essentially what indexing doesis track the Averages, a strategy which was impossible or difﬁcult (expensive)when Magee examined it, as in Chapter 15. (EN9: In the opinion of this editor hiring a management company to run an indexing strategy is imprudent and awaste of capital. Much better for the investor to invest directly AND to exit themarket when uptrends end and reverse. This is a much better strategy than “passiveindexing”which cleverly manages to capture both lossses and proﬁts in theAverages.) AU3772_book.fm Page 383 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The Kinds of Stocks Long-Term Investors Want

Perhaps one of the most important actualizations of this eighth edition is to bring current this book’s treatment of the Averages, noting that it is nowpossible to trade the Averages in stock-like instruments. This fact deservesto be marked as an vitally important development in modern markets. Theimportance, if it is not obvious, was explained in detail in Strategies and Tacticsfor the Long-Term Investor, Chapter 18.1. This chapter will conﬁne itself todescribing facilities for trading and investing in the Averages and Indexes. In 1993 the American Stock Exchange (AMEX) introduced trading in SPDRs™ or Standard & Poor’s Depositary Receipts, an Exchange-traded unit investment trust based on the S&P; 500 Composite Stock Price Index.The AMEX calls these securities Index Shares™, a name they also use forother similar instruments. As noted above, large investors and funds havelong traded “baskets” of stocks representing the S&P; 500, obviously anactivity requiring large capital. And in fact a certain class of investmentmanagers and funds have practiced “passive investing” meaning indexing,primarily for large clients. The purchase and liquidation of these and other “baskets” is one form of “program trading.” Recognizing the utility of this investment practice, the AMEX created the SPDR as a proxy instrument to allow the smaller investor to practice the same strategy. The effectiveness of this product introduction may be mea-sured by public participation in the trading of the SPDR (SPY). By 2000,almost $15 billion was invested in SPDRs with more than 100,000,000 sharesoutstanding. These units allow the investor to buy or sell the entire portfolioor basket of the S&P; 500 stocks just as he would an individual stock. Butthe capital required to do so is radically reduced. In 1998, the AMEX introduced DIAMONDS™ (DIA), Index Shares on the Dow–Jones Industrial Average™, which is analogous in every way tothe SPDRs. Thus an investor may “buy the Dow–Jones Industrial Average.”So in current ﬁnancial markets, it is possible to “buy the market,” unlikethose conditions under which Edwards and Magee operated. Construction of the Index Shares and Similar Instruments The AMEX unit investment trusts are constructed to replicate the composi-tion of their base instrument. The SPDR, for example, is an instrument whichrepresents 1 / 10 of the full value of a basket of the S&P; stocks and trades on the AMEX, just like a stock. Other characteristics of stocks are also repro-duced. Long life: the SPDR Trust lasts into the 22nd century. Quarterlydividends: quarterly cash dividends are paid on the SPDRs reproducingdividends accumulated on the stocks of the S&P; 500. Even dividend rein-vestment is possible, and the units may be traded on the AMEX duringregular trading hours. Under normal conditions, there should be little vari-ance in the price of the SPDR relative to the S&P; 500. AU3772_book.fm Page 384 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 20.1: The Long-Term Investor’s Viewpoint 385 These elements, as discussed for SPDRs, are common to all the Index Shares — DIAMONDS, WEBs, etc. There are, of course, some expenses and costs to using the Index Shares — a small price to pay for the use of theinstrument, and generally less than the costs of a fund. Index Shares are alsomuch more ﬂexible for the independent investor. Among other advantagesthe private investor can control the tax consequences of his investment,which is not possible in funds. Other Exchanges have created similar security instruments or deriva tives or futures to replicate or track the well-known averages and indexes.Among these are tracking shares or index shares or futures (let us call them“instruments”) on other indexes (Russell, Nikkei, etc.) or options on thefutures or indexes until there is a bewildering array of instruments availablefor trading, investing, and hedging. Among the more important exchangesand instruments traded are the Chicago Board of Trade (futures and optionson futures on the Dow); the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (futures on theS&P;, Nikkei 225, Mini S&P; 500, S&P; Midcap 400, Russell 2000, andNASDAQ 100); Chicago Board Options Exchange (S&P; 100 and 500options)…. This, by no means, is an exhaustive list. All the futures andoptions which matter will be found listed in The

Wall Street Journal under Futures Prices, or Futures Options Prices. This book does not deal in comprehensive detail with futures and options. But it is worth mentioning these exchanges and their futures andoptions products because of the facility that they offer the investor and traderfor hedging portfolios in Index shares and Average trading, not to mentionopportunities for speculating. Brieﬂy, hedging is the practice of being neutral in the market. That is, one might be long the DIAMONDS and buy a put option on the DJIA at theChicago Board of Trade, meaning that advances in the DJIA would result inproﬁts in the DIAMONDS, and a loss of premium in the put. Conversely, adecline in the Dow would result in proﬁts in the put and losses in theDIAMONDS. As this area is not the province of this book, this is a highlysimpliﬁed description of a hedge. Nevertheless, the reader should see andunderstand that hedging can be a very important strategy. Hedging can takethe place of liquidation of a portfolio when the analyst recognizes a changeof trend or unstable conditions but does not wish to incur taxes, or wishesto defer them. An Outline of Instruments Available for Trading and Investing It would be herculean to attempt to list the entire panoply of averages, indexes, futures and options available for trading — herculean due to thefact that new trading instruments are constantly in creation, and due to thefact that, now operating at Internet speed, we may expect the rate of changeto accelerate. In addition to those listed above, there are WEBS (World EquityBenchmarks — meaning that exposure to world markets may be arranged). AU3772_book.fm Page 385 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
In all, approximately 30 or more Index Share units or instruments were

available for trading on the AMEX at the turn of the century, in addition to DIAMONDS and SPDRs. Similar instruments exist on the Philadelphia andin Chicago, and others are being created daily. In order to reduce the con-fusion, the general investor will probably ﬁnd the major indexes of the mostimportance. The more instruments one deals with the more complicatedbecome the strategy and tactics. Therefore, the Dow, the S&P; 500, and theNASDAQ composite (DIA, SPY, QQQQ) are probably sufﬁcient for the pur-poses of the gentleman (or gentlelady) investor. The Mid-Caps, the Nikkei,etc., etc., begin to come into play when the trader begins to try to catch sectorrotation, fads, short-term cycles, etc. The Importance of These Instruments: Diversiﬁcation, Dampened Risks, Tax, and, Most Important, Technical Regularity It would be difﬁcult to underestimate the importance of these new trading instruments. First of all, they afford the private investor what was previouslyreserved for the large capital trader — the ultimate in market diversiﬁcation.The S&P; 500 represents stocks comprising 69% of the value of stocks on theNYSE. Buying it is literally buying the American economy. The 30 DowIndustrial stocks represent the most important symbol in the American econ-omy — and perhaps in the world. Investors are well advised to pay attentionto both averages if they would fare well in the markets. Note the plural: markets. These two averages now have the inﬂuence or clout that once the Dow alone had to express the state of the markets and stocks in general. Buying the SPDR or DIAMOND then represents the immediate acqui sition of a diversiﬁed portfolio. And buying the NASDAQ or QQQQ givesone immediate exposure to the more speculative and volatile sector of theAmerican economy. Given the long-term bullish bias of the averages andthe American economy, it is difﬁcult to argue with this as both strategy andtactics for the long-term investor. This does not mean that positions shouldbe taken blindly without thought, or that positions should not be monitored.On the contrary, recall if you will the record of the Dow Theory. Even forthe long-term investor, Bear Markets should not be allowed to destroy liquid-ity and equity value. These questions are discussed at greater length inChapter 18.1. While we believe these instruments are good vehicles, it is wise to remember Magee’s frequent admonition (less important now than whenspoken) that it is a market of stocks, not a stock market. Meaning that whenthe tide is ﬂowing down with the Dow and S&P;, prudence and care mustbe used in taking long positions in stocks which are in doubt as to direction.And it is worth noting that investments in these instruments will be lessproﬁtable than an astutely chosen individual stock. For example, Qualcommappreciated approximately 240% (temporarily) in 1999–2000 compared to AU3772_book.fm Page 386 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 20.1: The Long-Term Investor’s Viewpoint 387 about 24% in the S&P; over the same period. Those who bought Qualcomm at its top and sold it at the bottom of its reaction lost about 75% or about$148 a share. Traders in Qualcomm tended to obsess and pay hyperattentionto the stock, while investors in the SPDRs reviewed it once a week or less,or told their computers or their brokers to give them a call if it broke thetrendline, or entered stops. Then they slept at night and had eupeptic digestion. Other advantages accrue to the trading of the SPDRs. Ownership of a fund can result in tax liabilities as managers adjust portfolios to reﬂectchanging membership in the fund or withdrawals in capital by irate stock-holders. Since Index Shares last into the 22nd century the long-term investorhas no need to realize gains and pay taxes. Bear markets may be dealt withby hedging with other instruments — futures, options, or proxy baskets ofstock, or individual stocks, and accepting the tax consequences of thesetrades. John Magee aptly observed before the direct trading of the averages was possible that the Dow–Jones Industrials were very regular and dependablefrom the technical point of view. This observation is annotated at some lengthin comments on Dow Theory in Chapters 5.1 and 36. So the investor in theIndex Shares may have a smoother time technically than a trader of anindividual stock. Summary The long-term investor and mid-term speculator attempt to capture longsecular (as well as cyclical) trends in the markets. They shun frequent tradingand capital-eroding transactions. They recognize that risk ﬂuctuates with time and trend and they know that frequent turnover beneﬁts mainly the broker. The strategy of thelong-term investor may be to match the market by using funds or SPDRs orbaskets. But he does not like to participate in bear trends. He hedges orliquidates his positions on major trend shifts. And in fact he may even shortthe indices if his analysis indicates major bear markets. If he desires to outperform the market (which will happen automatically if he follows the methods of this work), he ﬁnds some individual speculativestocks to trade in addition to his foundation portfolio. Depending on his risktolerance, he may always be somewhat hedged. When long the indices, heﬁnds some stocks in downtrends to short. When he is short the indices heﬁnds some strong stocks to hold long. There is no excuse for a moderatelyskilled and reasonably capitalized investor to lose money over the long termin the market. AU3772_book.fm Page 387 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 203.1. S&P.; Here the beneﬁts of relaxed long-term investing may be seen,

buttressed, of course, by the longest and handsomest Bull Market in American history in the Clinton–Gore years. At the end of this record, the effects of public enthusiasm(or as Chairman Greenspan of the Fed said, “irrational exuberance” vide tulipomania) can be seen in the wide undisciplined swings (best seen in Figure 203.2). Dotted linerepresents 150-day (approximately) Moving Average. SPX LAST-Monthly Created with TradeStation www.TradeStation.com 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 001500 1400 1300 1200 1100 1000 900 800 700 600 500 400 300 AU3772_book.fm Page 388 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 20.1: The Long-Term Investor’s Viewpoint 389 FIGURE 203.2. SPDR. For illustration, here is a chart of the AMEX Index Share, the SPYDR, or share based on the S&P; 500. The costs and beneﬁts of this instrument as an investment vehicle are explored in the text of Chapter 20.1. After the, what shallwe call it, crash?, of 1998 (the Asian Economic Flu crash), the fan lines tell a story,as does the last phase of the chart where the market whips in what appears aBroadening Top. EN9: Note that this Broadening Top was identiﬁed in 1999–2000, before the crash. See Figure 203.3. SPY LAST-Daily Created with TradeStation www.TardeStation.com 144.999 139.999 134.999129.999 124.999 119.999 114.999 109.999 104.999 99.999 94.999 2400000 20000001600000120000080000004000000 5/1998 6/1998 7/1998 8/1998 9/1998 10/1998 11/1998 12/1998 99 2/1999 3/19994/1999 5/1999 6/1999 7/1999 8/1999 9/1999 10/1999 11/1999 12/1999 00 AU3772_book.fm Page 389 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 203.3. The S&P; 500 in all its glory and tragedy. An especially good portrait

by Holbein, the younger. The Broadening Top pointed out in Figure 203.2 in 2000 foretold the decline of the S&P; to below 790 – not quite 50% but close enough tocatch the eye. Especially ﬁne lessons here, besides the Broadening Top lesson. All ofthem screaming for action. The broken trendline at A, the broken trendline at B, the broken “neckline” or horizontal line at C. Notice the close correspondence of thebreak at B and C. The next lesson is not to buy down trends until a clear bottom ismade in a major bear market. And clearly no bottom is made until the Kilroy Bottomat 1 – 2 – 3. Even then the least risky trade for the long term investor is when theKilroy Fenceline (Neckline) is broken at D. All of this was knowable at the time. $INXWeekly US A B C D 1 231193.03 1077.90 938.571464.00 1356.001255.00 1100.00 1156.85 1076.00 996.00 922.00 854.00790.00 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Created with TradeStation AU3772_book.fm Page 390 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

391 chapter twenty-one Selection of Stocks to Chart The trader who operates on the “fundamental” basis, making his commit ments on his analysis of earnings, dividends, corporate management, pros-pects for the industry, etc., will usually (of necessity) conﬁne himself to afew stocks or a single group of stocks in the same ﬁeld. To the contrary, the technical trader, using daily charts, should have a large portfolio of issues. Since he is primarily interested in the technical chartpatterns, he will not try to make an exhaustive study of the background ofeach company. In fact, the characteristics of the stocks themselves, as theyact in the market, are more important to him than what these companiesmake or what they are earning. This is because, although the stocks represent ownership in the company, the capital structure, “leverage,” and ﬂoating supply of the stock may (and very often does) mean ﬂuctuations in the stockprice that are not directly in proportion to changes in the affairs of thebusiness. You will also ﬁnd many cases where the stock of a well-regarded, well managed, long-established concern, whose latest earnings report showsincreased proﬁts, and with a long record of dividends paid, would not be agood buy at the market price. It may be overpriced and due for a seriousdepreciation. You will ﬁnd other cases where a stock, which apparentlyrepresents no great promise of either earnings or dividends, suddenly startsa series of spectacular moves upward, and is indicated clearly as a buy. Ofcourse, the answer, in each case, is that the records available apply to thepast, not the future; and very often, chart action will indicate the insideknowledge of those who are in possession of facts the public has not yetreceived. To change our example to something more easily visualized: there are two houses for sale. One is a ﬁne, well-built, modern home in an attractivepart of town at, say, $200,000 — and the other property, a somewhat shabbysix-family tenement in a less attractive section, at the same price of $200,000.There is no question which is the “better” house. But in a case like this, themarket for well-built single homes at this price may be poor, while thedemand for apartments may be good. The six-family house may be the betterinvestment. And then again, we have the question of what is conservative and what is highly speculative. It is not always enough to judge from the type ofbusiness of the company itself. You may have a highly conservative concern, AU3772_book.fm Page 391 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
carrying on a stable volume of business, with a long record of successful

operation. And yet, if there are bonds, debentures, preferred stocks, andother senior obligations, the common stock may be subject to wide ﬂuctua-tions. Also, if the issue is small, or if a large part of it is closely held, youwill have a “leverage” effect which results in wide swings in the stock. Therefore, in choosing your stock to chart, you will want to consider the kind of stock and its character and habits in the market, rather than thebusiness of the concern it represents. We will come back to this point andshow you how you can shape up a list that will give you the kind of stocksyou want for trading. Meanwhile, the question “How Many Charts?” has been left hanging. One answer to this is that the more stocks you chart, the more good oppor-tunities you will have. Many stocks, even of active issues, will go throughlong periods when the chart tells nothing — when, indeed, there is nothingmuch to tell. In a period of stability, the chart simply indicates that it is aperiod of stability, and the only possible trading activity would be purchasesand sales at the Bottoms and Tops of its undulations. The charts are moreinformative when a change in the situation occurs; they will signal a changeof trend as soon as (and usually before) the news of the changed conditionshas come out. If you have enough charts, you will always have some stocksmaking decisive and clear-cut moves either up or down, at any time. You should, therefore, keep as many charts as you can. Don’t bite off more than you can chew, however. A man with only 15 minutes to half anhour a day for this work might have to conﬁne himself to 20 or 30 charts. Itwould be much better if he could have 100. And if he is in a position to givea major part of his time to the work, he could very well run as many as300 charts. A most important word of caution is indicated here. Don’t startanything you can’t ﬁnish. It is better to have too few at the beginning thantoo many. Then, if you ﬁnd that you can add others, you will be in a betterposition, from your experience, to pick out the ones you want to include.But if you start with too many charts, begin to run behind with your analyses,you will not be getting the best use from your portfolio, and it would bebetter to cut down at once. EN: Magee’s admonitions are still in effect for the manual chartist. The modern computer-equipped investor has a different problem.He can chart every issue in the market every day. The question becomes, how manycan he effectively study and analyze? There is even a computer answer to thisquestion. Namely, the cybertrader can program the computer to report stocks on anexception basis. For example, “Computer, show me all the stocks which are abovetheir 50-day moving average and which have unusual volume.” From what we have already been over, you know that it is possible to chart anything that is sold in identical units in a free competitive market.This includes, of course, all kinds of commodities, bonds, debentures, when-issued contracts, etc., as well as stocks. You may have some special interestwhich will call for charting something outside the ﬁeld of stocks. Well andgood. AU3772_book.fm Page 392 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-one: Selection of Stocks to Chart 393 In general, however, you will want to chart active, listed stocks of well established corporations. There is no reason an unlisted stock cannot be charted, but ordinarily, the only ﬁgures you can obtain on it are the bid andoffer prices. On these stocks, you do not have a published statement of thevolume of sales each day or any record of prices at which sales actually tookplace, and those are essential to the charting of daily technical action. There-fore, you will usually be charting stocks which are listed on some exchange.This is also an advantage, since concerns listed on the larger exchanges arerequired to meet certain conditions, publish certain information, and complywith deﬁnite rules and practices. In this book, most of the examples havebeen taken from stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange. There arethousands of issues traded on the NYSE, and these stocks represent everytype of security, from the most conservative to the most speculative, fromthe cheapest to the most expensive, and they include every principal typeof industry and business. However, there is no reason that stocks should notbe chosen from the American Stock Exchange, the NASDAQ, or from anyother exchange in this country, or for that matter, in some other country. So far as the chart action is concerned, the patterns and their meanings will be thesame. (Editor’s italics.) EN9: In general the stocks to watch, or chart, will tend to leap out of the haystack of stocks. For stock pickers Investors Business Daily is in the constant process of sifting the markets for nuggets with its CANSLIM system. (Not a recommendationto use that system, only a recommendation to examine every tool that might be ofuse.) Stocks which appear suddenly on the most active lists of prophet.net andstockcharts.com might bear examination by the chart analyst. Optionable stockswhich suddenly show a radical change in implied volatility. Stocks which pop upwith suspicious volume spikes compared to average volume. And with Internet andsoftware packages one might construct a ﬁlter to be informed by the computer ofstocks breaking their 14, 44, 150, and 200 day moving averages. 14 because someprofessionals think the public thinks in this time frame; 44 because some think fundsthink in 44 day time frames. The others because everyone thinks they are important. AU3772_book.fm Page 393 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 394 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

395 chapter twenty-two Selection of Stocks to Chart — Continued In choosing your stocks, you will probably look for the greatest diversity in the kind of industry. Since you are not specializing in the detailed study of a single group, you will try to get stocks from as many different groups aspossible. You will want to include mines and oils, rails and chemicals, liquorsand amusements, airlines, utilities, techs, Internets, biotechs, ad inﬁnitum …. The reason for this is simply that, very often, many stocks in a particularindustrial group will show the same or similar patterns, as the entire industryis affected by certain Major conditions. You will often ﬁnd, for instance, thatwhen Allis-Chalmers (EN: or Dell) makes a Triangle or other Area Pattern, followed by a sharp upward move, Deere (EN: or Compaq), Minneapolis Moline, Harvester, and Case will make similar Triangles, or possibly Rect angles or some other Consolidation Pattern, followed by a similar upward move. When Schenley is moving in a long downtrend, you will very likelyﬁnd that Distillers — Seagrams, National Distillers, Publicker, and AmericanDistilling — are also moving in a long downtrend. EN: Metaphorical names, like the names of Greek gods. Or Ulysses and Leopold Bloom. The present-day readermay read Intel, Fairchild, and National Semiconductor or 3COM. The idea is thesame. Therefore, unless you plan to keep enough charts to include several stocks of each important group, it is best to pick your stocks to make up as widely diversiﬁed a list as possible. In this way, during times when certaingroups are moving indecisively, or are inactive, you will have some repre-sentation in other groups which may be active. (Do not infer from this thatall stocks of a group move together at all times. Individual concerns willfrequently move according to special inﬂuences that bear on a single com-pany. But where the Major inﬂuence is some industry-wide condition, thegroup will move more or less as a unit.) We, therefore, choose stocks representing a wide variety of groups or basic industries. But, suppose we are limited as to the number of charts, andwe must choose one stock from a group; which stock to choose? Suppose,for instance, we must choose one stock from the transportation group. EN: Or Biotech, or Internets. As a matter of fact, you would probably want more than one because this particular group is so important and so large. But for AU3772_book.fm Page 395 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
the moment, let us choose just one. EN9: Or, even better, why not

one of the indexes for the desired group. An example of betting on all the horses rather than trying to pick the winner, and there is no conﬂict between making both bets. Should it be a high-priced stock or a low-priced stock? Let us examine that point ﬁrst. If you examine the past records of stocks you will ﬁnd that, in general, the lower-priced issues make much larger percentage moves than the higher priced stocks. It is not unusual for a stock selling around 5 to make a rise of100%, moving up to 10 sometimes within a few weeks. On the other hand,you do not ﬁnd 100% moves in days or weeks among the stocks selling at100 or 200. The same industry-wide move which carries your $5 stock from5 to 10 might carry your $100 stock from 100 to 140. Obviously, if you hadput $1000 into outright purchase of the stock at 5, the move would haveincreased the value of your stock 100% or $1000. In the other case, if youhad put the same amount into a stock at 100, the move to 140 (althoughmany more points) would have increased your capital to only $1400. Thegain in the lower-priced stock would be about two- and one-half times asgreat. The authors have worked out and tabulated the percentage moves of large groups of stocks over long periods of time (cf. Appendix A), and haveset up a table which shows the relative average sensitivity of stocks at dif ferent price levels. This table pertains only to the price level of stocks; thus,the same stock which today sells at 5 and makes wide percentage swingswill not swing so widely when it has moved up to a price level of 20 to 30. Several questions may come to your mind at this point. Do not the costs of trading low-priced stocks relative to higher-priced issues have to be takeninto account? EN: Yes, they do. Given the extreme changeability in these costs in the Internet economy, calculation of those costs here would be tantamount to wastingtrees. This cost question may be researched quickly and easily given availability ofgoogle.com and the Internet. In selecting the price level of the stocks you prefer to trade in, you cannot set too arbitrary a limit, since there are other factors to consider, and youmay have to make some compromises on one score in order to get what youwant in some other direction. Stocks from 20 to 30 are in a good tradingprice range. Very often, you will ﬁnd stocks in the 10 to 20 range which areso interesting you will want to chart them, and trade in them. You will ﬁndgood situations in stocks selling at 30 to 40. Furthermore, you will under-stand, of course, that the stocks which are now selling at 10 may be sellingnext year at 40, or vice versa. And since you cannot be changing yourportfolio of charts all the time, you must not be too “choosy” in picking theprice range of your stocks. However, you would not ordinarily pick out astock that was selling far above the price range of most stocks of its group,say at 150, when several others in the same industry were selling at 15, 28,or 37. For the high-priced stock, as we have said, is likely to be sluggish as AU3772_book.fm Page 396 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-two: Selection of Stocks to Chart — Continued 397 FIGURES 204 and 205. Low-priced stocks move faster than high-priced stocks. Here are weekly charts of two rail stocks, charted on ratio scale over the same 6-month period. Baltimore and Ohio during this time advanced from 12 ⅜ to 28 ⅞, a gain of 16 ½ points, while Union Paciﬁc moved up from 109 to 137, a gain of 28 points. The advance in “UP,” however, compared to its price, is much less than the advance in “BO.” A thousand dollars used for outright purchase of “UP” would show you acapital increase of 25%. On the other hand, if you had put a thousand dollars intooutright purchase of “BO,” your increase would have been 133%, or more thanﬁve times as much. Bear in mind that low-priced stocks not only go up much faster, but also come down much faster than high-priced stocks. When you own a low-priced stock, you cannot safely “put it away in the box and forget it.” For security and stability, youwould do better to buy a few shares of a high-priced, gilt-edge security. But, fortrading purposes, you will want to strike a compromise between the rather sluggish“blue chips” and the extremely erratic “cats and dogs” in the lowest price bracket. BALTIMORE & OHIO BO 1945 UNION PACIFIC UP 1945 J A NF E BM A RA P R J U N E MAY JAN FEB MAR APR JUNE MAY34 323028 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12136 128 120 112 104 96 88 80 AU3772_book.fm Page 397 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
a trading medium. On the other hand, you would not take the very lowest

priced issues of the group, selling at, say, 4 or 2 when others were in the10 to 30 bracket. You would not only be faced with erratic and tricky chartaction, and much higher percentage costs for commissions; but you mightnot be able to operate on margin at all. There are, from time to time, limita-tions on the amount of margin on stocks at all levels. In the lower-pricedissues, these limits are often more stringent. And in the lowest-pricedstocks, you are sometimes not permitted to trade on margin. EN: Because these requirements are subject to the vagaries of the Federal Reserve Board, theinvestor must inform himself at his personal broker or ECN. For quite some yearsthe general margin requirement has been 50%. The Fed came in for some sharpcriticism for not dampening speculation in the ﬁn de siècle bubble by raising margin rates to 100%, and its lack of action exacerbated the blow off of 2000. Achange in margin rates should get the immediate attention of the tecnical analyst.Something will be up. Ordinarily, you will get the greatest effective leverage at some point in the 20s, considering all these factors. And your trading can run downthrough the teens and up through the 40s. Above 40 and below 10, you willhave to have strong reasons for trading, which might be, of course, amplecapital. It would therefore be best for the moderately ﬁnanced investor tochoose a majority of his stocks from the middle price range (10 to 40), plusonly those special situations you are particularly interested in watchingamong the very low and very high brackets. However, if you will go back to the long-time past record of any group of stocks, you will ﬁnd that even among stocks moving at nearly the sameprice levels today, there are widely different behavior patterns. You will ﬁndthat some stocks respond to a severe market setback by reacting, let us say,20% — that is, if they were selling at 30, they would move down to around24. And you will ﬁnd others that will respond to the same setback in thegeneral market by a reaction of 50% — that is, if they were selling at 30, theywould end up at around 15. And you will notice, if you examine the records,that the same stocks which make these relatively different reactions in onesetback will make about the same moves, relative to each other, in othersetbacks. Furthermore, the same ones which make only moderate correctionson declines will make only moderate advances on rises. And the ones thatgo down sharply on setbacks will also skyrocket in a Bullish Market. Thishas nothing to do with the phenomenon we discussed earlier, by which wesaw that cheap stocks move faster than expensive stocks. This is due to thehabits of particular stocks, and these habits seem to be quite stable overperiods of many years. We will ﬁnd, for instance, volatile and speculative issues which make larger percentage swings than most other stocks at their price level. And, onthe other hand, we will ﬁnd a stock, selling for much less, that has smallerpercentage swings than most stocks at its price level. This fact may beobscured, as the comparatively low-priced stock may actually make largerswings than the higher priced. It is only when we have taken the price level AU3772_book.fm Page 398 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-two: Selection of Stocks to Chart — Continued 399 into account that we can see what the individual habit of the stock really is. Knowing this, we can project that habit to other price levels. We are not too interested, as we have said before, in stocks which do not ordinarily make substantial moves. We are very much interested in thosewhich make the wider moves. We can compute the basic swing power of astock, which we call the Sensitivity Index, and will outline the method fordoing this in Appendix A. EN: The procedure Magee speaks of here, of computing a “Sensitivity Index,” may be regarded as the historical predecessor of what are now called “betas.” The beta of a stock compares its relative volatility to that of the marketas a whole, so that if the beta of the market is 1.00 and the beta of the stock inquestion is 1.50 a move of $1 in the market will probably be matched by a move of$1.50 in the higher beta stock. The formula for beta will be found in Resources, andcalculated betas at ﬁnance.yahoo.com. So, you will have eliminated from your list stocks at the wrong price level and stocks without enough swing power (for you want to chart onlythose stocks in which you can trade proﬁtably). Of the ones that are left, youwill eliminate others. You will ﬁnd that some stocks, which make wide pricemoves and apparently offer large opportunities for proﬁt, may be very“thin.” The charts will be spotty, ﬁlled with gaps, days of “no sale,” andmoves of several points on only a few hundred shares of business. Thesestocks are thin because of a small issue, because of ownership of a largeblock of shares by some corporation or by insiders, or for other reasons.They are difﬁcult to trade in because they are hard to buy and hard to sell;you stand to lose heavily on the “spread” between bid and offer. It mightbe hard to liquidate even 500 shares without driving the price down badly,to your loss, and sometimes you will see changes of 1 or 2 full points betweensales of single hundreds. These you will want to eliminate, and if you donot know the habits before you choose your portfolio, you will probablyﬁnd it worthwhile to drop any stocks that prove too thin, substituting newand more dependable choices. After you have culled the list from all these angles you will ﬁnd you have left a choice of a number of stocks, all of them selling in a price rangethat is attractive, all of them sufﬁciently active and responsive to markettrends, and all of them available in sufﬁcient supply to provide a goodtrading medium. The ﬁnal choice of any one (or several) of these stocks isthen a matter of personal preference. After you pick out your stocks from one group, study the other groups — the motors group, the amusements, the computers (EN: the Internets) and so forth, until you have ﬁnally made up your selection of stocks to follow. Tryto get as complete and balanced a representation of groups as the numberof your charts will allow. EN: In this context, the process described here is made inﬁnitely simpler by available software and by the proliferation of group indexesand indicators. In fact, if the investor desires, rather than trading an individualstock in an industry group, he may often choose to trade the average or index itselfand cushion his risks. This will almost never be as proﬁtable as a well-chosenindividual issue, but will always be better than a badly chosen individual issue. AU3772_book.fm Page 399 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
In this connection, if you are not planning to represent all groups, there

are some groups that are more likely to provide good trading stocks than others. The foods and tobaccos, for example, are generally less responsiveto market swings than the rails, liquors, and airlines, which are very respon-sive. Do not worry too much, however, about exactly which stocks to choose.For even if you took the ﬁrst 50 or 100 stocks in the listed issues, you wouldhave among them at least 25 good trading stocks. You can start with almostany list, and, as time goes on, you will drop some and add others, improvingyour portfolio and tailoring it to your own needs. EN: As additional commentary here it is worth noting that “techs,” “biotechs” (or whatever the mania of the moment is — probably space hotels and intergalactic travel in this millennium) will present areas of risk and reward sufﬁcient to excitethe 17th century tulip trader. The centered investor and trader will consider voguesand manias as he chooses his active portfolio and choose to participate (or not)depending on his appetite for risk and excitement. Or as the popular maxim has it,one man’s champagne is another man’s poison. This question is pursued in greaterdetail in Chapter 23.

By way of further simpliﬁcation, the investor may choose to follow only one or two issues — the SPDRs (SPY) or DIAMONDS (DIA). If it were not only bought, but also sold, or hedged, the market would be outperformed. This would be a simpleinvestor’s life indeed.

AU3772_book.fm Page 400 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

401 chapter twenty-three Choosing and Managing High-Risk Stocks: Tulip Stocks, Internet Sector, and Speculative Frenzies Nothing could more vividly illustrate the timeless nature of chart patterns and situations than the Internet stocks which bloomed at the turn of thecentury. These stocks repeated that eternal pattern — the tulipomania, thegold rush, the can’t-fail-opportunity-to-get-rich-quick. It is almost impossible to resist comparing the speculative frenzy which took place in the Internets and technology issues to the famous 17th centurymania which Holland experienced in the famous tulipomania. In MacKay’sundying classic account ( Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds), the trading of tulip bulbs replaced sober commerce and business as the occupation of the country, and enormous fortunes were made trading the tubers. Blocks of real estate, breweries, assets of real and large value were traded for one tulip bulb. And MacKay produced my favorite paragraph inthe literature of ﬁnance: “A golden bait hung temptingly out before thepeople, and one after the other, they rushed to tulip-marts, like ﬂies arounda honey pot. Every one imagined that the passion for tulips would lastforever, and that the wealthy from every part of the world would send toHolland, and pay whatever prices were asked for them.” That mania ended in ruin. A better long-term prospect may be in store for the Internets as there is a basis of technology and economic substance tothe sector. You could not, after all, use your tulip to check the market forprices. And, in fact there were those, admittedly a small number, who struckit rich in the California gold rush of 1849. It’s an ill wind, etc…. But as an exercise in rueful perspective, the seventh edition of this book remarked, in the words of Richard McDermott, “Companies like Lotus orMicrosoft went public and grew into business giants in a short period oftime…. A signiﬁcant theme stock for the 1990s has been Internet stocks.Names like America Online, CompuServe, and Netscape have providedimportant products and services that allow individuals to ‘surf the net’ forinformation around the world.” Young students of the market will search invain for Lotus, CompuServe, and Netscape in the lists of stock symbols. The AU3772_book.fm Page 401 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
giant Lotus was swallowed by IBM, in part because Microsoft, a ruthless

competitor, disemboweled it. CompuServe and Netscape disappeared intothe belly of a larger ﬁsh, AOL, with some of the same factors involved. LaterMicrosoft got its comeuppance — halving in value as the U.S. Justice Depart-ment brought successful antitrust action against it. There are those who fault the great Wall Street investment banks for having brought half-baked potatoes (or unblooming tulips) to market. The Street ﬁrms,cashing in on the mania, were willing to sell the public every immature prof-itless idea and company named “dot.com inc” that venture capitalists ﬂoatedon a sea of seed money. Mining engineers will recognize the phenomenon of“salting the mine.” It was the ﬁnest moment for the great old ﬁrms of the Streetsince the investment trusts of the 1920s. The reader is most recommended tolook into The Great Crash 1929 by John Kenneth Galbraith to compare the Street ﬁrms’ behavior from one mania to the next. It will be found most edifying. Atthe pinnacle of great manias, no one can be trusted. Managing Tulipomanias and Internet Frenzies In a time of excess, the centered investor maintains his composure and focus.Probably easier said than done. Nonetheless, many investors and tradersproﬁted from the Internet boom or were not severely damaged. Many man-agers and traders watched with envy from the sidelines, and with schaden freude when the bubble burst. For technical analysts speculating and trading according to the principles of this book, important opportunities arise in speculative frenzies and buyingpanics — namely important proﬁts may be made by remaining calm andmethodical while the uninformed and naive cause speculative blow-offs.And, speculative blow-offs have some things in common with the ends ofgreat bull trends in substantive issues. So the question becomes that of realizing some of the proﬁts to be made in these exciting times. Of course, the ﬁrst thing to do is not get excited.These manias come and go — sometimes they are called biotechs, sometimescomputers, sometimes Internets, and probably, at some point, humangenome miracle drugs or Martian real estate. It should be emphasized thatthese proﬁts are to made on both sides, long and short. The crowd will onlythink of the riches to be made long. Professionals and skilled technicians,professional or not, will take the proﬁts on the short side. Here is the most important concept in trading these runaway issues: all of the techniques and methods described in this book remain valid for dealing withthese kinds of stocks. In addition, here are some other points which should be taken into consideration. The sector in question, tech-tech, web-tech, bio-tech, Internet, space travel, whatever, will be a market unto itself, and specialtechnical factors will apply to it. The phases of market lives, accumulation,attraction, mark up, mania, blow-off will occur in compressed time spans —much shorter than the cyclical life of an issue with fundamental data toattach it to reality (cf. Figure 205.2 of Palm Computing). AU3772_book.fm Page 402 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-three: Choosing and Managing High-Risk Stocks 403 By the time the IPO occurs, the insiders are already prepared to begin the distribution phase. For example, when Palm Computing was spun off from 3Com in 2000, only 3% of the shares were sold — creating an artiﬁcial scarcityand propelling it to absurd heights — so that Palm attained an instant marketvalue greater than that of 3Com which owned most of its stock. EN9: We have, since The Fall, learned of “laddering.” In order to let their inside clients in on the IPOsome of the underwriters required the clients to buy more of the stock in the open marketafter the IPO at higher prices. A clever way to throw gasoline on a raging bonﬁre.Whether Palm was laddered or not is not known. These issues must be traded with the utmost care and attention. For example, it is the height of foolishness to enter a market order to buy on theissue of the IPO. An issue going public at 12 might trade on the opening at50 in these frenzies — a sign to the savvy technician that the sheep are headedfor the shearing shed. Certain factors must be kept in mind. Some IPOs collapse shortly after going public. Others rocket off before distribution is complete. So stops mustbe carefully computed. Once it is clear that the rocket is taking off, asindicated by price and volume, some discreet pyramiding might be possiblefor the experienced and skilled speculator. FIGURE 205.1. Multitudinous lessons in Microsoft. But short-lived joy. The top rounds over, price makes another attempt, and then the momentum is clearly, if puzzlingly down. The cancellation of the runaway day in January deﬁnitely markedthis move as a bull trap, and the short-term trendline from October would also havetaken the trader out of the trap. Use of basing points technique (Chapter 28) wouldalso have allowed escape from the trap. Failed signals, as this one, often are excellentsignals for a trade in the other direction. MSFT(D)Daily NASDAQ L = 27.56 +0.35 +1.29% B = 27.55 A = 27.56 O = 27.67 Hi = 27.73 Lo = 27.44 C = 27.56 V = 571 45012 Bull Trap Runaway Days Runaway Gap Exhasution GapDepartment of Justice Gap48.00 42.00 37.00 32.00 31.33 28.00 25.0044.06 35.30 SO N D 00 FM A M J JA SON Created with TradeStation AU3772_book.fm Page 403 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Detailed Techniques for Management

of the Runaway Issues The technique described in Chapter 28 for progressive stops is certainly one way of dealing with these stocks. There the method for ﬁnding basing pointsand raising stops based on the 3-days-away rule is detailed. Also, especiallyin the case of these rocket stocks, the practice of raising stops based on newpercentage highs should be implemented. Since these are “game” situations,and irrational, one may employ tactics that he might not ordinarily use withhis serious capital — some light pyramiding and some scaling out of theposition based on continuous new highs. Additionally in the blow-off phasewhen close monitoring is necessary, one might want to exit on a long reversalday, or on a key reversal pattern (see Chapter 10.1), and then go to the beach.Or, if from Texas, one might want to short the issue. FIGURE 205.1.1. MSFT

Monthly. It is easy to lose perspective when looking at a daily chart of a bull trap in which one has lost a leg. A monthly long-term look at Microsoft can help restore perspective. Unfortunately, the Dow–Jones Company waslooking at this chart, not the nearby, when they added Microsoft to the Dow 30 in2000. Expert timing? At the time the John Magee Newsletter observed that it was anegative indicator of a major top in the Industrials. Microsoft Corporation-(Nasdaq NM) 26.86 0.03 0.11% 52 44 36 28 24 20 16 12 8 4 0.07 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 1998-2004 Prophet Financial System, Inc. Term of use apply. AU3772_book.fm Page 404 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-three: Choosing and Managing High-Risk Stocks 405 Essentially, I view these stocks as interesting aberrations in the early part of their lives. So I would not look for long-term investment type trades. Take the money and run. In all likelihood, these stocks will explode like ﬁreworksand then expire. There will, of course, be the Microsoft and — it remains to beseen — the Yahoo. After the ﬁreworks show, the patient technician may returnto the scene of the crime to see if there are any burning embers. Once they haveblown off, crashed, and made reasonable bottoms, then one begins to look forinvestment possibilities, which there will deﬁnitely be. The technology of the FIGURE 205.1.2. The editor learns a lesson. Never leave a chart unanalyzed, even if the implications are obvious. And never be afraid to belabor the obvious. Obviously

## _Figure 205.1.1 should have had a long-term trendline drawn on it. No monumentalbull market should be ignored. Why give the market its money back? It should havebeen obvious from Figure 205.1 that the Microsoft party was over and not just thefat lady but the entire chorus was beating on anvils. And. The protective line mustbe drawn. Here the broken line at A is the most important and saves a bit of capitalrather than waiting for the plaintive signal at C. Given the robust bull market inMicrosoft the long-term investor might have been justiﬁed in waiting until the Ctrendline was broken. A matter of investing style and philosophy. There appears tobe some long-term support at 18. And the 5 year sideways market appears to beresolving itself into a macro triangle which might breakout one way or the other in2005. This is a case in which an investor might make a fundamental analysis to guidehis position (always conﬁrming with the chart analysis). Microsoft is beset withhowling wolves on all sides. Linux, Unix, sales of only one copy of Windows inChina, hackers playing hob with security holes in its software. Can it rise again?Only the chart knows for sure, and it is silent at this recording._
MSFT(D)Weekly NASDAQ L = 25.27 +0.82 +3.35% B = 24.27 A = 26.28 O = 24.88 Hi = 25.30 Lo = 24.79 C = 25.30 V = 9884 9923

48.00 41.00 35.00 30.00 22.00 25.30 18.00 16.00 13.00 11.00 10.0026.96 21.34 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005BA C Created with TradeStation AU3772_book.fm Page 405 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Internet — and biotech, and the human genome — there is too much poten

tial in all of them for some phoenix not to rise from the ashes. And, in the beginning it behooves the trader to regard them as specula tive instruments of exceptional risk and opportunity. Several caveats are in order. One, that the prudent speculator does not commit too much of his capital to such enterprises. Probably no more than 5–10%. Two, when selling them short, one should not be early. A deﬁnite top should be seen, because there might be a second stage of the rocket. Three, emotional involvement with tulips and Internet stocks — or stocks of any kind actually — can lead to a broken heart. In the charts, note the success in a number of cases of trading the key reversal day. EN9: Reviewing charts from the apocalypse is a sobering experience. So many rash and mad adventures. So much capital sucked into the black hole ofunderwriters and 21-year-old huckster CEO wallets. Better than the SouthSeas Bubble. And, as deﬁnite proof that man is directly descended from geeseand sees no farther ahead than the next feeding bowl the ghost of the maniaoozes from the closet in 2005, reborn as Google mania. Man (or goose if youwill) never learns. That’s why he’s so much fun to watch. Honk. FIGURE 205.2. PALM. Fool’s gold. Fool’s gold with naivete writ large on it. Here is a spike reversal day on the initial day of trading. The accumulation, markup, and most of the distribution occurred behind closed doors before this trick was perpe-trated. After the matanza, the continuation takes on the shape of a rounding bottom. Perhaps there is some real gold there — but only over the long term. PALM Created with MetaStock www.equis.com

## _2000 April May June July August September2 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 30 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 4 11170_
160

150 140 130 120 110 100 90 80 706050 40 30 2010 35000 30000 25000 20000 15000 10000 5000 X10 AU3772_book.fm Page 406 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-three: Choosing and Managing High-Risk Stocks 407 Google. What a creature is man! What a game is the market! Google, a wonderful company, and a great concept goes public in 2004 after world class (World class? Intergalactic class!) hype. Floated as a red herring at 135it eventually goes IPO at 85 in an innovative public offering. Then the funstarts. Future readers of this book may observe the mark up made as of thedate of writing (November 2004) and judge whether the method worked. Acompany on roller blades, impossible to dislike as a company. Remember,unless you are Warren Buffet you are buying the stock, not the company. FIGURE 205.2.1. Dealers palmed all the missing capital in PALM? Somebody made the money disappear up a shirt sleeve. What makes you think the deck was stacked? Or that the IPO was laddered? Maybe it was just fools chasing tulips. Those investors(gamblers) playing the shell game with PALM found themselves playing with 6 shellsinstead of three as like an insidious amoeba PALM divided into two tulips PLMOand PSRC. Keep you eye on the magician closely. For the analyst all the smoke andmirrors could not hide the fact that gravity took PALM in all its manifestations down.The downtrend lines are broken in 2003 and 2004 and a respectable Kilroy Bottomis made. But. The implications of the bottom may have already been carried out. Acontinuing story for speculators or astute (very astute) investors who know some-thing fundamental and have very long-term vision. PLMO(D)Weekly NASDAQ L = 21.40 –0.40 –1.03% O = 21.36 C = 21.43 2001 2002 2003 2004 200518.231610.00 1010.00 633.00 397.00 249.00156.00 98.00 61.00 39.00 24.00 21.43 15.00 10.00 Created with TradeStation AU3772_book.fm Page 407 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 205.2.2. PSRC in its amoeba-like glory. The failure of what might have

been a rounding bottom, especially with the breakdown gap in October and the failure to rally back to the neckline left no doubt as to the fate of PALM by any othersymbol. Broken trendlines are also indicative. Remember that any large pattern canbe broken down into smaller patterns susceptible to short trend line analysis, as inthis case. Sooner or later a palm-size computer, PDA, widget device is going to bethe wave of the future. The canny investor will not mistake the company for thestock, and will also not venture capital until there is a better chart story. PSRC(D) -Daily NASDAQ L = 8.89 +0.02 +0.23% O = 8.85 C = 8.89 42.00 35.00 29.0024.00 20.00 17.00 14.00 12.00 10.00 8.89 O D 04 F M A M J J A S O N D 05 F M A M Created with TradeStation AU3772_book.fm Page 408 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-three: Choosing and Managing High-Risk Stocks 409 FIGURE 205.3. COMS. Underwriters cleverly only three 3% of 3Com-owned Palm stock onto the market at the IPO. Palm wound up

> “worth” more than 3Com for a short time. Here the lesson of tulipomania is vivid. The contrast in befor e and after volume. The necessity
of analysis to deal with tulips in bloom. The fatal lesson of heeding (or not heeding) gaps acr oss horizontal trendlines. Impossible to manage for the buy and hold investor. 3com Corporation-(Nasdaq NM) 3.71 0.10 2.77% Volume (Millions)1998=2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. I Terms of use apply. Apr Jul Oct 97 Apr Jul Oct 98 Apr Jul Oc t Apr Jul Oct 00 Apr Jul Oct 01 Apr Jul Oct 9924 2220 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 540 480420360300 240 180 120600 AU3772_book.fm Page 409 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 205.4. ORCL. True to the character of stocks during the tulipomania, Oracle was dif ﬁcult to handle without careful analysis. Stock

splits preceded a number of the sell offs (note gaps post splits). Bullish gaps ar e also frequent here, and the tulip top is obvious, and was at the time. An excellent trading vehicle. A wreck for the casual investor. Oracle Corporation-(Nasdaq NM) 12.28 –0.04 –0.32% 45 39 36 33 30 27 24 21 18 15 12 9 6 3

## _296 Apr Jul Oct 97 Apr Jul Oct 98 Apr Jul Oct 99 Apr Jul Oct 00 Apr Jul Oct 01 Apr_
AU3772_book.fm Page 410 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-three: Choosing and Managing High-Risk Stocks 411 FIGURE 205.5. INKT. The pleasures and delights (and disappointments) of Internet stocks. The last tr endline, in conjunction with the second horizontal trendline, clearly marks the end of the party (AND WILL FOR ANY STOCK WHATSOEVER). The break of the long term trendline is the last exit signal, as if the previous signals wer en’t clear enough. Is it not obvious that this issue was (and is) manageable with technical analysis? Inktomi Corp-(OTC) 260 220 180 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 2 Jul Oct 99 Apr Jul Oct 00 A pr Jul Oct 01 Apr 1999–2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. Terms of use apply. AU3772_book.fm Page 411 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 205.6. EMULEX. (ELX) The message of 2000, a severe drubbing, and pr ecipitous at that, would have been lost on the non

technician. Those who continued to ride the roller coaster relearned a lesson technicians know, that stocks often repeat the same behavior (or misbehavior). The lesson of monster breakaway gaps (or air gaps) may have needed r elearning also. Oh well, after such a gap the damage is done, the unenlightened investor says, only to see the damage continue down to 10 (fr om 110!). These are signals of such magnitude that disaster awaits him who denies its signiﬁcance. The air gap her e nicely complements those of Figure 130 and Figure 269. Emulex Corp 19.74 0.01 0.05% 120 100 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0.6

## _96 Apr Jul Oct Apr Jul Oct 97 98 Apr Jul Oct 99 Apr Jul Oct 00 Apr Jul Oct 01 Apr Jul_
© 1999–2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. Ter ms of use apply. AU3772_book.fm Page 412 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-three: Choosing and Managing High-Risk Stocks 413 FIGURE 205.7. Amazon weekly. Amazing Amazon dances in the Internet follies. The breathtaking plunges are the direct result of the breathtaking speculative excess. See the daily chart (Figure 205.7.1)

for a closer look at the details of the blow-off. Amazon.com Inc.-(Nasdaq NM) 47.15 –0.84 –1.75% Volume (Millions)120100 80 60 50 40 30 20 10 1 Apr Jul Oct Jul Oct 98 99 Apr Jul Oct 00 Apr Jul Oct 01 Apr Jul1999-2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. I Terms of use apply. 120 100 80 60 40200 AU3772_book.fm Page 413 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 205.7.1. Amazon daily. In cases of speculative blow-off, trendlines are of

little use. A dozing trader (presumably it was obvious that this was not an investment issue) would have been mauled in the plunge. An alert trader, knowing that in blow-offs the procedure is to sell strength, might have avoided it. Other techniques includerecognition of the second exhaustion gap and exit. Also a trader using the techniquesdescribed in Chapter 28, setting progressively tight stops, might have avoided thefall. AMZN (Amazon.com, Inc.) 08/26/2006 5:51 PM EDT © 2002-2006 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. All Rights Reserved. AU3772_book.fm Page 414 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-three: Choosing and Managing High-Risk Stocks 415 FIGURE 205.7.2. The wild frontier of the Internet and of the gunslinger speculators (gamblers?). Amazon bucks on. Give us a slug of rotgut whiskey and get out the ruler. A clear top for the rational analyst with clear broken trendlines and brokenhorizontal lines and then a clear bear market with a clear bottom resembling a KilroyBottom and then a clear breakout and another bull market and then another down-trend. Talk about your fearless bull riders down at the rodeo. But this bull/bear isridable with a little technical analysis. Without technical analysis it’s like being thetarget in a shooting gallery. A sitting duck. AMZN(D)Weekly NASDAQ L = 32.31 –0.21 –0.65% O = 32.85 C = 32.36 42.04 18.3588.00 62.0044.00 32.36 22.00 15.00 11.00 8.00 5.00 4.00 3.00 2.00 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Created with TradeStation AU3772_book.fm Page 415 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 205.8

CISCO. (CSCO) While the ﬁrst long term trendline beautifully inter cepts the downtrend in progress at a gap (a coincidence of indicators which occurs too often to be a coincidence), the trendlines drawn later are of such strength thateven the novice analyst should know how to exit. And, in fact, one of my students,an employee of Cisco, did just that, saving himself thousands of paper dollars in thisvery case. Cisco Systems Inc.-(Nasdaq NM) 17.29 0.08 0.46% 18 17 1615 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4

## _97 Jun Jul Aug Feb Mar Apr May Sep Oct Nov Dec 98 Jun Jul Aug Feb Mar Apr May Sep Oct Nov_
© 1999–2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. Terms of use apply. AU3772_book.fm Page 416 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-three: Choosing and Managing High-Risk Stocks 417 FIGURE 205.8.1 Is there any way the trader (investors keep away) could avoid stepping of f this cliff? Extreme paranoia is one way. Another way is by being acutely conscious of the pattern of behavior manifested by Cisco in Figure 205.8. CSCO LAST-Daily 08/22/2001 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 4/2000 5/2000 6/2000 7/2000 8/2000 9/2000 10/2000 11/2000 12/2000 01 2/ 2001 3/2001 4/2001 5/2001 6/2001 7/2001 Created with TradeStation 2000i by Omega Research 1999 AU3772_book.fm Page 417 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 205.8.2. You thought all the tulips and bulls had been exhausted in the

tulipomania in 2000? Silly you. There is an inexhaustible supply. All you need is a company and a story and an underwriter to peddle it. Sometimes there are evenearnings. Sometimes the earnings are even real. Sometimes the earnings are skatinguphill on roller blades. And sometimes the characters are so appealing that you arealmost willing to buy the IPO at face value. But not if you are a cynic as all technicalanalysts are. Google was rumored at $200 or more on the IPO. The editor offered tosell all of it at that price and throw in the Brooklyn Bridge for free. This offer (well,there may have been other factors also) knocked the IPO down to $85 (still an arrantspeculation), but only insane, not unreasonable. The oversubscription in an innova-tive offering revealed that the tulip virus was not dead, but very much alive andinfecting not just the same old suspects, but many new ones. We love a horse raceand this is a great one. Notice the obvious defensive lines and support and resistance.How long Google can defy gravity (a galactic P/E ratio) remains to be seen. Prudentgamblers will have a stop identiﬁed. On this chart, for the long-term gambler it mightbe in the 182 area. For the more agile gambler it might be failure of the supportaround 204, or closing of the breakaway gap there. No opprobrium is attached tothe-term gambler. In fact bolder investors (competent readers of this book) shouldtake a ﬂyer from time to time with about 5% of their capital. This, of course, is theﬂyer which should have been taken. The breakaway gaps in October and April,operating against disbelief, were signals of enormous technical strength. And Googlewent to 475!! The lesson here, which must be learned and relearned and… ad inﬁni tum … is: Trust the chart. Ignore the story. GOOG(D)Daily NASDAQ L = 219.75 +0.30 +0 14% O = 221.91 C = 220.00 204.79 163.99216.00 220.00 204.00 193.00 182.00 171.00 162.00 153.00 144.00 136.00 128.00 121.00 114.00 108.00 101.00 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 05 Feb Mar Apr May Created with TradeStation AU3772_book.fm Page 418 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

419 chapter twenty-four The Probable Moves of Your Stocks At ﬁrst glance, all stocks appear to move helter-skelter without rhyme or reason, all over the lot. All stocks go up at times, and all go down at times —not always at the same time. But we already have seen that in these risesand falls stocks do follow trends, make various typical patterns, and behavein a not completely disorderly manner. It is also true that each stock has its own habits and characteristics, which are more or less stable from year to year. Certain stocks normally respondto a Bullish Phase of the market with a very large upsurge, while others,perhaps in the same price class, will make only moderate moves. You willﬁnd that the same stocks which make wide upward swings are also the ones which make large declines in Bear Markets, whereas the ones that make lessspectacular up-moves are more resistant to downside breaks in the market. In Appendix A you will ﬁnd in a discussion of Composite Leverage thatthere are stocks which ordinarily move many, many times as fast as others.We do not know, for example, whether a year from now Glenn Martin (EN: Read, Microsoft, Ebay) will be moving up or down, but we do know, and it is one of the most dependable things we know, that whichever way it isgoing, it will be covering ground much faster than American Telephone andTelegraph. (EN9: Even T accelerated into hyperspace after its ill-advised divestment of local Bells. And, unlike the leopard, completely changed its spots.) These differ ences of habit, of course, are due to the size of issue, ﬂoating supply, natureof business, and leverage in the capital structure, matters we have touchedon brieﬂy before. As a matter of fact, we are not especially concerned withwhy the differences exist. We are interested mainly in what the differencesare, and how we can determine them. This is important: stocks which habitually move in a narrow range, although excellent for investment purposes where stability and income arethe chief desiderata, are not good trading stocks. A fairly high degree ofsensitivity (EN: volatility), with wide percentage moves, is necessary in order to make possible proﬁtable commitments that will cover costs and leave anet gain. In order to be in a position to make a proﬁt, you should see theprobability of at least a 15% move in your stock. How then are you going to tell which stocks are most sensitive and potentially most proﬁtable? AU3772_book.fm Page 419 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURES 206 and 207. Some stocks move faster than others. We have already

noticed that low-priced stocks have much larger percentage moves than high-priced issues. But even between two stocks, which may, at a particular time, be selling atthe same price, there are enormous differences in their habits. Furthermore, thesehabits change very little from year to year. Here we have a weekly chart of Corn Products Reﬁning Company (left), covering an 18-month period in the years 1945 and 1946. Also a chart of Schenley Distillers(right) for the same period. The average price between the high and low on thesecharts is about 64 ½,the same for both stocks. However, during this period, we see “CFG” moving between a low of 58 ½ and a high of 71, a range of 12 ½ points, while at the same time, “SH” has moved between 28 ½ and 100, a range of 71 ½. A thousand dollars put into outright purchase of “CFG” at its extreme low would have grown to $1210 at its extreme high, whereas the sameamount used for outright purchase of “SH” at its low would have grown to $3510.Your gain of $2510 in “SH” would be more than 10 times the gain of $210 in “CFG,”and this without using margin. It is not likely, of course, that you would actually purchase either stock at the extreme low, nor sell at the extreme high. The point we are bringing out here is thatthere are enormous differences in the swing habits of stocks. Individual stocks have their characteristic habits, and so do some entire industries. In general, the food stocks, of which “CFG” is one, are stable and slow-moving. Onthe other hand, liquor stocks make wide moves on any general advance or declineof the market. At this time “CFG” had a Sensitivity Index (EN9: Or beta equivalent) of 0.58, whereas Schenley’s was 2.05. CORN PRODUCTS REF. CFG 1945 194680 76 72 68 64 60 56 MJ J ASO NDJFM A M JJAS O SCHENLEY DIST. SH 1945 1946 MJ J ASO N DJF M A MJJAS O100 96 92 888480 76 72 68 6460 56 52 46 44 40 36 32 28 AU3772_book.fm Page 420 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-four: The Probable Moves of Your Stocks 421 FIGURES 208 and 209. Another example of the difference in swings between stocks. In this case also, the stocks show the same average price between the high and low of the period, and both stocks ar e plotted for the same 18 months in 1945 and 1946. Although in a lower price range and even though the disparity in their Sensitivity Indexes is less, ther e is a considerable dif ference in their actions. Cuban–American Sugar (left), a food stock, shows a range of 76% fr om its low of 16 ½ to its high of 29, whereas Electric Boat (right), a shipbuilding concern, advances mor e than 140%. CUBANAMERICAN SUGAR CSU 1945 194636 34 32 30 28 26 24 2220 18 16 14 MJJ A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O ELECTRIC BOAT EB 1945 194636 34 32 30 28 26 24 2220 18 16 14 MJ J A S O N DJ F M A MJ JAS O AU3772_book.fm Page 421 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
By examining the record of a certain stock for a number of years back,

and comparing the percentage moves it has made with the percentage moves of the market as a whole, you can obtain a fair picture of that stock’s habits.You will not be able to say, at any particular moment, “This stock is nowgoing to move up 25%,” but you can say, with a good deal of conﬁdence,“If the market as a whole makes an advance of 10%, this stock will probablyadvance about 25%.” Or, conversely, of course, “If the market goes down10%, this stock will very likely go down at least 25%.” Many methods have been used for measuring and checking these per centage-move habits, differing only in detail. Indexes on several hundredimportant stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange have been com-puted by the authors and are presented in Appendix A. EN: Current day betas may be compared with these and/or substituted for them in other computations suggested in this book, for example in Composite Leverageformulas. The reader may read in the following text “beta” for “Sensitivity Index”and avoid the annoyance of excessive notation by the editor.

The Indexes are relative. They show that stocks with a high Sensitivity Index (EN: beta) will move much faster in either Bull Markets or Bear Markets than stocks with low Indexes, and about how much faster, relative to theother stocks. EN: As is obvious to the experienced reader, and new to the inexperienced, Magee’s method predates the compilation of betas. Beta measures the systematic risk of a stock, or for those who are not into ﬁnancial industry jargon, the sensitivity of a stock to the market. Thus, if the market moves one point, a stock with beta of1.5 will move 1.5 points. And a stock with a beta of.5 will move a half a point.Approximately. Or more or less. For readers who like to roll their own, I offer herethe formula for computing the beta of a stock, which is somewhat more sophisticatedthan Magee’s method:

whereN = the number of observations X = rate of return for the S&P; 500 Index Y = Rate of return for stock or fund. The general investor may not be avidly interested in this calculation, especially when the beta is readily available at Value Line and is published regularly by MerrillLynch. Of equal or greater importance is the individual risk of a stock which profes sionals like to determine by computing its volatility. Somewhat akin to Magee’s“normal range for price,” volatility measures the variability of a stock’s returns(price movement). The general investor should be informed that the study of vola-tility is an extremely sophisticated subject, and that professionals expend enormousN Sum of XY Sum of X Sum of Y () ()() −() ()() AU3772_book.fm Page 422 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-four: The Probable Moves of Your Stocks 423 resources dealing with the question. Numerous methods are used to derive volatil ities, but these mainly come into play in options arbitrage and professional tradingon exchange ﬂoors.

For the private investor it is sufﬁcient to know of the dangers of this arcane area. Before venturing into “volatility plays,” the newcomer should take a postgrad-uate course. For the general investor who wants to know enough to calculate hisown volatilities (not recommended or necessary), I note the formula here: To calculate the volatility of a portfolio, ﬁrst ﬁnd the difference between each return and the average. Then square each difference and add them together. Divide the sumby the number of returns minus one. This result is known as the variance. Finally,take the square root of the variance to get the volatility. Combining these steps intoa formula: • Step 1: Calculate the average return.• Step 2: Calculate the deviation of each return.• Step 3: Square each period’s deviation.• Step 4: Add them together.• Step 5: Divide the sum by the number of periods – 1. This is the variance.• Step 6: Take the square root. The less punctilious investor may ﬁnd volatilities at optionstrategist.com, cboe.com, as well as other locations ﬁndable at google.com. σμ =−() −=∑R ni in 2 1 1 AU3772_book.fm Page 423 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 424 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

425 chapter twenty-ﬁve Two Touchy Questions This chapter is directed largely to the new trader, to the investor who has followed other analytical methods, and to the investor type who is now, forthe ﬁrst time, taking up the technical trading of stocks for the shorter term. The ﬁrst question here is the use of margin. There are many people who, knowing of the disastrous margin calls of 1929 and the staggering way lossescan be multiplied against one in a margined account during a sharp breakin the market, take the attitude that the use of margin is intrinsically bad,dangerous, foolish, and unsound. They will tell you that they are willing torisk their own money, but they never speculate on borrowed funds. Theywill tell you that by buying securities outright, they are safe against any kind of break in the market. There is something to this line of argument, although very often you will ﬁnd that the arguer has not really thought the case through all the way. If he had, he might realize that, in buying outright stocks which are sensitiveor highly leveraged, he is accomplishing almost exactly the same thing assomeone else who buys more conservative stocks on a margin basis. Veryoften, despite his feeling that outright purchase is more conservative thanmargin buying, he is a speculator at heart. He is not really interested individends and a stable investment. Rather, he is looking for “something withappreciation opportunity.” And because he is not facing the issue squarely,he may fall into expensive errors. To be thoroughly consistent here, a man who shuns the risks inherent in margin trading should shun the risks of leverage and volatility. He shouldavoid risk, forget “opportunity for appreciation,” and conﬁne himself tosound, income-producing stocks of a sort that will not ﬂuctuate widely. If we are looking for stability, we do not want excessive ﬂuctuation. And there are securities that provide stability. In this work, however, we arelooking for “swing power.” We want the highest degree of ﬂuctuation wecan handle safely. We can secure this by buying outright a stock that isnormally subject to fairly broad swings; that is, a stock with a high SensitivityIndex (EN: beta). We can get the same effect by trading in a stock of more conservative habits, but increasing the Composite Leverage (EN: or simple leverage) by using margin. (The method of computing and comparing Com posite Leverages in various situations is covered in Appendix A.) Let us assume, for example, that we will buy 100 shares of a rather speculative stock, which we will call UVW, on an outright basis. It has a AU3772_book.fm Page 425 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Sensitivity Index of 1.50, and now sells (let us say) at 20. At the same time,

we buy a somewhat less speculative stock, XYZ, also selling at 20; but inthis case, we buy on 70% margin, putting up only three quarters of the valueof the stock. In a general advance affecting both of these stocks, the proba-bilities would favor a somewhat greater percentage move in UVW than inXYZ. If such a general rise should bring UVW to 30, we might expect XYZto rise to a lesser degree, say to 28. Now the advance of 10 points on the$2000 invested in outright purchase of LVW will represent a gain of $1000or 50%. The advance of XYZ to 28 on the $1400 invested at 70% margin willmean a gain of $800 or 57%. In other words, we have, by the use of margin,increased the effective leverage of XYZ; made it, in fact, slightly more spec-ulative than UVW. The effect of margin use is simply to accentuate or increase the sensitivity of a situation. It is a mechanism for assuming more risks and, therefore, moreopportunities for faster gains. Assuming you are willing to assume risk (asyou must be if you intend to make speculative commitments), it is simplya matter of knowing approximately what risks you are taking and whetheryou can afford to take them. The danger in margin lies in cases where thecustomer grossly overextends himself, taking on a risk far beyond his abilityto protect himself. This will not happen if he sets a reasonable limit to histotal leverage (EN: put another way, his portfolio risk). The margin transaction is simply a matter of buying (or selling short) more stock than you have money to pay for in full. The purchase of a homeon a mortgage is essentially a margin transaction. The ﬁnancing of businessoperations, using borrowed money for part of the capital, is the same. Thebuying of anything where the purchaser puts up part of the capital andborrows the rest, using the value of the purchased property as security forthe loan, is exactly similar to the trading of stocks on margin. In each case,any change in the value of the property will cause a larger net change in thevalue of the margin capital. Thus, if a man buys a home for $100,000, paying $50,000 cash, and later sells it for $150,000 (an increase of 50% in the valueof his property), he will beneﬁt to the extent of $50,000 proﬁt, or 100% onhis invested capital. The question of margin calls, being “wiped out” on margin transactions, will seldom, if ever, come up if you protect yourself properly by maintainingstops at all times or by closing out the transaction when it has violated certainpredetermined danger points. Needless to say, if you have allowed a tradeto go so bad that it has reached the minimum margin maintenance range,the best thing is to take your loss and forget it; not try to meet the margincall. But again — this need not ever happen. As we will see in discussions of sensitivity and leverage, stop levels, etc., there are certain limits which can be fairly well deﬁned, beyond which youcannot safely venture. If you could buy stock on a 10% margin, as you couldat one time, you might have visions of highballing a thousand dollars up toa million in one Bull Market. But that is not a reasonable hope, and it is not AU3772_book.fm Page 426 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-ﬁve: Two Touchy Questions 427 safe to risk your capital on a 10% margin, since, in many cases, your perfectly logical purchase would sag enough to wipe you out entirely before goingahead to the normal advance you expected. EN: In a nutshell, the risk of trading commodities and futures. In judging how much margin you can or should use, within the limits of margin trading laid down by law, you must take intoaccount the method of trading you are using, the amount of adverse ﬂuctu-ation you must expect in the normal operation of your method, the natureof the stock you are dealing with, that is, its Sensitivity Index and NormalRange-for-Price (EN: at the risk of being repetitive, beta and volatility) at the time you make the original commitment. Short Selling The other touchy question is that of short sales. A majority of traders avoidthe short side of the market. Six out of seven you meet, who have boughtor sold stocks, will tell you that they would never sell a stock short underany conditions, at any time. In fact, short selling is limited, very largely, toskilled professionals. EN: The private investor, because of his fears and prejudices, voluntarily grants this “edge” or advantage to professionals. Magee dealt with thissubject at length in Winning the Mental Game on Wall Street, which I whole heartedly recommend to the reader. EN9: The widespread proliferation of hedge funds in the new century attests to the frustration of professional managers with mutualfund rules requiring them to maintain only long positions. Even with this develop-ment short selling by the general investor remains a limited technique — to thedisadvantage of the nonprofessional. Now, if you have studied long-term charts (weekly and monthly), and the daily charts in this book, you will recognize several facts about the actionof markets. Most stocks go up most of the time. There are almost alwaysmore advances than declines in the list of most active stocks published eachday. Stocks, in general, advance about two thirds of the time, and go downonly about one third of the time. (EN9: Probably a truth over the long term, but in the modern context ample short opportunities exist.) Furthermore, most of the news releases, rumors, and comments in the press related to stocks and corporate affairs have to do with the brighter sideof industry. It is only natural that executives, public relations people, andthe reporters themselves should be interested in forward-looking develop-ments, new processes, expansion of facilities, increased earnings, and thelike; and that such items should prove more newsworthy than less optimisticreports. These various factors may explain why “the public” is always Bullish. The public is always hoping and expecting stocks to go up all the time. If stocks are rising and in a Bullish Phase, the public expects them to go stillhigher. If stocks have declined sharply, the public will argue that they arenow better buys than before and must surely go up soon. But it is up, up UP, always up, in the mind of the public. AU3772_book.fm Page 427 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
And, yet, examination of the long-term charts, covering the action of the

Averages over many years, will show you that through these long periods, the levels rise and fall about the same amount.* This being the case, it must follow that stocks come down as far as they go up, and since they go up about two thirds of the time, they must comedown much faster than they go up. This you will ﬁnd is true. The angles ofdecline in the Averages and also in individual stocks are usually steeper inBear Market Moves than the advances are in Bull Market Moves. A corollaryto that is that proﬁts can be made faster on the downside of the market than on the upside. Such proﬁts are made by selling short. It is important if you are a trader that you understand the meaning of a short sale. When you sell a stock short,you borrow that stock from someone who owns it, and then you turn aroundand sell it to someone else, agreeing with the original owner to replace hisshares at some unspeciﬁed time in the future. All of the detail of this trans-action is, of course, handled by your broker. Shares of most stocks of largeoutstanding issue are available for loan at all times in the hands of brokers,and your own broker has access to them. The mechanics of this borrowingand sale are interesting; you may wish to get from your broker the wholestory of how these operations are carried out. For all practical purposes,however, all you need to do is tell your broker what you wish to sell andleave the rest to him. He will advise you if, by any chance, the stock you have selected for short sale is not available for loan. Another practical point, although of minorconsequence, is that a slight additional tax is assessed against short sales. EN: In that gains on short sales are not eligible for long-term capital gains tax. It is important also, if you are a trader, that you accept opportunities to sell short as readily as you go long stock. Unfortunately, there are psycho-logical barriers to short selling. There are, for example, the unintelligent andentirely irrelevant slogans about “selling America short.” There is the feelingon the part of many who are poorly informed that short selling is thesomewhat unethical trick of the manipulator. Others have the impressionthat, in selling short, one is hoping to proﬁt by the misfortunes of others attimes of disaster and Panic. It is not the purpose of this book to persuadeanyone to sell stocks short, any more than it is our purpose to advise anyonewho shouldn’t to speculate on the long side of the market. But so manyquestions are constantly raised, even by fairly sophisticated investors, about * This principle probably still holds even after the extension of the Dow Industrial Average into new all-time high ground since late in 1954. EN: And into the economic stratosphere at the turn of the millennium with predictions — we will not assess their credibility — being made that the Dow willin good time reach 36000. In spite of the long-term “secular trend” and the history of these recent years (EN: 1950s and 1960s) in the Average, it seems safe to assume that there will continue to be major general declines in the future as there have been in the past. As a matter of fact, anumber of important stocks have been in Major Downtrends throughout the past few years ofthe mid-20th century Bull Market: Celanese, for example, Kresge, Lorillard, Schenley, andStudebaker–Packard. EN: Compare the historic Bull Markets of the 1990s and Kodak, Avon, Xerox, General Motors, and IBM, all of which were under their 1990 benchmarks in 2000. AU3772_book.fm Page 428 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-ﬁve: Two Touchy Questions 429 the ethics, as well as the practical procedure of short selling, that we may perhaps be pardoned for saying a few more words in its defense. All of the popular ideas about short selling mentioned in the preceding paragraph may be branded as so much nonsense. There is nothing morereprehensible about selling short than buying long. Each is a speculation inrelative values. The truth is that money is a commodity, just as much as ashare of stock. There is no moral or practical difference between borrowingmoney to buy stock because you believe that the latter will go up in valuein terms of the former, and borrowing stock in order to “buy” money becauseyou believe the latter is going to go up in value in terms of the former. Ineach case, you are obligated eventually to repay the loan whether it be moneyor stock. In each case, you are taking a risk on the basis of your consideredforecast as to the future trend of relative values. There are, in fact, many common business practices which are more or less analogous to selling stocks short. For example, every time the publisherof a magazine accepts cash in advance for a subscription he is makingsomething like a short sale. His ultimate proﬁt or loss will depend on whatthe magazines he will eventually supply have cost him by the time thesubscription runs out. When you sell stocks short, you (or rather your broker) receives the proceeds of the sale at once but you are obligated to turn back an equalnumber of the same shares at some future date to the man from whom thestock certiﬁcates were borrowed. EN: One of the advantages or edges that pro fessionals enjoy over private investors is the credit of short sales to their accountsand the payment of interest thereon. While the proceeds are credited to the privateinvestor, no interest is generally paid on it, unless the investor has inﬂuence withthe broker. A favorable situation is created, however, in that, if a short sale of$100,000 were made on, say, 50% margin, a credit of $150,000 would be made tohis account, and no interest would be charged. Any dividends the trader paid onthe transaction would be expensible. Consequently, sooner or later, you have to go into the market again and buy those shares. When you buy them, you(or rather your broker) returns the shares to the original lender, thus dis-charging your obligation. If the cost of your purchase was less than theproceeds of the earlier sale, the difference is your proﬁt. If it costs you moreto buy in the shares — or as it is termed, cover your short — then thedifference represents a loss. Of course, you do not enter into a short-sidetransaction unless you expect the price of the stock to go down and, hence,show you a proﬁt. One of the little-appreciated results of a large volume of short selling is actually to strengthen the market. Every short seller is a potential buyer.Most short sellers are glad to cover and take their proﬁts on a relativelyMinor Decline. Consequently, if there is a big short interest at any given timein a particular issue, that means that there are many people waiting to buythat stock when it goes down. This situation tends to “cushion” bad breaks.Some astute operators will actually buy a stock when they learn that thereis a very large short interest in it (that is, that a great many shares of it have AU3772_book.fm Page 429 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
been sold short and not yet covered) because they realize that competition

among the short sellers to buy the stock whenever it has a small decline mayresult in a very fast and proﬁtable Short-Covering Rally. Any stock is stron-ger, technically, if there is a good-sized short interest in it. There is one further objection raised against short selling. It will be pointed out that when you buy stock, your loss, if worse comes to worst,can be no more than the total amount you paid for it. But in the case of ashort sale, the price of your stock could, theoretically, rise against you to $50,$100, $1000, $10,000 a share; in other words, could rise without limit. Thisargument sounds much more alarming than it really is. Certainly there is nooccasion to lose sleep over it. Stocks do not go up without limit all of asudden. It is just as easy to set a stop on the loss you are willing to take ona short-side transaction as it is on a long purchase. Such situations as thefamous 1901 corner in Northern Paciﬁc are not likely ever to occur againunder present regulations. EN: The famous “short squeeze.” Short squeezes still occur but extremely rarely in big liquid issues. A famous short squeeze occurred inthe silver markets of the 1980s when the Hunt brothers trapped Exchange membersand almost bankrupted them. The Members, of course, being in control, retaliatedby quintupling margin requirements and bankrupted the Hunts. The authors realize that nothing they can say, and probably no amount of cold-bloodedanalysis on the part of the reader himself, will remove entirely the trepidationwhich most nonprofessional traders experience when they sell short. Themental hazards will always be slightly greater than in buying long. Never-theless, from every practical angle, a short sale is exactly the same thing(although in a reverse direction) as a long purchase, with no greater risk,with actually somewhat greater chance of quick proﬁt, and differing only indetails of execution. A commitment in commodity futures contracts, whether long or short, though quite different in theory, has some similarities to a short sale of stock.In making a contract, no actual sale takes place, and no loan of either cashor the commodity is involved. Such a contract is simply a binding legalagreement to accept delivery or to deliver a certain commodity at a certainprice at a certain time. In this respect, it is different from a short sale of stock. It is also different in that it must be closed out on or before a deﬁnite date.But the purchase or sale of a commodity contract is similar to a stock shortsale in that: (1) it is necessarily a margin transaction, and (2) it creates an“open” or incomplete transaction which must eventually be liquidated. A short sale of stock must always and necessarily be a margin transac tion. Thus, if you buy 100 shares of stock outright at 20, it can sink to 15 andyou cannot be called for more margin. You have lost $500, but the stock isstill yours. If you sell, you get back $1500, disregarding commissions. Onthe other hand, if you sell a stock short at 20, putting up a margin of 100%,and the stock rises to 25, you will also have lost $500. The broker, undercertain conditions, such as the 100% margin requirements in effect at onetime, might call on you for $500 additional margin. Or, if the transactionwere to be closed out at that point, you would receive back $1500 less AU3772_book.fm Page 430 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-ﬁve: Two Touchy Questions 431 commissions, the same as in the long transaction. In the case of this short sale, had the price dropped to 15, your proﬁt would have been $500. On short-term moves, the effect of short selling is exactly the same as the buying of long stock, but in the opposite direction. You simply apply thesame methods here in reverse, during a Bear Market, that you would use ina Bull Market. As we have already seen, the various technical indicationsthat point to upward moves in a Bullish Phase have their counterparts indownside signals during a Bearish Phase. Execution of short sales cannot be made at any time and at any price you wish. A short sale must be made in a rising market. You are not permittedto sell a stock short on the New York Stock Exchange during a market breakwhen each regular sale is at a lower price than the one before it (EN9: the uptick rule). However, this need not bother you much since, ordinarily, you would make such a sale on the rally as it reached your price, and this wouldnaturally ﬁll the requirement of a rising market. Your broker can give you,in detail, the special rules and regulations that apply to short sales. It willpay you to study these so that you can place your orders correctly when theproper time comes to make such sales. EN9: At the AMEX short sales on ETFs and some HOLDRS are exempt from the uptick rule as are futures contracts on thefutures exchanges. AU3772_book.fm Page 431 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 432 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

433 chapter twenty-six Round Lots or Odd Lots? (EN: Or, Put Another Way, Size?) One of the minor tactical questions bound to plague you is whether to trade in round lots of 100 shares or odd lots (less than 100 shares in active stocks). EN: In Internet Age markets this question has virtually lost its relevancy. In Magee’s time, there was a distinct disadvantage to trading odd lots, and one onlytraded odd lots if hampered by limited capital. Now that an investor can achievefull diversiﬁcation in an odd lot position by buying odd lots of SPDRs and DIAMONDs there seems little point in discussing it. There is, of course, alwaysthe question of broker commission — if the broker has a ﬁxed commission rateregardless of the size of the trade, then the small investor gets nicked. It would seemthat this follows the old adage that the rich get richer. But now the small investor can strike back by ﬁnding a broker who does not charge commissions. At ﬁrst Ithought that commission-free brokers were making up their proﬁt on volume. But there are in fact other ways to make a proﬁt on trades than charging a commission —for example, directing the execution of the orders to a trader who needs “order ﬂow.”

In the Internet Age, the question of what size a trade or investment should be is different from the question which confronted traders of, as it were, ancient times.Now it is not so much a matter of cost disadvantage in trading odd lots as it is amuch deeper question — that of risk and portfolio management. So how does theaware investor determine the size of any individual trade?

I am indebted to a longtime friend, colleague and broker, and fellow trader, William Scott, for articulating the common sense procedure here for calculatingtrade size and controlling risk.

First, we determine the percentage of our capital we want to risk on any given trade. Among many professional traders of our acquaintance, this ﬁgure is often2 or 3%. For the sake of illustration, using round numbers, if we have $100,000capital this means we will be risking $3000 on a trade. Let us say that we are goingto buy a $20 stock and defend our position with a stop-loss order $5 away. Ourformula for computing position size is

## 5 n number of sha res, or 600 shares =
AU3772_book.fm Page 433 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
If we were going to accept a $10 risk, our trade size would be 3000/10 =

300 shares. Thus we adjust our trade size to ﬁt our risk parameters.

This is a simple, practical, elegant way to implement risk control at the indi vidual trade level.

AU3772_book.fm Page 434 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

435 chapter twenty-seven Stop Orders We are going to take up two kinds of stop orders, or, rather, two entirely different uses of the mechanism of stop orders. First, let us look at the protective stop order. At best, it is not a happy subject. Stop orders of this type are like ﬁre extinguishers. The occasionswhen they are put into operation are not times of rejoicing. Stop orders areused for emergency rescue when things get so bad that there seems noreasonable hope for a situation. Wherever you set your protective stop, it is likely to be touched off at what seems to be the worst possible moment. You will set it at a safe distanceunder a certain bottom. The stock will break through, catch your stop, and then proceed to build a new bottom at this level for the next rise, or to rally at once and make new highs. No matter. You had your reasons for settingthe stop. The stock did not act the way it should have. The situation is notworking out according to Hoyle, and certainly not the way you hoped itwould. Better to be out of it, even at a loss, rather than face a period ofuncertainty and worry. If the stock has started to act badly, you cannot tellhow much worse it is going to behave. If you fail to set a stop, you may goon day after day hoping for a rally that never comes, while your stock sinkslower and lower, and eventually you may ﬁnd (as millions have found) thatwhat started to be a small reaction, and an annoying but trivial loss, hasturned out to be a ruinous catastrophe. Stop orders cannot always be placed.In certain cases in active stocks, the exchanges may even restrict the use ofstop orders. The question is where and when to set the stop, realizing that there is no perfect and absolutely satisfactory rule. If the stop is too close, you will,of course, take unnecessary losses; you will lose your holdings of stocks thateventually forge ahead and complete the proﬁtable rise you hoped for. Ifstops are too wide (too far away), you will take larger losses than necessaryin those cases where your stock deﬁnitely has broken out of pattern. Now it will be obvious that the setting of stop orders depends on the price of the stock and its habits. You would not place your stop level at thesame percentage distance under a Bottom in a conservative, high-pricedstock when it is selling at 80 that you would to protect a speculative issueat a time when it is selling at 8. The higher-priced stocks, as we already have seen, make smaller per centage moves. Conversely, the lower-priced stocks make wider percentage AU3772_book.fm Page 435 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
moves. Therefore, the lower-priced stocks should have more leeway for their

gyrations. We will need a wider stop for them than we will for the lessvolatile “blue chips.” Similarly, we can take our Sensitivity Indexes (EN: Betas in considering a stock relative to the market, and Volatilities for absolute measure of one stock againstanother) to give us a picture of the individual habits of the stock. Although two stocks may be selling at the same price at a given moment, you wouldexpect a high-beta, high-volatility stock to make wider swings than alow-beta, low-volatility stock; therefore, you will set your stops wider onthe higher-volatility stock. We must take these factors into account and work out some sort of simple rule of thumb that we can follow. Let us arbitrarily assume an imaginarystock of “average” habits and a price of 25. Let us further assume that wewill be satisﬁed, in this particular case, with stop protection 5% below thelast established Minor Bottom. For a stock of the same sensitivity selling at 5, we would need about half again as much stop leeway (on a percentage basis). That is, the stopwould be placed 7.5% below the last Bottom (EN9: Signiﬁcant low). We arrive at this by taking the normal expected range of an average stock at price 25,which is represented by the Index Figure 15.5, and comparing it with thenormal range of a stock selling at 5, which is 24. These are merely relativeindexes and mean only that the stock selling at 5 will normally move about24%, while the stock selling at 25 is making a move of about 15.5%. Wemultiply the basic stop distance of 5% by the fraction 24/15.5, and we getapproximately 7.5%. In exactly the same way, we introduce the relative sensitivity of the stock, using the Sensitivity Index. If this Index should be 1.33, we multiply the stopdistance again by this ﬁgure and get 10%. In the case of a stock having asensitivity of 2.00 at this same price, our stop distance would be 15%. If thesensitivity of the stock were only 0.66, we would get 5%. In any case, the stop distance, expressed as a percentage, is obtained by dividing the Normal Range-for-Price by 15.5, then multiplying by the Sen-sitivity Index, and multiplying this result by 5%. (This operation can be donemost easily and quickly with a calculator or computer routine.) All of the foregoing may seem needlessly complicated to the average reader. We realize that many will not care to take the time and trouble towork out an exact, scientiﬁc stop level for each of their occasional commit-ments. However, the method of determining where stops should be placedin a systematic and consistent way has been given in some detail here, sothat the principles involved will be perfectly clear, and so that you can changeor adapt the various factors if you feel your experience justiﬁes changes. For most ordinary purposes, a simpliﬁed table of stop distances will be sufﬁcient. This table, which follows, gives you the approximate stop distanceyou would get by the method outlined above, for stocks in various priceclassiﬁcations and of various degrees of sensitivity. AU3772_book.fm Page 436 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-seven: Stop Orders 437 EN: The informed reader may consider an alternative to Magee’s Sensitivity Index which I have conjectured here — that is, basing the stop distance on implied volatility, which would present a dynamic method of adjustment. Implied volatilityis produced from, for instance, the Black–Scholes Model when the model is solvedfor volatility rather than price, taking the market price as the given. The stop level should be marked on your chart as a horizontal line as soon as an actual or theoretical transaction has been entered into, and itshould be maintained until the transaction is closed, or until progressivestops (which we will explain in a moment) have been started in order toclose it out. In the case of purchases, the stop level ordinarily will be at theindicated distance below the last previous Minor Bottom. In the case of shortsales, it ordinarily would be at the indicated distance above the last MinorTop. To determine the position of this stop level, simply ﬁgure what the percentage distance would amount to at the price of the stock. If you aredealing with a stock selling at 30 and the stop distance comes out 10%, then allow 3 points under your last Minor Bottom. To make this even easier, if you are using the TEKNIPLAT paper, you will see that it is possible to divide each of the two cycles making up a chart sheet into ﬁve spaces. If the center of the paper were numbered 10, thenthese spaces would be from 10 to 12, 12 to 14, 14 to 16, 16 to 18, and 18 to20. Each of these “jumps” is made up of 16 of the smallest vertical spaces.In the lowest section, it will take about four of these small spaces to make5%. It will take ﬁve in the second position, six in the third position, sevenin the fourth, and eight in the top position. You will soon learn to count outan approximate stop interval of 15% or 8% or 12% at any price level, withouta moment’s hesitation.

## _Table of Stop Distances_
(Expressed in Percent of the Price of the Stock)

PriceConservative Median Speculative Sensitivity Sensitivity Sensitivity under 0.75 0.75 to 1.25 over 1.25 Implied VolatilityImplied VolatilityImplied Volatility under 0.40 0.41–0.79 over 0.79 Over 100 5% 5% 5% 40 to 100 5% 5% 6%20 to 40 5% 5% 8%10 to 20 5% 6% 10%5 to 10 5% a 7% 12% Under 5 5% a 10% 15% a

Note: Ordinarily, stocks in these price ranges would not be in the conservative group. AU3772_book.fm Page 437 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
In no case would we ever set a protective stop level at less than a 5%

interval, even for the most conservative, high-priced stocks. These questions remain: “What constitutes a Minor Bottom? What makes an established Minor Top? How do we know how to choose the basing point (EN9: cf. Chapter 28) from which to measure off our stop level interval?” What constitutes a Bottom or a Top will be taken up in the next chapter. For the present, let us accept the proposition that we will determine the correctbasing point and that we will always, always set our stop level at the momentwe make the commitment. It is understood, of course, that protective stops under long stock are never moved down, nor are protective stops over shorts ever moved up. As soon as the stock has moved in the right direction far enough to establish anew basing point, the stop level is moved up (on longs) or down (on shorts),using the same rules for determining the new stop level as were used inﬁxing the original level. The Progressive Stop There is another use of the stop which is properly considered here. This is the progressive stop, used to close out a stock that has made a proﬁtablemove, or in some cases where a stock has given a danger signal before eithercompleting a proﬁtable move or violating a previous Minor Bottom. You will ﬁnd that on many moves, the stock will progress in the primary direction for several days, and then may develop exceptional volume. Often,this occurs just as the stock reaches an important trendline or pattern borderor Resistance Area. This heavy volume means one of two things. Usually itmeans that the Minor Move has come to an end, that this is the top of therise for the moment. Occasionally, however, the volume may signal the startof a breakaway move that may run up several (and perhaps many) points,almost vertically. (The reverse situation, of course, may develop on downsidemoves.) If, noticing the heavy volume following a good rise, and assuming that this day marks the end of the move, you sell the stock at the market or at alimit, you are going to be dreadfully disappointed if this should be one ofthose rare cases where the stock opens next day on an upside gap andcontinues 3, 5, or 20 points up in the following days. On the other hand,experience will have shown you that it will not pay to expect that sort ofmove very often. You will know that, nine times out of ten, you will be betteroff out of the stock. Very well. After such a day when volume is exceptionally high (provided this is not the ﬁrst day of breakout into new high ground beyond the lastprevious Minor Top), cancel your protective stop and set a stop order forthe day only, just ⅛ point under the closing price. For example, you have bought a stock at 21. It goes up on moderate volume, smashes through theold Minor Top one day at 23 on very heavy volume, the next day continuesto 23 ¾ on moderate volume, the third day advances on moderate volume AU3772_book.fm Page 438 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-seven: Stop Orders 439 to 24 ¼, and, ﬁnally, the fourth day makes a rise to 25 on much heavier volume than it has shown on any day of the rise except the day it broke through 23. The morning after this close at 25, you will notice the volume signal. Youwill cancel your protective stop, which may be at 18, and you will place astop order, for the day only, to sell on stop at 24 ⅞. In most cases, this will mean that your stock will be stopped out on the ﬁrst sale of the day. Andyou may get a slightly lower price than you would get with a straight marketorder. On the other hand, after a day of high volume activity, you are notlikely to be left in a thin market; there should be bids enough, near the top,to get you out at or near your stop price. Meanwhile, you are protected against losing the stock if there should be a continued move in the right direction. Suppose the opening the morningafter you set your stop at 24 ⅞ should be a gap at 25 ¼, and that prices then move up further, closing at 26. (On “runaway” moves of this sort, the closingfor the day during the move is likely to be at the top.) You will then set yourstop, again for a single day only, at 25 ⅞. If the stock then opens at 26 ⅜ and moves up to 28, you will set another day stop at 27 ⅞, which, let us assume, is caught at the opening the following day at 27 ⅝. In this example, you risked only ⅛ point on the ﬁrst day, and eventually netted an extra gain of 2 ⅝ points. This, it should be pointed out, is all net gain, since your commissionsare approximately the same in either case. A progressive stop of this sort can be indicated on the chart by any mark you choose to use; for example, a band of short diagonal lines. When a stockmoves for several days in a runaway move, you may repeat this mark eachday, indicating a tight stop ⅛ point under the close for each successive day, until ﬁnally, one of these stops is caught. In the case of short sales, a buystop is used in precisely the same way as the selling stop we have discussed,to follow the stock down on a sharp runaway dive.* This use of stop orders is indicated wherever a stock has reached its reasonable objective on high volume, or where it has exceeded its objectiveand is moving out of the Trend Channel in free air, so to speak, and in somecases, where the stock has failed to reach its objective. If your stock, for instance, is rising in a Trend Channel, and, about halfway between the lower and upper trendlines, suddenly develops greatvolume, then a progressive tight stop will protect you against the threatenedfailure of the move. Extreme volume in such a case, before there has been abreakout to a new high above the last Minor High, is deﬁnitely a warningand a threat. This would be especially true if there were also a gap or a One-Day Reversal at this point. * In the case of a stock which has presumably completed its proﬁtable move and has given a Minor Top signal by volume, you may place a near (EN: or “Hair-trigger” Stop) ( ⅛ point) stop the ﬁrst day. If the stock moves up the next day, without abnormal volume, you may leave the stop at this same point each day until another “blowoff” or Top signal appears; that is, untilyou see another day of heavy volume, a gap, or a One-Day Reversal, and then move the stopup to ⅛ point below the close of that day. This method often works out somewhat better than the continuously progressive near stop. AU3772_book.fm Page 439 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The one day on which a tight stop would not be applied after heavy

volume had appeared would be the day the stock made a new high, running entirely through the previous Minor Top and closing above it. This actiongenerally means the move is not yet completed. However, should the movecontinue higher and again show heavy volume, even if it is the very nextday, we would then protect with a progressive stop. In this chapter, as throughout the book, the expression “heavy volume” means heavy only with respect to the recent volume of sale in the stock youare watching. A thousand shares may be signiﬁcantly heavy volume in somethin issues, whereas 10,000 shares would be no more than a normal turnoverin more actively traded stocks. The volume chart itself will show, by a marketpeak, when a day of abnormally heavy volume occurs. It should be understood that the progressive stops we have been dis cussing are intended to take short-term gains, or to close out an exceptionallyproﬁtable runaway move terminating in an Intermediate Climax. While theextreme conditions that call for this type of operation are by no means rare,they are not the usual, everyday action of the market. In the case of ordinaryMinor Tops, even when they are fairly apparent on the basis of Trend Chan-nels, volume peak, and other indications, many traders and investors willprefer to wait out the expected reaction rather than pay additional commis-sions and lose a position that is still presumably in a favorable Major Trend. In short, the progressive stop is a device which may be very useful on occasion, but it is intended to cope with a special and somewhat unusual move. The protective stops, on the other hand, offer the average trader, the man who is not able to spend his entire time studying the market, or whohas not had long experience, a device by which he can limit his possible loss.He will be protected from his own unwillingness to close out the bad holding,and so, he will avoid the ruinous condition of becoming frozen into a hope-less situation. Since he will be taken out automatically, regardless of whetherhe has an ultimate gain or loss, he will have the capital to use in better-look-ing issues and will not have to worry about the prospects of recovery in hisstock after it has gone many points against him. However, if one has sufﬁcient knowledge and sufﬁcient determination to get out as soon as the trend has shown convincing evidence on a turn, there isless need for the stop orders. EN: This editor believes that only the proven trader-investor should trade without a stop in the market. The reader may determineif he meets this criterion by examining his portfolio to see if he has ever let a loss run,or allowed a signiﬁcant proﬁt to slip away. If so he, or she, or they, or it, is not proven. It is possible for such a person to operate successfully without them; and thereare some advantages in doing this, since a stop order will occasionally be caughtby a false move or an extended dull reaction. There are also advantages in notusing stop orders for the experienced technician who is looking toward apossible long-term gain and who is willing to wait out a Secondary reaction.But it is a thousand times better for the person who is not sure of his methodsto be stopped out early, then to be left holding a stock bought at, say 60, whenit has declined to 29 — or to 5! AU3772_book.fm Page 440 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

441 chapter twenty-eight What Is a Bottom — What Is a Top? EN9: In this extremely important chapter I have left intact Magee’s usage of “Tops and Bottoms.” It will be less potentially confusing for the reader to think of “highsand lows” as that terminology is commonly used in the business in the modern era.Also, thinking in terms of highs and lows is an important concept in itself. Thus,for a bull trend, higher highs, higher lows. And when this pattern is broken in animportant way the trader should be alert for a trend change. And, as the use ofeighths is of the essence in Figure 210, I have left the discussion in eighths whilethe reader knows that decimals are now used in the markets. In this chapter, we are not talking about what makes a Major Top or Bottom,nor what makes an Intermediate Top or Bottom. We are speaking of the Minor Tops and Bottoms that give us important hooks on which to hang ourtechnical operations. Stop-order levels, trendlines, objectives, Supports andResistances are determined by these Minor Tops and Bottoms. They are of prime importance to us as traders. Usually, these Minor Tops and Bottoms are well marked and perfectly clear. Often they are not. Sometimes, it is not possible to say deﬁnitely thatthis or that place is or is not a Top or Bottom. But it is possible to set certainstandards, practical working rules, that will help us in making these points;and these rules will not fail us too often. A good rule for setting stop levels is to consider that a Bottom has been made when the stock has moved “three days away” from the day markingthe suspected low of the Bottom. If a stock reacts for some days and ﬁnallymakes a low at 24, with a high for that day at 25, then we will not have anestablished Bottom until we have had 3 days in which the stock sells at no lower than 25 ⅛. The entire price range for 3 full days must be entirely above the top price for the day making the low. This is the “three days away” rule,and it would apply in reverse in declining markets, where the range for3 days must be entirely below the entire range of the day making the high. This gives a rule for setting an original stop order. It also gives a rule for changing the stop order. As soon as the stock has moved 3 days awayfrom a new Bottom, we move the stop order to a position below that Bottom.(We have already explained in Chapter 27 how we determine the distancethis stop level should be below the Bottom.) AU3772_C028.fm Page 441 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 210. Advance of a protective stop order in a long commitment. The daily

chart of American Cable and Radio in the summer of 1945 made a Rounded Bottom, part of a long period of Consolidation following the advance which ended in July1944. A breakout on heavy volume occurred September 12, and purchases were thenpossible on any Minor Reactions. The ﬁrst protective stop would immediately be placed 6% below the previous Minor Bottom of August 21, using the table given in Chapter 27. This would put thestop level at 9 ⅞. On September 19 and 20, we would have 2 days of market action entirely “away” from the September 17 Minor Bottom, and, on September 28, a thirdday. We would then move the stop up to 6% under the September 17 Bottom, or to10 ⅝. The next move would come after the new high closing of October 11, which is more than 3% higher than the October 1 Minor Peak. The stop would now be placedat 11 ⅞. On November 2, a new high close was registered more than 3% over the October 15 Minor Peak; the stop would be raised to 12 ¾. On November 15, another high closing topped by over 3% the Minor Peak made on November 7. The stopwould be moved up again, this time to 13 ½. November 29 made the third day the entire range was “three days away” from the November 26 Bottom, and the stopwas upped to 13 ¾. The closing on December 5 gave us a 3% advance over the November 17 high, and again we moved the stop, raising it to 14 ⅞. Finally, on January 3, 1946, this stop was caught as shown on the chart. In a Bear Market, protectivestops would be moved down in exactly the same manner to protect a short sale. EN9: A number of inconsistencies exist in this ﬁgure and caption which are clariﬁed later in the text. AMERICAN CABLE & RADIO ACR 1945–1946 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 Sales 100’s 250 200150 100 50 71 4 2 1 2 84 11 18 25 18 15 22 29 61 3 2 0 27 3 10 17 24 1 81 5 2 2 2 95 AU3772_C028.fm Page 442 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

Chapter twenty-eight: What Is a Bottom — What Is a Top? 443 Protective stops for long stocks can move only up. A stop level, once established, is never to be moved down except when the stock goes ex-div idend or ex-rights; then the stop may be dropped the amount of the dividendor rights. Similarly, protective stops for short sales are to be moved onlydown, and may not be raised. (In the case of ex-dividends and ex-rights, theshort-sale stop would be dropped the amount of the dividend or rights.) There are certain situations where it is difﬁcult to determine Bottoms and Tops; where, indeed, it seems as though a Consolidation or Correctionhad been made without any signiﬁcant move in the Secondary Direction. Insuch cases (as contrasted to the obvious situation where the stock moves upor down in series of well-marked steps and reactions, like a staircase), youwill need all your judgment and experience to determine where the MinorBasing Points actually occur. Basing Points Let us call the levels which determine where stops should be placed Basing Points. In a Bull Market Move, we will consider the Bottom of each Minor Reaction as a Basing Point, from which we will ﬁgure our stop-order levelas soon as the stock has moved up to “three days away.” We will also useeach Minor Top as a Basing Point in a Bull Move. In a Bear Market, we willconsider the Tops of each rally and also each Minor Bottom as Basing Pointsfor the protective stops, in the same way. Where a stock makes a substantial move in the Primary Direction, say a move of 15% or more, and then moves back at least 40% of the distancecovered from the previous Basing Point to the end of the Primary Move, thatsurely gives us a Basing Point as soon as the stock again starts off in thePrimary Direction. However, if the stock reacts less than 40%, perhaps evenmarks time at the same level for a week or more, that should also be con-sidered a Basing Point as soon as the move in the Primary Direction iscontinued (provided the volume indications are right). The daily volume, as we have seen, is like the trained nurse’s clinical thermometer; it tells a great deal about what is happening in a stock, morethan the superﬁcial symptoms of price alone. There are three times at whichyou may look for exceptionally heavy volume: (1) on the day of breakoutfrom a pattern or a period of inaction, especially if the breakout is on theupside; (2) on the day on which the stock goes into new ground in thePrimary or Intermediate Direction, that is, goes above the last Minor Top ina Bull Market, or below the last Minor Bottom in a Bear Market; and (3) theday on which the Minor Move is completed or nearly completed, that is, thenew Minor Top in a Bull Market and the Minor Bottom in a Bear Market.To this we might add that extra heavy volume on any other day during a move in the Primary Direction is likely to indicate that the move is at anend and will not complete the hoped-for advance or decline. AU3772_C028.fm Page 443 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Now, after a Minor Top has occurred, the stock now being in new high

ground, and the Top having been made on very heavy volume, we may look for the corrective move. Ordinarily, that would be a decline of several days,a week, sometimes longer. Occasionally, the correction, as we said a fewparagraphs back, will take the form of a horizontal hesitation lasting a weekor more without any particular corrective move in the downward direction.Where there is a downward correction, it is likely to come down to or nearthe Top of the last previous Minor High (support). Also, and often at thesame time, the corrective move will carry down to the Basic Trendline drawnthrough two or more previous Minor Bottoms; or to the “parallel”; or to atrendline drawn through the last two or more previous Minor Tops. If thecorrective move is horizontal, it is likely to run out until it meets one of theselines. In any case, the thing to watch for is the decline of volume. If the trading shrinks, perhaps irregularly, but on the whole, steadily, for some days aftera new Top has been made, during which time the stock either reacts or, atany rate, makes no progress in the Primary Direction, then you are justiﬁedin considering this as a Minor Correction. If the stock now continues thePrimary Move and gets to a point that is “three days away,” you can considerthe Bottom (that is, the point you draw your trendline through, not neces-sarily the extreme low point in the case of horizontal moves) as a new BasingPoint. Where a stock is starting what appears to be a new move, a breakout from a period of vacillating moves, it is sometimes hard to say preciselywhat point should be considered the Bottom. There may be several smalland indecisive moves on low volume preceding the real breakout. In sucha case, we would consider the appearance of high volume as the breakoutsignal, and set our Basing Point at the low point immediately preceding thissignal. There will usually be such a point on one of the low-volume days inthe 3 or 4 days just before the breakout. All that has been said about Basing Points in a Bull Market would also be true, in reverse, in a Bear Market, except that heavy volume does notalways accompany a downside breakout. Now there comes the difﬁcult and distressing situation where the stock, having made a long runaway move (let us assume it is an upward move),starts out, apparently, to make a Flag, and is bought after a sufﬁcient cor-rection of 40% with a decline of volume, and then continues to go downsteadily, without any rallies and without any clear volume indications. Thisis an unusual situation, but it does happen on both the upside and thedownside, from time to time. In the case we have just mentioned, we wouldlook for Support Levels (Consolidation Patterns, Multiple Tops, etc.) formedon the way down in the previous trend, and lying below the level at which we purchased the stock. We would use these supports as Basing Points ratherthan hold a stop under the extreme Bottom of the vertical move. In many cases of this type, you will not be able to ﬁnd adequate Basing Points. Therefore, it seems unwise to try to get in on corrections after long AU3772_C028.fm Page 444 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

Chapter twenty-eight: What Is a Bottom — What Is a Top? 445 runaway moves except: (1) where the stock has risen well above good Sup port that can serve as a Basing Point, or (2) where the stock is completelyabove all prices for several years and is moving “in the clear.” (The reverse,of course: in Bear Markets, the stock should have fallen below a strongResistance Area, or must be in new low ground for the past several monthsbefore you consider a short sale.) And in any case of this sort where you arethinking of a trade in a stock that appears to be making a Consolidationafter a fast, long, vertical move, you must have pronounced and conspicuous drying up of volume throughout the formation of the Flag or Pennant Cor-rection. There is one more word of caution needed here regarding trading in an Intermediate Trend. A series of moves in a trend will often take place in veryregular form. There may be a good trendline, and the reactions may be about40% to 50% and may come back to the previous Minor Tops. The volumeon the Corrections may shrink, with increasing volume on the new Tops. Itis easy to start trading on such a “staircase” in the expectation that the moveswill continue to be regular and consistent. But trends do not go on forever.Any Minor Top may be the last. The importance of ﬁnding your BasingPoints is to enable you to get out, at best, on any closing violation of one ofthese points, and at worst, on your protective stop order. The volume mayagain come to your aid in this question of when to stop trading on a trend.Although you look for high volume on the Tops, you will be exceedinglysuspicious of volume that is much higher than that on any of the preceding Minor Tops (or Bottoms in a Bear Market). The ﬁnal, or the next-to-ﬁnal,“blow-off” of a trend will usually show more volume than any of the Minorblow-offs along the way; and when you see such climactic volume, youshould prepare to retire into your shell and wait for a full Correction of theentire series of moves making up your Intermediate Trend. Later, weeks later,or perhaps months later, you may ﬁnd the stock has corrected 40% or moreof the whole Intermediate Move and is resting quietly with very little activity.Then is the time to watch it for new opportunities and a new trend in thePrimary Direction. EN9: In a book composed of nothing but important chapters this Chapter 28 mightnot get the emphasis it deserves from the unwary reader. In fact the procedureoutlined here is of absolutely basic importance in analyzing and trading trends. InChapter 28.1 I have added to it material which has been of great importance to mytrading and to the trading of my students. AU3772_C028.fm Page 445 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

chapter 28.1 Basing Points – A Case Analyzed The longer one thinks about the chart so casually tossed off in Figure 210 the more he realizes that it embodies a profound and natural understandingof trends and the market. Consider — wave up, wave recedes; wave up,wave recedes, and so on. As long as the trader or investor is not chased fromhis position by the corrective wave he will under normal circumstances ridethe trend to its natural end. But locals and hedge funds and those who proﬁtfrom volatility know that the previous low is where investors and tradersset their stops. So in the ordinary ﬂow of trading if they see an opportunityto take out an important low they will do it. If possible. And it is sometimespossible. And the low sometimes falls from the natural ﬂow of trading. Bruce Kovner, on being interviewed by Jack Schwager ( Market Wizards), was asked where he set his stops. “Where they’re hard to get to,” he said.A stop set on a basing point with a prudently calculated ﬁlter is hard to getto, unless the market has truly reversed direction. In fact, what is a long-termmoving average but a lagging stop with a ﬁlter built in? And what are Basing Points but the marking of highs and lows in full realization that a pattern of higher highs and higher lows is a bull trend,and when that pattern changes to one of lower highs and lower lows thetrend is changing, or has changed. This is the principle behind Dow Theory,and it is the principle behind trading trends of lesser duration than Dowtrends. And, as is quickly realized, a pattern of lower highs and lower lowsmeans inevitably that the trendline has been broken. As for Figure 210, Mark Twain had some cogent comments on it. He said that anyone trying to make sense of it would go crazy, and anyonetrying to justify the prices with the chart would be shot. Figure 210 preservesunexplainable conundrums and conﬂicts carefully preserved since the ear-liest editions. The reader is urged to take it as a concept rather than usingit as a lesson. And see Figure 210.1. Therefore let me codify the rules implic-itly presented in the Figure: 1. A high is made, being recognized by no higher prices occurring for the moment. 2. Prices recede and a low is made. This low is found by watching each day after the previous high until no lower prices are made. As pricesbegin to rise again we note each day on which prices are completelyoutside the range of our low day candidate. AU3772_C028.fm Page 446 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

Chapter 28.1: Basing Points – A Case Analyzed 447 3. When three such days are observed before a new low is made we mark the candidate day as a Basing Point and raise our stop to 6% (or x%) under the low of the basing point day. (See Chapter 27). 4. If a new high is 3% greater than the previous high a new Basing Point is found at the low of the new high day. The Basing Points Paradigm By no means will every issue be amenable to this kind of analysis. But themethod is so paradigmatic that it is worth examining at greater length. Andlike virtually every other method of classical chart analysis it must be used with caution and good and thoughtful judgement. Sometimes on some stocks it will seem to work as smooth as silicon lubricant and on other issuesit will appear to be useless. However, even on recalcitrant issues the princi-ples underlying the method will be of use, if not the actual method itself.With this in mind Figure 210.1 is presented. The careful reader will see thatthe chart in this example uses only bottoms or lows in stop setting and doesnot advance stops on the making of new highs as in Figure 210. This is donefor instructional purposes and to keep the example simple for the generalinvestor. More advanced traders will want to study and perhaps utilize thetechniques in Figure 210.

## _Figure 210.1 actually serves more than one instructional purpose. It_
illustrates a picture perfect case of the use of Basing Points, and it alsoillustrates a complete analysis of a bull market from entry to exit with keysmarking events in the life of the market. Thus, the observation of BasingPoints, the setting of the stops, the tracking of potentially false turns are allnoted. The chart is accompanied by the keys. Originally the marked andkeyed chart was used in graduate seminars at Golden Gate University forinstructional purposes. Shortly it became obvious that marking the chart inthis manner was extremely useful in trading. So it is suggested to the readeras a way of making his charts more communicative and more useful. AU3772_C028.fm Page 447 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 210.1

Apple Computer, bull market of 1987. A near perfect example of the use of Basing Points for trading of a reasonably regular and smooth bull market. Only low wave Basing Points ar e illustrated.

AU3772_C028.fm Page 448 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

Chapter 28.1: Basing Points – A Case Analyzed 449 KEY TO FIGURE 210.1 ANALYSIS 1. A rounding bottom, or perhaps a scallop. 2. Resistance or breakout line. 3. Wake up call on volume. 4. Run Day, big volume. Breakout through line 2. Sure entry signal. 5. First Basing Point (BP) Notice prior volume fall off in consolidation, and surge on run-day. A stop was entered before this BP using the low of the formation before the entry. 6. BP 7. A weak BP (because of shallowness of retracement) 8. BP 9. Test of BP at 8. 10. A trendline drawn after point 9. 11. BP 12. BP candidate which fails 3 day rule. 13. BP 14. A potential BP but not a very good one because new high has not been made from 13. 15. A support/resistance line. 16. BP. 17. BP 18. A resistance/support line. 19. Flag which becomes BP. 20. TL, but too steep to last. 21. Trendline. 22. BP 23. Trendline. 24. BP 25. BP 26. Horizontal trendline. 27. BP at 26.75 (stop 25.41). Stopped out at 25.41. A Narrative of the events in the Chart 1,2,3. Had we been asleep the event at number 3 should have awakened us. A volume day like this should catch the attention, and we begin paying attention to the stock and note the pattern that has been developing—the rounding bottom, or scallop. 4. And at number 4 we see a ‘run day’ on heavy volume. A good signal for entry with the breaking of the horizontal line at 2. When we enter we set our stop 5%under the recent low. After entering on strength there is every possibility that someproﬁt taking will occur as well as probing by locals to chase out arrivistes. 5. We watch with interest for the ﬁrst reaction. Each day we observe as a candidate for a possible ‘Basing Point.’ This occurs at 5 and we now begin to count ‘days away’from the Basing Point, that is, days whose range is entirely outside the range of thecandidate day, and which occur before a lower low is made. When the Basing Pointat 5 is conﬁrmed we raise our stop to 5% under the low of 5. 6. A higher high is made after 5 with a subsequent reaction to 6, which proves to be another Basing Point. So we raise our stop to 5% under 6. 7. Prices continue to climb and another Basing Point is made at 7. The procedure is becoming clear: Find a Basing Point and establish a stop a prudent distance underit. If a new Basing Point is made raise the stop. Watch with interest the reactionsagainst the trend. Either they allow you to establish a new higher Basing Point, orthey end your trade. AU3772_C028.fm Page 449 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
8,9. We ﬁnd a new Basing Point at 9, raise our stop and draw the trendline at 10. At 9 we have a lower low than 8, but our ‘ﬁlter,’ our 5% padding keeps our position

intact. We do not lower our stops using 9 as a new Basing Point. One of the inviolablerules is that stops are never lowered. The ﬁlter is important, since traders try to takeout nearby lows and exacerbate volatility. It is called the running of the sheep. 11. At 11 we ﬁnd a new, if tenuous Basing Point. An advance with a thin higher high. 12. At 12 we have a candidate for a Basing Point which fails the 3 day rule. 13. At 13 we ﬁnd the Basing Point that is good and raise our stop. 14. And at 14 we are confronted with a marginal situation. It is potential Basing Point. But a marginal one because a higher high was not made after 13. 15. At 15 we are able to draw a line deﬁning resistance — a line which will become a support line. 16. At 16 a new Basing Point which would have tested a point at 14. 17. At 17 we ﬁnd a new Basing Point and at 18 we can identify a resistance line. The spurt across this line is both gratifying and a warning. Because it becomes a ﬂagpolefrom which the ﬂag at 19 ﬂies. Flags and ﬂagpoles are messages that the market hasheated up and now wants close watching. A ﬂag can serve as a Basing Point, so wemove our stop again, fully aware that the end may be approaching. The trendline at20 is further conﬁrmation of this environment due to its steepness. But we see twogood anchor points in 16 and 17 and draw trendline 21 — a better line to defend. 22. A good reaction ﬁnally occurs at 22 giving a strong Basing Point and good rationale for raising the stop. Notice the interesting fact that points 22 and 24 havecome back to rest on the trendline we drew at 10. 24. As the tempo has increased and the volatility 24 furnishes us another valid Basing Point. 25. Even 25 is a valid point and we can now see the clear support line at 26. 27. When this line is pierced at 27 upon extraordinary volume, and in the process takes out our Basing Point stop from 25, it is clearly time to exit the train. The Basing Point concept is even more thoroughly explored in the paper titled “Stair Stops” on the John Magee Technical Analysis website: www.edwards-magee.com AU3772_C028.fm Page 450 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

451 chapter twenty-nine Trendlines in Action From what has already been said in Part One of this book, you will be familiar with the characteristic single-line trends of stocks, and the numerous excep-tions and deviations that come into the picture from time to time. We knowthat stocks often move in parallel trends, sometimes for months, occasionallyeven for years. We also know that they may, and do, break out of trend orchange the direction of their trends without notice. Most of the pattern formations we have studied can be considered as manifestations of trend action, that is, as Continuations or Reversals of atrend. Thus, a Symmetrical Triangle is simply the meeting of two trends. During the formation of the Triangle, the stock is following both trends in a narrow-ing pattern, until ﬁnally, the dominant trend asserts itself. An AscendingTriangle is following an upward trend, but has encountered a ResistanceLevel at the Top. A Head-and-Shoulders shows the end of an upward trendand the beginning of a downward trend. A Rectangle is a Parallel TrendChannel running in a horizontal direction. And so on. We can project a Parallel Trend, and, in the case of stocks which happen to continue moving in that trend, we can buy and sell at almost the precisepoints of contact with the trendline. Unfortunately, long and perfect straight-line trends of this sort are the exception rather than the rule. For actualtrading purposes we will project our trends more or less continuously onthe basis of the most recently established data. From the standpoint of tactics, let’s consider the trends as they are indicated by the successive Minor Tops and Minor Bottoms. For illustrationof this, and as a guide to what we are leading up to, we will considersimpliﬁed, ideal situations (see diagram examples on the next page). To avoid confusion, mark the top trendline in blue and the bottom trendline in red. This can be done on daily charts easily by using coloredpencils. We will refer to the upper trendline as the Blue Trend, and the lowertrendline as the Red Trend. From time to time, we will also want to draw aline parallel to a Blue Trend across the Bottom of the trend so as to includea segment of the Trend Channel between two Tops within parallel lines. Thiswe will call the Blue Parallel, and we will mark it with a dotted or brokenblue line. Conversely, we may wish to draw a parallel to the Red Trend soas to include the segment of the Trend Channel between two Bottoms; andthis dotted red line we will call the Red Parallel. AU3772_book.fm Page 451 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
DIAGRAM 3 (Left, above). Here is a rising trend showing the Basic Trendline

across two Bottoms, which we call the Red Trendline, and its parallel (indicated by a broken line) through the Top of the intervening peak. The parallel suggests theapproximate objective of the next move if the stock continues in trend. DIAGRAM 4 (Right, above). The same rising trend with the Return Line, which we call the Blue Trendline, drawn through two Tops. Broken line represents itsparallel through the intervening Bottom. This Blue Parallel is useful in determininga buying point, especially in trends of rapidly changing form when the stock maynot react to its Basic Trendline. DIAGRAM 5 (Left, above). This is a declining trend showing the Basic Trendline across two Tops, which we call the Blue Trendline, and its parallel (indicated by abroken line) through the Bottom of the intervening decline. The parallel suggests theapproximate objective of the next move if the stock continues in trend. DIAGRAM 6 (Right, above). The same declining trend with the Return Line, which we call the Red Trendline, drawn through two Bottoms. Broken line represents itsparallel through the intervening Top. This Red Parallel is useful in determining apoint at which to make short sales, especially in trends of rapidly changing formwhen the stock may not rally to its Basic Trendline. AU3772_book.fm Page 452 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-nine: Trendlines in Action 453 DIAGRAM 7. Simpliﬁed diagram of a stock chart showing trend action. Basic Trendlines are marked with heavy lines; Return Lines are marked lightly. At the start, the stock declines in a Parallel Trend Channel. Blue Trendline is basic here. A short sale on a rally to the Red Parallel at point A will ﬁnd its objective on the Blue Parallel at B. Another short sale on the Red Parallel at C would be followedby failure to reach the objective. Chances are good, however, that increased volumewould develop at the Double Bottom and give warning to get out of short commit-ments. The upside penetration of the basic Blue Trendline at E, alone, is not sufﬁcientreason to reverse position and go long. Trendlines set up during formation of theRectangle would be marked in the regular way, but are indicated here by brokenlines to emphasize the pattern. Another short sale, if tried on the sixth point of contactwith the Rectangle at F, would be stopped out on the breakout. The trend is now rising, although we cannot yet draw a Basic (Red) Trendline. The ﬁrst buy would be made on a 40–50% correction of the breakout move from theRectangle, or on a return to the Top (Support) level at H. A trendline would be drawn to the ﬁrst Bottom established in the Triangle. This is not shown, as it would ultimately be replaced by the line shown through theoutermost point in the Triangle. We have indicated by broken lines the trendlines setup during the formation of the pattern. The objective of the breakout move from the Triangle would be the Red Parallel to our now rising Basic Trendline. This objective is reached at J. A Return Line (Blue)would be drawn from the ﬁrst Reversal Top of the Triangle at G through the Top ofthe breakout move at J, and the parallel to this through point I would indicate aboutwhere to make the next purchase. As a matter of fact, the stock does not actually getback to that point; in practice, the purchase would probably be made at K on thebasis of a 40–50% correction, or on a reaction to the Support Level G. The subsequent upward move would not carry through to the Red Parallel marked W. However, the alarm would probably be sounded clearly by a day of heavy volume,a One-Day Reversal, or a gap. Since the trend is now obviously convergent, no furtherpurchases would be considered. The next move fails to make such headway and fallsfar short of the objective set by the Red Parallel marked Y. Soon after, the Wedgebreaks out downside.A B DCEFG HIKJWY AU3772_book.fm Page 453 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Since, ordinarily, a Top will be formed after a Bottom and a Bottom after

a Top, we will expect to draw, alternately, a Blue Trendline and then a Red Trendline, these lines being drawn as soon as the new Top or Bottom isestablished. (In some cases, a light pencil line may be drawn to indicatesuspected Tops or Bottoms, until developments conﬁrm their validity.) We have already taken up the important and rather difﬁcult question of determining the Minor Tops and Bottoms. Very often, these points will beclear and obvious. Sometimes they will be obscure, and you will be able todraw trendlines with conﬁdence, in such cases, only after considerable expe-rience covering many types of action. The most difﬁcult times to determineMinor Trends are during Reversals, especially where these are of the roundedand irregular types. However, in these cases (of Reversal), we will notdepend so much on the trendlines to determine buying and selling points. So long as a stock persists in a Parallel Trend Channel, it is perfectly clear that you should buy near the Bottom of the channel and sell near theTop. From the geometry of the situation (see examples), you will see at aglance that it is not likely to be proﬁtable to sell short in an upward-movingtrend (since the reactions are necessarily smaller than the advances), nor tobuy stock in a downward-moving trend. Therefore, a trend must show that it is presumably an uptrend before you are justiﬁed in buying stock. And you must have what is presumably adowntrend to justify a short sale. You will notice from the simpliﬁed examples shown here that pattern formations indicate trends. The breaking of a Rectangle on the upside resultsin an upward slope of the Blue Trend. The move up out of an AscendingTriangle conﬁrms the rising Red Trend and creates a rising Blue Trend. Thedownside breaking of a Head-and-Shoulders neckline conﬁrms a descendingBlue Trend and sets up a descending Red Trend. And so on. From studies of these patterns and various trend actions, we arrive at a compact set of trading rules based on these Red and Blue trendlines. Theserules are summarized below. Buying Stock, “Going Long” • Preparatory Buying Signals (indicating that a buying opportunity may be in the making). Penetration of Blue Trend to a new highclosing (in most cases). (The simple breaking of a descending BlueTrendline, where no other pattern or indication is present, is notsufﬁciently conclusive evidence of Reversal to justify commitments.)– Contact with the ascending Blue Trend if Red Trend is also as cending, provided the trends do not converge (Parallel or Diver-gent Trend Channel). AU3772_book.fm Page 454 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-nine: Trendlines in Action 455 – Contact with horizontal Blue Trend if Red Trend is also horizontal or ascending (Rectangle, Ascending Triangle). – Penetration of descending Blue Trend on volume if Red Trend is ascending (Symmetrical Triangle). • Execution of Buys (after preparatory buying signal). – In case the previous Blue Trend has been ascending, draw the Blue Parallel and buy at or near this line. – In case the previous Blue Trend has been horizontal or descending (that is to say, emerging from Rectangles, Triangles, and various Reversal Patterns), buy on a reaction of 40 to 45% of the distancefrom the last previous Minor Bottom to the extreme Top of themost recent move. Liquidating, or Selling a Long Position Immediately on execution of the buy order, determine the stop level (seeChapter 27 on Stop Orders), and place your protective stop. Penetration ofthis stop level will automatically close out your transaction. The stop levelmay be moved up according to the “three days away” rule, but may neverbe moved down (except to adjust for ex-dividend or ex-rights). If the stockcloses below a previous Minor Bottom (thus setting up a descending RedTrend), sell on tight (EN: or hair-trigger) progressive stops. If the stock advances on moderate volume and then develops unusually high volume on any day during the advance before either the Blue Trend isbroken (with a close above that trendline) or before the stock has made anew high closing over the last Minor Top, close out the transaction on tightprogressive stops. If the stock develops high volume on the day on which it either tops and closes above the Blue Trend or makes a new high closing over theprevious Minor Top, hold it. If heavy volume again occurs on the followingday or any subsequent day, however, sell on tight progressive stops. You will ﬁnd that, in many cases, the heavy volume signal will develop (sometimes with also a One-Day Reversal or an Exhaustion Gap) on or nearthe Red Parallel. You will watch especially for this volume indication as asign of a good proﬁt-taking point. If the volume signal does not show up,your selling objective is this Red Parallel, at a limit or on tight progressivestops. In case there is no such volume signal at the top of the move and themove does not reach the Blue Trend nor make a new high, you are verylikely running into a Triangle situation. In that case, you will have to waitfor a breakout one way or the other. Meanwhile, maintain your stop protec-tion underneath. AU3772_book.fm Page 455 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
DIAGRAM 8. Preparatory buying signals shown by trend action. (A) Penetration of an ascending Blue Trendline. (B) Penetration of a horizontal Blue Trendline. (C) The penetration of a descending Blue Trendline without other technical indica-tions is not conclusive evidence of a change in trend, and does not justify longcommitments. (D) Contact with the Blue Trendline of an Ascending Parallel Trend Pattern. (E) Contact with the Blue Trendline of an Ascending Divergent Trend Pattern.(F) In this case, contact with the Blue Trendline does not suggest a buy on the nextreaction, since the trend appears to be converging; a possible Wedge in the making,with Bearish implications.(G) Contact with the Blue Trendline of a Rectangle at its ﬁfth point of Reversal.(H) Contact with the Blue Trendline of an Ascending Triangle. (I) Penetration on volume of descending Blue Trendline when Red Trendline is as-cending (Symmetrical Triangle). In rising trends, the Blue Trendline is a Return Line, and purchases will be made

on reactions to a line parallel to the new Blue Trendline established at the Top of thesignal move, and drawn through the intervening Bottom. Note that in the case ofdecisive breakouts from patterns such as Rectangles and Triangles, a purchase mayalso be made on the basis of a computed 40–50% correction of the breakout move,or on a return to Support.A B C D E F G H I AU3772_book.fm Page 456 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-nine: Trendlines in Action 457 DIAGRAM 9. Preparatory signals for short sales shown by trend action. (J) Penetration of a descending Red Trendline. (K) Penetration of a horizontal Red Trendline.(L) The penetration of an ascending Red Trendline without other technical indicationsis not conclusive evidence of a change in trend, and does not justify short commitments. (M) Line of a Descending Parallel Trend Channel. (N) Contact with the Red Trendline of a Descending Divergent Trend Pattern.(O) In this case, contact with the Red Trendline does not suggest a short sale on thenext rally, since the trend appears to be converging; a possible Wedge in the making,with Bullish implications. (P) Contact with the Red Trendline of a Rectangle at its ﬁfth point of Reversal.(Q) Contact with the Red Trendline of a Descending Triangle. (R) Penetration of ascending Red Trendline (with or without volume) when BlueTrendline is descending (Symmetrical Triangle). In descending trends, the Red Trendline is a return Line, and short sales will be made on rallies to a line parallel to the new Red Trendline established at the Bottomof the signal move and drawn through the intervening peak. Note that in the caseof decisive breakouts from patterns such as Rectangles and Triangles, a short salemight also be made on the basis of a computed 40–50% correction of the breakoutmove, or on a return to Resistance.J K L M N O P Q R AU3772_book.fm Page 457 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Selling Stock Short

• Preparatory Selling Signals (indicating that an opportunity for short sales may be in the making). – Penetration of Red Trend to a new low closing (in most cases). (The simple breaking of an ascending Red Trendline where no other pattern or indication is present is not sufﬁciently conclusive evidence of Reversal to justify commitments.) – Contact with descending Red Trend if Blue Trend is also de scending, provided the trends do not converge (Parallel or Di-vergent Trend Channel). – Contact with horizontal Red Trend if Blue Trend is also horizontal or descending (Rectangle, Descending Triangle). – Penetration of ascending Red Trend (with or without volume increase) if Blue Trend is descending (Symmetrical Triangle). • Execution of Short Sales (after preparatory selling signal). – In case the previous Red Trend has been descending, draw the Red Parallel and sell at or near this line. – In case the previous Red Trend has been horizontal or ascending (that is to say, emerging from Rectangles, Triangles, and variousReversal Patterns), sell on a rally of 40 to 45% of the distance fromthe last previous Minor Top to the extreme Bottom of the mostrecent move. Covering Short Sales Immediately on execution of the short sale, determine the stop level (see Chapter 27 on Stop Orders), and place your protective stop. Penetration ofthis stop level will automatically close out your transaction. The stop levelmay be moved down according to the “three days away” rule, but may neverbe moved up. If the stock closes above a previous Minor Top (thus setting up an ascending Blue Trend), buy to cover on tight progressive stops. If the stock declines on moderate volume and then develops unusually high volume on any day during the decline before either the Red Trend isbroken (with a close below that trendline), or before the stock has made anew low closing under the last Minor Bottom, close out the transaction ontight progressive stops. If the stock develops high volume on the day on which it either breaks and closes below the Red Trend or makes a new low closing under theprevious Minor Bottom, hold it short. If heavy volume again occurs on thefollowing day or any subsequent day, however, buy to cover on tight pro-gressive stops. You will ﬁnd that in many cases the heavy volume signal will develop (sometimes with also a One-Day Reversal or an Exhaustion Gap) on or nearthe Blue Parallel. You will watch especially for this volume indication as a AU3772_book.fm Page 458 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-nine: Trendlines in Action 459 sign of a good proﬁt-taking point. If the volume signal does not show up, your buying objective is the Blue Parallel, at a limit or on tight progressivestops. In case there is no such volume signal at the bottom of the move andthe move does not reach the Red Trend nor make a new low, you are verylikely running into a Triangle situation. In that case, you will have to waitfor a breakout one way or the other, meanwhile maintaining your stopprotection overhead. Additional Suggestions When a level is reached which appears to be either a Minor Bottom on a reaction or a Minor Top on a rally, and when the stock continues to stall and remain at this point, moving in a very narrow range for 3 weeks or morewithout giving any signal either by way of price change or volume actionas to its next move, it is wise to assume that this congestion is deﬁnitely akey area, should be considered a Minor Top or Bottom, and protective stopsadjusted to it as a Basing Point, instead of the previously established Top orBottom, as against the possibility that the move out of this area, when itcomes, may be in the wrong direction. After a series of moves in a trend, with each move in the Primary Direction marked by heavier volume than the retreats or Corrective Movesagainst the trend, you are likely to have a move in the Primary Direction,which is marked by extraordinary volume; that is to say, by much larger volume than the normal increase for a Primary Move. On such a move, aftertaking your proﬁts on previous commitments, you would ordinarily beginto plan the next commitment on the Correction. But in this particular case,noting the extreme volume, you would cancel any immediate plans forfurther commitments in the Primary Direction. The reason for this is that such climactic volume normally indicates the ﬁnal “blow-off” of the Intermediate Trend, to be followed either by a Rever-sal, or at least by a period of stagnation, or formation of ConsolidationPatterns, or Intermediate Correction. In such a case, it is not safe to makeany further commitments on this trend pending further developments andthe positive reassertion of the trend. If you examine daily charts of various stocks, covering long and impor tant trends, you will ﬁnd that the series of Minor Moves making up theIntermediate Trend is likely to culminate in a Minor Move marked by tre-mendous volume. This is more true of Tops than Bottoms, although at theend of the Panic Phase of a Bear Market, we very often see climactic volume.The climax indicates, on the other hand, the sale of large amounts of stockby strong investors to weak traders, near the top; on the other hand, theliquidation of holdings by weak traders occurs near the bottom, into thehands of strong investors who will hold them for the next Major Move. One of the most common errors, and one of the easiest to fall into, is to mistake a Climactic Top or Bottom for a normal conﬁrmation or preparatorysignal for a new commitment in line with the preceding trend. AU3772_book.fm Page 459 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
It is similar in nature to the error often made by novices in the market

of buying on the Minor Tops (becoming dazzled with the rapid price advance and the great volume of activity). However, in the case of these ﬁnal “blow-off” moves, the volume is greater and the adverse portent far more serious. General Outline of Policy for Trading in the Major Trend A. Always trade in the direction of the Major or Primary Dow Trend (EN: See the editor’s comments in Chapter 3) as it is indicated at the time. B. If the two component Averages of the Dow Theory (Industrials and Rails EN9: Transportations) are not in agreement, trade in the direction of the last established Primary Trend but only in the componentwhich is still following that trend. C. Examine charts of group Averages covering groups of businesses in the same or related lines; trade in the Primary Direction when thetrend of the group corresponds. D. Trade in any particular stock when its own individual chart indicates a trend in the same direction as the Primary Trend, and when thetechnical picture has indicated a probable move in that direction. Make all new commitments on the reactions or rallies following the signaling move in the Primary direction, except in the case of Primary Rever-sals from Bull Market to Bear Market, when short sales may be made at themarket immediately following the Reversal. Exception: after an extended move or a series of moves in the Primary Direction, when signs of exhaustion and Reversal appear in individualcharts, commitments in the opposite direction may be made with objectiveslimited to a correction of the preceding Intermediate Move in the PrimaryDirection. EN9: Now the reader’s head is spinning and the color blind are completely confused. As this book is unfortunately printed in black and white the reader withoutcolored pencils will be at sea. But the principles articulated here by Magee are ofgreat value to a Trader and are worth study. Technology rides to the rescue. A colorPDF of this chapter will be found in the distant future on the John Magee TechicalAnalysis website at www.edwards-magee.com. AU3772_book.fm Page 460 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

461 chapter thirty Use of Support and Resistance We know that after many breakouts from well-deﬁned Reversal and Con solidation Patterns, we get a short countermove back to the edge of thepattern, and that the checking of this move at that point is an example ofSupport or Resistance, as the case may be. Also, we should be familiar bynow with the tendency of stocks to move up or down in a series of zigzagsteps. If the move is upward, the reaction after each advance tends to stopat the level of the preceding peak. If the move is downward, the rally aftereach decline tends to stop at the level of the preceding bottom. This is againa matter of Support and Resistance, and provides the basis for buying onreactions or selling on rallies. It has also been pointed out that Intermediate Secondary Moves will frequently stop at or close to the previous Intermediate Top or Bottom. It is necessary to evaluate the importance of these phenomena of Support and Resistance, and apply them in market practice, for they are among themost important tools we have. Unfortunately it is not easy to reduce thisparticular subject to a neat formula or body of rules. (EN9: And the effort will be made. See endnote of this chapter for an interesting effort to do just that.) Here you will depend very largely on experience and observation. You will haveto be alert in spotting the levels where Resistance or Support is likely to beencountered, and some judgment is needed in balancing the various factorsthat will affect the situation. For example, there is a stock which has broken up out of a well-deﬁned Rectangle of considerable duration. Should the heavy volume of the breakoutmove give way to a dull reaction, you will look for an opportunity to buythis stock at a point a little above the top level of the Rectangle. It willprobably not penetrate very far below that level and, indeed, will often failto react all the way to the Support. If the stock should then advance to anew high, and once more decline on low volume, you may look for anotherbuying point at about the level of the peak reached on the original breakout.Another advance may be followed by reaction to the second peak, and thisprocess may be repeated a number of times, each reaction carrying back tothe level of the preceding high. AU3772_book.fm Page 461 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Now we all know that this sort of thing does not continue indeﬁnitely. When the stock ﬁrst breaks out, moving from, say, 15 to 19, we may buy

rather conﬁdently on the reaction to 17, if that is the Support Level. If wedid not buy on this move, we may buy with considerable assurance on thereaction to Support after the next advance. This advance might have carriedthe price to 21 and our buying point would, of course, be at the previouspeak of 19. However, as the stock moves up to 25, 30, 40, it must be clearthat we are approaching a real Top; that although we cannot say where thatTop will be reached, we can be sure that it is becoming increasingly temptingto long-time holders of this stock to sell and take their substantial gains. Theseries of steps is bound to come to an end. To be sure, the Major course ofthe stock and of the market may continue up for months or years, but aftera series of sharp rises, we may reasonably expect a Reversal and a rathersubstantial Intermediate Decline before the upward move is continued. Therefore, we must regard each successive step of advance with increas ing suspicion, and it is a fair rule that after a stock has made three suchmoves in the Primary Direction, it is time to look for an Intermediate Cor-rection, or at least an important period of Consolidation. Thus, we have the rough shape of a rule. Buy on the reaction to Support after the ﬁrst breakout. Buy on the reaction to the ﬁrst Minor Peak after thenext move. But do not buy on the reaction to the second Minor Peak. Let us say, then, that we have been successful in two short-term moves, buying on the reaction to Support and selling on the climax after a new Tophas been made. But we have decided not to attempt a third such trade. What,then, may we expect next? We may see a period of Consolidation, we maysee the beginning of an Intermediate Decline, or we may see the stockactually go right on moving up. No matter. We will wait for the IntermediateReaction. We will wait until the stock makes a very substantial decline, andthis may take many weeks. Then, if the Major Trend has not reversed itself,we will again look for a buying opportunity at (or somewhat above) theIntermediate Support, which will usually be the top level of the advancepreceding the one just completed, for this is the level from which the nextPrimary Advance is likely to proceed and is a good buying point. Of course, we ﬁnd the same situation in Bear Markets. A breakout is likely to be followed by one, two, three, or more steps of decline, withintervening rallies to Minor Resistance. Sooner or later (and we would counton no more than three such steps in a series), we will get a turn and anIntermediate Recovery. We will then wait for this rally, which may itself bemade up of several Minor steps, to reach or approach closely the precedingIntermediate Bottom, at which point we may look for substantial Resistance.Here is the place again to put out shorts. Questions will come to your mind. One of them, and one of the most important is: how do we decide when an expected Support or Resistancehas failed us, and at what point do we then abandon our position? It will be clear that this question can be a very painful one. Let us suppose you have seen a stock rise to 25 and have placed an order to buy it at 23 ½ AU3772_book.fm Page 462 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty: Use of Support and Resistance 463 on the basis of expected Support at 23, the level of a previous Minor Peak. The order is executed during a dull reaction. The next day, the stock slipsdown to 22 ½, on perhaps only two or three sales. The next day, it continues down to 21 ½, still on low volume. And during the next week, it goes down steadily, without much volume, nearly every sale being at a lower price, asthough no new bids were being received, and as though no substantialnumber of bids were standing on the book at any point. A decline of thissort can eventually assume the magnitude of an Intermediate Reaction. Themove may carry down to 15 before it turns. Obviously this was not whatyou expected, and you should be out of the stock. The painful part of these drifting moves is that you do not want to sell your stock (which you bought at 23 ½) on just a slight move down, say to 22 ¾, since the probability is strong that it will shoot up at any moment to new high levels. And yet, at some point during a continued decline, youmust decide, “This has gone through the Support; I should sell and take asmall loss now, rather than risk a more serious loss.” And the most painfulpart of all is that sometimes, the moment you have sold and taken your loss,the stock will come to life and complete what would have been an extremelyproﬁtable move. You might just as well prepare yourself for this sort of disappointment; for it will happen to you. But to avoid nights of pacing the ﬂoor and daysof worry, you should decide, at the time you make the original commitment, just how much leeway you are prepared to give the stock. Then you will not betempted to put off a decision from day to day if things are not going theway you hoped. In the case of purchases or short sales made against Minor Peaks or Bottoms, as the case may be, you might set up the following rule. Measuringfrom the extreme high of the previous (Supporting) Minor Top, or theextreme low of the previous (resisting) Minor Bottom, set a stop using themethod we have outlined in Chapter 27. (EN9: See also Chapter 28. And consider the risk limitation procedures in Chapter 42.) This would often be the intraday high or low, not necessarily the closing price. Penetration to thatextent should be presumptive evidence that your expected Support or Resis-tance is not going to function. Where you are buying against Major or Intermediate Support, or selling short against Major or Intermediate Resistance, you can allow a little moreleeway for penetration. In such cases, examine the Support or ResistanceArea, and estimate visually its core or axis; in other words, try to gauge the“center of gravity” of this area, the point which is most nearly the meanprice of sales occurring there, taking into account the volume, since theimportant thing is to determine the approximate price level at which a greatmany shares changed hands. Having determined this point, set your stopbeyond it, according to the methods speciﬁed in Chapter 27. Up to this point we have concerned ourselves (reversing the usual order) with how to get out of situations which have gone bad. We have said nothingabout where, precisely, to get in, nor where, precisely, to take proﬁts. AU3772_book.fm Page 463 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
In the matter of getting in, i.e., making the original commitment, you

will feel, perhaps, that there is a conﬂict between acting on Support or Resistance, and acting on either trendline action or a computed reaction of40% to 50% after a previous move. At times there is such conﬂict, and it isnot possible to state any exact rule which will reconcile these three differenttrading indications. However, in a great number of cases, you will bedelighted to observe that a reaction of about 45% will bring your stock tothe trendline, and will also bring it near to the Support or Resistance Level.After a move to a new Minor Top, a stock may be expected to react: (1) about40% to 50% of that move, (2) to the Basic Trendline, and (3) to the previoussupporting Minor Top. Your purchase, then, will be based on a consider-ation of all three factors. If you have bought “early,” on the basis of onefactor alone, you may expect the stock to react a bit further without spoilingthe triple indications to the extent of catching your stop. It would be bestto make your purchases on the basis of whichever factor indicates thesmallest reaction, and to place your stop beyond the greatest reactionindicated by any of the three. Ordinarily, there will not be too muchdifference between these three points. As usual, the method applies inreverse to short sales. Where you are buying after an Intermediate Decline, or selling after an Intermediate Rally, you will lean somewhat more heavily on Support andResistance than on either a computed percentage for the Secondary Moveor a trendline. You will, of course, examine the history of the stock, preferablyon weekly or monthly charts ﬁrst, to see its Major Trend, to locate importantSupport or Resistance Areas, and to estimate roughly the extent of the Cor-rective Move, the termination of which you are trying to gauge. You willthen check these data in the more detailed picture you can get from yourdaily charts. As the Intermediate Corrective Move approaches within 4% or5% of the Support or Resistance Level, you may come to a day of extremelyheavy volume; and this day may also be a One-Day Reversal. If so, yourcommitment should be made at once, protected, of course, by a stop. Oth-erwise, you may make your commitment whenever the chart begins tohesitate or ﬂatten out, or, lacking other indications, when it has come towithin 3% of the Support or Resistance. Now in this case, your problem in taking proﬁts is a bit more difﬁcult than in the case of Minor Moves. You are expecting a Reversal of the Inter-mediate Corrective Move and the establishment of a new Intermediate Trendin the Primary Direction. You are at a point where the course of the marketis uncertain. You must realize that prices may stay at the Support (or Resis-tance) Level, forming a Line or Rectangle, and ﬁnally penetrate that level,establishing Reversal of the Major Trend. Or they may be stopped and turnedat the Support or Resistance Level, only to make a small move away andthen return for another, and possibly successful, attempt at penetration. Or(and this is what you hope, of course) a continuation of the Major Trendmay develop, with a sharp move on increased volume in the favorabledirection, to be followed, perhaps, by a Minor Corrective Move and another AU3772_book.fm Page 464 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty: Use of Support and Resistance 465 thrust in the Primary direction; perhaps a new series of Minor Moves car rying the entire Primary Trend into new ground. Taking these cases one by one, if the stock remains at the Support or Resistance Level for many days or several weeks, and then penetrates thatlevel, closing at a price that is clearly through it, get out at once. If the stockmakes a small move in the right direction and returns to the Support orResistance, prepare to get out if there is a deﬁnite penetration. If, however,the move is in the right direction, watch for volume indications, and prepareto set tight stops to take your proﬁts as soon as heavy volume appears (excepton a day of breakout). Of course, once such a signal has appeared, you arethen justiﬁed in continuing to make new commitments on the followingMinor Correction, and the one following that, for you are again moving inthe Major Trend. There is one other situation that should be mentioned here. Up to this point, we have assumed that all of your commitments have been made totake advantage of a move in the direction of the Major Trend. Let us suppose,however, that a move which has carried a stock up to new high levels in aseries of Minor steps proceeds to form and then breaks out of a ReversalPattern. We must now look for a Secondary Move of Intermediate extent.We may sell short on the rally to the Minor Resistance, and, if the movecontinues down, we may make a second and even (more cautiously) a thirdcommitment against successive Minor Bottoms. But, in this case, we will belooking for the decline to end somewhere in the vicinity of the last previousIntermediate Top, which is now a Support Level. Similarly, following arecognized Reversal Pattern and upward breakout on volume during a BearMarket, we may expect an Intermediate Rally which can be used for tradingup to the previous Intermediate Bottom where strong Resistance is likely toshow up. A skillful trader can turn these Secondary Moves into proﬁts duringperiods when it is not possible to trade along the indicated Primary Trend;but it should be remembered that, ordinarily, such moves cannot be expectedto go as far as will those in the Primary Direction. We might close this chapter by reminding you again that, while Support and Resistance action in the Minor Trend is shown clearly in daily charts,the Intermediate and Major Supports and Resistances are most easily recog-nized on weekly or monthly charts. EN9: It seems to this editor that Magee’s discussion here of the use of Support and Resistance is really most pertinent to position building and pyramiding. Alter-natively the method applies to an issue which has just caught the analyst’s attention,and he has missed the breakout, which is usually obvious (at least in hindsight). Ifeel strongly that the serious trader should not miss the original breakout. Chasingmoving trains is never a helathy activity. Does this appear an impossible occupation,watch thousands of stocks? Impossible for your average analyst, but not for youraverage computer. For example the computer may be programmed to alert you whena stock is gapping on volume or trading at volumes which are suspiciously large.And given the plethora of services and user groups the trader stands a good chanceof spotting an issue to put on his watch list before it takes off. AU3772_book.fm Page 465 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Investors should, in theory, never miss a breakout, because they should be

watching a much more limited group of issues. In my opinion these are primarily indices and ishares. Of course an investor’s portfolio might include a few well chosenindividual issues, but these would be of obvious visibility to the individual, e.g.,biotechs for an investor with some knowledge of the area, or Internets for an engineer,etc. The unending effort to remove ambiguity from market interpretation extends to identifying areas of support and resistance. Metastock (metastock.com), an excel-lent software package, has a number of value added packages. One of the moreinteresting of these, Powerstrike™ by John Slauson of Adaptick, Inc. (adaptick.com)attempts to mathematically deﬁne support and resistance zones. Slauson’s packageis interesting, and the reasoning and observation behind it are interesting. Marketanalysis is rooted in one thing: the intelligent observation of the operation of themarket. Dow watched the markets for years and came to the understanding of waveswhich led to Dow Theory. Schabacker and Edwards, equipped with these observationsand comments, collated and observed more data and recognized the persistent pat-terns which occurred over and over in the markets, and added Magee for his practicalengineer’s approach to solving the tactical and strategic questions. In the 1980s oneof my friends, a Chicago market maker in the options pit, noticed that there was a90 second delay on data coming out of the futures pits to the options pit. He set upa “human ticker” with a direct phone connection to his pit and enjoyed a 90 secondadvantage over other market makers until the glitch was noticed and corrected. Slauson (among others) noticed that important trading and support and resis tance in optionable stocks tended to cluster around important option strike pricelevels. In fact these levels inﬂuence stock prices and may be said to determine where“important” buying and selling occur. Obviously support and resistance levels areset by concentrated face offs between buyers and sellers. A battleground metaphoris appropriate: Since the time of the Greeks battles have occurred time and again inthe same physical locations. The reason is obvious. You need physical space to deployan army. So commanders will be attracted to the plain or open ground for face offs,and to the high ground for defensive purposes. Option strike prices have the sameattractiveness for traders that a good battleground has for a military commander. Agood place to test the enemy. Powerstrike™ analyzes the instrument price and volume around the nearby option strike prices and determines whether support or resistance is stronger. Allin all a clever application of number-driven analysis to the support and resistancequestion. The chart analyst may supplement his analysis with a routine like this. AU3772_book.fm Page 466 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

467 chapter thirty-one Not All in One Basket EN: As diversiﬁcation for the small investor is nowadays inﬁnitely easier, an inter esting endnote follows Magee’s text.

Diversiﬁcation is important because technical patterns do not always carry out their original promise. If all your capital is tied up in one stock, orin a few stocks of the same group or line of business, you may be hurt by afalse move affecting only your holdings, even though the rest of the marketmay continue to hold ﬁrm or even to move farther along the Primary Trend.By diversifying, you are protected by the law of averages against all of yourholdings going the wrong way, except of course, in the case of some Reversalthat affects the entire market or a large segment of it. Intelligent diversiﬁcation calls for study of the costs of buying and selling stocks, especially in small quantities. You might wish to have a portfolio ofstocks representing the entire Dow–Jones Averages, or a selection thatincludes at least one stock of every major group. But if your capital is limited,this might mean buying only a half-dozen shares of each stock, and theminimum commission charges would make this an expensive operation,entirely too costly for short-term trading. The short-term trader must alwaysthink of these costs. They are more important to him than to the long-terminvestor who may intend to hold the same stock for many months or years.To you as a trader, a quarter point or a half point may mount up to seriousproportions when it is multiplied through a number of transactions. Your broker can give you a schedule showing commission and tax costs, and in case there are any important changes in the rates, you should studythem to see what effect they will have on your costs of trading in stocks atvarious prices. EN: You may also evaluate these charges at gomez.com and by checking websites of scottrade.com, etrade.com and tdameritrade.com. google.com isas ever an important price checking resource, and Barron’s publishes a yearly editionevaluating brokerage houses. In general this editor believes that the investor whodoes it the “old-fashioned way,” i.e., by phone and human broker operates at adisadvantage unless the broker’s value added can be quantiﬁed and proven. You will ﬁnd that your round-trip costs are a higher percentage of the capital invested in low-priced stocks than in high-priced stocks. Also, thatthe percentage costs will be higher on a smaller number of shares than ona round lot, and increasing as the number of shares decreases. Also, that thepercentage costs rise as the total amount of capital used is less. If your capital is, say $1000 or $2000, you might do well to divide it into units of about $500 each and conﬁne your trading to odd lots of stocks selling AU3772_book.fm Page 467 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
at 40 or higher. With larger capital, you could use larger trading units and

extend the range of trading into somewhat lower-priced stock. In any case,it is important to diversify your holdings. By dividing your capital and usingit in such a way as to avoid unnecessary penalties in high costs, you willhave greater protection against freak moves and sudden changes that mightaffect a single stock very seriously. On the other hand, if you have sufﬁcient capital to secure plenty of diversiﬁcation (8 or 10 stocks should be a maximum for an active tradingaccount), you can increase the size of the trading units. The whole questionhere is as to the minimum amounts to be invested in a single commitment,and if these amounts were doubled or tripled, it would not increase costs,but would, in many cases, reduce them. EN: Diversiﬁcation and Costs In this original chapter, Magee discussed the necessity for considering costs whilestriving for diversiﬁcation. In present-day markets, diversiﬁcation may be achievedthrough the use of SPDRs and DIAMONDS and similar instruments at compara-tively reasonable costs. Index funds and mutual funds also represent diversiﬁcationand cost control for the general investor. Mutual funds will not control costs andexpenses as efﬁciently as the Index Shares. This is because mutual funds create coststhat the Index Shares do not: management fees and expenses, slippage, the spread,turnover, and taxes resulting from realized gains. These costs may be avoided bythe careful independent investor.

An internationally prominent trader has told me, on more than one occasion, that his respectable trading fortune amounts to what brokers and specialists wouldhave made off him if he had been a member of the general public. The most importantweapon in his quiver was seats in Chicago, New York, and San Francisco.

The message is extremely clear. The general investor must control his costs. The more frequently he trades the greater his chances of having his capital ground tohamburger meat by brokers, specialists, ﬂoor traders, market makers, tax authorities,Exchanges, etc. Etcetera, because there is undoubtedly another party out there takinga chunk as the capital changes hands. The phone company maybe.

Trading costs are the last item brokerage ﬁrms want to focus on (see the book Where are the Customer’s Yachts?). For years the Street ﬁrms and Exchanges controlled commission costs, but entering the Internet Age a different ethos rules —Cutthroat (and cutfees) competition, reluctantly brought to the old-line exchangesby upstart competitors, and not suppressed by the SEC and CFTC.

It would be misleading to attempt to analyze costs in this book because of the mercurial nature of cost ﬁgures as ﬁrms compete in the Internet Age. The SEC, runs a mutual fund calculator for computing costs of mutual funds. Mutual funds are among those that manage somehow to not be overly punctiliousin estimating (read, disclosing) their costs to investors. (See Resources, AppendixD.) morningstar.com is also a good resource for researching mutual funds. But let me emphasize once again that ishares and etfs have really made mutual funds obsolete if the investor uses the simple procedures outlined in this book. AU3772_book.fm Page 468 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

469 chapter thirty-two Measuring Implications in Technical Chart Patterns If you show one of your charts to a friend and tell him it looks Bullish, he will reply immediately, “How far do you think it will go?” This is an auto-matic response; you can count on it. The question is a good one. How far is this expected move likely to go? You don’t know. Nobody knows. Very often you can say, with a fair degreeof assurance, “This stock, which has just made such-and-such an advance,is likely to react to around such-and-such a price.” That you can estimate fairly closely seven or eight times out of ten, by referring to the BasicTrendline, the parallel projection of the top trendline, or the Support Level. These rules work out fairly well as applied to reactions in the Bull Trend, and similarly, we can estimate rallies in a Bear Trend. Not so with the move in the direction of the trend itself. A Bullish Move may, and often does, overrun the upper trendline by running up as far again as the move to thetrendline. A Bearish Move may exceed the downtrend, dropping apparentlywithout limit. (That is one reason we have protective stops — to preventdisaster in case the trend suddenly reverses itself.) And that is why we preferthe use of nearby progressive stops as a method of taking proﬁts, rather thanusing limit orders placed at a trendline, Resistance Level, or at some otherdeﬁnite point. Very often, to be sure, a stock will check its advance at one of these indicated points, but the cases where a move carries beyond its objec-tives are fairly common, and in such cases, no one can make even a reason-able guess as to what limit the stock will reach on the move. This follows because the move itself is an unreasonable one. It is an example of public participation, the surge of uncontrolled speculation (andvery often, it is the ﬁnal surge of that particular trend). In exactly the same way, and often more violently, the uncontrolled falling out of trend in a downward move is an example of Panic, and beingcompletely beyond reason, it follows no rule and knows no predeterminedlimits. There are, however, certain patterns and certain situations where we can make some estimate of the probable extent of a move in the Primary Direc-tion — usually an estimate of its minimum extent. In these cases, we havea guide to help us in making the decision as to whether the situation offers AU3772_book.fm Page 469 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
enough potential gain to be worth the risks involved. Also, the indicated

measurement gives us at least a hint of about where we might reasonably begin to look for the volume which will indicate the Top. For example, a decisive breakout from a Symmetrical Triangle is likely to carry at least as far as the height of the Triangle measured along its ﬁrst reaction. This is a conservative measurement. The move may go much far-ther. In fact, the trend implications of the Triangle would suggest a contin-uation equal to the move preceding the Triangle and leading into it, for ifthe trend continues valid, the move should run up to the upper limit of thechannel. In the case of a Reversal, we would also use the height of the ﬁrstreaction as a minimum measure. With Right-Angle Triangles, we also cantake the long side (formed by the ﬁrst reaction) as a rough measure of theminimum expected move. And with Rectangles, the minimum we may reasonably expect after a breakout is a distance equal to the height of the Rectangle. The Head-and-Shoulders Pattern carries a good measuring stick. The height of the formationfrom the extreme Top of the head down to the point directly beneath wherethe neckline crosses represents the minimum probable move from the neck-line down. Again, this is a matter of Trend Channels, and most emphaticallythis is only a minimum move. Some Head-and-Shoulders Patterns, repre-senting an implied move of no more than three or four points, have markedthe start of a decline eventually running to hundreds of points. The rather unusual breakout which takes the form of an almost vertical

> “mast” running up (or down) many points before arriving at a stoppingpoint, where some Consolidation Pattern is made, carries with it a mostexplicit measuring rule, and one which works out with amazing accuracy.The Flag or Pennant Consolidation will occur at the halfway point — “theFlag ﬂies at half mast.” The speculation move leading up to the Flag verylikely will be duplicated by another rise, at least equal to the ﬁrst, in thenear future. Following this rise, there may be another Consolidation andother rises, or there may not. After two surges of this sort, it is best to standback and let someone else carry the ball. If you keep enough charts, and fora long enough time, you will see many perfect examples of this beautifulformation. You will also see some imperfect examples, some failures. Andbecause the move is so spectacularly proﬁtable when it works out, you willbe tempted to buy on every Consolidation Pattern formed after a sharp rise.It would be best to wait until the example is clear — a nearly vertical, almostunbelievable rise, followed by several days of congestion with practicallyno volume. If the congestion continues or sags off for more than about3 weeks, sell the stock; it is probably not the real thing.
Needless to say, this same pattern appears in reverse in downtrends and can be traded on accordingly. The questions relating to the measuring attributes of gaps have been reviewed in detail in Chapter 12. The only type of gap which carries sub-stantial implications as to the extent of the move to follow is the Runawayor Continuation Gap. The appearance of such a gap during a rapid price AU3772_book.fm Page 470 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-two: Measuring Implications in Technical Chart Patterns 471 move is likely to mark approximately the halfway point; and two or more such gaps can be weighed, in connection with volume and total extent ofthe move, to estimate the probable mid-point of the move, and thus to predicta probable ultimate objective. Measuring properties have been ascribed to other patterns and occasion ally work out according to plan. In general, however, the best measuringdevices are your trendlines, Support-and-Resistance Levels, and the all-important signals of increased volume. EN9: I have always been extremely chary of measuring moves. If the measure ment does not lead the trader to indulge in expectations which distract him fromthe crucial nature of the moment at hand it might be quite all right. So as an off hand casual tool it might serve some use. Always better to observe closely whatthe situation is when the price arrives at the measured point. Decisions shouldalways be made in the here and now, not in the I measured it then. AU3772_book.fm Page 471 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 472 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

473 chapter thirty-three Tactical Review of Chart Action The Dow Theory The record shows that an investor who had bought a representative group of stocks on every Major Bull Market signal according to the Dow Theoryas outlined in Chapters 3, 4, and 5, and had sold all his stocks on every MajorBear Market signal, since the start of the Dow Averages, would have comeout very well indeed over the years (EN: See tables, Chapters 5 and 5.1). Although this tabulation does not take short sales into account, (EN9: Now taken into account in the 9th Edition) it would be perfectly consistent to add that a representative group of stocks might be sold short on every Major Bear Market signal and covered at the next Bull Market signal. And if theﬁgures for such short sales, based on the level of the Industrial Average, were included, the total proﬁts on these theoretical transactions, both longand short, would be enormous. (EN9: Buy and Hold to 2004: $39,685.03. Dow Theory, long only: $347,895.51. Dow Theory, long and short: $1,914,490.) We believe that this record carries some weighty implications which have a bearing on the operations of every trader and investor. We willcomment on these shortly. But before doing so, it should be pointed out that few, if any, investors have actually followed the long-time Dow signals, buying or selling 100%on every Major signal. In the ﬁrst place, to do so would require a long market lifetime, and would presuppose that the investor had accepted the Dow Theory in itsclassic form in toto from the start, and that he had never wavered, never altered the deﬁnitions nor his method of trading, and that he had neverwithdrawn any of his capital during the entire period. In the second place, we would have to assume that our ideal investor had an extraordinary degree of courage in order to stand ﬁrm in periodsduring which the Major Trend appeared to be making dangerous threatsagainst his position, and an extraordinary degree of patience in order to waitout the many months of stagnation when the trend seemed to be gettingnowhere at all. And in the third place, we would have to make the assumption that the group of stocks actually bought or sold really represented a fair cross-section AU3772_book.fm Page 473 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
of the Averages in that they would make about the same moves as the

Average itself. As a matter of fact, if the group were well diversiﬁed, thechances are good that its moves might approximate those of the Averages. But it is taking a lot for granted to suppose that an investor could meet all these conditions over a period of years, which he would have to do in FIGURE 211. Head-and-Shoulders Top. The Bull Market that carried Southern Pa ciﬁc from 8 to 70 in the years 1941 through 1946 culminated in June 1946 with this formation. Notice the heavy volume on the left shoulder, lower volume on the head,and small volume on the right shoulder. The breakout signal, which was decisive onJuly 15, served notice on holders of long commitments to sell at the market the nextday (at about 63) instead of waiting for the protective stop, which would have beenset at 61, to be caught. Volume eventually developed at the Bottom of the breakoutmove at about 58 ½, which move, incidentally, carried out the minimum measure of the Head-and-Shoulders prediction. From this point, however, a weak rally on low volume started, and continued up for 4 weeks. The weakness of this picture would justify a short sale on a rally of 40to 50% of the move from the left shoulder to the bottom, or on a return to the neckline,say, at 63. The rally actually extended to the neckline at 64, broke away on a gapwith volume, and continued down in a move that led, in the next 3 months, to pricesbelow 40, and later even lower. An extraordinary feature of Head-and-Shoulders Tops is the frequency with which a comparatively small formation, such as the one shown here, will herald a MajorMove, changing the course of the stock for months or even years to come. Not allpatterns of this type will lead to such big moves as this, but no Head-and-Shouldersshould be regarded lightly, ever. SOUTHERN PACIFIC SX 1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER72 6864 60 56 52 48 44 Sales 100’s 125 100 7550 25 XD 1.00 XD 1.00SSH S SHNL 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 AU3772_book.fm Page 474 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-three: Tactical Review of Chart Action 475 order to operate strictly as a “Dow Theory” trader. It is not seriously sug gested that anybody try to follow any such plan literally. EN: Well, in retro spect, why not? Given, in the Internet Age, the availability of trading instrumentsand markets, (DIA, SPY) it might not be such a bad idea. The implementation ofsuch a plan in Magee’s time would have been extremely cumbersome and expensive,but it is eminently practicable in modern markets. The important implications of which we spoke are these: if the record of the Averages shows that on these Major Signals it is possible to takesubstantial theoretical proﬁts over the long term, and if the Averages arecomposed of the prices of individual stocks, then the probabilities favorbuying or selling a majority of stocks in line with the Major Trend of theAverages. The evidence shows that Major Trends normally continue formonths or years. The line of “most probable gain,” therefore, is the line ofthe Major Trend. On this basis, we would be on safe ground to say that when a trend of sufﬁcient importance gives a Major Signal that the Averages are under way,there will be a greater likelihood of ﬁnding proﬁtable situations amongindividual stocks moving in that trend than among those moving in thereverse trend. It is suggested that you read this preceding paragraph again, carefully. It means that we do not try to sell stocks “at the Top” in a Bull Market. Wedo not try to “pick up bargains at the Bottom” in a Bear Market. We do notdeliberately buck the kind of trend that history shows is likely to continuefor an undetermined and possibly long time. What we have said here is stated with a little different emphasis than in previous editions of this book. You will notice we have not said that youwill never sell a stock short during a Major Bull Market, nor buy a stock ina Bear Market. There will be, and often are, cases of stocks which are movingagainst the Major Trend, and which, on the basis of their individual technicalbehavior, may justify a commitment against the trend of the Averages. But we feel such trades should be made cautiously and with a full realiza tion that the majority of stocks are moving in a contrary manner. Such tradesmight be made, for example, in particular cases as indicated by the charts ofthe stocks involved, as partial hedges to reduce overall risk. For example, if aBull Market had persisted for several years and was still presumably in effect,but certain stocks had broken badly and showed individual weakness, a tradermight continue to hold three quarters of his capital in good long positions, butmight make a limited number of short sales in the weaker stocks. If, then, theBull Market continued, he might eventually have to close out the shorts forlosses, which could be regarded as the reasonable cost of “insurance.” On theother hand, if the general weakness became greater and eventually reversedthe Major Trend, then the short sales would cushion the depreciation of thelongs up to the time of the Reversal signal. (EN9: An extremely wise observation which the present Editor has developed at greater length in the theory of “naturalhedging.” And, given the complexity of modern markets proﬁts may be made on bothsides of the hedge, and this should be the objective.) AU3772_book.fm Page 475 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
By using an Evaluative Index (see Chapter 38) instead of, or in addition

to, the Averages, it is possible to say, “The market appears to be about 60% Bullish,” or “55% Bullish,” instead of merely Bullish or Bearish. This takesaccount of the fact that some markets are more Bullish or more Bearish thanothers; and it enables the investor to “roll with the punch” instead of havingto take an all-out position one way or the other. (EN9: I have called this

> “Rhythmic Trading.”)
It should be noted, however, that while he may take such a partial position against the (presumed) Major Trend, he will continue to use thebulk of his capital in situations which accord with the main trend. He willnever risk the larger part of his assets in opposition to the trend, and he willmake any countermoves with a clear understanding that they are of thenature of insurance and serve this purpose even though they ultimately maybe closed out as small losses. Summarizing all these implications of the Dow Theory: do not make a majority of your commitments against the Major Trend. During periods ofpotential Reversal, gradually reduce your long holdings, and make shortsales to a limited amount in weak stocks; but do not attempt to anticipateeither a Major Top or Major Bottom in the Averages by making an all-outcommitment counter to the main trend. EN: Regarding speciﬁc formations, the following suggestions are made: Head-and-Shoulders Top A. If you are long a stock, should a breakout down through the neckline occur, with a closing at least 3% below the neckline, next morningplace a stop ⅛ point below the last close. Continue to place such

> “tight stops” if not caught the ﬁrst day,
⅛ point under each day’s close until one is caught. B. Short sales may be made after a breakout, on a recovery of 40% of the distance from the top of the right shoulder to the bottom of thebreakout move, or on a recovery to a line drawn down across thetop of the head and right shoulder, or on a Pullback to the neckline,whichever point is reached ﬁrst. If the breakout move continuesdown another day, or for several days, the 40% recovery would bebased on the entire move from the top of the right shoulder to thelowest point reached. Head-and-Shoulders Bottom EN: The editor, long distressed by the paradox of the term “Head-and-ShouldersBottom,” proposes that this formation be renamed in technician’s nomenclature to“the Kilroy Bottom.” See Figure 23.1.

AU3772_book.fm Page 476 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-three: Tactical Review of Chart Action 477 A. If you are short a stock, should a breakout on increased volume occur, penetrating the neckline and closing at least 3% above it, place a stop next morning to cover at ⅛ point higher than the close. If such a stop is not caught, continue each day to place a stop ⅛ point higher than the previous day’s close until one is caught. B. New purchases may be made after a breakout, on a reaction of 40% of the distance from the bottom of the right shoulder to the top ofthe breakout move (which reaction must be on decreasing volume),or on a reaction to a line drawn across the bottom of the head andthe right shoulder, or on a Throwback to the neckline, whichever isreached ﬁrst. As in the case of the Top Formation, this 40% reactionis ﬁgured on the entire distance of the breakout move if it shouldcontinue up for several days. Complex or Multiple Head-and-Shoulders The same tactical suggestions apply to these as to the simple Head-and-Shoulders. Deﬁnitions and special features of these formations are coveredin Chapter 7. Rounding Tops and Bottoms It is difﬁcult to set precise rules for trading on these gradual changes oftrend. In the case of Rounding Tops, if one is long the stock, the generalappearance of a Rounding Formation, extending over a period of severalweeks, leveling off from the rise and then turning down, very likely with atapering off of volume nearing the top of the rise and a pick-up of volumeas the turn starts down, would suggest getting out of the stock at the marketas soon as the picture looks more or less deﬁnite. A short sale of a RoundingTop could be very proﬁtable; but no exact rule could be stated except that,in the absence of ﬁxed Basing Points, one would want to be very certain thatthe formation was unmistakably a Rounding Top. It would need to be wellformed and following a long rise, and extending over a period of some weeksin its formation. It would also need to be protected with a stop above theTop of the curve, as explained in the chapter on stops. You would not be likely to be short a stock on a Rounding Bottom. The long and gradual rounding appearance with dull volume, followed by asudden revival on greatly increased volume, would be signal enough tocover if you should ﬁnd yourself in this uncomfortable position. Purchaseswould be justiﬁed in a stock whose chart showed a Rounded Bottom orSaucer, after the ﬁrst spasm of activity following a long, dull period ofdormancy. You would buy, according to the rules we have given for pur-chases on reactions, not on the breakout, but on the reaction following it,which would almost surely come. AU3772_book.fm Page 477 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 212. Head-and-Shoulders

(or Kilroy) Bottom in Braniff Airways, 1945. Strictly speaking, a Continuation Head-and-Shoulders after a Secondary Correction in the Bull Market. A Major Bottom, reversing a long Bear Market, would normallytake much longer to form. Here we see heavy volume on the left shoulder, somewhat less on the head, and very little on the right shoulder, with a sharp increase, as required, on the breakoutmove of September 21. The breakout was followed by a Throwback to the necklineon diminishing volume, providing a good opportunity for purchases at 23. Theupward move was resumed, and again there was a reaction to the neckline Support.A second reaction of this sort is not unusual. The closing at 22 ¾ on October 19, below the previous Minor Bottom, and on increased volume, was mildly disturbing. But inview of the strength of the pattern and breakout, we would not have sold the stock,and the protective stop at 21 ⅞ was not even threatened. On October 25, the advance was resumed with a Breakaway Gap and continued up to 29 ½, where the move was signed off with a One-Day Reversal and Exhaustion Gap. Notice that on reaching 29 ½, “BNF” went into a Consolidation Pattern for over 3 weeks, making an Ascending Triangle, before leaping to 37 ½. Notice also (we might as well get all we can out of these examples) that the Ascending Triangle takes shapeat approximately the halfway point of the whole advance. We are already familiarwith this tendency of stocks in fast moves to form “halfway” patterns. BRANIFF AIRWAYS BNF 1945 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBERSS SSH H36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 125 100 75 50 25 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 478 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-three: Tactical Review of Chart Action 479 FIGURE 213. Associated Dry Goods winds up its Bull Market Trend with a Round ing Top. This is a daily chart for the ﬁrst 6 months of 1946. The advance in “DG” from 4 to above 72 in just 3 ½ years, when seen on monthly charts, is a smooth, accelerating curve which emerged from a long Bottom Formation that had lasted 5 years from 1938 through 1942. As we enter the ﬁnal 6 months leading up to the ultimate peak, note ﬁrst the action during January and February. “DG” had just completed a fast run-up in the lastquarter of 1945, and was about due for a Consolidation or a Secondary Correction.On reaching 48, it turned back to 45, advanced to 50 ½, to 51, and ﬁnally to 52, and then reacted to 44 at the end of February. Had the move on January 22 gone a littlelower and closed below the January 3 low, and then been followed by an even lowerclosing on February 26, we would have had to consider this January–February patterna completed Broadening Top, a deﬁnite Reversal signal. However, the pattern wasnot perfect, and, therefore, not valid, but the erratic price action shows incipientweakness. It is not unusual in these last stages, when public participation is running high, for the climactic advances to be spectacular and fast. And that is what we see here.A 5-point Breakaway Gap occurred on March 25, followed by an advance whichpetered off at 63 ½, reacted, and then ran up to over 68. From here on, the move advanced slowly, with suggestions of a Convergent Trend and a succession of “heads” and “shoulders,” and volume dropped off as the Topwas reached. The drop on June 4 to below the May 7 Minor Bottom on increasedvolume would complete the Rounding Top and call for immediate sale if we werestill long; and the penetration of the “neckline” on June 18 was a conclusive break. ASSOCIATED DRY GOODS DG 1946 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE72 68 64 60 56 52 48 44 50 40302010 5 1 21 92 6 2 9 1 62 3 2 9 23 30 6 13 20 27 411 18 25 1 815 22 29 16Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 479 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 214. Greyhound: a Rounding Bottom in 1945. A Continuation Pattern after

the May run-up to over 29 and reaction to Support at 24, the 1944 high. In July, volume ran fairly high on downside days, drying up as we entered August. August 10 showed a spurt of volume on the upside, then more dullness. The various small moves through August and September would not give us any basis for trading operations. The move to a new high in the pattern on August 31 suggested an upturn, and again on September 19–20, we see another little push upto the 26 level. Still not conclusive, however. The move which got under way in the week ending October 13 is more deﬁnite. This decisive move with good volume carries right out of the “Bowl” in an almostvertical ascent. Not a big move, but a clear indication of the probable trend. We wouldlook for a point to buy “G” on a correction of 40–50% of the entire move up fromthe Bottom, or on a return to near the Support Level around 26. The purchase wouldprobably be made around 26 ½. Notice the drying up of volume on this reaction. The advance from here to 30, marking an entirely new Bull Market high, came almost immediately. On November 3, with very heavy volume for a Saturday, “G”closed at 30, and since this volume was not on the day of breakout, we would haveclosed out the transaction on a tight stop at 29 ⅞ on Monday (unless we had elected to wait out the next Minor Reaction for a further advance). Two weeks later, on the basis of the reaction to good Support, we would have bought “G” again at about 29 (you cannot ﬁgure on getting the extreme low priceon any reaction). The following advance carried up to 34 ¼ in 2 days. At that point, proﬁts could have been taken or the stock held for the longer term. “G,” it might benoted, continued up eventually to 54. GREYHOUND CORP G 1945 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBERG34 32 30 28 26 24 22 125 100 75 5025 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 181 5 2 2 2 9Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 480 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-three: Tactical Review of Chart Action 481 Symmetrical Triangles A. If you already have a position in the stock. During the formation of a Symmetrical Triangle, you may be unable to make any change in your holdings. Let us say you have bought the stock on a reactionafter a Bullish Move. The next upsurge fails to make a new high andgives no sufﬁcient volume signal to cause you to sell out. The nextreaction fails to carry below the previous one. You are “locked” intothe Triangle, and you cannot safely sell, since the Triangle that hasformed may eventually break out in the original direction and showyou a good proﬁt (in fact, the odds favor that it will break out in thatdirection). In case of a breakout move (which, of course, must be onincreased volume on the upside), you can close it out for a proﬁt(according to rules for trading we have already given), and immedi-ately mark it as a rebuy on the next reaction. If the breakout is down(whether or not on increased volume), with a closing outside theTriangle, you should protect yourself with a tight ( ⅛ point) stop the next day, and continue to set such tight progressive stops under eachday’s close until it is sold.If you are short the stock, the same rules in reverse would apply,except that the breakout in the right direction (down) would requireno volume conﬁrmation, and the adverse breakout (up) would needsuch increased volume. B. If you do not have a position in the stock. Stay away from any stocks making Symmetrical Triangles until a clear and deﬁnite breakoutclose has been made. After such a breakout, if on the upside, buy onthe next reaction if the Major Trend is up, or if on the downside, sellshort on the next rally if the Major Trend is down. Rules for makingsuch commitments have already been given. Note: avoid breakouts from Symmetrical Triangles of the type which have continued to narrow until the breakout point comes far out toward the apex.The most reliable breakouts occur about two thirds along the Triangle. Right-Angle Triangles The same rules would apply to Right-Angle Triangles as to SymmetricalTriangles (see Chapter 8 on Triangles). Early breakouts are more dependablehere, as in the case of Symmetrical Triangles. Volume conﬁrmation is moreimportant on upside breakouts from Ascending Triangles and is not strictlyrequired on downside breakouts from Descending Triangles. Commitmentsalready made are retained until the breakout and then closed out in the sameway as any transaction that shows a gain. AU3772_book.fm Page 481 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 215. Symmetrical Triangle in Allied Stores, a Consolidation in the 1946

decline. Notice heavy volume as “LS” crashed to the ﬁrst Reversal point of the pattern on September 10, and the drying up of volume during the successive swings of theTriangle. In Point-and-Figure charts, this type of pattern is known as a PendulumSwing, since it does seem to come to rest like a pendulum. Often, volume will pickup somewhat at each Reversal point, but a valid Triangle must show some overalldecrease of volume. If, by some unhappy chance, you were then long “LS,” you should have had your protective stop at 33 ⅛, 8% below the Bottom reached at 36. However, the move down out of the Triangle on Friday and Saturday, October 4 and 5, although on slightvolume, was a true breakout (remember that downside breakouts do not require volume conﬁrmation), and you would have been justiﬁed in selling your long com-mitment at the market on Monday. You would have received about 38 ½. To justify a short sale, however, the breakout would have had to close at least 3% outside the Triangle. The return to the border of the pattern at 40 was interesting, and you willnotice that volume increased characteristically as the decline really got under wayon October 9 and 10. No question about the validity of this breakout. Short sales were in order on a return to the border of the Triangle, or a 40–50% Correction of the breakout move,say at 38 ½ to 39. The rally carried to the apex of the Triangle, then broke away fast for the decline to 33 where, on October 30, a Selling Climax and One-Day Reversaloccurred — a signal to take proﬁts. Notice the small Head-and-Shoulders in August. This was a Continuation Pattern marking the top of the rally before the September–November crack-up. ALLIED STORES LS 1946 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBERS SH G S SHSC SC52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 125 100 755025 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 71 4 2 1 2 8Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 482 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-three: Tactical Review of Chart Action 483 Since the Ascending and Descending Triangles carry a directional fore casting implication that the Symmetrical Triangles do not have, it is possible to make new commitments on reactions within an Ascending Triangle orrallies within a Descending one. However, since the ﬂat horizontal side ofone of these Triangles represents a supply or demand area of unknownmagnitude, and since, therefore, such a Triangle can be (and sometimes is)turned back before the horizontal line has been decisively penetrated, itmight be better policy to note such formations in the making, and wait untilthe decisive breakout before making the new commitment. Broadening Tops Presumably, you would not be long a Broadening Top. The early Reversalsin the pattern would have taken you out of the stock, if you follow the tacticalrules based on trendlines, as previously outlined, long before completion ofthe pattern. Neither would you be tempted to buy into such a pattern, sincethe trend indications would be clearly against a move. On the other hand, a Broadening Top, after its completion, offers excel lent opportunities for a short sale. After downside penetration and closebelow the fourth point of Reversal in the pattern, you are justiﬁed in sellingshort on a rally of about 40% of the distance covered from the extreme top(ﬁfth point of Reversal), and the lowest point reached on the breakout move.The stop, of course, would be placed at the proper distance above the ﬁfthReversal, that is, the extreme top of the pattern. Rectangles A. If you already have a commitment in the stock. The early moves of a Rectangle may provide no volume signals to permit you to get out.And there will, of course, be no “breakout” moves during the forma-tion of a Rectangle that will allow you to take a proﬁt. However, assoon as the character of the Rectangle is well established (and thatwill require at least four Reversals to set up a clear Top and Bottom),you may trade on the Tops and Bottoms, that is, sell at or near theTop; or buy at or near the bottom. Since, as in the case of SymmetricalTriangles, there is a deﬁnite presumption in such formations that theyare more likely to lead to continuous moves than to Reversals, thiswould mean that you would probably pass up your ﬁrst opportunityto get out (on the ﬁfth Reversal), and would indeed probably decideto “ride along” in the expectation of a continuation of the originalmove, which will be in the “right” direction for your commitment.In the case of a breakout in the right direction, you would disposeof your commitment according to the rules for trading already stated.If in the wrong direction, use the tight ( ⅛ point) progressive stops, the same as with the Triangles. AU3772_book.fm Page 483 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 216. An Ascending Triangle. “CMR,” after emerging from the doldrums

in 1943, forged up to about 12 early in 1945. The ﬁrst 8 months of the year on a monthly chart showed an Ascending Triangle with Top at 12 ¼. On daily charts, however, we see the more detailed aspects of this large pattern. For instance, theﬁnal reaction of the whole (monthly) formation in August became here a SymmetricalTriangle. The breakout from this pattern carried out the minimum measuring require-ments, bringing the price again to the 12 ¼ Top, from which point there was a reaction which was stopped cold at 11, the apex of the Triangle. A purchase on the reactionafter the powerful breakout from the Triangle, say around 11 ½, would have been closed out on progressive stops, starting September 28 when “CMR” reached 14, thesale being consummated October 2 at 14 ⅞, a highly proﬁtable move. Proﬁt-taking of this sort would largely explain the stopping of the rise and the formation of a Consolidation Pattern which turned out to be the Ascending Trianglewith Top at 16 ¼, lasting 8 weeks. Notice the November 7 volume when price went through the 16 ¼ level, but failed to close outside the pattern; and the volume on November 30 when a clean, decisive breakout move closed at 17. This move ran to20, and purchases would have been made at 18 or less on the reaction. The next wavetook “CMR” to its ultimate Bull Market Top at 24 in January. On the ratio scale, theTop of the Ascending Triangle was exactly halfway between the September Bottomat 11, and the extreme high of 24. This type of halfway consolidation is typical ofFlags and Pennants, and this is a very similar case. CONTINENTAL MOTORS CMR 1945 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 125 100 75 50 25 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 484 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-three: Tactical Review of Chart Action 485 FIGURE 217. A Broadening Top. This somewhat rare but beautiful and highly dependable formation developed as CertainTeed made its Bull Market Peak in 1946. A quick glance at the volume scale in this daily chart shows the high volume on theﬁnal stages of the advance, the dullness during the development of the Top Pattern,and the increased volume after the breakout. As we all know by now (or go back to Chapter 10 and review the speciﬁcations), a Broadening Top is a Five-Point Reversal, differing from the Head-and-Shoulders,Triangles, Rectangles, etc., in that each Reversal must be at a new high or low forthe pattern. It is, if you wish, a sort of reversed Triangle with its apex to the left, theswings becoming continually wider. In the second week of May, “CT” (the symbol has since been changed to “CRT”) made a new Bull Market high at 25 ¼ (marked “1”). The reaction carried back to Support at the previous Minor Peak (point “2”) and the following week, “CT”advanced to another new high at 3, closing ⅛ point above the previous Top. Another week had brought “CT” down to point “4” with a closing at 22 ½, three quarters of a point below point “2.” This, in itself, is not sufﬁcient reason for makingshort commitments. Three weeks later, “CT” closed at 25 ⅝, another new high, at point “5.” Finally, the stock dropped to 21 ½ on July 23, and at this point (marked

> “B”), the pattern was completed. Notice the tendency of volume to rise at eachReversal point of the pattern.
Long holdings would be sold at the market the day after the breakout. But short sellers should wait for a correction of 40–50% of the move from point “5” to point“B.” If shorts were put out at 23, we would not worry if the stock advanced for atime, as it did, without making a new high. The downside move in “CT” went quicklyto 15 ½, and within 12 months to 11 ½. CERTAIN–TEED PRODUCTS CT 1946 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER1 23 45 BP26 24 22 20 19 18 17 125 100 7550 25 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 30Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 485 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 218. Rectangles in Remington Rand. This is part of a long Bull Market rise

that carried “RR” from under 10 to above 50 in the period from 1942 to 1946. The last 3 years of this advance were almost continuous, as seen on monthly charts,without any extensive reactions. When we put the chart on a daily basis, such as thissection covering the end of 1944 and the early months of 1945, right in the middleof the advance, we see that the rise was not actually continuous but was built up ofsteps in an ascending “staircase” of Accumulation Patterns. Each sharp advance onincreased volume is followed by a period of dullness and slight recession. A picture of this type suggests the methodical campaign of buyers who intended to purchase large blocks of the stock for large long-term advances without creatinga “skyrocket” market by their own buying operations. Presumably each advance waschecked by the temporary distribution of part of the stock held by such buyers, andreaccumulation started on reactions. In October and November, there is a well-marked Rectangle between 20 ¾ and 22. A purchase could have been made at or near the bottom limit, say at 21, on the ﬁfthReversal on November 14. The move out of pattern in the week of December 2 didnot carry 3% out of pattern, but about 2 weeks later a move got under way thatqualiﬁed as a valid breakout, with volume conﬁrmation as required on upside moves.Notice the volume increase and One-Day Reversal on December 20 as this moveneared its Top. Purchases would have been made at about 22 ½ on the basis of a normal correction, and you would have expected Support at the 22 level. This Supportwas respected, but the move did not advance beyond 23 ¾, made this same Top 3 times in a period of 2 weeks, and returned again to 22 ¼. There was no question about the breakout on January 25. Extent and volume were decisive. Notice the gap and One-Day Reversal on the following day as this MinorMove reached its end. In mid-March, as you will see, “RR” plunged down from its high of 27, but the decline was stopped in its tracks at the top level of the January Rectangle, a goodSupport shelf. Never again during the Bull Market did “RR” even threaten this level,since it moved up in April and continued its long march to the 1946 Top. REMINGTON RAND RR 1944–1945 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH26 24 22 50 40 3020 10 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 17 24 31Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 486 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-three: Tactical Review of Chart Action 487 B. If you are not committed in the stock. Trades can be made within the Rectangle on the ﬁfth and subsequent Reversals. Since there is the slight probability that the move will eventually continue in the samedirection as the preceding move leading up or down to the Rectangle,it might be best to wait until the sixth Reversal for new commitments,which would set your interests in the same direction as a continua-tion. And, of course, short sales can be made after any downsidebreakout close from a Rectangle, or purchases after an upside brea-kout close with increased volume. Both the short sales and the longpurchases would be made on the Corrective Move following thebreakout. Double Tops and Bottoms Double and Multiple Tops or Bottoms are not valid unless they conform tothe requirements for such formations. Chapter 9 on these patterns shouldbe read carefully in this connection. A. If you are long a stock. On penetration and close at a price lower than the extreme Bottom of the pattern between the Multiple Tops, disposeof the stock on tight ( ⅛ point) progressive stops. B. If you are short a stock. On penetration of the highest point of the Inverted Bowl or rise between the Bottoms, with a close above thatpoint, close out the short sale on tight stops. C. If you are not committed in the stock. Consider a penetration and close beyond the limit of the correction between the Tops (or Bottoms) asa signal of Reversal, and make new commitments on rallies or reac-tions. Right-Angled Broadening Formations The handling of these on breakouts through the horizontal side would besimilar to what has been said about Multiple Tops and Bottoms, andRight-Angle Triangles. The Diamond If you are sure that what you have is a valid Diamond Pattern, the rules fortrading will be the same as those we have already covered in connectionwith breakouts from Symmetrical Triangles. As in the case of such Triangles,new commitments should wait for a deﬁnite breakout; and commitmentsalready in force would have to remain until such a breakout had occurred,either declaring a Reversal, or indicating a probable continuation of theoriginal trend. AU3772_book.fm Page 487 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 219. A Double Bottom in Paramount Pictures. Double Tops and Double

Bottoms are not as common as many traders like to think. They require considerable time to develop and must conform to speciﬁcations as to price range and time, andalso (on upside breakouts from Double Bottoms) as to volume. They are easier tospot on weekly charts than on dailies. This is a weekly chart of “PX” from September 1941 through March 1943. A Bottom was made on climactic volume at 11 ¾

during the “Pearl Harbor Panic” Move. Then came a rise lasting 8 weeks which brought “PX” back to 15 ⅝ — a rise, incidentally, on feeble volume, strongly suggesting the possibility of another crack-up to evenlower levels. This rise, you will notice, was a considerable one, amounting to 35%of the price at the December low. The downward move, however, which lasted to mid-April, was on low volume and ended precisely at the December low of 11 ¾. ( Note: it is not necessary that moves of this sort end at exactly the same level; the second Bottom could have been a bithigher or lower without spoiling the pattern.) The second week in July shows the ﬁrst sign of a possible Reversal when the price advanced on increased volume, but it did not close above 15 ⅝, and was, therefore, not a breakout. Two weeks later, on heavy volume, “PX” had moved up to 16 ½, closing the week at 16. This is a true breakout, and purchases would have been inorder on reactions from this point on. The move continued up for 3 years to an ultimate Top at 85. PARAMOUNT PICTURES PX 1941–194322 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 50 40302010 SO N D J F M A M J J A S O N D JF MSales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 488 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-three: Tactical Review of Chart Action 489 FIGURE 220. A Right-Angled Broadening Formation in Associated Dry Goods. A beautiful example of a breakout through Multiple Tops, followed by an important move. This is, however, a pattern that is more fun to observe in retrospect than tofollow as an active trader. The stock had moved up from an important Bottom around4, established in 1938, 1940, and 1942. At the time of this chart in 1945, “DG” wasstarting the accelerating climb that eventually ended with the 1946 Rounding Top atover 70. (See Figure 213.) If you had been holding the stock, you would have been watching for a substantial corrective move after the advance from 12 to 20. In late February and the ﬁrst weekof March, “DG” went into new Bull Market high-ground, reacted to Support around19 to 19 ½, and then advanced again in the week of March 17, failing in this move to make a new high. Ten days later, “DG” had reacted to 18 ½, closing below the previous Minor Bottom. An inexperienced observer might, at this point, have commented“Double Top” and planned to sell “DG” at once or even to make a short sale.However, the pattern was not large enough in duration nor extent of price movementto qualify as a Double Top, nor did it conform to any other recognizable pattern ofReversal. Nor was the volume as high as one would expect on an important Top. The rally in early April carried through to a decisive breakout of more than 3% in the move which reached 22 ⅞ on April 18. This move was a near penetration of the middle Top, and conﬁrmed the uptrend. If you still held your long stock, you wouldnot rest easier, and in any case, you would have looked for a chance to buy on areaction after the breakout. If you had tried to buy at the 21 ½ Support Level, you would have been left behind, but if you had put your order in a little higher, say at22, you would have had a nice proﬁt on the advance to 25 ⅞, where you would have sold on a tight stop at 25 ¾. ASSOCIATED DRY GOODS DG 1945 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE28 26 24 22 20 19 18 50 403020 10 XD.25 XD.25 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 1724 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 291 6 2 3 3 0Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 489 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 221. A Diamond Pattern in American Can. The daily chart covers the

period from 3 December 1946, through May 1947, inclusive. For background on this situation, keep in mind that “AC” made its Bull Market Peak in October 1945 whenit reached 112. The tendency of high-grade, high-priced stocks to top-out early at theend of a Bull Market has already been noted. The ﬁrst decline carried nearly to 90and was followed by a rally to 106. The stock then dropped to below 80 and a secondrally brought us to the situation we see here. You will notice at once that the moves have a gradual “rounding” appearance, due to the fact that, at this price, conservative stocks do not make large percentage moves.If charted on a scale having larger vertical intervals, the patterns would look verymuch like those in more speculative stocks. The ﬁrst part of the pattern is similar to a Broadening Top. The ﬁrst Minor Peak at 96 is followed by a reaction to 92. The second peak carries even higher, to 98; andthe reaction this time goes down to 91 ¼. A third rally takes “AC” to 99. So far, we have the ﬁve Reversal points of a Broadening Top, needing only a close below 91 ¼ to conﬁrm the Bearish indications. However, the next decline fails to break out ofthe pattern, and for several weeks, we have a narrowing picture like a Symmetrical Triangle. Eventually, the stock makes a clean breakout to 89, which is the signal to get out of longs and to consider short sales on the next rally. As a matter of fact, the 3-weekrally which then started never made an upside penetration of the Resistance Levelat 94, the level of the apex of the converging lines bounding the latter part of theDiamond. American Can did not make a spectacular move down from this point, which is not surprising considering the markdown that had already taken place in “AC,” andconsidering the habits and price of the stock, and the general condition of the market.It did not, however, again rise to the level shown here, and, in fact, retreated to the80 level. To review the nature of the Diamond — it is not a common pattern. It is somewhat like a Complex Head-and-Shoulders with a bent neckline. It resembles, at the start,a Broadening Top, and its latter phase narrows like a Symmetrical Triangle. AMERICAN CAN AC 1946–1947 DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY104 96 88 50 40302010 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 XD.75 XD.75Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 490 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-three: Tactical Review of Chart Action 491 Wedges There is no need to set forth detailed rules for policy within a Wedge and during its formation, since the general principles taken up in connectionwith trendlines and Support and Resistance, would take you out of such asituation at the ﬁrst opportunity after the convergent nature of the patternbecame clear. At the very worst, your stops (which we hope you maintainfaithfully in all situations) will take you out before the consequences becomeserious. Regarding new purchases (from a Falling Wedge breakout) or short sales (from a Rising Wedge), the same volume characteristics would be expected: notably increased volume on an upside breakout from a Falling Wedge; lesspronounced volume action on the ﬁrst stages of breakout from a RisingWedge. New commitments, in line with the implications of the breakout,may be placed on rallies or reactions after a clear breakout closing occurs,carrying beyond the trendlines forming the Wedge. One-Day Reversals One-Day Reversals are not technical patterns suitable for trading in the same sense as the important Reversal and Consolidation pictures we have exam-ined. They are mainly useful as a gauge in helping to ﬁnd the precise Topor Bottom of a Minor Move in order to protect proﬁts on commitmentspreviously made. The One-Day Reversal, the Exhaustion Gap, and the dayof exceptionally heavy volume following several days of movement in aMinor Trend are strong indications that the move may have run out. Any ofthese three signals is worth watching for; any two of them together carrymore weight than one alone; and the appearance of all three carries verystrong implications of a Minor (EN: or even a Major) Top or Bottom. So far as trading on movements signaled by One-Day Reversals, this type of trading would lie almost in the ﬁeld of gambling, or at least tradingfor quick, small proﬁts on short moves. It would not be the same kind oftrading at all that we have been studying in the greater part of this book.The indications and some suggestions for trading on those one-day movesare covered in the discussion of them in Chapter 10. Flags and Pennants In many cases, the total decline from a Flag in an uptrend will bring theprice back to a point where the stock may be bought according to our regulartrading tactics, that is, the decline may carry down to the Basic (Red)Trendline, to the Blue Parallel, or make a 40 to 50% correction of the rising“mast” preceding the Flag. If the “mast” move is the ﬁrst such move out ofa level or only moderately rising trend, and if the Major Trend of the market AU3772_book.fm Page 491 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 222. Gulf, Mobile, and Ohio builds a beautiful Wedge, as shown on this

daily chart for the ﬁrst half of 1945. This was the move which terminated the spec tacular rise of “GFO,” its ﬁnal Bull Market Top. Immediately after the downside breakdown from the Wedge, “GFO” came down to 18 ¾, and from this Intermediate low, which was reached in August, rallied into a long Rectangle between 23 ¾ and 26 ¾ from which it eventually broke down in a series of crashes that found it, in May 1947, selling for 6 ⅛! It is rather hard, with a formation of this sort, to say at what precise point the convergence of the trends is established. The breakout move late in April was, ofcourse, normal; the stock was a buy on the next reaction. The following advance inMay, which reached 23 ½, did not carry out a Parallel Trend Channel, and we saw a tendency to converge as prices retreated on the reaction. The next three advances allrepeated and conﬁrmed the Wedge picture, and at the top, we see a sort of “bunchingup” as prices make little or no headway. The chances are that at 11 an alert traderwould have taken proﬁts on long commitments after the high volume appeared atthe top of the Minor Move ending June 4 and 5. In any case, he would have main-tained a protective stop at all times to take him out if and when a downside breakoutoccurred. GULF MOBILE & OHIO RR. GFO 1945 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE30 2826 24 22 20 19 1817 16 15 250 200150100 50 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 291 6 2 3 3 0Sales 100’sAU3772_book.fm Page 492 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter thirty-three: Tactical Review of Chart Action 493
is Bullish, we would be justiﬁed in buying at the ﬁrst opportunity, which would be on the Blue Parallel. In such a case we would expect, and ordinarilyget, some further reaction, but it is important to get in early because some-times the reaction is very brief, and does not meet either of the other require-ments for the correction. It is most important in a situation like this that thevolume drop off sharply. Volume must decrease and remain slight. Anyincrease of volume during the formation of the Flag should be reviewed ascasting suspicion on the entire pattern, except, of course, the increasingvolume that characteristically attends the start of the breakout drive. Thisdrive is usually so virile that we would be safe in placing a tight ( ⅛ point) stop under the close of any day during formation of a Flag or Pennant that showed notably increased volume. So that if the volume indicated failure ofthe pattern, we would be taken out at once; but if the breakout was underway, we would probably be left in, since the stock would ordinarily moveup then without a reaction, very often making a Breakaway Gap. In downward movements, when the Major Trend of the market is Bear ish, the same suggestions would apply, with one difference. The ﬁnal high day of the Flag-type of rally may be on high volume, and, of course, mayalso show the Exhaustion Gap or One-Day Reversal. If a short sale has beenmade into such a day showing high volume, gap, or One-Day Reversal, astop order placed above the peak of the Flag will protect you should theadvance be resumed unexpectedly. In either the up-moving or down-moving manifestations of this type of action, there may be Flags having horizontal Tops and Bottoms, which are,of course, Rectangles. If the drying-up of volume and other aspects of thepicture, including the sharp upward or downward move preceding it, sug-gest a Flag-type Consolidation, you would be justiﬁed in making a commit-ment on the sixth Reversal point, or for that matter, at almost any point inthe pattern (since you cannot expect this pattern to continue very long). Flags and Pennants which do continue too long (over 3 weeks) are open to question. Stops should then be set at the usual computed distance aboveor below their extreme Tops or Bottoms (as the case may be). The fairlyfrequent appearance of Flag-like Formations which eventually fail is unfor-tunate, since it is particularly hard to give up hoping with this kind ofpattern, and it is necessary to set the 3-week time limit to prevent the stockfrom drifting all the way back to previously established stop levels. On theother hand, breakout moves from these patterns, when completed normally,are among the fastest and most proﬁtable forms of market action. The question remains what to do in the case of stocks you may be holding as they go into Flag or Pennant Formation. Obviously, they should be heldif you are long and the move leading to the Flag is up; or short positionsshould be retained if the move is down. However, this would not happenAU3772_book.fm Page 493 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 494 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 223. A Pennant in Martin–Parry. This type of pattern is fairly common in fast-moving markets. The extraordinary point about Flags and Pennants (and some times other Consolidation Patterns in fast moves) is their tendency to form almostexactly halfway between Bottom and Top. Just before this move, “MRT” had built a Rectangle between 10 and 12 lasting 7 months, which followed the 1944 rise from around 4 to 12. The May breakout onheavy volume carried “MRT” right to the top of the Pennant without any adequatereaction. Note the increase of volume at the top of that rise. For 3 weeks prices driftedoff with a drying up of volume that is clearly shown in the chart. The pattern didnot correct the entire ﬁrst phase, but found Support at the Minor Peak at 14 ½. Suddenly, on high volume, the move was resumed, and this time went right up to 24 ¾. The chances are that traders who were still long their original stock or who had bought in around 15 on the Pennant would have sold after the high volume ofJune 6 when “MRT” reached 19 ⅞. MARTIN-PARRY MRT1945 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 125 100 75 50 25G XD.15 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29Sales 100’sAU3772_book.fm Page 494 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter thirty-three: Tactical Review of Chart Action 495
FIGURE 224. This daily chart of Lehigh Valley R.R. through late 1945 and early 1946 shows a variety of gaps. At this particular time, “LV” was completing a Sec ondary Corrective Move before making one more (and as it turned out, ﬁnal) effortto exceed the 1945 Top just above 17. This long-term situation could be used for adiscussion of Double Tops, since the Bottom of the intervening move was violatedin the summer of 1946 and the stock continued a downward course to below the5 level. Not all gaps are signiﬁcant; for example, the ﬁrst gap shown, on October 3, when the stock was moving in a narrow range on low volume. The gap on Saturday,November 3, however, is important, since the Saturday volume (when doubled) ishigh. The move failed to qualify by a 3% new high closing as a true breakout, butthe implications of the move were Bullish and might well have justiﬁed purchaseson Minor Reactions. The low-volume gaps on these reactions were of no particularinterest. It is not until the third week of January that we see another gap that looks like a real breakaway. On January 14, with high volume, “LV” moved up and out in a rushthat took it to 15 ⅞ on January 16, closing at 15 ½. The second appearance of volume here would have suggested application of progressive stops, and long trades wouldhave been closed out at 15 ⅜. New purchases could have been made on the reaction at 14 ½. A second advance accompanied by a Breakaway Gap developed on January 23. If we consider thesecond gap (of January 24) a Runaway or Measuring Gap, we would estimate theprobable top of this move at around 17 ¾. However, when a third gap appeared on January 28 with a One-Day Reversal and climactic volume, it would be clear thatthis move was about ﬁnished, and progressive stops would be used to clear out longsat 16 ¾. Note the attempt to rally after the sharp drop, and the One-Day Island formed by two gaps as “LV” fails to hold at the 15 level. LEHIGH VALLEY R. R. LV 1945–1946 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH17 16 15 14 13 12 11 125 100 75 5025GGGG GG 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 291 6 2 3 3 0Sales 100’sAU3772_book.fm Page 495 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 496 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
ordinarily if you had followed the trading rules strictly. In most cases, your signals calling for tight ( ⅛ point) progressive stops would have appeared during the formation of the “mast.” You would have been taken out of thepicture somewhere along the way, possibly at the extreme top of the mast(though ordinarily, you could not count on being so fortunate). If, however, no signal should appear, and you still are holding a position as the Flag starts to make its appearance, by all means hold your position.The odds favor a continuation of the original move. Now if you have been holding the stock long (in a Bull Market), and have seen it break out and start leaping to new highs, say from 20 to 32, andyou have been stopped out at 30, and then you see the price advance, haltand during the next several days retreat, with the rather high previousvolume drying up to practically nothing (it must be a drastic drying-up, andno mistake about it), then you are justiﬁed in buying right back in again,even at a higher price than you received only a few days before. Gaps If you are long a stock which is in a well-marked pattern formation, or inan area of dull movement within fairly narrow limits, and the stock suddenlybreaks out on the upside with high volume and a gap, that is a Bullishindication. You will hold the stock until signs of exhaustion appear as therise continues, or reappearance of high volume, or another gap or One-DayReversal. Then, particularly if two or all three of these indications show upat the same time, you can protect your commitment with tight progressivestops. You will have to consider whether a second gap should be consideredan exhaustion gap or a continuation gap, depending on the volume and thespeed of the rise, as discussed in the chapters on gaps and their measuringimplications. Ordinarily, after a Breakaway Gap, regardless of whether you sell on the next Minor Top, you would consider the move Bullish, and would prepareto make a purchase on the next reaction. Now if you are long a stock, and during the course of a sharp rise it develops a gap after several days of the move, you must make your decisionas to whether or not it is a Continuation (Runaway) Gap. If so, you wouldprepare to hold the stock for a further rise approximately equal to the riseup to the gap; and you would watch the approach to the ultimate objectiveindicated very closely, so that, on the appearance then of Reversal signals,you could protect your holding with tight stops. If you are satisﬁed that a gap following a good rise is actually an Exhaus tion Gap, then you should protect your stock with a tight progressive stopat once. In Bear Markets, you would apply these same rules in reverse to your short sales, remembering that a downside breakaway is not necessarilyaccompanied by the high volume you expect on an upside breakaway.AU3772_book.fm Page 496 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter thirty-three: Tactical Review of Chart Action 497
Where you are long or short a stock which is moving in a Pattern Formation, and the stock then makes a Breakaway Gap in the adverse direc tion, the commitment should be closed out immediately at the market, oron tight progressive stops. Support and Resistance When you are long a stock, you do not want to see it violate any MinorBottoms previously made. Neither do you want to see it violate any of thepreceding Minor Tops which it has surpassed. Therefore, your stop orderswill be placed at a computed distance, as explained in Chapter 27 on stop orders, using both the Minor Bottoms and the Minor Tops as Basing Points. Normally, the Minor Bottom most recently formed will be at the approximatelevel of the preceding Minor Top, so that often these Basing Points willcoincide. Ordinarily, therefore, in a rising trend, we look to the most recentlyformed Minor Bottom. When the stock has, for 3 days, made a price rangewhich is entirely above the entire range of the day marking this Bottom, youmay move up your stop protection to a place indicated by this new BasingPoint. The same procedure will apply in Bear Markets; the “three-day” rule being used to conﬁrm Basing Points established by Minor Peaks and alsoby the preceding Minor Bottoms. But, ordinarily, it will be sufﬁcient to usethe Minor Peaks as Basing Points. Intermediate Tops and Bottoms are used in determining the probable objectives of Intermediate Moves, since previous Tops constitute Supportunder Intermediate Reactions, and previous Bottoms indicate Resistanceover Intermediate Rallies. Multiple Tops are Support Levels. Multiple Bottoms are Resistance Lev els. The neckline of a Head-and-Shoulders Pattern is a Support or ResistanceLevel, as the case may be. The apex of a Symmetrical Triangle is a strongSupport and Resistance point which may show its effect again on a subse-quent move. Any congestion or area at a certain price level or within narrowprice limits may provide Support or Resistance when a stock moves againto that price or range. Trendlines We have already gone into the methods of following trends in stocks, andthe use of the Top and Bottom Trendlines (Basic and Return Lines) as indi-cators of Bullish and Bearish opportunities, and as price determinants forexecuting purchases or short sales. There remains the tactical problem of the stock in which you are com mitted, which is acting badly, but which has neither broken out of a recog-nized pattern nor violated an established Minor Peak. This is not a commonsituation, but it can present a very difﬁcult problem when it does come up.AU3772_book.fm Page 497 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 498 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 225. This daily chart in Northern Paciﬁc, covering 6 months during 1944, shows several examples of Support and Resistance. The entire chart covers only part of the series of Consolidations that took place in 1943 and 1944 preceding the 1945–46advance that carried beyond 38. Support and Resistance phenomena appear, of course, on many, in fact on most of the charts in this book, and you will ﬁnd them on the charts you set up for yourself.There is nothing unique or even unusual about the Support–Resistance action in“NP.” Starting at the left in April, after the downside move on volume to 14 ¼, notice the recovery to 15 ⅝ where the move stops at the Resistance Level of the preceding 2 weeks. After the formation of the Symmetrical Triangle, there is a breakaway movewith a gap which runs right on up to above 17, where a small Rectangle is builtduring the next 3 weeks. The stock ultimately breaks down from this pattern onconsiderable volume. It is doubtful whether one would want to trade on this as anormal reaction after the breakout from the Triangle, because of the downside volumeand the implications of the Rectangle. However, note how the reaction stops cold at the 15 line, the apex level of the Triangle, and then moves right on up. Rather surprisingly, there is only a 3-dayhesitation at the Bottom of the Rectangle, but a little setback occurs at the Top of thatpattern. The July Top might be classed as a Head-and-Shoulders or Complex or Rounding Top; in fact, it is almost a Rectangle, and after the downside breakout, prices hesitateat the level of the Top of the May Rectangle, continue down, ﬁnd temporary Supportagain at the April Support Shelf around 16, and ultimately wind up a bit under 15.Although “NP” actually did penetrate and close slightly below the apex of theTriangle, the violation was barely 3%, and it is interesting to note that this SeptemberBottom was the lowest point reached. From here, the stock started its climb to the38 level, which was reached in December 1945. NORTHERN PACIFIC NP1944 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER19 18 17 16 15 14 125 100 75 50 25 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 291 6 2 3 3 0Sales 100’sAU3772_book.fm Page 498 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter thirty-three: Tactical Review of Chart Action 499
FIGURE 226. Trendlines in American Steel Foundries. This daily chart shows the tendency of trendlines to develop along straight channels. We have already pointed out that these channels are frequently easier to see in retrospect than during theirformation, that stocks move in perfect channels only occasionally, and that all chan-nels come to an end, frequently without warning. In this case, the long trend channeldoes give a warning of Reversal. In 1946, “FJ” had declined from 48 to a Support Level of 30. From here it rallied for 3 months in a Trend Channel that brought us to the February Top at 37. The nextdecline broke the previous trend, and volume developed at the bottom of this break.If you will follow the entire chart, you will notice that volume nearly always showsan increase at the points of Reversal, which are also usually points of contact withthe Trend Channel. Notice also the way the Corrective Rallies tend to stop at or nearthe previous Minor Bottoms in the downward trend, and how reactions tend to stopat the previous Minor Tops in the upward trend. Trading on this situation would have been proﬁtable. The Secondary Intermediate Rally up to February approached the Resistance Level marked by a 1946 Bottomaround 40, and a correction of the drop from 48 to 30 would indicate short salesaround 37 (which objective was just barely reached). Such sales, if made, would havebeen covered after the ﬁrst drop (week of March 1) around 33 ¼. New shorts at 34 ½ would have been closed in the week of March 15 at about 31 ½. Shorts made on the rally of the March 22 week around 33 would be covered in the week of April 19 at30. If shorted again, the same week at 31, the sale would have been covered after theClimactic Bottom in the week of May 24; and the combination, here, of great volumeand a One-Day Reversal would have warned against further shorts. The Rising Channel, being a Secondary, presumably of limited extent, would not offer any great inducement to long-side trading in the absence of other good reasons. AMERICAN STEEL FOUNDRIES FJ 1947 MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY38 36 34 32 30 28 26 50 40302010 XD 50C XD 50C 8 15 22 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 512 19 26 2Sales 100’sAU3772_book.fm Page 499 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 500 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Let us say the Major Trend is Bullish, and a certain stock which has been moving up irregularly in a Parallel Trend Channel conﬁrms its uptrend bya long, more or less continuous advance and calls for repurchase on the nextreaction. You buy on the reaction, and the stock continues down; that is, thereaction continues with prices sagging for days and weeks, without anyrallies, Consolidations, or Corrections that are sufﬁciently well-deﬁned toserve as Basing Points for stop orders. In the absence of clear indications during the reaction, and also during the preceding large upward move, your stop would be placed at a computeddistance below the top of the preceding rise. And if the reaction continues down until that level is reached, you will have sustained an abnormally large loss. In a case like this, you should examine the trendlines making up the long advance in the Trend Channel. The points of contact with the BasicTrendline can serve as a fair emergency substitute for Minor Bottoms. Yourstop level should, therefore (in the absence of more deﬁnite Basing Points),be placed at the computed distance below the last point at which the stockmade contact with the bottom trendline and moved decisively up away fromit. If penetration and close below this point occurs without catching the stop,sell on tight progressive stops. EN: The editor feels that such situations should occur only in position building or pyramiding cases. Every effort should be madeto join trends on breakout or origination, whatever the source. There is no excusefor “chasing stocks” in the modern environment where literally monitoring all stocks is possible with a computer, and instructing the system to alert one to the conditionsattending breakouts. EN9: On the other hand, human frailty being what it is wewill all ﬁnd ourselves chasing a train at some time or other. The reverse of this rule would apply to the same type of situation in a Bear Market, where stops for short sales would be placed at the computeddistance above the point at which the stock made contact with and fell awayfrom the upper trendline. The changes of angularity and direction in Intermediate trendlines are helpful in showing the gradual turning of a Major Trend.AU3772_book.fm Page 500 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

501 chapter thirty-four A Quick Summation of Tactical Methods There are three types of tactical operations: (1) Getting into new commit ments; (2) getting out of commitments which have moved as expected andshow a proﬁt; and (3) getting out of commitments which have not movedas expected, whether the transaction shows a proﬁt or a loss. The principles of taking proﬁts based on trends, Resistance and Support Levels, measuring implications of patterns, and most especially, on the dailytechnical and volume action of the stock, already have been covered. Theseproﬁt-taking operations seldom present very difﬁcult problems, since thepicture has developed normally and in the way you hoped and expected itwould. The “stepping off” point is usually easy to determine. The more difﬁcult problems arise in making new commitments correctly, and in the very important defensive operations of getting out of losingcommitments with the least possible loss. It should be emphasized that a stock which has ceased to act in a Bullish manner and which should, therefore, be sold is not necessarily a short saleon the next rally. In other words, the signal that shows weakness or failureof a move in one trend is not always a signal to make new commitments onthe opposite side of the market. More often than not, in fact, it is nothing ofthe kind. We know that certain moves, such as adverse breakouts from Symmet rical Triangles or Rectangles, advise us simultaneously to get out of commit-ments in what is now clearly the “wrong” direction and to make new com-mitments in the “right” direction. The simple failure of a trendline, however,where the stock merely penetrates an old Minor Bottom without completinga Head-and-Shoulders or other Reversal Pattern, although reason enough toget out of commitments which are showing losses, is not sufﬁciently con-clusive, by itself, to justify reversing policy and making new commitmentsin the opposite direction. Therefore we separate the two types of signals asfollows: Get out of present commitments • On adverse breakout from Head-and-Shoulders Formation.• On adverse breakout from Symmetrical Triangle. AU3772_book.fm Page 501 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
• On adverse breakout from Rectangle. • On establishment of new Minor low or new Minor high in adverse

direction. • On adverse breakout from Diamond.• On adverse breakout from Wedge.• On One-Day Reversal if marked by heavy volume or a gap.• On adverse breakout from Flag or Pennant.• On clear penetration of any Resistance or Support Level in the ad verse direction. • On an adverse Breakaway Gap.• On the appearance of an Island after a move in the favorable direc tion. • On penetration of basic trendline in the absence of pattern or other favorable criteria. Note: It is understood that all breakouts must close in the breakout area. A closing 3% beyond the Support, trend, or pattern is sufﬁcientto give the danger signal. All takeouts are performed by the use of ⅛ -point progressive stops. Make new commitments • In line with the Major Dow Trend, or to a limited extent in coun tertrend moves as insurance to reduce overall risk. • On breakout from Head-and-Shoulders Pattern.• On breakout from Symmetrical Triangle, provided it is not working into the ﬁnal third of its length toward the apex. • On breakout from Right-Angle Triangle.• On breakout from Rectangle, or (possibly) on points of contact, be ginning with the sixth Reversal. • On breakout from a Broadening Top.• On breakout from Double or Multiple Top or Bottom. (By this is meant breakout through the Bottom of the valley between Tops, orupside penetration of the “dome” between Bottoms.) • On breakout from Wedge, or (possibly) commitments within the Wedge in the last third of its length as it approaches its apex. • On Flags and Pennants, after sufﬁcient Secondary or Corrective Move by the pattern, or (possibly) within the pattern, provided that volumeand all other indications tend strongly to conﬁrm the pattern. • On clear penetration of a well-deﬁned Support or Resistance Area.• On Breakaway Gap (possibly).• After formation of an important and well-deﬁned Island following a considerable move. • On contact with, or penetration of, the “favorable” trendline if both trendlines are moving in the Major Trend direction. (Blue TopTrendline in a Bull Market, Red Bottom Trendline in a Bear Market.) AU3772_book.fm Page 502 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-four: A Quick Summation of Tactical Methods 503 Note: Breakouts and penetrations must show a closing in the brea kout area and must conform to volume requirements. Breakout clos ings should conform to the 3% rule. New commitments (marked “possibly”) may be made in certain cases within some patterns: Rectangles, Wedges, Flags, and Pennants. Exceptionalcare should be used in such cases. It is extremely difﬁcult to catch Breakaway Gaps, and we would not recommend this as a general practice. EN: This is not so difﬁcult as it was in Magee’s time due to modern communications, computers, and the Internet. All commitments, except those just noted, are made on the next follow ing reaction or rally, to rules previously stated. All commitments are protected by stops from the moment they are made. Stops are moved, as conditions justify moving them, but always in thefavorable direction, never in the adverse direction. AU3772_book.fm Page 503 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 504 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

505 chapter thirty-ﬁve Effect of Technical Trading on Market Action The question often is asked whether the very fact that traders are studying methods and patterns tends to create those very patterns and trends — inother words, whether the technical method sets up, to some extent, anartiﬁcial market in which the market action is merely the reﬂection of chartaction instead of the reverse. This does not seem to be true. The charts we make today seem to follow the old patterns; the presumption is very strong that markets have followedthese patterns long before there were any technicians to chart them. Thedifferences mentioned brieﬂy in Part One, due to changed margin require-ments, restraining of manipulative practices, etc., seem to have changed these habits, if at all, only in degree and not in their fundamental nature. The market is big, too big for any person, corporation, or combine to control as a speculative unit. (EN9: And even beyond big in the 21st century. Gargantuan.) Its operation is extremely free, and extremely democratic in the sense that it represents the integration of the hopes and fears of many kinds of buyers and sellers. Not all are short-term traders. There are investors,industrialists, employees of corporations, those who buy to keep, those whobuy to sell years later — all grades and types of buyers and sellers. And not all short-term traders are technicians by any manner of means. There are those who trade on fundamentals for the short term; those whorely on tips, hunches, on reading the stars, on personal knowledge of thecompany. They are all part of the competitive market, they are all usingmethods different from yours — and sometimes they will be right and youwill be wrong. The technician using the various tools of technical analysis, Dow Theory, Point-and-Figure charts, oscillators, scale order systems, and monthly, weekly,and daily charts is in the minority. The cold attempt to analyze a situationon the basis of the market record alone does not appeal to many people.Technical analysis leaves out the warmth and human interest of the board-room, the trading room, the fascinating rumors of fat extra dividends tocome, the whispered information on new patents, and the thrilling study ofthe quarterly earnings reports. (EN9: Unless I am mistaken the only appearance of irony in Magee’s work.) AU3772_book.fm Page 505 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
It is the inﬂuence of all these rumors, facts, and statistics that causes

people to buy and sell their stocks. It is their actions that build the familiar chart patterns. You are not interested in why they are doing what they aredoing. So far as your trading is concerned, you are interested only in theresults of their actions. The habits and evaluative methods of people are deeply ingrained. The same kinds of events produce the same kinds of emotional responses, andhence, the same kinds of market action. These characteristic approaches areextremely durable. It is not quite true that “you can’t change human nature,”but it is true that it is very difﬁcult to change the perceptive habits of alifetime. And since the “orthodox” investors greatly outnumber the techni-cians, we may conﬁdently assume that technical trading will have little orno effect on the typical behavior of free markets. EN: This statement by Magee is still true in principle. And, it should be noted that in modern markets professional investors attempt to learn (or perhaps it is “themysterious and anomalous market ”) what makes systems and other investors suc cessful. They then take action to frustrate those methods which are inimical to theirself-interest. For example, locals and professionals will search for stops above acongestion zone in an attempt to cause the market to break away. This might be inan attempt to create a trend, or it might be in an attempt to create a bull trap.

The proliferation of systems trend traders in the futures markets has, some of those traders feel, created conditions hostile to systems traders as a group. The moralof the story is that the trader/investor must be ever alert for the false move and thechanging rhythm of the markets.

No one has been able to quantify chart analysis, nor to disguise his own activities from the x-ray of the charts. Nor has anyone changed human nature to eliminatetreachery and perﬁdy and truculent defense of self-interest.

EN9: And – dramatic drum roll – in 2005 Smith-Barney ﬁres its entire technical analysis staff. What to make of this is left to the imagination of the reader. Somecommentators attribute it to the bearish outlook of the technical staff as opposed tothe need of the ﬁrm to sell long positions to its customers. In my view an unintendedvalidation of the craft. When you have to shoot the messenger it says somethingabout the state of the market, as well as something about the industry. Also, in conversation at a meeting of the Technical Securities Analysts Asso ciation of San Francisco (tsaasf.org), Larry Williams: “I hate technical analysis.” Iam reasonably certain that the “technical analysis” referred to is number drivenanalysis. AU3772_book.fm Page 506 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

507 chapter thirty-six Automated Trendline: The Moving Average There was a time back in 1941 when we were still ﬁlled with starry-eyed ignorance, and we felt that if only we worked hard enough and lookedshrewdly enough, we would discover the sure, unbeatable formula or systemthat would solve all our problems in the stock market, and all we wouldhave to do for the rest of life was apply the magic and telegraph our brokerperiodically from Nassau, or Tahiti, or Switzerland, or wherever we hap-pened to be enjoying life at the time. We have learned (we hope) quite a bit since then. We have learned most particularly a number of things not to do; and by not repeating the sameerrors over and over, we have been able to improve our performance sub-stantially. We have also learned that (to date) (EN: still true in the 21st century) there are no sure, unbeatable formulas or systems in the market, that eventhe most useful and generally dependable forecasting methods must beregarded as statements of probability only, subject to revision and vulnerableto failure at times. One of the useful tools, and one of the ﬁrst many students of market action adopt, is the trendline. Whether a stock is moving generally up, orgenerally down, or generally sideways, there seems to be a tendency for theMajor Trend to continue, to persist. It is true that every trend is broken sooneror later, and the fact that it has been broken is often signiﬁcant. But given awell-established trend, the probabilities certainly appear to favor its contin-uance rather than its Reversal. However, as with all other market studies, there are times and conditions in which the simple trendline action seems “not quite good enough.” Onefeels that there should be some mechanical or mathematical way of deter-mining the trend that might avoid some of the perplexities of choosing theright point through which to draw a trendline. And, it was back in 1941 thatwe delightedly made the discovery (though many others had made it before)that by averaging the data for a stated number of days, or weeks, or months,one could derive a sort of Automated Trendline which would deﬁnitelyinterpret the changes of trend over the past 30 days, or 200 days, or 12months, or whatever period was chosen. It seemed almost too good to betrue. As a matter of fact, it was too good to be true. AU3772_book.fm Page 507 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
The Moving Average is a fascinating tool, and it has real value in show

ing the trend of an irregular series of ﬁgures (like a ﬂuctuating market) more clearly. It also has value in that it can be used to cancel out the effect of anyregular cyclical variation, such as a normal seasonal range of temperaturesin order to get a better picture of the true secular trend. The trouble with a Moving Average (and which we discovered long since, but keep bumping into from time to time) is that it cannot entirelyescape from its past. The smoother the curve (longer cycle) one has, the more“inhibited” it is in responding to recent important changes of trend. Andthere is a very bad fault of Moving Averages in that “the tail tends to wagthe dog”; the ﬁgures back to the ﬁrst date of the current tabulation, perhaps6 months ago, or a year ago, if they are large, may unduly affect the presentaverage, and may conceal or mask some important feature by distorting thecurve. We feel the Moving Averages trendlines are useful. But they should be understood and used with discretion, and with a full perception of theirlimitations. Now that we have gone through some of the caveats of Moving Aver ages, let us give you some of the ways to construct them. Moving Averagescan be classiﬁed as Simple Moving Averages, Weighted or Exponential Mov-ing Averages, and Linear Moving Averages. We prefer, and have found overthe years, that the simple methods work just as well and sometimes betterthan the more complicated Moving Averages, and the others are more usefulwhen using computers. For this reason, we will concentrate on Simple Moving Averages. The most common are the 50-day and the 200-day Moving Averages. If you wantto increase the sensitivity of a Moving Average, shorten the Moving Averageby using 10 or 20 days. Another way is to increase the lead time by startingon the third day for the 10-day Moving Average, or on the 20th day for a50-day Moving Average, etc. To construct a Simple Moving Average, whether it is 5 days, 10 days, 50 days or 200 days, you add the price of 5 days, and divide by 5, or the10 days and divide by 10, or the 50 days by 50, or 200 days by 200. A simpleway of doing the 5-day Moving Average, instead of adding all 5 prices eachtime, is to drop day 1 and add day 6. A similar method can be used in doingthe 50-day Moving Average or the 200-day Moving Average. Instead ofadding the 50-day Moving Average each time, just drop the ﬁrst day of theprevious average and add the 51st day. The same with the 200-day MovingAverage; drop the ﬁrst day of the previous 200 and add the 201st day.Another way of doing the 200-day Moving Average is to take one day of theweek of 30 weeks, such as Wednesday or Thursday, add them and divideby 30. This will give you the same Moving Averages as you would havedoing 200. Another way to put it is, on the second day, take the total, addthe new day’s price, and subtract the oldest day’s price from your 5-dayMoving Average, 10-day Moving Average, 50-day, or 200-day, whicheverway you are doing it. Repeat the process on a daily basis and divide by the AU3772_book.fm Page 508 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-six: Automated Trendline: The Moving Average 509 representative day — for the 5-day, you would divide by 5; for the 10-day, you would divide by 10; for the 50-day, divide by 50; and for the 200-day,you would divide by 200. Sensitizing Moving Averages The shorter the time period, the greater the sensitivity you will develop inyour Moving Average. The 5-day Moving Average will be much more sen-sitive than a 10-day. The problem with short-term Moving Averages is thatyou can have a greater number of false moves. Shorter Moving Averages aremore suitable for commodities. On commodities, we would even advise using a 30-hour, a 3-day, and a 6-day Moving Average. It is often better to use two Moving Averages, one of shorter duration and one of longer duration. In addition, you can use channels, a Moving Average of lows, and a Moving Average of highs. Crossovers and Penetrations As a general rule, consider the crossing of two lines by the price line as asell or buy signal in the direction of the crossover or penetration. 1. Uptrends — Long positions are retained as long as the price trend remains above the Moving Average Line.a. When the price line intersects or penetrates the Moving Average Line on the upside, it activates a buy signal. b. When the price line goes above the 200-day Moving Average, but falls sharply toward it without penetration, it is a buy signal. c. When the price line falls below the Moving Average Line while the line is still rising, it could be a buy signal. d. When the price line spikes down too fast and far below a declining Moving Average Line, a short-term rebound toward the line maybe expected: a possible whipsaw trap. 2. Downtrends — Short positions are held as long as the price trend remains below the Moving Average. When the price trend reaches abottom and turns upward, a penetration of the Moving Average is abuy signal.a. When the price line moves above the average line while the av erage line is still falling, it is a sell signal. b. When the stock price line moves below the average line and rises toward it, but fails to penetrate and breaks down again, it is a sellsignal. c. If the price line rises too fast above the rising average line, a short term reaction may be expected: could be a whipsaw. d. Occasionally, penetration of the Moving Average Line will occur in close conjunction with the penetration of a trendline, thenaccording to its direction, it is a buy or sell signal. AU3772_book.fm Page 509 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
3. Horizontal, Diagonal or Sideways Movements — If the ﬂuctuations

are broad in comparison to the length of the Moving Averages being used, the price trend will ﬂuctuate back and forth as the MovingAverage, true to its character or purpose, moves horizontally. 4. Gaps — Moving Averages, depending on their length, may have a tendency to be penetrated in close proximity to a Breakaway Cap,particularly at the beginning of a Major Phase of an Intermediatecycle, and also in such cases where Breakaway Gaps occur at thebeginning of correction phases. Area Patterns can be a pitfall for the Moving Averages. Normally, the Moving Average oscillates through the center of these areas producing buy and sell signals in rapid succession. In Area Patterns, the Moving Averageis a headache to the trader because he never knows which penetration is theone preceding either the renewal of the trend or Conﬁrmation of a Reversal. When trading areas develop in the form of Triangles — Descending, Declining, or Symmetrical — the Moving Average will trend through the center of the Triangle. The technician has some small advantage in judgingwhich of the series of penetrations of a Moving Average is the importantone. When the Triangle reaches its apex, and the stock breaks out in onedirection or another and penetrates the Moving Average, the penetration islikely to be the most important one during the sideways movement of theTriangle’s development. Penetrations occur many times in close conjunctionwith the penetration of a trendline. As a price derivative product, the Moving Average can be a trend indi cator by the way it ﬁts a trendline. But, nevertheless, it should be consideredan adjunctive tool to everything else you have learned in relation to technicalanalysis. A 150-day Moving Average is charted on the following page. AU3772_book.fm Page 510 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-six: Automated Trendline: The Moving Average 511 FIGURE 227. 150-day moving average (dotted line). Up to the 1980s (the period during which Ronald Reagan tripled the national debt) trading the 150-day moving average (buying on an up crossover and selling on a down crossover) gave a tradersomewhat the same advantage that trading the Dow Theory afforded. In the 1980s,the system stopped working. But here in 1929 it would have been a life saver as canbe seen. $INDUA LAST-Monthly Created with TradeStation www.TradeStation.com499.99 449.99399.99 349.99 299.99 249.99 199.99 149.99 99.99 49.99 1920 1925 1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 AU3772_book.fm Page 511 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 512 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

513 chapter thirty-seven

> “The Same Old Patterns”
To the newcomer, the market appears ﬁlled with wonders and mysteries as the landscape of Mars will appear to the ﬁrst space travelers to land there.There are strange rumblings, apparently unexplainable upheavals, weirdgrowths. An unknown stock will suddenly emerge from a morass of debtand deﬁcit, and proceed to soar to great heights. An old and trusted issuewill paradoxically sag and droop, although apparently rooted in the soil ofeconomic stability. All will seem peaceful and secure; and suddenly, theground opens up and swallows values in a sensational market break. Such a newcomer, perhaps not realizing what appears unusual and alarming is only the normal ﬂuctuation and adjustment that goes on contin ually in the market according to the changing evaluations of millions of investors, will feel frightened, insecure, and indecisive. He may scurry fromboardroom to boardroom, personally or on the telephone, scan the ﬁnancialpages, talk with friends, accumulate a mass of conﬂicting information, andend up shutting his eyes and making a blind stab in the hope that he maycome up with the right answer. Some never, even after years of contact with the market, achieve a tran quil and assured approach. But it is possible to learn something about the basic nature of stock trends. It is possible to know, within reasonable limits, about what might beexpected in certain situations. And it is also possible to ﬁnd ways of copingwith these situations, including the exceptional cases that persist in doingthe unexpected. To repeat: It is possible to deal successfully with the unex-pected and with that which cannot be precisely predicted. To put it another way, it is possible to be wrong part of the time, and still to be successful on the balance. And to do this, it is only necessary tohave a background of experience sufﬁcient to know what will usually hap-pen under particular conditions, about how often the unexpected will occur,and how to deal with the unexpected when it does happen. These are thesame general problems that would confront the space traveler, the chemist,the physician, or almost anyone else in his daily affairs. There are men who have observed the market long enough and carefully enough to discover that there are not quite so many unexpected events asthe newcomer might be led to believe. AU3772_book.fm Page 513 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 228. A 1952 Major Head-and-Shoulders Top in U.S. Smelting, Reﬁning & Mining. This stock had moved up fr om

a bottom at 33 in 1950 to the peak at nearly 88 shown here. The decline carried down to 37. This chart shows the typical high volume on the left shoulder. The volume at the head is a little higher than in the “ideal” pattern. Light volume on theright shoulder is a deﬁnite warning. Notice the Pullback Rally to the neckline in the last week of August. Also the Secondary Recovery in November and December. There also appears at the left side of this chart in 1951 a beautiful example of an Ascending Triangle, indicating the resumption of the previous interr upted advance. U.S. SMELTING, REFINING & MINING COMP ANY UV 1951–1952–1953S SH88 80 76 72 68 64 60 56 52 48 44 40 25020015010050 JF MA MJ J ASO ND J F M A M JJ A S O ND J F MA M J J A S O NDSales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 514 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 515 The charts in this book are, in the main, the same as used for examples in the ﬁrst edition in 1947. Some of them show situations from 1928 and 1929, others from the 1930s and 1940s. EN: And still others from the 1990s and the 2000s. The reader can hardly overlook the similarities that occur in var ious stocks at different times during corresponding phases of their trends orturning points. We have said that these same patterns, trends, and Support Resistance phenomena repeat themselves over and over again, and that they may beobserved by anyone in his own current charts for any period of time, in anynormally active stocks, and on any exchange or market. By way of demonstration, there were included in this chapter of the ﬁfth edition a number of typical technical examples, similar to those alreadydiscussed, but taken from the period 1947 to 1966. EN: The eighth edition includes examples taken up through the turn of the millennium. It would be possible to include ten times the number of good examples, for almost everysituation that has been previously illustrated has appeared again and againin recent years. FIGURE 229. Downtrends seldom show the perfect and regular trendlines we often see in uptrends. But in spite of the irregular, ragged rallies and spotty volume action, the basic principles are about the same as for advances. Notice that in this 6-monthperiod Inspiration Copper had no rally which carried above the Top of a precedingrally. A well-marked downtrend of this sort must be presumed to continue until thereis a marked change in the pattern and volume action. Notice the volume on the day“IC” broke the historically important 52 level; and subsequent action. INSPIRATION COPPER IC 1956–1957 SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY64 60 56 52 48 44 50 403020 10 XD XD52.00 52.00 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 1926 2 9 16Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 515 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 230. Part of the Major Advance in Granite City Steel. Here we see the

familiar phenomenon of Support and Resistance in almost every move through the period shown. The August–September Rectangle held for 6 weeks between the top limit of 47, which was reached on three occasions, and the bottom at 44. Like most Rectangles,it was marked by heavy volume at the start on July 19, and gradually decliningvolume as the pattern progressed. The breakout move on August 29 was on enormousvolume. After this breakout, there was a typical Flag-like reaction on sharply diminished volume; and while this move penetrated the top border of the Rectangle, the pene-tration was not decisive or signiﬁcant, and the lower border was never violated. Nowsee how volume appears on October 15 as the old high is reached, and again at thetop of the move on November 14. The decline returns to the level of the Septemberhigh on a low-volume reaction. It is interesting how, on ﬁve occasions in this chart,the 52 level served as a Support or Resistance point: twice as Resistance on the wayup, and three times after the new October high, as Support. On the next rise, we see almost the same type of advance. In this case, the Support Resistance Level is about 57. Notice the approach to the critical level, the backingaway, the aggressive move into new high ground (in mid-December), and the reces-sion to the Support at 57. Advances of this sort seem to represent the ebb and ﬂow of the Minor Moves during a Major Trend when there are no great “news developments” to change thenormal progress of the trend. Where there are frequent and important changes in themarket or in news affecting the industry, we may see long Consolidations or Second-ary Reactions. But the Major Trend is durable. We must not assume a Major Reversalprematurely. GRANITE CITY STEEL GRC 1956 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER60 56 52 48 44 40 38 Sales 100’s 125 100 75 50 25 XD 75 XD 75 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 181 5 2 2 2 9 5 AU3772_book.fm Page 516 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 517 FIGURE 231. During the same period that Granite City Steel was making the series of steps upward, as shown in Figure 230, Masonite was doing almost the same thing in reverse. To have continued to hope for a change in trend with a stock which was acting as

> “MNC” did through the latter part of 1956 would have required an unusual amountof optimism or innocence about the habits of stocks. Actually, of course, there wouldbe good reason for optimism if the stock had been sold short early in the trend.This is almost a perfect counterpart to the “GRC” chart. We have not only a seriesof declines with rallies which fail to establish even Minor highs above the previousTops, but we are also able to draw a trendline which has a number of points of contacton the way down, which is somewhat unusual in a down-trending situation.
Notice the tendency of the rallies to stop short at the level of previous bottoms in a series of Support–Resistance Levels. We see such action at 44, at 41, at 38, and at 36.We would certainly not consider the breaking of the trendline on the upside in lateDecember as evidence of a Reversal. Such a break after a trend of this sort probablymeans no more than a Secondary Recovery. To be of greater signiﬁcance, it wouldcertainly call for some volume showing, which was utterly lacking here; and beforewe would consider the stock again strong enough to buy there would have to besome sort of Reversal Pattern. A faltering rally back to around 40 would, in fact,suggest the advisability of further short sales. MASONITE MNC 1956 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBERXD.30 AND 50AND 4% STOCK XD.3048 44 40 3836 34 32 30 28 125 100 755025 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 181 5 2 2 2 9Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 517 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 232. Very often you will hear the question, “But how can you tell whether

a technical formation or a breakout is valid?” In many cases, and in a great majority of upside patterns, the volume gives such a decisive answer that all doubts areremoved. Not always is the volume conﬁrmation as clear as in this chart of Delaware,Lackawanna & Western, but this is typical of a good many breakouts in uptrends.You will see that the volume was generally light during the Rectangle, in which wesee ﬁve plainly marked Tops and Bottoms. On Thursday, November 4, the volume increased sharply as the price moved up to the top of the Rectangle and closed at that point. The following day, Friday, wesee good volume again with a close beyond the top border. From this point on, themove is obviously upward. There was no indication of Reversal at any time after the breakout. A Top was reached in March at 25 ½. This was an especially vigorous move as it came out of the Rectangle. Normally, we would look for Minor Setbacks such as the series of reactions in “GRC,”Figure 230. And if these had occurred, it would in no way have weakened the BullishPattern. DELAWARE, LACKAWANNA & WESTERN DL 1945–1955 SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 125 100 75 50 25 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 5 1 21 92 6Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 518 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 519 FIGURE 233. The situation, somewhat similar to “DL” in Figure 232, presents a little complication. The problem would have been whether to sell or continue to hold

> “LA” after the late October break down through the Bottom of the Rectangle. Therewas no important volume on this drift move, and on only one day did the price closebarely 3% below the bottom of the pattern. A holder of the stock might well havesold it, might even have executed a short sale.
Suppose now, that you had actually sold the stock short. Observe the volume and the price action on Thursday, November 4 and Friday, November 5. Notice thevolume and the price on the following Monday and Tuesday as it reacted slightly.Then see the quick pickup in volume as the price advanced on Wednesday, the weekand a half of dull Consolidation, and the larger volume on the move up on Friday.Surely by the middle of the ﬁrst week of December, if not before, you would haveseen the danger signals and closed out your short. Such a turnabout does not need to be a tragedy nor even a discouragement. Some easily discouraged traders would be so concerned about the small loss realized ontheir unsuccessful short sale that they would not be ready to seize the opportunityto reverse position and buy the stock after the strong up signals. This move carriedto 26 ¾ in March 1955. AMERICAN LOCOMOTIVE LA 1954 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER XD 25C XD 25C22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 250 200 150 100 50 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 41 1 1 8 2 5Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 519 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 234. Bottoms normally take longer to complete than Tops. That is one

reason we have this chart of Fansteel on a weekly basis, so that a year and a half of the action can be shown. The pattern shown at the left is a Consolidation formedafter a rise from the 1953–54 Multiple Bottoms around 21. The top of the AscendingTriangle corresponds roughly with the April 1953 peak. Of course, at the time this Triangle started, in early 1955, it was not possible to identify it as such — particularly since the February high ran a little higher than thehorizontal Tops that eventually formed. However, during the 7 months that precededthe ﬁrst breakout move, it became increasingly clear that each rally to the neighbor-hood of 32 ½ was followed by a reaction on low volume, and that these reactions were forming a series of Rising Bottoms. In the ﬁrst week of September we see a clean penetration upside, and from here on, the advances and declines ﬁt into the typical pattern of a Major Advance. Noticethe Breakaway Gap in November, and the low volume throughout the December–Jan-uary–February reaction. FANSTEEL METALLURGICAL FNL 1955 – 195652 4844 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 250 200150100 50 FM A M J J A S O N D J F M AM J JSales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 520 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 521 FIGURE 235. Here, in a daily chart, we see once again the dramatic sequel to a Descending Triangle. Here is the typical series of declining Tops on rather low volume, with retreats between the rallies to a horizontal line. Notice that the important Support here was violated with heavy volume on Friday, January 25. Although the degree of penetration was not great, in view of the generallyBearish reaction to this point we would sell at once. A Descending Triangle hasBearish implications even before the breakout. There was no substantial Pullbackafter the breakout. Since it is not possible to count on such a recovery after a breakthrough Support, it is safest to sell long holdings immediately or to place a very nearstop on them as soon as a close outside pattern occurs (in this case, outside the patternas adjusted for ex-dividend). Notice the pickup of volume as the price drops into a tailspin at the end of January. Heavy volume is not necessarily a feature of important downside moves, but it may,and often does, accompany them, and when it does, it simply underscores thesigniﬁcance of the move. Question: Does Textron look like a “bargain” to you at the end of January on this chart? Would you be tempted to buy this stock because “it can’t go down any more,”or because it is “due for a rally,” or because it is “selling below its true value”? Suppose that “TXT” did have a technical rally, which seems quite likely after the move shown. How far would you look for it to go? Would you expect it to penetratethe 20 level in the near future? Would you call this a Bullish Situation at the end ofJanuary 1957? TEXTRON TXT 1956–1957 AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY XD.40 XD.4024 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 125 100 7550 25 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 512 19 26 2Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 521 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Not All the Same

Although a majority of stocks will participate in a big market trend, they will not all move at the same time nor to the same degree. Some will movequite independently and contrary to the Averages. There was a “boom” inthe 1920s. And there was a Panic in October 1929. But these are inadequatestatements, half-truths if you will, and can be very misleading if they areswallowed whole. A technician, following the individual behavior of stocks,would have been able, through a balanced and diversiﬁed portfolio, toprotect himself against irreparable loss. FIGURE 236 (Left, above). Libby, McNeill & Libby showed no serious effects at the time of the October 1929 panic, and went on to new highs in March and April 1930. FIGURE 237 (Middle, above). Chrysler, one of the great market leaders, made its Bull Market Top in 1928, more than a year before the Panic, and had already lost 60% of its value before October 1929. FIGURE 238 (Right, above). Eagle–Picher Lead never enjoyed any Bull Market at all. Aside from an unimpressive rally in 1928 it was in a downtrend all the way. The examples given are not rare exceptions. There are many others involving important stocks which did not follow the pattern set by the Averages. This varietyof behavior is typical of the market. It is to be seen today. They are not

> “all the same,”
and each stock must be studied individually. In Figures 239, 240, and 241 are a fewexamples showing disparate action during the years 1953–56. There are hundreds ofothers that would illustrate the point equally well. LIBBY, McNEILL & LIBBY30 25 20 15 10 1927 1928 1929 1930 CHRYSLER 150 120 90 60 30 1927 1928 1929 1930 EAGLE-PICHER LEAD50 40 30 20 10 1927 1928 1929 1930 AU3772_book.fm Page 522 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 523 The facts are that of 676 stocks we have studied through the period 1924–35, only 184 made a Bull Market Top in August–September–October 1929 and suffered Major Declines in October and November of that year. Therewere 262 stocks actually in Major Downtrends before the year 1929. Another181 stocks made their Bull Market Tops in the ﬁrst 9 months of the year andwere already moving down before the end of the summer. Five stocks did notstart their decline until after 1929. And 44 stocks continued to make new highsafter 1929. In Figures 236, 237, and 238 are three stocks showing very differenttrends during the years 1927–30. FIGURE 239 (Left, above). West Indies Sugar broke out of its “Scalloping” Pattern in late 1956 to make its own Bull Market at a time when action in the Averages was apathetic and generally weak. FIGURE 240 (Middle, above). Although the Averages continued to make new highs through the spring of 1956, Westinghouse Electric made its top and went into a MajorDecline more than a year earlier. FIGURE 241 (Right, above). Here is a companion piece to Eagle–Picher’s chart of more than 25 years ago, shown above it. Kresge, like a number of other “blue chips,”did not participate in the Bull Market Moves of 1953–56. These six charts were adapted from “Graphic Stocks” (F.W. Stephens, New York). The 1927–30 charts are from a Special Edition covering nearly 700 stocks through theperiod 1924–35. The 1953–56 charts are from a later edition of “Graphic Stocks.” WEST INDIES SUGAR50 40 30 20 750 500 250 1953 1954 1955 1956 Sales 100’s WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC100 80 60 40 3000 20001000Sales 100’s 1953 1954 1955 1956 KRESGE (S.S.) CO. 50 40 30 20 600 400 200 1953 1954 1955 1956 Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 523 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 242. A beautiful Top Formation in Northrop Aircraft, 1954-1955. The move

which ended here at 39 ¾ in January 1955 emerged from a Bottom in 1953 at 6 ¼. The Descending Triangle is marked by rather unusual volume at the peaks of rallies in February and March. Otherwise it is typical of this sort of Reversal Pattern. As so frequently happens, there was a Pullback effort after the March 14 breakout; but thisrally lasted only 2 days. You will notice that the volume on the breakout and throughout the downside move was not so spectacularly heavy, not nearly as heavy, in fact, as that on theMinor Rallies within the Triangle. However, as pointed out previously, we do notneed nor expect so much volume on a decline as we look for in an advance. Volume did not develop until the end of the ﬁrst stage of the decline. It is quite usual for heavy volume to show up at the end of a Minor Move whether on theupside or the downside. Notice the Flag formed on the subsequent rally in mid-April. The measuring implications of this Flag were approximately carried out a month later. During the following year and a half “NOC” never reached 31 again. NORTHROP AIRCRAFT NOC 1954–1955 DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAYAdjusted for 2/1 SPLIT38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 250 200 150 100 50 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 71 4 2 1 2 8Sales 100’s XD 40C AU3772_book.fm Page 524 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 525 FIGURE 243. Bearing in mind the 1954–55 chart of Northrop in Figure 242, we now turn to the action in this same stock in the latter part of 1956 and the beginning of 1957. The question, of course, is whether the Major Downtrend is still in effect orwhether an important upturn has taken place. As usual, it is the volume that must be watched and studied. Notice the Minor Peak on August 14, then the very heavy volume on August 24. See how the activitydries up during September, but resumes briskly as a new Minor Top is establishedin October. Observe the drying-up of volume on declines and the activity on ralliesto the 25 ½ level, which, by the middle of December, has become the horizontal Top of an Ascending Triangle. There was no question about the validity of the breakout move on December 10; and the subsequent reaction in the next 2 weeks conﬁrmed this by the lack of activityon the decline. And again, in early February, we see volume pick up notably as anew high is registered. At the time this is written (EN: 1957), it is not possible to say whether or not “NOC” will continue this upward course and eventually smash the “31 barrier.” But we feelthere will be no doubt in the reader’s mind that at the beginning of February,Northrop was presumably moving in an uptrend, and must be presumed to be inthat trend until a deﬁnite change in its market action has taken place. It seems quiteprobable that if “NOC” should advance to the 30–31 level, there is likely to be aperiod of Consolidation with the formation of an Area Pattern before a successfuladvance above 31 is accomplished. As a sidelight on this chart, it might be mentioned here that during the period of advance shown above many aircraft stocks were moving lower. NORTHROP AIRCRAFT NOC 1956–1957 AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARYXD 40C XD 40C28 262422 20 19 18 17 125 100 75 50 25 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 525 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
CHICAGO, MILWAUKEE, ST. PAUL & PAC IFIC ST

1954–1955 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNEXD 1.00 XD 1.5038 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 250 200150100 50 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 5 12 19 26 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 2 9 16 23 30 6 1 32 02 7 411 18 25 815 22 29 1 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2Sales 100’s FIGURE 244 (Caption appears on facing page) AU3772_book.fm Page 526 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 527 FIGURE 244. The 1954–55 advance in Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul & Paciﬁc is an object lesson in Bull Market technics. Where would such a trend (of which there are many similar cases) leave the man who sells just “because he has a good proﬁt,” sayat 15, or who feels “17 is too high a price”? Here is a chart that is worth considerable study, since it exempliﬁes a great many features of the “ideal” uptrend. In this full year of advance, there is no point at whicheven a tyro technician could ﬁnd reasonable cause for anxiety or justiﬁcation forselling the stock. And we should not overlook the tax advantages of long-term gains. Here, in August and September, we have a perfect example of the Symmetrical Triangle as a Consolidation. The volume is typically heavy at the start of the patternand shrinks to almost nothing as it progresses. The breakout volume is decisive. Thereaction after the breakout, also on lower volume, as it should be, runs right back tothe apex, the “cradle point” which is nearly always a strong Support on such areaction. Now follow the action from here. The two days of higher volume in the early November rally represent the penetration of the previous Minor Top, and the end ofthe rally, respectively. The reaction comes back to the previous top. The December rally is marked by heavier volume when the November top is exceeded, and again, to a lesser degree, at the end of the move. Once more there isa reaction, this time to the November top. A fast move near the end of December repeats the same price and volume action, and is followed by a typical low-volume reaction to the early December top. (Thisis becoming monotonous. But it is important. You are seeing here a long-term dem-onstration of Bullish technical action.) Next we have the January breakout. How far would you expect its Minor Reaction to go? Would you be surprised if it found Support at the level of the three little Topsformed early in the month at 17 ½? The following advance drives through the 20 level, and, in a series of small ﬂuc tuations, forms an Ascending Triangle. By the end of February, another new highhas been established. Can you estimate where to look for support on the reaction?And now we see the formation of the second Ascending Triangle (notice the relativelylow volume), which is broken on the upside in a burst of trading activity toward theend of April. The next reaction comes back to the support of the former Tops as youwould expect. Once again, an Ascending Triangle is formed, and you will see how the volume dries up throughout this pattern, coming to life emphatically on the breakout onWednesday, June 8. Many students, on ﬁrst seeing this chart, remark, “Well, the trend wasn’t broken until Tuesday, June 21.” Actually, of course, no break occurred on that day. The stocksimply went ex-dividend $1.50, which, as you will see if you adjust the price by thatamount, merely brings it back to the Support at the top level of the April–MayAscending Triangle. It is inconceivable that any such regular series of Bullish Patterns could appear throughout a full year of trading in a stock “by accident.” This is part of the normalmechanism of the market, representing the judgments, opinions, fears, hopes, andtrading tactics of thousands of traders and investors. However, it should be addedthat it is not often that one sees such a long and “perfect” Major Advance as this.Normally, there are interruptions, distortions, or Secondary Reactions from time totime. AU3772_book.fm Page 527 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 245. Does it require second sight to perceive that this is a Bearish stock? If you were keeping a chart on Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing, wouldn’t

you have recognized, long before the end of the period shown above, that the trendwas down, not up? It is one of the great delusions of the market that the stock we own must be “good.” As prices decline, the price–dividend ratio, based, of course, on past history, willimprove. And the price–earnings ratio likewise will look continually better. Investorswill begin to speak of “averaging their cost” by putting more money into a tumblingstock (instead of looking for something that is going their way). They will talkendlessly about improved outlook, new products, a forward-looking management.They will prove to you that it is selling “below its true value,” whatever that maymean. They will bend every effort to establishing that what is going on before theireyes is not true; that the very weak-looking stock is actually strong; that the Americanpublic is making a great mistake and is misjudging this stock; that the tape is wrongbecause they must be right. But values in the market are determined democratically and, by and large, probably represent the best composite appraisal you can ﬁnd. A move like this is not mean-ingless, nor is it possible today to attribute it to the machinations of a few manipu-lators. In the chart we are seeing the reﬂection of a collective evaluation which cannotbe lightly disregarded. Westinghouse reached 50 ⅞ in November 1956. WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC & MANUFACTURING CO. WX 1955 FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULYXD 50C XD 50C80 7672 68 64 60 56 52 48 44 250 200150 100 50 51 2 1926 512 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 528 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 529 FIGURE 246. A typical stock chart on TEKNIPLAT charting paper. Allowing for ex-dividends, “OT” never signiﬁcantly violated the apex of the Triangle. The advance ultimately added 60% to the value of the stock. (Continued on page 530.) TEKNIPLAT Chart Paper Published and Distributed by JOHN MAGEE, Inc. Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, 360 Worthington Street, Springﬁeld 3, Massach usettsType RUCOPYRIGHT 1961 BY JOHN MAGEE, SPRINGFIELD, MASS. DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARC H APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUS T SEPTEMBER OCTOBER N OVEMBEROTIS ELEVATOR CO. OT 1954–1955 152 144136 128 120 112 104 96 88 80 76 72 68 64 60 56 52 48 44 50 4030 20 10 41 1 182518 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 5 12 19 26 4 11 18 25 2 2 9 1 62 33 0 91 6 2 3 3 0 71 4 2 1 2 8 61 3 2 0 2 7 31 0 1 7 2 4 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 XD.625 XD.625 XD.625Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 529 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 246 (Continued from previous page). This chart, in its long, mostly side

ways movement, is a good example of the importance of making allowance for the ex-dividend drop in the price. During the ﬁrst 5 months shown, we see an almostperfect Symmetrical Triangle. The ﬁrst critical point would be on the slight break-down in the middle of May. The lower border of the Triangle was violated just atriﬂe, even if we had allowed for the 62 ½ ¢ March dividend. If one had sold the stock here, who could blame him? And no great or immediate harm would have beendone. However, an experienced technician might have taken into account the insig-niﬁcant volume at this point and waited a bit, with a stop at, say, 60. (See thesomewhat similar situation in the chart of “LA,” Figure 233.) If “OT” had been held,the volume pickup on the rally would have shown that the trend had not yet reverseditself. The second critical point came in late September and early October at the timeof President Eisenhower’s illness. However, if we allow for the two dividends whichwent ex in July and October, the break did not violate the May Bottom. Furthermore,it was on relatively light volume. If the stock was still held, there was no valid reasonfor selling on this decline. From here on, breaking upward sharply from the Octo-ber–November Island, “OT” resumed the Major Advance interrupted by this longperiod of Consolidation, and advanced to the equivalent of over 100 (adjusted fortwo-for-one split) in 1956. AU3772_book.fm Page 530 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 531 FIGURE 247. The Broadening Top in the Dow–Jones Industrial Average which formed in May, June, July, and August 1957. Although Broadening Tops have ap peared many times in individual stocks, and, as a rule, have carried out their Bearishimplications, such a chart pattern has never before been completed in the IndustrialAverage. (Continued on the following page). Close 454.82 Feb 12Close 520.77 Jul 12 Close 419.79 Oct 12DOWJONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC550 540 530520510500490480470460450440430420 BREAK OUT1 23 45 AU3772_book.fm Page 531 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 247 (Continued from previous page). In 1929, on two occasions, there

were patterns which began to show Broadening tendencies, but since these were interrupted by continuation moves, about all one can say of them is that they mayhave indicated a growing technical weakness in the market. The 1957 situation, on the other hand, was very deﬁnite and was fully completed. During the early stages of the pattern, several of our friends wrote, calling attentionto the possible Broadening Top, among them Charles E. Carden of Fort Worth, TX,who has handled Dow Theory comment and analysis for the Fort Worth Star Telegram. The chart shown in Figure 247 is adapted from one of Mr. Carden’s charts and isreproduced with his permission. The ﬁrst signiﬁcant point after the February 12 Bottom was the Minor Peak of Tuesday May 21, marked (1). The Minor Decline from this point on Tuesday, May28 (2) was quite normal, as was the renewed advance to Monday, June 17 (3). The ﬁrst sign of a broadening tendency was when the Average closed on Monday, June 24 (4), below the May 28 bottom. However, this by itself did not indicate aReversal. The advance was resumed, and surmounted the May 21 and June 17 MinorTops, reaching a high closing ﬁgure of 520.77 on Friday, July 12 (5). The Broadeningpicture was now quite evident, and the completion of a Broadening Top requiredonly a close below the June 24 Bottom. On Tuesday, August 6, the Industrial Average closed decisively below the June 24 Bottom, signaling the completion of the Broadening Top. This, of course, was anindication of Major weakness, a warning not to be taken lightly. The Broadening Top, as we have pointed out previously, is an indication of a wildly gyrating market, a market without leadership or deﬁnite trend. The presumption isthat heavy distribution is going on under cover of the rallies, and the breakout moveis seldom a false one. Since we are dealing, here, with an Average, rather than a single stock, we would consider that any closing below point (4) after the peak at (5), regardless of how slight the margin might be, would constitute a valid breakout, since Averages are lesssensitive than individual stocks, and it is customary to consider even slight penetra-tions at signal points (as in Dow Theory) as perfectly satisfactory. You will noticealso that, although it would be possible to draw the Broadening Top through theextreme ranges of the price, as we have done with the wide-dashed line, we haveused the closing prices as marked by the narrow-dashed line. This, too, is in linewith Dow Theory practice, where only closing prices are considered. The implication of the pattern here was Bearish for the “market-as-a-whole.” As might be expected, a majority of stocks showed weak patterns of trends at this time.However, as always, it was necessary to examine each stock separately on its merits,since, as we will show in the following pages, not all stocks behaved alike even inthis extremely weak market situation. AU3772_book.fm Page 532 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 533 FIGURE 247.1. The Broadening Top in the Dow in 1999-2000. If repetition is the heart of pedagogy the r eader may die of heart disease with looking at the Dow Broadening Top. Especially if he was long at the time and either disr egarded the signs, or was not educated as to their signiﬁcance. And the lesson is always the same: Bad news is on the way. The numerous technical aspects of this historic market top are discussed at length in other views of the Dow taken at this time. Remember. This time it’s different. The market paradigm has changed, etc. etc., etc….Those who listen to fools will be fooled. $INDUDaily US L=10125.40 -114.52 -1.12% O=10239.84 C=10125.40 HandFenceline–Neckline 9082.6211378.00 10897.00 10437.00 9996.00 9573.00 9169.00 9119.00 8781.00 8410.00 8055.00 7714.00 Oct 99 Apr Jul Oct 00 Apr Jul Oct 01 Apr Jul Oct Created with TradeStation AU3772_book.fm Page 533 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 248 (Caption appears on facing page.)

TEKNIPLAT Chart Paper Published and Distributed by JOHN MAGEE, Inc. Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, 360 Worthington Street, Springﬁeld 3, Massach usettsType RUCOPYRIGHT 1961 BY JOHN MAGEE, SPRINGFIELD, MASS. JANUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBERINDUSTRIAL RAYON CORPOR ATION ILR 1957 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 Sales 100’s 50 40302010 51 2 1 92 6 41 1 1 8 2 5 2 2 91 6 2 32 91 6 2 3 3 0 91 6 2 3 3 0 71 4 2 1 2 8 71 4 2 1 2 8 61 3 2 0 2 7 6 1 32 02 7 31 0 1 7 2 4 3 1 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 XD.50 ¢ XD.75 ¢ XD.25 ¢ XD.25 ¢DECEMBER FEBRUARY AU3772_book.fm Page 534 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 535 FIGURE 248.

## _1957 Bearish Trend in Industrial Rayon. At no time did this stock_
show signiﬁcant strength. Averages do not tell the whole story. Each stock has to be considered on its own

merits. Long before the formation of the 1957 Broadening Top in the Industrial Average, Industrial Rayon was moving down in a Major Decline. You will ﬁnd manycases where it is difﬁcult to “see” what a stock is doing, or to determine its MajorTrend. But in such a situation as this (and this is not a rare case), it is perfectly obviousthat the trend is down. Although there were a number of Minor Rallies and Consol-idations during the decline, the entire pattern was so obviously part and parcel ofthe same big decline that no one who was even slightly familiar with typical stockbehavior would have been tempted to buy the stock, even to cover shorts. On Monday, July 29, there was a sharp downward break with a gap on climactic volume. This would have suggested the probability of a Minor Bottom, and for threeand a half weeks, the stock did stabilize at around 24. But even during this Consol-idation, the continuing weakness showed up on the small Descending Triangle thatwas formed, and ultimately on Wednesday, August 21, the price broke sharply tocontinue the Major Decline. AU3772_book.fm Page 535 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 249 (Caption appears on facing page.)

TEKNIPLAT Chart Paper Published and Distributed by JOHN MAGEE, Inc. Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, 360 Worthington Street, Springﬁe ld 3, MassachusettsType RUCOPYRIGHT 1961 BY JOHN MAGEE, SPRINGFIELD, MASS. JANUARY FEBRUARY MAR CH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AU GUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBERLORILLARD LL 1957 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 250 200150100 50 51 2 1 9 2 6 41 1 18 25 2 2 91 6 2 3 2 91 6 2 3 3 0 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 71 42 1 2 8 61 3 20 27 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 18 15 22 29 512 19 26 XD.30 XD.30DECEMBERSales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 536 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 537 FIGURE 249.

## _1957 Bullish Trend in Lorillard. Although most stocks declined in_
1957, there were a number of strong issues like this one which appeared to be totally

unaffected by the general pessimism. Averages do not tell the whole story. It will come as a shock to many readers, who rightly regard the latter half of 1957 as a Major Bear Market, to see Lorillard makinga typical Bull Market Advance. Lorillard moved up from 15 ⅝ to 34 during the year — and reached 54 ⅛ during the ﬁrst 3 months of 1958. It is hard to believe that this chart and the Industrial Rayon chart we just looked at cover the same period, that is, theyear 1957. The majority of stocks did suffer severe depreciation. But there were a good many issues which, like Lorillard, enjoyed a generally Bullish Trend all year. Among theimportant stocks that moved up consistently in 1957 were American Chicle, AnchorHocking Glass, Colgate-Palmolive, General Foods, General Cigar, Grand Union, Na-tional Biscuit, Parke Davis, Penick & Ford, Plough, Inc., Proctor & Gamble, Ruberoid,Vick Chemical, Winn-Dixie Stores, and Zenith Radio. Whatever theories we may have as to the condition of the “market-as-a-whole,” we must always realize that we are buying and selling individual stocks. (EN: Unless we are trading Index Shares.) We may get a picture of extreme Bullishness or extreme Bearishness in the “general market,” but if this picture conﬂicts with the clear evi-dence in a particular stock, we must recognize that it is the stock, not the Average,that we have to deal with. We cannot assume that a stock “must” follow the Average.And it is often possible to obtain greater stability and safety by buying a few strongstocks in a Bear Market or by selling short a few weak stocks in a Bull Market, thanby attempting to maximize proﬁts with an “all-out” position one way or the other. AU3772_book.fm Page 537 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 250. During the latter 9 months of 1961, some well-known market Aver

ages continued to show new all-time highs. However, the Evaluative Index (see Chapter 38), in this period did not indicate any such overall strength; many stockswere in almost continuous decline for the 9 months. These included such importantissues as Air Reduction, Allied Chemical, Allis-Chalmers, Aluminum, Ltd., FansteelMetallurgical, Flintkote, Heyden Newport Chemical, Sperry Rand, Texas Instru-ments, Trans World Airlines, Universal Match, and many others. At such times it isbest to choose stocks selectively and maintain adequate liquid reserves. AVNET ELECTRONICS CORP. AVT 1961 MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER68 64 60 56 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 500 400 300 200 100 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 71 4 2 1 2 8Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 538 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 539 FIGURE 251. A familiar Top Pattern. From the end of 1957 to the spring of 1961, Burndy Corporation moved from below 10 to 37 in a generally Bullish Trend. The advance accelerated sharply on the post-election rally of late 1960 and early 1961.But with Burndy, as with many other stocks, the rally ended in the early months of1961. Here, we have not only a perfect example of the Head-and-Shoulders Top inthe price action, but we have the typical volume conﬁrmation. The early April rallywas on heavy volume. The rally in the last week of April was on somewhat disap-pointing volume, although a new high was made at that time. We have a deﬁniteincrease of volume on the retreat from this peak, and practically no enthusiasm inthe ﬁnal rally of the ﬁrst week of June. The breakdown on Monday, June 19, accom-panied by heavier volume and a deﬁnite gap in the price track, conﬁrmed the TopFormation. Although Burndy held around the 30 level for a time, and after a furtherdrop recovered to 31, the Major Trend had deﬁnitely been reversed. By June 1962Burndy was selling at 11 ¾. BURNDY CORPORATION BDC 1961 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 50 4030 20 10 29 1 6 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 51 2 1 9 2 6Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 539 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 252 (Caption appears on facing page.)

TEKNIPLAT Chart Paper Published and Distributed by JOHN MAGEE, Inc. Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, 360 Worthington Street, Springﬁeld 3, Massach usettsType RUCOPYRIGHT 1961 BY JOHN MAGEE, SPRINGFIELD, MASS.BRUNSWICK CORPORATIONS BC 1960–1962 76 72 68 64 60 56 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 500 400300200 100 NJ D F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J A S ′60 ′61 ′62Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 540 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 541 FIGURE 252. Weekly chart of Brunswick Corporation showing the ﬁnal stages of the long Bull Market in “BC,” the Climactic Top in March 1961, the distributive phase through December 1961, and the ultimate breakdown. For 5 years, from 1956 into early 1961, Brunswick advanced in a great Bull Market surge. During this period, the stock was split four times. In the ﬁrst week of March1961, terminating the post-election rally, “BC” made a new high on extraordinaryvolume, but closed the week nearly at the bottom of the weekly range. The One-Week Reversal might well have served as a warning to the market trader. However, assuming that the owner of shares in Brunswick was not a trader, and was interested in the stock from a long-term point of view, he might have held thestock through the breakdown from the Symmetrical Triangle formed in March andearly April. He might have continued to keep his shares through the summer andfall of 1961 and the rally of September and October. If so, and if he had been watchingthe action of the stock, he would realize that the 50–52 level was a critical area. Thata break through this previous Bottom would represent a serious failure of Support.And certainly, the decisive violation of the 50 level in the ﬁrst week of January 1962(with heavy volume) could be recognized as a very dangerous Reversal Signal, callingfor immediate sale of the stock regardless of capital gains tax or anything else.Although this move preceded the general collapse of the market by several months,it was a clear technical indication of extreme weakness and extreme danger in Brun-swick, regardless of the action of other stocks at that time. If an investor had notedthe break but decided to “wait for a rally” to sell his stock, he would have had nochance to get out. Brunswick never recovered, never rallied, and by October 1962 itwas selling at 17. AU3772_book.fm Page 541 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 253. A beautiful example of a Rectangle in Polaroid. Notice the low

volume ﬂuctuations between (approximately) 178 and 202. On Thursday, May 10, on the highest volume of that year to date, Polaroid broke Support and plunged to 168.This was a clearly Bearish Move. It would have been fatal to “hold for a rally,” forthere was no rally. It can be very expensive to hold onto a stock wishfully when thesituation has changed radically, no matter how good it may have looked previously.Note that this break came more than 2 weeks before the “near-panic” of May 28. Bythat time, “PRD” had dropped 50 points and was headed for still lower levels. POLAROID CORPORATION PRD1962 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE240 224208192176 160 152 144 136 128 120 112 104 96 88 1100 1000 900800700600500400 300 200 100 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 29 1 62 33 0Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 542 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 543 FIGURE 254. At a time when a majority of stocks were already showing signs of serious weakness, early in 1962, Copper Range was making vigorous new highs. Actually, the move did not get far; it never substantially broke above the 1961 Top.The evidence of weakness in “CPX” did not become apparent until, after the relativelyweak April rally, the stock broke through 19 on Monday, April 30, and closed at 17 ¾. This was, of course, the completion of a well-marked Head-and- Shoulders Top. Inthis case, there were 3 days of rally before the downward move really got under way,but it might have been dangerous to count on a rally after the clearly Bearish signal. Incidentally, this Top Formation was completed well before the precipitous drop of May and June. COPPER RANGE CO. CPX1962 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE26 2422 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 50 4030 20 10 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 291 6 2 3 3 1Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 543 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 255. Like practically all stocks, “W” went into a tailspin in the spring of

1962. After the “bad day,” May 28, it continued to slide throughout the month of June. At this point, there started what could be considered no more than a technicalrally in a Bear Market. This rally stopped at 29 and was followed by a dull declinelasting about 2 weeks. The next move, in the second week of August, was marked by considerable volume, and while there was no obvious, clear-cut pattern, it seemed signiﬁcant that the 29level, brieﬂy touched on May 23, May 28, and July 12, was penetrated on August 6.Whether to regard this August 6 closing as an immediate buy signal, or to wait forthe completion of the breakout move and look for an opportunity to buy on a reaction,would be a problem. In this case, it would have paid to wait. Notice that the lateAugust reaction came back to the 29 level where it found Support, and then continuedits upward move. Considering the weakness of most stocks in this period, the action of “W” is remarkable. The important thing to recognize here is that individual stocks do notnecessarily follow “the main trend” of the Averages. U.S. SMELTING, REFINING & MINING CO. UV 1962 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 50 40 302010 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 544 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 545 FIGURE 256. Weekly, July 1961 through June 1962. This chart shows the Head-and Shoulders Top Formation in the Industrial Average which preceded the collapse of April, May, and June 1962. Normally, and especially in the charts of individual stocks,there would tend to be heavier volume on the left shoulder. However, the pricepattern alone is sufﬁcient to mark the pattern as a dangerously toppy situation.During the entire period in which this formation took shape, many individual stocksrepresenting important companies were showing Top Reversal symptoms, as mightbe expected. Note that so far as this Head-and-Shoulders Pattern is concerned, theReversal Signal is not deﬁnite until the neckline has been penetrated. DOW–JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE 1961–62 SALES IN MILLIONS JULY AUG SEPT OCT NOV DEC JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUNE740 720700680660 640 620 600 580 560540 520 5 4 3 2 1 AU3772_book.fm Page 545 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 257. Daily, April through September 1961. Here is a rather confusing and

complicated chart, but one which contains several points of interest worth a bit of analysis. Notice the beautiful little Head-and-Shoulders Top in April and May, espe-cially the volume weakness on the ﬁnal rally before the downside breakout. Noticealso that this stock was split 2-for-1 in June, but that such a split does not materiallyaffect the technical action of the stock, except that since there are now two shares ofstock (at half the market value) for each share of old stock, there may be some increasein the average number of shares traded per day. Notice also that once the downtrendwas established, the rallies (especially the mid-July rally) do not penetrate thetrendline drawn through the April and May peaks. This trend continued down forover a year after this, reaching a low of 11 ¼ in October 1962. ABC VENDING CORP. ABC 1961 APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER72 68 64 60 56 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 50 4030 20 10SPLIT2 118192022242628 61 3 2 0 2 731 0 1 7 2 41 81 5 2 2 2 951 2 1 9 2 62 91 6 26 181 5 2 2 2 9Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 546 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 547 FIGURE 258. Daily, January through June 1963. Here is a good example of a Sym metrical Triangle as a Continuation Pattern. Triangles of this (Symmetrical) type may mark Consolidations in a Major Trend, or may constitute a Reversal Formation. Thecharacteristics in either case are an active move to the ﬁrst turning point of theTriangle, and then, generally diminishing volume as the price ﬂuctuates in a narrow-ing pattern. During this period, it could be said that the stock was in both an uptrend, marked by the lower boundary of the formation, and a downtrend, indicated by theupper boundary. Notice the increase of volume on the breakout, which, in this case,was on the upside. Also notice the reaction to the “cradle point” deﬁned by theintersection of the two boundary trends of the Triangle. The advance of the stockfrom April to June measures just a little more than the height of the open side of theTriangle. The attainment of this “objective” does not necessarily mean the terminationof the Major Trend, however, and by August 1963 Cerro had reached 33 ¼. CERRO CORPORATION CDP 1963 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 125 100 7550 25 51 2 1 9 2 62 91 6 2 32 91 6 2 3 3 061 3 2 0 2 741 1 1 8 2 5 18 1 52 22 9Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 547 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 259. Daily, March through August 1963. Here is a good example of an

Ascending Triangle, in which the rallies advance repeatedly to a given level, and the reactions ﬁnd Support at gradually higher points. Such a pattern normally indicatesa potentially Bullish situation in the making, just as the reverse (Descending Triangle)implies a Bearish tendency. Notice the higher volume on the various peaks near 22,and the very high volume on the breakout move in August. If any further evidenceof the strength of this move was needed, the Breakaway Gap at the opening, Monday,August 12, would supply it. After a breakout of this sort, it would be quite normalfor the stock to suffer some proﬁt-taking reaction, usually on light volume, and sucha reaction might run back to 22 or even a little below this without altering theessentially Bullish nature of this picture. CRUCIBLE STEEL CO. OF AMERICA XA 1963 MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 125 100 7550 25 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 310 17 24 31Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 548 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 549 FIGURE 260. Daily, June through November 1962. Before commenting on the No vember breakout here, we should call attention to the fact that “SOC” was one of the stocks that held up fairly well during the Cuban crisis in October 1961, and didnot make a new low under the June bottoms. This chart picture is an excellentexample of a Double Bottom. It is not necessary that the two Bottoms be at exactlythe same level if they are reasonably close. The important thing is that the stock hasfound Support once, has rallied, then declined again, and has found Support at nearlythe same point. The Bottoms should be some distance apart; there should be at least6 weeks between them, preferably more. Also, the rally between them should bedeﬁnite and should amount to at least a 15% gain at its peak. The formation doesnot acquire signiﬁcance as a Major Bottom Pattern until the level of the top of therally is penetrated on substantial volume. This penetration took place on Tuesday,November 13, and from that time continued in a Major Bullish Trend, reaching 1559in May 1963, an advance of over 500 points from the close on the day of breakout. Double Tops have an opposite signiﬁcance; they are similar to the Double Bottoms, but consist of two tops at approximately the same level, separated by some weeksor months, and with a decline between them, which must be penetrated to validatethe Top Formation. SUPERIOR OIL CO. (CALIF.) SOC 1962 JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER1408 1280 1216 1152 1088 1024 960 896 832 704768 5 4 3 21 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 2731 0 1 7 2 4Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 549 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 261. Daily, November 1962 to April 1963. To the average person, unfamiliar

with the usual behavior of stocks in the market, the price ﬂuctuations appear mean ingless and entirely fortuitous. If they are aware of general trends lasting months oryears, they are often inclined to consider only the trend of “the Averages,” and arenot conscious of the fact that many stocks may be making large advances at the verysame time that others are sliding lower and lower. It is not always possible to lay astraight edge ruler along the trend and show that it makes a perfect straight line(though this does sometimes happen) but, as in the case of General Steel Industries,there is no question but that the advance is fairly consistent over a long period oftime, barring the relatively unimportant reactions, Consolidations, etc., along theway. You will notice, too, that the two-for-one split in early March did not materiallyaffect the upward trend except to show somewhat more volume, as might be expectedwith a greater number of (new) shares. For a contrasting (downside) trend, see thechart of Avnet Electronics, Figure 250. GENERAL STEEL INDUSTRIES, INC. GSI 1962–1963 SPLIT2 1 NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL64 6056 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 50 40 30 201030 28 26 24 20 19 18 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 291 6 2 3 3 061 3 2 0Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 550 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 551 FIGURE 262. Daily, February to August 1963. This is an interesting study of Support and Resistance phenomena. Incidentally, it is also an example of a Bearish Stock (and not the only one by any means) in what was generally considered a Bullish Market,during the spring and summer of 1963. We would point out several rallies to 31 inMarch and April, and the breakdown in early May. In May and June, the stock rallied,but stalled at about the level of the March low. Then there was another drop, and inthe rally this time came back to the late April low. The next drop, in July, was followedby a little rally to the June Bottom at 25. This is fairly typical Support–Resistancebehavior. The price level which has been a support tends to become a resistance oncethe support has been substantially broken. Vice versa, as regards overhead Resistance;after it has been broken, it tends to serve as a support level. UNITED ARTIST CORPORATION UNA 1963 MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULY32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 250 200150100 50 16 23 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 1320 27 3 10Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 551 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 263. January through June 1963. Sometimes a move happens all of a

sudden and does not result in a continuing long trend. In this case, it is not possible to say whether the long-term trend will be up or not. The purpose of showing thischart is to point up the remarkable action that can follow a break through an impor-tant Support or Resistance Level. You will notice that the entire period from mid-January to Tuesday, May 14, can be regarded as a Rectangle on the chart, with Bottomsat about 10 ⅛ or 10 ¼, and Tops at about 11 ¾. Notice the increase of activity on the several rallies during the formation. The move, which was a “situational” thing insugars, affected all sugars in May, and turned out to be somewhat of a ﬂash in thepan. Nevertheless, it was a spectacular one, and a trader with courage and acuitymight have picked up this stock as a speculation after the close of Tuesday, May 14.The next 5 trading days advanced the price from Wednesday’s opening at 12 toTuesday, May 21, close at 17 ½, an advance of 46%. This is a type of market trading we would not recommend generally; it calls for courage, experience, and the will-ingness to take a number of small losses in order to secure one substantial gain.However, the in-and-out trader, who observed the action on May 21 and noticed theOne-Day Reversal with abnormal volume and a gap, could have secured maximumquick proﬁts either by selling his stock at the opening of the next day, or by placinga stop-loss order just under the close, say at 17 ⅜. UTAH – IDAHO SUGAR CO. UIS 1963 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE19 1817 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 125 100 755025 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 51 2 1 9 2 6 291 6 2 3 291 6 2 3 30Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 552 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 553 FIGURE 264. There are some warning signs in “CDA” in the Minor Breakdowns of late March and early May. What seems especially signiﬁcant, though, is the nature of the recovery move in May and early June 1965. The two convergent boundariesof the Recovery Trend form an up-sloping Wedge, which has rather deﬁnite Bearishimplications. If the Wedge had been pointed down, it would strongly suggest thepossibility of a decisive upward breakout. Notice that on the 2 days when the highestprices were attained during this Wedge Pattern, the stock closed near the Bottom ofthe day’s range. The subsequent history here, the collapse on heavy volume, showsclearly how dramatic a break from this not-too-common formation can be. CONTROL DATA CORP. CDA 1965 FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JULYWEDGE64 60 56 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 500 400 300200 100 13 20 27 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 7Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 553 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 265. Here is a chart that shows several interesting technical features. In

July, August, and most of September, “W” was in a period of dormancy. The breakout of September 27 was followed by a week of inaction, and then a strong continuationof the move on big volume. Notice the October–November Consolidation, whichtook the form of a large Symmetrical Triangle. If we draw the upper boundary ofthis Triangle, and the lower, we see that the breakout signaling a continuation of themove, on Wednesday, December 1, was decisive both in price and volume action. Atno time during the advance from 28 ½ to over 62 was there any indication of potential weakness. U.S. SMELTING, REFINING & MINING CO. UV 19654 1SPLIT JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER256 240 224 208 192 176 160 152 144 136 128 120 112 104 96 88 500 400300200100 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 3 1 01 72 43 1 7 1 42 12 8 4 1 12 82 5 291 6 2 3 3 064 6056 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 24 22 Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 554 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 555 FIGURE 266. The weekly chart of Livingston Oil from January 1965 into January 1966 is a good example of a Major Bottom. Just how weak the stock was during the early months of 1965 can be judged by the clear Downside Gap during the monthof May. Also, you will notice that the volume on this whole headlong collapse wasrather heavy. However, from July to the middle of October, the trading activity “driedup,” and the stock ﬂuctuated in narrower and narrower swings, forming a Symmet-rical Triangle. The pickup of volume on the October breakout was spectacular, andan observant investor would have had a “second chance” to buy on the reaction inthe ﬁrst week of November, when the stock drifted back to the top of the Triangle. LIVINGSTON OIL COMPANY LVO1965–196616 1514 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 500 400 300200 100 JF M A M J JA SO N D JSales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 555 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 267. Here is a beautiful picture of technical market action in Packard–Bell

Electronics from August 1965 into January 1966. The ﬁrst point of interest is the Flag Consolidation in September and October, a classic example (“The Flag ﬂies at half-mast”) and on the resumption of the up-move, the stock did duplicate the earliermove, and a bit more. (Compare with the 1945 chart of Martin–Parry, Figure 223.)Notice the nearly ﬂat Tops and the rising Bottoms from October to January, withgenerally declining volume (Ascending Triangle), and the magniﬁcent breakout movein the second week of January 1966. In this case, we can see no evidence calling forselling the stock all the way from September into January. PACKARD – BELL ELECTRONIC CORP. PKB 1965–1966 AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY30 2826 24 22 20 1918 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 500 400300200100 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 815 22 29Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 556 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 557 FIGURE 268. This could be regarded as a very ﬂat Head-and-Shoulders Top or as a long Rounding T op. The breakdown through 66 was a warning, and certainly the sharp break below 60 in Febr uary was a deﬁnitely Bearish signal. PARKE, DAVIS & COMPANY P DC 1969–1970 JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBE R JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE76 7268 64 6056 52 48 44 40 38 36 34 32 3028 26 24 22 1000 800 600 400 200 XD.25 XD.25 XD.25 61 3 2 0 2 741 1 1 8 2 51 81 5 2 2 2 961 3 2 0 2 7 51 2 1 9 2 6 291 62 3 3 0 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 1 3 20 27 3 1 01 72 43 1 7 1 42 12 8Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 557 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 269 (Caption appears on facing page.)

ASTRODATA INC. ADA 1969–1970 OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY38 3634 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 125 100 7550 25 708 620 1828 1072988 689 890 4 1 11 82 5 1 8 1 52 2 2 961 3 2 0 2 731 0 1 7 2 4 3 171 4 2 1 28Sales 100’s AU3772_book.fm Page 558 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 559 FIGURE 269. A complete collapse in one day, Astrodata in January 1970. Not the sort of action you see every day, or every month. But it is “normal” in the sense that it is a phenomenon we have seen many times in the past and which will undoubtedlybe seen many times in years to come. When it does happen, it should be heeded. Itmeans trouble. “ADA” was doing well in what appeared to be a typical and perfectlyhealthy uptrend. After a one-day suspension on January 15, it reopened many pointslower and never recovered. Trading was halted in late September. Some readers mayremember other downside moves of this nature in the past. In Mack Trucks, in FifthAvenue Coach, and some may even recall, many years ago, a break like this inAmerican Woolen. Such a break is, of course, due to some sudden development orchange in company affairs; but it is not necessary “to know the reasons”; the chartspeaks for itself. As Lady Macbeth put it (in another connection), “Stand not uponthe order of your going, but go at once.” There was a good example of this type ofa “Gap Move” in Villager Industries on April 30, 1971, when the stock dropped 42%,from 7 ⅜ to 4 ¼ in one day. Such moves as we are discussing here are nearly always on the downside; we do not often see comparable upside gap moves. And after thistype of break, although there may be brief rallies, the stock nearly always resumesthe downtrend, and in many cases, is delisted from the Exchange. Anyone caughtholding such a stock should not feel that he had made a mistake in buying it, norshould he look for evidence of weakness before the big breakdown, for ordinarily,there is none. But he should get out immediately to avoid further loss. And by wayof reassurance, it can be repeated that this kind of collapse is a rather rare occurrence. AU3772_book.fm Page 559 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 269.1. Lest one think that the air pocket gap does not still exist, here is an

example from the turn of the century (third millennium). These gaps, caused by disappointing earnings, were so prevalent at the end of the century at the top of thatBull Market, that one could short vulnerable stocks before earnings reports with littleupside risk and often collect nice scalps like this one. FIGURE 270 (Figure appears on facing page). A typical electric and gas utility stock. There are a great many stocks in this group, serving various municipalities or regions.They tend to show similar market behavior because they are basically similar in nature. There is, of course, a relation between the earnings of a company and the dividends paid, and the market price of the shares. However, neither earnings nor dividendsalone are sufﬁcient to constitute a complete determination of “value,” since there aremany other factors that can affect the “value” considered from different angles, suchas dependability of earnings, future prospects, taxability, research and developmentinvestment by the company, and so forth. The electric and gas companies, enjoying a regulated monopoly position in most communities, have a sure and steady income; and they are also in a deﬁnite “growth”situation because of the constantly increasing demands for power by users. Mostutilities will show a record and pattern of trading over a period of years very similarto that of “PEG.” You will notice that reported earnings have been larger each yearfrom 1959 through 1970. Also, the dividend rate has been increased each year exceptin 1970, when it was unchanged from the year before. Anyone basing his estimateof “value” on a simple index such as “price–earnings ratio” would conclude that thestock was 2 ½ times as good a buy in 1970 as it had been in early 1965. Obviously, there is more to it than that. The big funds and other large holders of stock are not giving up “bargains” of that sort lightly and for no reason. The de-pressed chart is undoubtedly reﬂecting the whole thorny outlook facing the utilityindustry, including costly new facilities, antipollution devices, and other problemsincluding deregulation. Oracle Corporation-(Nasdaq NM) 12.21 –0.08 –0.65% Volume (Billions) Jul Oct 97 Apr Jul Oct 98 Apr Jul Oct 99 7 6.5 6 5.5 5 4.5 4 3.5 2.5 3 1.2 1 0.6 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 1999-2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. I Terms of use apply. AU3772_book.fm Page 560 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 561 FIGURE 270 (Caption appears on facing page.) PUBLIC SERVICE ELECTRIC & GA S PEG9/1 SPLIT THOUSANDS OF SHARES 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1.14.90.92 1.02 1.48 1.55 1.61 1.64 1.641.35 1.60 1.87 1.96 2.06 2.23 2.39 2.54 2.57 2.60 2.63 1 2 1.121 2 1.221 2 1.311 2 1.381 248 46 44 42 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 18 16 14 12 250 200 150 100 50 EARN. DIV. AU3772_book.fm Page 561 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 562 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 271. Although 1969 was Bearish for most stocks, “MRX” was enjoying the ﬁnal ﬂing of a dramatic 4-year advance. Notice the Island-like Top in November, December, and January, and the low volume all thr ough this period. The Breakaway Gap in early Febr uary speaks for itself. See also Figure 269. MEMOREX CORP. MRX 1969–1970 SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL M AY JUNE JULY AUGUS T176 160 152 144 136 128 120 112 104 96 88 80 7672 68 64 60 56 52 48 2000 1600 1200 800 400 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 2 27 3 1 01 72 4 317 1 42 12 8 4 1 11 82 5 181 5Sales 100’sAU3772_book.fm Page 562 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 563
FIGURE 272. From a 1967 high of 48 ½, “FLY” started a downtrend that lasted 2 years and took the stock down to 11 ¼. But during the spring and summer of 1970, the stock found bottom, made a Head-and-Shoulders Reversal, and took off in a skyrocket move that, by February 1971, had recovered nearly all of the 2-year drop. 1969, 1970, 1971 FLYING TIGER CORP FLY44 40 383634 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 250 200 150 100 506970 7071 ONDJ FM A M J J AS ON D J FAU3772_book.fm Page 563 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 564 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 273. Here is a familiar pattern you have seen many times before in the pages of this book or in your own charts. Here we see a large Ascending Triangle in the daily chart of Action Industries, formed in December of 1971 and January of 1972. Notice thetypical breakout and reaction moves and the continued uptrend into April of 1972. ACTION IND, INC. ACX 1971–1972 NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL44 4240 383634 32 30 2826 24 22 20 1918 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 250 200 150 100 50 340 365 335424 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 4 11 18 25 1 8 15Sales 100’sAU3772_book.fm Page 564 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 565
FIGURE 273.1. Two things are remarkable here. One, the amazing story of a business emer ging from a college dorm room — a computer business, of course — and two, the regular occurrence of air pockets, which will be seen better on the next chart. Not a stock for those who dislike carnival rides and surprises. One should ﬁt his portfolio to his digestion. Dell br oke its long term trendline, which the reader may easily draw here with a ruler, and after setting a bull trap, went to 20, displaying several major warning downside gaps (s ee next chart). The out of proportion volume at the chart end is a prewarning. DELL LAST- Monthly Created with TradeStation www. TradeStation.com160140 120 100 80 60 40 20 80000000 60000000 40000000 20000000 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00AU3772_book.fm Page 565 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 566 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 273.1.1. DELL. The breakaway or air pocket gap continues to astound, so fr equently choosing to occur at horizontal lines. An exceptionally alert trader might have avoided the air pocket, observing the br oken trendlines. The average technician would have got out and shorted the breakaway gap. Seen one tulip, seen them all. Dell Inc.-(Nasdaq NM) 29.95 –0.33 –1.09% G G 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 29 28 29.96 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 06 © 1999–2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. T erms of use apply.AU3772_book.fm Page 566 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 567
FIGURE 273.2. The beneﬁts of the “Wintel” partnership are reﬂected in Intel’s chart. The trader might have been in and out of Intel several times based on tightening trendlines, while the long-term investor would have patiently waited out the — callit a “rectangular wedge” — which never was violated on the downside. The steeperthe trendline the more likely — even the more certainly — it will be broken. INTC LAST-Weekly Created with TradeStation www. TradeStation.com 1996 1997 4/1996 7/1996 10/1996 4/1997 7/1997 10/1997 1998 4/1998 7/1998 10/1998 1999 4/1999 7/1999 10/1999100 80 60 40 20100 80 60 40 20 50000000 4000000030000000 20000000 1000000050000000 4000000030000000 20000000 10000000AU3772_book.fm Page 567 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 568 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 273.3. NOKIA. (NOK) Not enough is made of the marking of zones of support and r esistance (highs and lows) with horizontal trendlines. These benchmarks help the technician to mark the r unning of the tide, just like Dow’s stakes on the beach. Notice h ow the high of ’99 inﬂuences the high of ’04. The breaking of horizontal lines her e after the breaking of the steepest trendline once again tells the tale for the technician. Nokia Cp Ads 18.38 0.09 0.49% Volume(Millions)60 52 44 40 36 32 26 24 20 18.39 16 12 3 4 6 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 1999-2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. I Terms of use apply. 225 200 175 150 125 100 75 50 25

## _0 AU3772_book.fm Page 568 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM_
## Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 569
FIGURE 273.4. AMD. Reﬂecting the vagaries of the semiconductor business, in cluding the felicity of being a competitor of Intel, AMD shows trading opportunities both up and down. Here the intermediate-term trader would respond to the vigorousbreaking of short-term downtrend lines to get long. AMD LAST –Daily 02/18/2000 C = 43.000 O = 39.375 H = 40.250 L = 39.000 V = 4151700 Created with TradeStation www. TradeStation.com Volume 3225500.0044.999 39.999 34.999 29.999 24.999 19.999 14.999 20000000 15000000120000008000000040000000 12/1998 2/1999 3/1999 4/1999 5/1999 6/1999 7/1999 8/1999 9/1999 10/1999 11/1999 12/1999 2/2000 99 00AU3772_book.fm Page 569 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 570 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 273.5. YAHOO. (YHOO). A superb trendline which should have kept the technician long until April of 2000 — and then got him out. Especially when combined with the top horizontal tr endline. The extravagant volume at the very top is the exclamation point on the warning. Yahoo! Inc.–(Nasdaq NM) 40.49 –0.19 –0.47% Volume (Millions)120 100 40.49 80 60 50 30 20 10 0.6 225 200 175 150 125 100 75 50 25 0 Jul Oct 97 Apr Jul Oct 98 Apr Jul Oc t 99 Apr Jul Oct 00 Apr Apr Jul Oct 011999-2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. I Terms of use apply.AU3772_book.fm Page 570 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 571
FIGURE 273.5.1. Any resemblance between this chart and Amazon, (Figure 205.7.2) is not strictly coincidental. Readers will remember Magee’s principle that birds of a feather ﬂock together. Internet goony birds certainly do, or did. Yahoo looks in thisguise somewhat stronger than Amazon, but then selling books and mortar is a harderrow to hoe than selling electronic images (best business in the world). And againsuch an attractive fundamental story. Gooks (or geeks) on skates helping revolution-ize the wild frontier. We love these stories. But not enough to stop drawing lines onthe chart and selling them when the violate our lines. Even love must obey the ruleof the ruler. YHOO(D)–Weekly NASDAQ L = 3.50 +0.17 +0.50% O = 34.60 C = 34.50 30.73 10.97 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Created with TradeStation 97.00 66.00 45.00 31.00 34.50 21.00 14.00 10.00 7.00 5.00 3.00 2.00 1.00AU3772_book.fm Page 571 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 572 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 273.6. APPLE. (APPL). Apple is an especial delight because it illustrates vividly one of the central principles of technical analysis: Ignore (or take with a cellar of salt) the news. Anytime the media swarms on a company, be skeptical. If we believed the media, Apple would have more lives than a cat, considering how many times the media has written it of f as dead. It is also a chartist’s design as illustrated in my Basing Point studies (Chapter 28), and here, by tr endlines (horizontal and sloped) and a large fan. Readers years fr om now will want to observe how the trendlines here forecast Apple’s future. Figur e 274 vividly illustrates the technical signal that kicked off Apple’s run, complete with triangle and run day, and wake up volume. APPLE COMPUTER INC–(Nasdaq NM) 71.89 0.44 0.62% 7571.09 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 3 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 1999–2004 Prophet Financial Systems, Inc. Terms of us e apply.AU3772_book.fm Page 572 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 573
FIGURE 274. The ﬁle of press clippings predicting the death of Apple weighs as much as the daily output of the Augean Stables. And is worth as much. One wonders why the press likes to beat on Apple so. Especially when the wizard is up to hisnever ending tricks. And when the wizard, (Steve Jobs) has millions of fanatics readyto support his next trick. And, although the Beatles are mad at Jobs and Apple, Appleis now a music company as well as a computer company. The smooth as siliconlubricant iPod made music to investor’s ears and Apple took off on another run. Thestart of the latest trick is pictured here. The volume in April is the wake up call. Andof course, what is that volume? A shakeout. The breakout across the descendingtriangle line after the false signal (Remember? Those false signals are often followedby valid signals) the volume and the surging run days — all good grist for theanalyst’s mill. Furthermore the surge across the downtrend line on big volume shouldbe recognized as an important technical pattern regardless of what proceeds it. Apple Computer Inc(32.5090, 32.9700, 31.8900, 32.5400, +0.04000)35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 30000 25000200001500010000 5000 x10 Aug Jul Sep Oct Nov Dec 2003 Feb Mar Apr MAy Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 2004 Feb Mar Apr May Jun JulAU3772_book.fm Page 573 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 574 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
FIGURE 275. $NDX, THE NASDAQ 100. Following the Basing Point Pr ocedure in Chapters 28 and 28.1, an almost completely objective procedure may be devised for the very long term investor to r eplace or augment Dow Theory. In this chart, the Basing Point Pr ocedure is applied to weekly bars. Thus, instead of three-days-away we look for thr ee-bars-away. The result is a trade which lasts around 10 years! The method gets long in 1991 at the arrow, holds the trade till about 2001 and r everses. Observes the bottom of 2002 and reverses again and is long into the bull markets of 2006. Arrows show the signals. Numbers mark the Basing Points. Stops, which would be about 5% under the Basing Points, are not illustrated. AU3772_book.fm Page 574 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Chapter thirty-seven: “The Same Old Patterns” 575
FIGURE 276. BASING POINTS PROCEDURE. In Figure 210.1 the use of Basing Points calculated on wave lows was documented. For the great majority of investors that will be sufﬁcient. In Figur e 210 Magee laid out the entire procedure, including advancing stop s based on a new high 3% above the previous wave high. This chart shows stops so generated at 1 1.33 and 13.72. These stops would have stop ped out the trader in this case sooner than the wave low Basing Points. Ther e are pluses and minuses to this part of the procedure. A mid trend blowoff might cause an premature exit from the position leaving the trader to grasp for a new entry point, unless the pos ition were constructed with scale-in scale-out units as recommended in Chapter 42. W e also see in this chart the result of not honoring stops, as Apple falls off the table in the Reagan Crash of 1987. AU3772_book.fm Page 575 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 576 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

577 chapter thirty-eight Balanced and Diversiﬁed The average investor wants a clear-cut, simple, easy answer to his question,

> “What do you think of the market?” To him, it must be at all times either aBull Market or a Bear Market. If, in answer to his insistent demand, youreply with the question, “What particular stocks are you interested in?,” hewill avoid that issue and say, Oh, I mean in
general. And if you will examine the pages of any magazine or newspaper carrying a great deal of ﬁnancial advertising, you will ﬁnd that many advis-ers and advisory services make a great point of giving unhedged opinionsas to the future course of the market, and these opinions are most frequentlycouched in terms of what the market as a whole is going to do. Now, there is just enough truth in the common belief that they all move together, to make this an exceedingly dangerous assumption. It is true, forexample, that we can set up deﬁnitions of what we feel constitutes a Bull Market or a Bear Market, such as the Dow Theory, and if a given set ofconditions meets the rules we have laid down (our deﬁnitions, that is), thenwe can say accurately, “according to my premises this is now a Bull Market”(or a Bear Market, as the case may be). It is also true that over the years, ifwe had treated the Dow Industrial Average as

if it were a stock, and had theoretically bought it and sold it according to classic Dow Theory, we wouldhave done very well. EN: As is vividly illustrated in Chapter 5.1, where buying and selling by the Theory netted one $362,212.97 as opposed to $39,685.03 (EN9:$347,895.10 December 31, 2004) through buying and holding.

Of course now it is a stock, DIA. It is also true that in the great inﬂationary and deﬂationary movements, which reﬂect the changes in the relative values of dollars to equities, thereis a tendency for the majority of stocks to move with the tide. And it is furthermore true that in the day-to-day movement of stock prices, it appears that most stocks move up or move down together. But we should never lose sight of the fact that the Averages themselves are abstractions, not railroads, manufacturing companies, airlines, etc. If theAverages move, it is because the individual stocks making up the Averageshave moved. And while it is true that during a time when the Averages areadvancing, a majority of stocks are also advancing, it is not quite possibleto reverse this and make it absolute by saying that because the Averages are advancing, therefore all stocks must advance. If we carried this to its logical conclusion, we would arrive at the point (which some have arrived at) where AU3772_book.fm Page 577 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
the fact that a stock has not advanced, but has declined in a Bull Market, is

considered sufﬁcient to make the stock attractive for purchase on the basisthat it must catch up with the others. If we examine the facts, that is, the long-term records of what stocks have actually done, we ﬁnd that there are periods when most stocks go upin value and other times when most of them go down. We ﬁnd, sometimes,that laggard stocks will eventually join the procession in an upward trend. But this does not always happen. And it can be extremely uncomfortable to have bought stocks in a presumably Bullish Market, because they arebehind the market, or because they are all going to go up, and then wait formonths as we watch other stocks climbing to new highs while our ownsecurities continue to languish or decline further. From what you already know of the market you will surely agree that it is not a wise policy to put all your capital into buying stocks in what isclearly a Bear Market in the Averages and in most stocks. And you will agree,too, that it is not a safe thing to sell stocks short to the limit of your resourcesin a skyrocketing Bull Market. If you have to be 100% on one side or the other, it is much better to go with the trend. In that way, you will be in line with the probabilities as shownby a majority of stocks, and by the Averages. But you should realize that going with the trend is not always as easy as it sounds. We can set up deﬁnitions, as we have, of what constitutes theMajor Trend. Then the question is whether you have the patience and thecourage to maintain a position in line with these deﬁnitions through monthsof uncertainty and possible adverse moves. During turning periods it is oftenhard to make the decision to buy or sell. And most especially, there is the difﬁculty of knowing what to buy or what to sell, and when. The simple patterns and signals of the Averages do not tell the whole story. There is a certain usefulness in regarding the market as a whole instudying Dow Theory, just so long as we keep in mind that the Averages weare studying are generalities (high-order abstractions), and the rules fordetermining their trend apply to these generalities and not necessarily toeach and every stock listed on the Stock Exchange. In many cases, for example, a group of stocks will top out and start an important Bearish Trend while other groups of stocks are continuing to makenew highs. This occurred in 1946, when we saw a large number of stockstopping out in January and February, and others continuing strong until theend of May. We think of 1929 as the year the market made its great peak, and crashed in October to start the series of breaks that continued into 1932. There issome truth in this; but it is not the whole truth. There were some importantstocks that made their highs long before the 1929 Top. Chrysler, for example,made its high in October 1928, and had dropped from 140 to 60 before the Panic of 1929. There were stocks which never enjoyed a Bull Market at allin the whole period from 1924 to 1929. By actual count of nearly 700 listed AU3772_book.fm Page 578 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-eight: Balanced and Diversiﬁed 579 stocks, 262 issues made their Bull Market highs before 1929, 181 topped in 1929, but before August of that year. There were several stocks which didnot have their ﬁrst downside break until after 1929. Forty-four stocks wentinto new Bull Market high ground after 1929 and before mid-1932. Only 184of the 676 stocks studied made their Bull Market highs in August, September,or October of 1929 and crashed in October and November. In other words, only 27% of the stocks acted the way everybody knows all stocks acted. EN: As the Dow and S&P; 500 made all-time highs in 1999 and were near those highs in 2000, the same condition held true again. Many stocks hadtopped and were in long downtrends. EN9: And as stocks crashed after the top ofMarch 2000 Dow stocks held up well compared to NASDAQ stocks and the S&P500;, which saw declines of around 50%. See Figure 203.3. It is all right to accept the general trend as a useful device, so long as we know it is a device only, and not a picture of the detailed reality. We haveto face the problem which continually confronts every student of the market:How to protect ourselves from uncertainties in interpretation of the Aver-ages, and how to protect ourselves against stocks which are not moving withthe majority. The problem can be met, ﬁrst of all, by not taking an unreasonable amount of risk at any time (see Chapter 41). It can also be met by using an Evaluative Index instead of switching from all-out Bullish to all-out Bearish. By this we mean using an indicatorthat will show not merely whether it is a Bull Market or a Bear Market, buthow Bullish or how Bearish it seems at a given time. At ﬁrst glance, this may seem not too different a conception from that of classic Dow Theory. The same technical methods apply. Also, during astrongly Bullish Market, an Evaluative Index will also indicate approxi-mately the degree of strength. As the market begins to develop weak spots, as did the market in 1928 and 1929, the degree of Bullishness will gradually decline. Before considering the use of this Index, let us outline what it is and how it may be constructed. You will understand it is not a precise tool; itgives only an approximate picture of the state of the market; it gives nopositive signals; and, in the ﬁnal analysis, it is a reﬂection of the judgmentand opinion of the person who is maintaining it. Suppose you are keeping daily charts of 100 stocks. At the end of each week, you can mark these along the bottom of the chart with a small plusor minus, indicating your opinion as to whether each particular stock ismoving in a Bullish Major Trend, or is Bearish. In some cases, you will ﬁndit hard to make a decision. This is not too important, however, since thesecases will not be numerous, and in the majority of stocks, you will normallybe able to mark them plus or minus on the basis of their obvious action. Ifyou now total the plus stocks and also the minus stocks, including those inwhich you have had to make a tentative decision, you will have two ﬁgurestotaling the number of your charts. If 75 of these are plus, you can say thatthe market looks 75% Bullish to you. If next week the percentage is higher, AU3772_book.fm Page 579 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
DIAGRAM 10. The Evaluative Index shows the percentage of stocks that appear in Bullish or Bearish Major T rends. In 1961, this Index conﬂicted with “stock Averages,” suggesting a possible Major T urn. THE EVALUATIVE INDEX 1961

% WEAK (RIGHT HAND SCALE) NEUTRAL(AREA BETWEEN GRAPH LINES) % STRONG (LEFT HAND SCALE)90 80706050403020 1010 2030405060 708090 JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE JUL Y AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER 714 21 28 7 1 42 12 8 41 1 18 25 41 1 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 1 8 15 22 29 6 12 20 27 3 10 17 24 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30 AU3772_book.fm Page 580 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-eight: Balanced and Diversiﬁed 581 say 80%, it indicates a stronger or more Bullish condition. If it is lower, say 70%, it shows that, on balance, there are fewer of your stocks that look strong,hence the market is presumably weaker. As we have said before, if the Averages are making new highs, you will expect (and ﬁnd) that the Evaluative Index will range well above 50%. In anobvious Bear Market, the Index will stand considerably lower than 50%. But notice that we do not speak, here, of signals. There is no point at which we need to say, “Sell everything.” Neither is there a point at whichwe can say, “Buy now,” in an all-out sense. The Index will ﬂoat and adjustitself continually to the shifting conditions. It must be clear that a market in which only 53% of a large group of representative stocks are moving Bullishly is not as strong as one in which80% of these stocks are acting Bullish. Therefore, you would be justiﬁed in making larger commitments on the long side in this second case. You would still have the problem of selection of the individual stocks to buy. But you would be justiﬁed in making larger total commitments, or inassuming total greater risk (see again Chapter 41), than in a market that wasbarely qualifying as a Bull Market. By bringing the total of one’s investment program into line with this Index, it is possible to roll with the punch; and one would almost automat-ically be withdrawn from a deteriorating market before things became toodangerous. Furthermore, this would be accomplished without the need fortorturing decisions as to whether to sell now or wait a while. There is a further extension of this method. If an investor were to follow the Evaluative Index only by increasing or decreasing his long commitmentswith the rise and fall of the Index, he might be better off than if he had onlythe two alternatives of complete optimism or complete pessimism. But inthis case, he would still be pointed always in one direction, and would standto lose to some degree on his long commitments if the market did eventuallyreverse and go into a Panic Move. The extension of the method is to proportion capital, or a certain portion of capital, between the long side and the short side of the market. Assumingthat your interpretation of your own charts is reasonably correct in a majorityof cases, you can, at any particular time, select several stronger-than-averagestocks, and similarly, several weaker-than-average issues. With the Index standing in the vicinity of 50% (as it did for a number of months in mid-1956), you can then select several strong stocks to buy, andseveral candidates for short sale, making commitments that will approxi-mately balance your total risk. In the case of an upward surge that sweepsall before it, you will, of course, accrue losses on the short sales, and mayeventually have to reverse your classiﬁcation of them from minus to plus,closing them out for a loss. But in such a case, the gains on your good longpositions will more than offset the loss, assuming your choices were wellmade; and the loss realized can be absorbed as insurance, the price you havepaid to be in a protected position. AU3772_book.fm Page 581 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
On the other hand, should the market collapse suddenly (as it did, for

example, at the time of President Eisenhower’s illness in 1955) (EN: and as it did on rumors of Reagan’s incompetence in October 1987, and the Aisian Flu of 1998, etc., etc....), the accrual of loss in the long positions will be offset by accrual of gains in the short positions. And if the decline should continue toa point calling for sale of the long stock, the losses here could be consideredthe price of the insurance protection to the shorts provided by the longs. EN: In the tradition of the Texas Hedge, I take a somewhat different view of shorts.While they would be viewed in Pragmatic Portfolio Theory as reducing risk, I liketo view shorts as another proﬁt opportunity with the added beneﬁt of reducing totalrisk. Of course, being short a stock in a conﬁrmed Uptrend is simply feckless. Andvice versa. It is also quite possible, in a more normal market, that both the long positions and the short positions will show gains. What we are proposing is a systematic and continuous arbitrage or hedge. As the Evaluative Index advances, the proportion of short positionswould gradually be reduced, and the long positions increased. As the Indexdeclines, the reverse would happen. (EN9: I have suggested that the method outlined here be called a “Natural Hedge,” and the implementation of the hedge be called Rhythmic Trading. A Natural Hedge of the Dow would consist of a longcommitment to, for example, the DIA in a bull market and short positions in bearstocks within the Dow. Or, even better, short positions in stocks positively correlatedto the weak Dow stocks. This last because even weak members of the Dow will tendto be cushioned by the large holdings of passive indexers.) This method is essentially conservative. Those who have always feared the short sale as a purely speculative gamble might well reexamine shortselling from the standpoint of using the short sale as a regular part of theirinvestment program as counterbalance to the long holdings. The result to be looked for in this conservative balanced and diversiﬁed program is primarily protection of capital. By its very nature, it eliminatesthe possibility of plunging for spectacular proﬁts. But it also provides the mechanism by which the technical method can stand on its merits, largely independent of the changes and chances of themarket. It makes it possible to eliminate a large part of the anxiety anduncertainty that so many traders and investors carry every day and oftenlate into the night. EN: Many modern readers are probably unaware that John Magee wrote a weekly advisory letter for four decades. These wise and practical letters comprisethe John Magee Market Letter Archive. From this Archive I append here the letterof September 28, 1985, relative to the Magee Evaluative Index. It speaks verystrongly for itself: September 28, 1985: An Oversold Market This week, the Magee Evaluative Index fell to 9% Strong, its deepest pene-tration into the oversold quadrant this year. Not since June of 1984 has this AU3772_book.fm Page 582 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-eight: Balanced and Diversiﬁed 583 index been lower (see Figure 14; EN: Now Diagram 10.1.). Shortly after its June low of 8% Strong, the MEI headed steadily higher, giving an Aggressive Buy signal throughout late June and July. The June 1984 MEI low of 8% Strong, together with the 8% level reached on February 25, 1984, constituted a Double Bottom oversold reading for thisindex. It corresponded to the 1079 Bottom recorded by the Dow–Jones Indus-trial Average on June 18, 1984, after which that index advanced steadily toits recent July peak of 1372. For over 20 years, all major stock market Bottoms have corresponded with extremely low MEI readings. During the “turbulent period” when thestock market oscillated violently but showed no gain at all, MEI readings of5% Strong or less corresponded with all Major DJIA Bottoms until the June1982 low of 9% Strong, which immediately preceded the stock market’supward explosion. That slightly higher than “5% Strong or less” Bottom was an important clue that a reinvigorated stock market was at hand; the straight-line DJIAadvance from 770 to nearly 1300 ended a 17-year “do-nothing” period forstock prices and ushered in the “renewed upswing” period shown on thechart. In this context, the “8% Strong Bottom” of June 1984, and the current MEI reading of 9% Strong, take on added meaning. If, in fact, we are in aperiod of Renewed (or major secular) Upswing, stock market Bottoms willtend to be less severe and Tops more extremely overbought than would DIAGRAM 10.1. From Collected Market Letters, September 28, 1985. Magee Eval uative Index computed on the Dow–Jones Industrials illustrating the use of the Index to identify tops and bottoms in the market. A sort of “oversold/overbought” indicator. DOW–JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE ‘TURBULENT PERIOD’ ‘GOLDEN AGE’ ‘RENEWED UPSWING’ MAGEE EVALUATIVE INDEX LESS THAN 5% STRONGSOURCE M.C. HORSEY & CO416564 525688741 736 627 570784737 73077082491810311067 958995 1001 1079129713721500 1375125011251000 875750 625 500 375 250125 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 6566676869707172 73 74 75 76 77 78798081828384851026 AU3772_book.fm Page 583 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
otherwise be the case. Both the June 1982 DJIA low and that of June 1984 ﬁt

this model. Because secular stock market waves tend to last for many years,even decades, the likelihood is that the current MEI reading of 9% Strongwill also deﬁne a Major DJIA low. AU3772_book.fm Page 584 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

585 chapter thirty-nine Trial and Error You will not expect to turn in a perfect record from the start. You may indeed do poorly. That is one of the reasons we have suggested using only a safeamount of your capital, allowing enough leeway so that if you should mis-read and misdirect your campaigns, or if you should encounter an Interme-diate Setback in the trend of a Major Turn, you will be able to get back oncourse, undismayed, and richer in experience. Your records of actual transactions (and notes on theoretical transactions) will help you. As time goes on, you will discover new trading reﬁnements.Try these methods against your previous chart records. See whether yourimprovements work out consistently to your advantage. In that way, you can test new details of method without risking actual capital until you have checked the operation thoroughly. In one actual case, a trader who had shown a rather poor record of performance through a fast-moving Bear Phase of the market, rechecked 30of his actual trades made during that period in the light of new methods hehad subsequently developed. Where the original record showed a loss at therate of about 40% per year on the capital for the time it was tied up, thechanges he introduced, applied to the same situations, would have resultedin a proﬁt at the annual rate of 156%. Such a result, while not conclusive,would strongly suggest trying out the new method in all similar situationsin the future, and if the performance continued to show this advantage, toadopt it as a permanent policy. It is only by continual checking and testingthat you can learn to pick up more of the proﬁtable opportunities and protectyourself better against the unexpected Reversals. If you follow the suggestions of this book, those already given, and those in the following chapters, you will proceed slowly and cautiously, not riskingall your capital on a single move in a single stock. Errors and plain bad luck,when they hurt you, will not hurt you too seriously. You will be preparedfor false moves, wrong interpretations, and complete Reversals of expecteddevelopments. If you have worked thoughtfully and serenely, without permitting your emotions to rule your judgment, the law of averages will bring you contin-ually greater success. You are not gambling blindly in this work; you areintelligently using past experience as a guide — and it is a dependable guide.Your operations are part of the competitive workings of a free market; yourpurchases and sales are part of the process of interpreting the trend, checking AU3772_book.fm Page 585 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
runaway inﬂation and crashes, and determining the value of the American

industrial plant. The market will continue to go up and down in the future as it has in the past. Your technical knowledge will save you from “buying at the top”in the ﬁnal Climactic Blow-off, and it will save you from selling everythingin a ﬁt of depression and disgust when the Bottom is being established. Inyour studies of past market action, you have a strong shield against thesudden thrusts that surprise and often defeat the novice trader. EN9: I have often told my students that if their knowledge of this material does nothing more than keep them from making stupid mistakes like buying a top or buying a downtrend or buying before a bottom has completed forming, then their time will have been well spent. The elimination of amateur blunders such as thesecan immeasurably improve investment performance. AU3772_book.fm Page 586 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

587 chapter forty How Much Capital to Use in Trading Up to this point, we have been talking mostly in terms of points and per centages. Little has been said about dollars. From here on we are going toturn the spotlight on the questions revolving around money, capital, thedollars you will actually be using in your operations. For, just as an under-standing of the technical signals and patterns alone will not guarantee yourproﬁts without a tactical method of applications, so your tactics alone willnot insure you proﬁts until you have tailored your method to ﬁt your pock-etbook, and until you have a systematic control of your trading in terms ofdollars and cents. At the start of your charting operations, you will be using no capital. You will be making no trades either actual or theoretical. Any commitment you might make during the ﬁrst 4 or 5 weeks on a new chart would be no more than gambling on a hunch. It will take about 2 months of thanklesscharting before you have any clear picture of how any of your stocks areacting technically. From then on, your chart history will become more valu-able each week. Your ﬁrst trades probably will be theoretical ones. You willwant to get the feel of the charts and learn to apply the methods you havestudied. Eventually, you will want to make an actual transaction. EN: The prudence of this approach can hardly be disputed. And, just as markets have changed, stock market mentality and awareness have changed. The mere exist-ence of this book and of the general atmosphere enable the modern investor to progressmore rapidly than the old pencil and paper and slide rule chap. The availability ofcomputers and databases and tutorial tools, not to mention online and ofﬂine coursesin the subject, are unparalleled resources.

Then the question will come up, “How much of my capital shall I use for trading purposes?” EN: In a certain sense, this question begs the question. It presupposes that the reader has capital. If the reader does not have capital, but isgambling with the milk money or the mortgage payment, his failure is virtuallyassured. Do not speculate with money whose loss will occasion you more thanpassing discomfort.

That will depend on your circumstances and how much of your time and effort you plan to put into stock trading, and also on your experiencein the market. If you have been buying and selling stocks for a number of AU3772_book.fm Page 587 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
years, you will naturally continue along the same lines, simply applying the

new techniques to your operations. On the other hand, if stock trading is entirely a new ﬁeld for you, or if it is only a minor hobby or sideline, it would pay to make haste slowly. Somewriters have pointed out that it usually takes about 2 years to gain enoughpractical experience to operate safely in the market, that during the 2-yearapprenticeship period, many traders come in, gradually lose their capital,and retire permanently from the ﬁeld, leaving their money behind them.Therefore, no matter how conﬁdent you may be or how anxious to get inand start pitching, it would be safest to do most of your experimenting onthe theoretical basis, and to use only a small amount of your actual capital,so that after, say, 2 years, if you have shown some actual proﬁts, consistentlyand regularly, even though small, you will be much better prepared to usemore of your capital wisely and safely. And conversely, if during that timeyou have made repeated mistakes and have registered many unnecessarylosses, you will be able to correct your methods and continue on a sounderbasis, without having lost your main capital reserve. In no case do you want to risk everything you can scrape together on the theory that here is the quick way to make easy money. That simply isnot true, and the chances are overwhelmingly against you if you go aheadunder any such plan. Better to ﬁgure out how much you can spare, how much you could afford to spend for experience, considering that the amount you start withis in the same category as money you might use for taking a special courseof instruction, or for improving property you hope to sell. Or, to take anotherexample, it would be similar to the salary you might lose in accepting alower-paid position in a new kind of work that eventually should be worthmore than your present job. In other words, you will not depend, from the start, on any returns from the capital you use in trading. You will plan your own budget outside ofthese funds, even if that calls for trimming your budget to make that possible.Then you can go ahead and follow your trading method free from anypressure to take unnecessary risks, free from the need to sell stock prema-turely to meet obligations, and free from heckling fears and worries. You can start operations with as little as $500. EN: This is especially true in the Internet Age. Free commissions in many sites and the availability of low costdiversiﬁed trading instruments like indexes and AMEX trusts offer the small inves-tor more opportunity than ever before in ﬁnancial market history. Better to have $1000 or several thousand. It makes little difference, so long as you haveworked out what you can afford to use during the apprenticeship period,and as long as you are sure you will have capital to continue your operationas you develop ability. The important thing at the start is not how manydollars you can make, but what percentage of increase per year you canaverage with the capital you are using. AU3772_book.fm Page 588 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty: How Much Capital to Use in Trading 589 If you approach the serious business of trading in this frame of mind, you will not be afraid to take losses when it is necessary (and there are times when that is the only wise course to adopt). You will not be straining tomake an unreasonable or impossible proﬁt (with the usual disastrousresults). And you will be able calmly to build your trading policy in the sureconviction that the market will still be there next year, that opportunitieswill still be waiting for you, and that the basic procedures you are developingare more valuable than any “lucky break” you might pull out of thin air ora boardroom rumor. AU3772_book.fm Page 589 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 590 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

591 chapter forty-one Application of Capital in Practice EN: Today we would refer to this question as “asset allocation,” about which many learned books and articles have been written (see Resources, Appendix D). Themodest suggestions in this chapter are, like Magee, very pragmatic and simple —and quite possibly more effective for the general investor than those complicatedprocedures spun out by super computers for complicated Street portfolios. Let us now restate a number of ideas we have already investigated and on which (let’s hope) we are thoroughly agreed. EN: If the reader is not in agreement, he should reread the book up to this point carefully. 1. Major Trends ordinarily run for long periods of time, covering a tremendous number of points in total advance or decline. 2. Almost unbelievable proﬁts could be made by one who could buy stocks at the extreme Bottom of a Bear Market and sell at the extremeTop of the following Bull Market; or sell short at the extreme peakof a Bull Market and cover at the extreme Bottom of the followingBear Market. 3. It is not possible to accomplish either of these desirable results.4. It is possible to avoid becoming trapped in purchases made at or near the extreme Bull Market Top so that losses become dangerousor ruinous in a Major Reversal. It is also possible, of course, to avoidsuch losses through ill-advised short sales near the extreme Bottomof a Bear Market. 5. It is possible to make proﬁts by trading in line with the Major Trend, and in some cases, by trading on the Intermediate Corrections to theMajor Trend, or, occasionally on the individual behavior of a stockwhich is moving contrary to the Major Trend. 6. The greatest and most dependable proﬁts may be made along the Major Trend during the principal period of advance (or decline, inthe case of short sales), but not during the earliest phases when themovement ﬁrst gets under way, nor during the rounding off or Re-versal phenomena near the end of the movement. AU3772_book.fm Page 591 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Therefore, in order to get the greatest beneﬁts from following the Major

Trends, one would want to have a relatively small equity in the market at the very start of the move and very little at or near the termination of themove, but a very substantial interest during the mid-portion when theadvance or decline was making the greatest headway. The writers have felt it should be possible to express this relation between the amount of capital tied up and the state of the Major Trend in aneat and deﬁnite equation. But inasmuch as the idea of a Major Trend is,itself, a matter of deﬁnition, and since, as we have already pointed out, thetrend is an abstraction from the individual movements of many stocks, itdoes not seem possible to arrive at any such easy solution to the problemof how much capital to use at a given time. Nor is it necessary to have a deﬁnite and exact answer. As we have already seen, it is possible to set up an Evaluative Index which will give anapproximate answer good enough for all practical purposes so far as weigh-ing the “strength” of the trend at a particular time. EN: To clarify and make more explicit the concept here, I would point out the Asset Allocation implicationsof the Magee Evaluative Index. If the analyst’s analysis of the market indicated that30% of stocks were bullish, 30% bearish, and 40% neutral he might so commit hiscapital — 30% long, 30% short, and 40% cash. This would also assume that hisassessment of risk also indicated that the risks of the long and short positions werebalanced, or approximately equal — approximately equal, since inﬁnite precision isonly achievable by the writers of academic treatises working with excellent hindsight. There are, however, some other questions. Most importantly, there is the question of how much total “risk” you are assuming. Since some stocks arevery conservative and others are very speculative, it is not enough to deter-mine what part of your capital should be applied in a market trend. Theproportion of your total capital used is not necessarily the whole measureof your participation. The price level of a stock will affect its habits(low-priced stocks make bigger percentage moves than high-priced stocks).The amount of margin you are using will have an effect on the degree of risk. There is some substance to this plan (otherwise we would not be taking the time to discuss it here at all), but there is a serious question whether thedecision as to the amount of capital to be used at any speciﬁed time can everbe reduced to a simple mathematical operation. EN: Still true although there are those who attempt it. Let us suppose you are convinced that this is a Bull Market, in a phase of such potency that you would be justiﬁed in using 80% of your capital.But you will immediately realize, from what has been said in earlier chapters,that if this money is put into a high-priced (EN: and low-beta) stock it will not give you as much likelihood of either proﬁt (if you are right) or loss (ifyou are wrong), as it would if put into a lower-priced (EN: and high-beta) stock. In the same way, your money put into a stock having a low SensitivityIndex, that is, a conservative stock like a Utility stock, will not give you asmuch likelihood for either proﬁt or loss as a stock of high Sensitivity Index (EN: volatility), that is, a speculative stock such as an Internet issue. These AU3772_book.fm Page 592 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-one: Application of Capital in Practice 593 factors, quite as much as the amount of actual dollars, affect your status, and are factors in answering the question, “Am I out on a limb and, if so,how far out?” To make this perfectly clear, we could take 80% of our capital, say $8000 out of $10,000, and put this amount into the market by purchasing a conser-vative preferred stock, outright. A great rise in the general market mightbring us an increase in value of a few points, perhaps 4% or 5%. Andconversely, a great decline might depress the issue by about the sameamount. An example of going to the other extreme might be to purchase$8000 worth of options on a low-priced, extremely speculative stock, inwhich the probable result within 90 days would be either a proﬁt of severalhundred percent, or a total loss of $8000. Obviously, we could vary our status during the progress of the market either by increasing or decreasing the amount of the total commitment, orby changing the nature of the account, switching part of the total into moreor less speculative stocks, higher- or lower-priced stocks, and also by varyingthe amount of margin used. In Appendix A we will show how the principal factors affecting a given sum of capital used (namely: sensitivity, price, and margin) can be combinedinto one ﬁgure, which we are going to call the Composite Leverage Index. EN: Once again Magee demonstrates a practical vision and intuitive understandingboth of the markets and of the basic character of investing far ahead of investmenttheory and understanding of his time. What we have in this concept is nothing lessthan the original glimmerings of V AR, or Value at Risk. The concepts and practicesof V AR are succinctly summarized in Chapter 42. It is perfectly true that you must vary your Composite Leverage (EN: risk exposure) so as to take advantage of the fast-moving central portions of important moves, using a lower Composite Leverage at the beginning ofsuch moves, and during the tapering-off or turning periods near the end. However, it is one thing to express the Composite Leverage accurately, and another thing to write a formula for applying speciﬁc degrees of leverageat particular times. The method suggested at the very beginning of thischapter has some value, but owing to the Secondary Reactions and thedifﬁculty of determining Major Trends in individual stocks, it is not possibleto make this into the neat, pat rule we are looking for. It must be a matter of experience, or intuition based on experience. You will not permit your Composite Leverage factor to run out to a dangerouspoint on the limb. Neither will you allow it to become so low during timesof good market opportunity that you are not getting full beneﬁts from themove. We can keep the general shape of a Major Swing in our minds as we consider this. Bull Markets normally rise through a series of irregularadvances and declines, starting with a moderate upward trend, and gradu-ally accelerating as the market approaches its ultimate top. Bear Markets arelikely to move fastest at the start, and taper off gradually toward the end.Bear Markets are steeper than Bull Markets. These considerations will help AU3772_book.fm Page 593 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
us to judge the times when the market will offer the best opportunities, the

times when our Composite Leverage should be increased. There are other factors, even harder to pin down in simple ﬁgures. We would, at times, make switches of our holdings for reasons that had no directrelation to the factors making up the Composite Leverage Index of the stocks.We know, for example, that high-grade issues, the active market leaders, andperhaps some stocks of a more conservative nature will tend to start theirmoves in a Bull Market fairly early, and to continue their advance at a fairlysteady pace. Eventually, they will reach their tops and make a ReversalPattern. They will decline from this point, probably at a steeper averageangle than the ascent. Low-priced and low-grade issues, on the other hand,tend to be slow in getting started, will remain dormant during the earlyphases of a Bull Market, and will then suddenly and spectacularly skyrocketin a series of moves that brings them to their ultimate Top. However, thisTop is likely to be reached at a later point (perhaps months later) than thepoint at which many of the more conservative stocks topped out. The spec-ulative group will then drop very fast and will return to the dead levels ofinaction before the conservative group has ﬁnished its more leisurely MajorDecline. This means that you will do well to concentrate your Bull Market trading in the early stages, in the higher-grade stocks, and in the later stages, in thelower-grade stocks. In a Bear Market, you would perhaps be able to makeshort sales unsuccessfully in high-grade stocks even while some of the “catsand dogs” were still completing their ﬁnal run-up; but you would be watch-ing for the opportunity to cover those shorts and go short the low-gradestocks as soon as their Reversal was signaled.

## _Appendix A will go into the Composite Leverage Index. It should be a_
useful gauge for you in your market operations, and a protection againstovertrading. But do not expect that you can use it mechanically as an indexagainst the market to answer all your questions involving the nature andsize of your commitments. For in gauging the condition of the Major Trendat any time, your own experience and judgment must be the ﬁnal arbiters. Put and Call Options

Options of various sorts have a long history in commercial markets. Nearly2000 years ago, the merchants who operated in the Mediterranean regionused “to arrive” agreements which amounted to option contracts, as insur-ance to reduce the risks of storm and piracy. Modern commodity futurescontracts resemble stock options in their dual nature of serving either astrading media or as insurance devices. Options are also widely used in realestate transactions and in various other applications. For many years, stock options were traded only on the basis of individual agreement between a buyer or a writer, and an opposite number, directly orthrough a broker or dealer. The customer and the writer were free to decide AU3772_book.fm Page 594 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-one: Application of Capital in Practice 595 what stock (any stock) would be optioned, at what exercise or striking price, for what period of time, and at what premium. In 1973, a new method of handling option contracts was inaugurated by the Chicago Board Options Exchange and later the American StockExchange, and then to other Exchanges around the country in which calloptions on a selected list of actively traded stocks are offered with standardexpiration dates (like commodity contracts) and at deﬁnite exercise prices,the premium depending on the bids and offers of buyers and writers. Anexcellent guide to this rapidly expanding market is (EN) Options as a Strategic Investment by Lawrence G. McMillan. EN: In the Internet Age options and derivatives markets have attained an astounding economic importance. One amusing way of measuring this importanceis by listing some of the great debacles which have occurred to major traders ofderivatives. Bank Negara, Malaysia’s central bank, lost $5B (billion) in 1992–93through bad bets on exchange rates. Showa Shell Seikiyu, Japan, lost $1.58B in1993. Metallgesellschaft, Germany, lost $1.34B in the same period. Barings Banklost $1.33B on stock index futures. From 1987–1995 known losses like this totaled$16.7B. And, as Magee would say, etc., etc. Of course, compared to the estimatedtotal market in 1995 of $25T (trillion), this is a mere bagatelle. Perhaps this issufﬁcient to warn the general investor that the ﬁeld is strewn with ﬁnancial minesfor even the sophisticated.

EN9: If the investor considers stocks a complex or difﬁcult area (though it is hoped this book will make it less so for him) options are exponentially more difﬁcult.Professionals beat amateurs at that game so thoroughly and so often as to considerit easy money. So the general investor should be sternly warned that much trainingand study should be undertaken before becoming fodder for the pros. EN9: Tradestation, the superlatively ﬁne trading system and brokerage opera tion, distributed with Tradestation 2000i, its standalone software package, an intel-ligent little book by Charlie Wright, Trading for a Living which among its other ﬁne points offered a plan for the ongoing allocation of capital to trading. AU3772_book.fm Page 595 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 596 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

597 chapter forty-two Portfolio Risk Management* As we suggested in the preceding chapter, there is some relation between the state or stage of a Major Market and its potentialities for proﬁt. Thereare many mechanical plans and systems for coping with the problem, butwe do not believe it can be fully solved by mechanical means alone. Wementioned one plan by which the commitments were governed accordingto the consensus of trends in an entire portfolio of charts. EN: The Magee Evaluative Index, or MEI. There are other plans which depend on pyramiding the commitment as the trend proceeds; and still others which are based onaveraging costs by increasing the commitment working against the trend,that is, by buying on a scale-down at progressively lower levels in a Bear Market, and selling on a scale-up in Bull Markets. (EN9: Invitations to disaster, both techniques. Avoid such methods.) None of the plans, taken by themselves, are adequate to answer the questions of when to buy and when to sell. The primary purpose of this book is to study the technical phenomena of individual stocks. If we canlearn from the charts at what points to buy and under what conditions tosell, we have acquired the basic machinery for successful trading. On theother hand, obviously, if your buying and selling are at points which moreoften than not result in net losses, then it makes no difference how you divideup your capital or apply it in the market, for it will be bound to shrink until,eventually, it has all disappeared. EN: An investor who ﬁnds himself in this situation should set a benchmark. He should decide that if he loses 50% of his capitalhe will quit trading and put his money in mutual funds or in the hands of an advisor.Generally speaking, an advisor is preferable to a mutual fund. And both are preferableto an investor with two left feet. They can certainly do no worse than a consistentlylosing performer.

The ﬁrst problem, then, is to learn to use the technical tools, patterns, trends, Supports, Resistances, etc. Then we can consider how much moneywe will risk and in what way. We have already seen that it makes a difference, sometimes a great difference, how we apply our capital. The various factors of price level,sensitivity, and margin enter into the concept we are going to call the Com-posite Leverage Index. In Appendix A, we will give a deﬁnition of this. * “A Discussion of Composite Leverage” in the seventh edition has been moved to Appendix A. AU3772_book.fm Page 597 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Meanwhile, we have said enough so you will understand what we are

driving at if we use the term in connection with your market commitments. You realize, of course, that you do not want to be so conservative that you will rule out practically all opportunities for making gains. If you decidenever to oppose the Primary Trend, you will have to be inactive during longSecondary Trends, and may be left waiting, sometimes for weeks on end,for a continuation of the Primary Move. Naturally, you will pass up all weaksignals and convergent trends, and shun new commitments after very activeblow-offs or Panic Climaxes. You could, no doubt, carry your reﬁnement ofcaution so far that your percentage of success, instead of being a mere 60,70, or 80%, might approach 90%; you might actually be right 95% of the timein your decisions. But this extreme conservatism would also mean that youwould trade only in the very ﬁnest possible situations, when every factorwas clean-cut and favorable. You would not have such opportunities veryoften. The result might be a proﬁt, but too small a proﬁt to justify all thework and study you would be putting into your charts, for you can obtainnominally respectable returns on your capital without very much study andwithout much risk, and you must expect a much higher rate of return if yourefforts are to be worthwhile. EN: These “nominally respectable returns” are obtained by investing in T Bonds and similar instruments. Bond traders and investors traditionally consider theseinvestments “risk free,” which is, of course, another form of the denial of reality. Inreality as David Dreman has demonstrated ( Contrarian Investment Strategy, Simon & Schuster) bonds are a kind of deteriorating asset due to the unarrestabledepreciation in the commodity-denominated value of currency.

In order to put your charts to work, you have to avail yourself of the higher-leveraged stocks, stocks which carry more opportunity for gain and,hence, more risk of loss. You have to accept, deliberately, a greater risk thanthe man who is content to buy a “safe” security, put it in the box, and forget it. By maintaining your Composite Leverage (EN: Portfolio Risk) at or near some constant level which your experience and judgment tells you is safefor the particular state of the market, you will be protected against overcau-tion. More important, if you maintain this Composite Leverage in youroperations, you will be protected against unconsciously overtrading. This isa fault more common than extreme caution, and can be a dangerous enemyeven when your percentage of theoretical trading gains is high. When youselect a deﬁnite Composite Leverage (EN: i.e., Portfolio Risk Strategy) and adhere to it in your trading commitments, changing it as necessary to meetchanged conditions, you will be forced to restrain your enthusiasm withinsafe limits, and you will be continually aware of the risks you are taking. Overtrading — and a Paradox This leads to another point. A series of identical percentage gains and losseson your capital does not give you a series of equal gains and losses in dollarsand cents. This is a serious problem, worth understanding, for a trader who AU3772_book.fm Page 598 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-two: Portfolio Risk Management 599 is greatly overextended is intensifying this problem (which exists in any case, but which does not need to cause him too much worry if he has plannedhis program). You can understand the paradoxical statement that percentage gains and losses are not equal if you take the extreme case, ﬁrst, of a man, who, inevery business venture he enters, risks his entire capital with the expectationof either a 100% gain or a 100% loss. If this ﬁrst venture is a loss, he loses100%. He is ﬁnished, because he cannot gain by making 100% on nothing.However, if the ﬁrst venture is successful and he then uses his entire capital,including the new proﬁts, again on the same terms, and the second ventureis a failure, he will be wiped out completely. No matter how many successeshe may have, he stands to lose everything on his ﬁrst failure. EN: This is, of course, the problem of “gambler’s ruin,” which has been admirably analyzed by anumber of writers, including Niederhoffer with the most delightful illustration. SeeResources (Appendix D) for the formula and discussion.

In a lesser degree, this is the situation we are speaking of. You would not risk all of your capital on a basis of doubling your money or losing all.But suppose you were extended, continually, to a point where you weretaking the risk of a 40% net loss on each transaction, with the hope of a 40%net gain. Should you start with $1000 and have a succession of 10 losses,you would wind up with about $6. Now suppose the very next 10 transac-tions were all successful. You would ﬁnally come out, after 10 losses and10 gains, each of 40%, with capital of less than $100. It would not be necessaryeither that these 10 losses and 10 gains come in the order given. You mighthave the 10 gains ﬁrst, or three gains, four losses, seven gains, and then sixlosses. The result would be the same. After 10 gains and losses, in any order,you would have lost more than 90% of your capital. On the other hand, if you risked your entire capital each time on 20 ventures, in 10 of which you took an 8% net gain and in 10 an 8% netloss, your $1000 after the 10 gains and losses would be reduced only to $937.You would still have about 94% of your original capital. Therefore, in thiscase (and 8% is a fair average ﬁgure for short-term transactions resulting ina loss, in fact, a rather liberal ﬁgure according to extensive tabulations ofactual transactions), you would have a handicap due to this paradox of onlyabout ⅓ of 1% on each trade. Now it is conceivable that 10 successive trades might go wrong, though that would be an unusual condition. There was one period of 10 monthsbetween the actual turn of the market and the Dow Signal for a Reversal ofthe Primary Trend. True, the resulting new trend, once established, ran farand long, and would have made up all losses and produced ﬁne proﬁts. Butduring the 10 hard months, allowing the fair average time of 30 days pertransaction, it is possible that 10 successive wrong-way trades might havebeen stopped out for losses, reducing the original $1000 to $434. The important thing here is that the next 10 successful trades would have brought this $434 back to $937; in other words, you could have rightedthe boat and sailed right on if you were working on the 8% basis, whereas AU3772_book.fm Page 599 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
if you had been following the 40% basis we gave previously as an example,

you would have been sunk without a trace, a victim of overtrading. Therefore, by maintaining a sane Composite Leverage Index (EN: Portfolio Risk Exposure) and letting the law of averages work for you and with you, you will be on solid mathematical ground. Your technicalstudies will have every opportunity to make you a proﬁt. Otherwise youcan, simply by unwise overextension of your trading, prevent even the besttechnical analysis from producing a net proﬁt. EN: John Magee could easily be called the father of modern investment theory but modern investment theory is so unenlightened as to technical analysis thatacademics largely have not recognized his contributions — and many probably havenot read his work. If they had, he would be recognized as having identiﬁed whattheorists now call systematic risk, or what is now called the beta (Greek letter β) with his concept of the Sensitivity Index. Similarly, his work on Composite Leverageprecedes (and may be more practical than) modern portfolio risk analysis, if cum-bersome in the modern context.

In his original exposition of Composite Leverage in this chapter Magee made use of some cumbersome manual procedures which I have relegated to Appendix A.There is nothing invalid about them, but there might be more simple and convenientways for the present-day trader to assess his leverage, his risk, and proﬁt exposure.One of these is certainly utilizing V AR technology. But — or, and — there mightbe simpler more pragmatic (and even more effective) ways of extracting this infor-mation from our trading portfolios.

Volatility, for example, tells us something about the risk of a stock. Portfolio volatility gives us a way of measuring the riskiness of a group of stocks. In research-ing our systems and methods we should be able to get some handle on “drawdown,”or the largest negative swing against our equity in an account. Simple conclusionsfollow: if we are willing to accept larger risks, we pick a portfolio of volatile stocks —a portfolio of Internet (or whatever the current frenzy is) stocks rather than a portfolioof utility stocks.

It is indispensable to maintain a regular periodic review of portfolio statistics to assure oneself that excessive risks are not being undertaken heedlessly. Theseimportant numbers include:

• Original risk per trade

• Actual realized loss

• Average loss and proﬁt per trade

and their relationship (average proﬁt divided by average loss)

• Number of winning and losing trades

and their ratio

• Time in winning and losing trades (long-time trades combined with oversizelosses is an ominous sign)

• Equity swings: average drawdown, maximum drawdown

• Costs and expenses, summation, and per trade

• Daily risk, yearly risk, and catastrophic risk, as computed by Pragmatic Portfolio Theory (as discussed below)

AU3772_book.fm Page 600 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-two: Portfolio Risk Management 601 Risk of a Single Stock The beginning of conventional, or academic, analysis of risk is the examination of volatility.

The formula for calculating the volatility of a stock (or downloading it) was discussed in Chapter 24. As a theoretical exercise, the formula and the theory makecertain assumptions which are not necessarily of interest to the pragmatic practi-tioner. One of the assumptions is that the holder chooses to accept the inherentvolatility of the stock at hand. But the point of technical analysis is to limit the riskaccepted while attempting to realize proﬁt opportunities. Thus the volatility of astock, its risk, is 0.30 or 30%, but when we trade it, we put a stop loss on it andonly risk a move of (say arbitrarily) 5–8% against our position. (Where the 5-8%sums to 2-3%, or x of total capital.) So our method of risk control is basically moredynamic than the theory. Nonetheless, volatility will give us a measure of the stockswhich make interesting trading vehicles.

It is perfectly possible to take our own experience with a stock, or our system’s experience with a stock and calculate its volatility to ourselves, using the method described in Chapter 24. If the dispersion of its returns was greater than our appetite,we could then eliminate it from our watch list. To my knowledge the literature doesnot mention this method for customizing our analysis of risk. Use of a customizingprocedure like this would give us an idea of the reliability of our methods in aparticular case. Stocks which didn’t behave would be banished to the portfolios ofmutual fund managers.

Risk of a Portfolio If you have sufﬁcient experience with a portfolio, you can calculate its volatility thesame way you calculate the volatility of a stock. And the method in Chapter 24 canbe used. You may also dramatize the volatility of your portfolio by preparing afrequency distribution. The dispersion of the returns would certainly highlightcharacteristics of your trading system or style.

Academicians and investment managers use a measure called the Sharpe Ratio to compare the performance of two systems or competing money managers. It isdiscussed in Resources (Appendix D), and has severe deﬁciencies in analyzingportfolio risk. I will address this question later in this chapter after looking at someof the ways professionals treat risk.

The reader may judge for himself in the use of Composite Leverage as presented in Appendix A by Magee, or he may consider the following brief presentation ofmodern portfolio management and risk analysis. The purpose of Composite Leverageis to measure and control risk and proﬁt exposure in a more or less quantitativemanner. Present-day portfolio managers might use V AR technology, or do this asfollows. The Editor offers this exposition only for perspective. His own preferredmethod, Pragmatic Portfolio Theory, follows thereafter.

AU3772_book.fm Page 601 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
EN9: Risk and Trend

Risk of a Portfolio and risk of a stock are affected by being the right way in the trend. It seems intuitive and it is observable that losses (thus risk) expandin an Enron case where the trader remains long while the stock dies. Theconverse is also true. Risk is diminished to a portfolio and a stock when itis with the trend. In a paper submitted to the Market Technicians Association(mta.org), Dissecting Dow Theory, Bassetti and Brooker argue (with some success in the opinion of this editor) that risk can be proved to diminish inthe Industrials when the portfolio (of Industrials) is with the trend as iden-tiﬁed by Dow Theory. Charts 9.1 and 9.2 present other material from thispaper which is available at the Magee website, www.edwards-magee.com. V AR Procedure Returns of the individual securities are determined and, from these, returns of theportfolio are calculated. This is done based upon some time period for which theportfolio is held. Thus, from day to day the returns, or changes in value, of theportfolio will vary — some positive and some negative. Taking a totality of returns,an average return will be determined. A frequency distribution of returns may beconstructed. The width of this frequency distribution measures the riskiness of theportfolio. Thus, a portfolio which has a minimum return of 1% and a maximumreturn of 8% is inherently less risky (according to investment theory) than one withreturns varying from –1% to 20%. And while a frequency distribution is illustrative,it does not give us a common measure for two different portfolios. That is done bydetermining the volatility of the portfolio.

Volatility measures the deviation of returns from the mean. This is known as the standard deviation and is indicated by the Greek letter sigma ( σ). The higher the volatility of a portfolio the greater its risk, according to the academic theory.This would seem to be intuitive, in that a commodity portfolio might range from–30% to 100% returns because of leverage, whereas a bond portfolio would varyonly by the market price of the bonds and would return face value at maturity. Ofcourse in calculating bond risks, managers ignore the deterioration of money — butthat is a little secret among us pragmatic analysts and we needn’t bother academi-cians and bond traders with that information, as they wouldn’t want to know itanyway.

As pointed out above, portfolio volatility can be easily obtained if we have sufﬁcient experience with the portfolio. If we have to calculate the volatility, theprocedure gets quite complicated and the entire procedure for determining our V ARrequires some statistical sophistication as well as a gamut of data. We must weightthe components of our portfolio, determine their correlations, compute correlationcoefﬁcients, and on and on. And, as Mandelbrot notes in Scientiﬁc American, at the end of all this, we would still be wondering what to do in the Perfect Storm. A crystal-clear procedure for computing V AR is presented in Philippe Jorion’s Value At Risk.

AU3772_book.fm Page 602 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-two: Portfolio Risk Management 603 Pragmatic Portfolio Theory (and Practice) Perhaps, rather than giving ourselves headaches trying to remember college statis tics, we should look for something simpler and more pragmatic — something justas serviceable for the general investor: Pragmatic Portfolio Theory. The academicworld, and the world of rareﬁed Wall Street, strives madly to quantify everythingin the world except the risks and liabilities that they themselves create for theircustomers.

Let us seek simpler methods to quantify the risks of individual stocks and the portfolios they reside in, knowing all the time that absolute precision is impossible.(Viz., Professional portfolio managers’ performance in The Great Panics — 1929,1957, 1987, 1989. Viz., Long-Term Capital Management which almost broughtdown the world ﬁnancial system in 1998, and Leland O’Brien Rubinstein PortfolioInsurance which contributed mightily to the Reagan Crash in 1987.)

Pragmatic Portfolio Risk Measurement Determining the Risk of One Stock The theoretical risk of a stock is commonly agreed to be its volatility, which isdetermined as detailed in Chapter 24. So we might say that the theoretical risk ofour stock, Microsoft, for example, equals on 100 shares, our position, at the marketprice of 120 and annualized volatility of.44:

where T$Risk = Theoretical $Risk V = Volatility Po = Position (number of shares) Pr = Price Theoretically speaking then, the annual risk for Microsoft should be volatility × Price or (in 2000) 0.44 × 120 or $52. In fact, those non-chart analysts who bought Microsoft at 120 (there were some) and who did not have the technician’s ability toset a stop and discipline to stick to it saw a risk of 50% from its top of 120 inFebruary 2000 to its (presumed) bottom of 60 in June 2000.

There is another measurement which might be more meaningful to us, Opera tional Risk. Operational Risk refers to the speciﬁc instance of the particular trade.For example, we have taken an initial position in Microsoft of 100 shares. Ouranalysis has identiﬁed a stop point where we put our stop, which is 5% away fromthe market price. Our Operational Risk is: Theoretical Risk Volatility Position Price V=× × ×××= ××=Po Pr T$Risk.$44 100 120 5200 AU3772_book.fm Page 603 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
where

O$Risk = Operational Risk MP = Market Price Po = Position S = Stop Price Determining the Risk for a Portfolio Computing the theoretical risk for a portfolio is quite a complex process. It involves, in essence, ﬁnding the volatility for the portfolio as a whole, andmultiplying the portfolio market value by the portfolio volatility. This doesnot sound so complex, but volatility is not determined by simply addingtogether volatilities of individual securities. Rather, correlations betweeninstrument returns must be computed, and variance and covariance of secu-rities must be determined as steps along the way. This by no means presumesto be a complete description of the process, further study of which may beguided by entries in Resources (Appendix D). The theoretical risk for a portfolio is, for a simple case:

where TP$Risk = Portfolio Theoretical Risk MV = Market Value V = Volatility Under normal market conditions, the Operational Risk of a simple Portfolio, PO$Risk, may be calculated by ﬁrst taking the sum of the Operational Risk ﬁgures,O$Risk, for each stock held long. Then the sum of O$Risk for short positions issubtracted from the ﬁrst ﬁgure.

In the situation of perfect negative correlation, the two factors would be summed. Operational Risk Market Price Stop Price Po = − × ssition MP S Po O$Risk−() ×= −() ×= 120 114 100 600 Volatility Market Value TP$Risk = MV V× × PO$Risk sum of O$Risk longs sum of O$Risk =() − shorts () AU3772_book.fm Page 604 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-two: Portfolio Risk Management 605 Measuring Maximum Drawdown, or Maximum Retracement In the designing and testing of a system, or in actual trading experience, we care little about standard deviations and cold statistics. What bothers us is the ﬂow ofblood, that is to say, the worst run of “luck” or experience we have. What is thegreatest sustained loss we suffer before our system or trading method rights itself,stanches the ﬂow of blood, and begins to accumulate proﬁts again? Constructing awave chart is one way to look at this experience. (A wave chart is illustrated in

## _Figure 2.)_
Measuring from the top of the wave to the bottom gives us our maximum

drawdown, and an idea of what amount of capital we need and how much reserves to maintain. It also gives us a vivid depiction of our results. A chart with manytsunamis (in the wrong direction) probably means that we need to modify ourmethods — unless we genuinely enjoy riding roller coasters (with the full under-standing that dreadful accidents do sometimes happen on thrill rides). If constructinga system without actual market experience, one should multiply maximum draw-down by 3 or 4 to get a reasonable amount of capital to back the system with.

Pragmatic Portfolio Analysis: Measuring the Risk In analyzing a portfolio, we must ﬁrst know what is important to measure. In orderto be able to control risk, we must be able to measure it. Theoreticians identify riskwith volatility. There are some real-life problems with this concept but we will useit for the moment anyway. In a portfolio, we want to be able to separate our varioustypes and weights of risk. In terms of volatility, bonds are obviously less volatilethan stocks, and unleveraged commitments are less volatile than, say, futures.Similarly, if the portfolio is not risk balanced, that is, if one issue represents a largeproportion of the whole, then it represents a larger portion of the risk. But, if aportfolio consisted of only the S&P; 500, that would obviously be a different case,since a commitment like this would be by deﬁnition diversiﬁed. So we must knowwhat is important to measure. (Cf. Philippe Jorion’s Value At Risk. In addition there is a piece of tutorial software called Risk Management 101, which is excellentin presenting these concepts.)

In operational or pragmatic terms, a trader wants to know what his operational risk is, rather than his theoretical risk. And he doesn’t consider upside equityvolatility a negative. A trader may choose to measure risk by the pragmatic methodoutlined here. In doing so, he will want to know for his Portfolio Ordinary or Normal Risk, POR, his Risk Over Time, PRT, and his Extraordinary or Cata strophic Risk, PCR.

Portfolio Ordinary, or Operational, Risk First consider that we want to measure our risk today. Our Ordinary Risk today iseasily computed by taking the stop price from the market price on each position and AU3772_book.fm Page 605 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
summing the differences, as above. Dividing this ﬁgure by the allocated capital

(Total Capital, TC) will give us a Portfolio Risk Factor, PRF. And that is the risk factor the trader is willing to assume for one day.

Portfolio Risk Over Time The number can be annualized to give us a number for risk over time — or it can be computed for a week or a month, etc. Or, this factor may be collected fromoperations. It may be collected by taking each day’s Ordinary Risk, summing anddividing for the desired time period (and plotted). It may also be computed by takingthe average return and the variances therefrom and calculating the standard devi-ation. This is Risk Over Time. Annualized risk, for example: DR × where DR = Daily Risk. Portfolio Extraordinary or Catastrophic Risk Extraordinary Risk is the risk of market collapse or panic on any given day. The way to look at this risk is, ﬁrst of all, to assume normal behavior of the markets, oryour everyday panic. In this case, if all of one’s positions cratered, one would takehis worst-case, one-day loss and be out of the market. To extend this analysis, assumethat the market makes a two, then four, then six standard deviation move. Whatwill be the effect on your position in this event, when stops will not be honored byspecialists and market makers and the market will be stampeding like spooked cattlefor the exits? That is, meltdown. This is Extraordinary or Catastrophic Risk.

Controlling the Risk The most danger in these meltdown events is in the greatest leverage — so thegreatest risk is in short options — and usually short puts. You will remember mystory of my customer who lost $57MM during the Reagan Crash of 1987. He wasshort puts. Some market makers have been destroyed by shorting calls, but the caseis rare and speciﬁcally results in the case of takeovers and unwise concentration ofcommitments in one issue only.

The least risk lies in being hedged. To oversimplify, long the stock, long the put. The proﬁt of one makes up for the loss on the other. Also, if one were long somestocks and short others, that also is a kind of hedge. Or long the Dow and shortfutures on the Dow, or some of its components.

Now let us be pragmatic. If we have during the management of our portfolios consistently measured the market with the Magee Evaluative Index and balancedour portfolio accordingly, we will be at less risk, both from the Ordinary and theExtraordinary viewpoint. In fact, we may proﬁt from an event which disemploysmany professional money managers. POR = sum of Differences PRF = PO$Risk TC 365 AU3772_book.fm Page 606 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-two: Portfolio Risk Management 607 If you have been religiously raising your stops, following the market with progressive stops, and in fact raising them based on new highs as described in Chapter 28 (3-days-away procedure), it is quite possible that while the market isstorming you will be sailing to Byzantium in your customer yacht.

Summary of Risk and Money Management Procedures The procedures described above are easily reducible to simple formulas, even for themathophobic.

Trade size is the basic unit for controlling risk. Regardless of volatility, 500 shares of anything is riskier than 100 shares.

To determine trade size, take the difference between the entry price and the stop price, giving Dollar Risk 1 ($R1). Take the Risk Control Factor, the percentage oftotal capital to be ventured on the trade, and multiply times Total Capital — e.g.,3% times TC of $100,000, giving Risk-per-Trade. Divide Dollar Risk 1 by Risk-per-trade to determine Trade Size.

where TS = Trade Size EP = Entry Price SP = Stop Price $R1 = Dollar Risk 1 RCF = Risk Control Factor TC = Total Capital RpT = Risk-per Trade Daily, measure Operational Risk as described above. Divide Operational Risk by Total Capital to determine Portfolio Operational Risk Factor. If this factor is toohigh, look for hedges or positions to eliminate, starting, of course, with those whichare underwater.

Recompute stops frequently (daily for a trader) raising them according to the Basing Points Procedure. Or Support and Resistance, or Trendlines. Or a moneymanagement stop may be employed, where the trader says, for instance, that nomore than 8% from the market price will be risked. And this 8% must represent nomore than x% of total capital. Money management stops, it should be noted, areinherently less dynamic than technically placed stops. As the markets proceed inevitably through their phases, track their internal composition with the Magee Evaluative Index, and as positions are naturally ter-minated, put on new positions in accord with the general long/short strengthreadings of the MEI. Remember that exceptionally high MEI readings coincide withEP SP = $R1 RCF TC = RpT $R1 RpT TS− × =AU3772_book.fm Page 607 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## 608 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
broad market tops, and exceptionally low MEI readings coincide with broad market bottoms. Professional risk managers compute daily the Extraordinary Risk potential in the markets using the procedure described above to constrain traders under theirauthority from overexposure. In fact, panics and crashes rarely occur out of the blue.There is almost always a prepanic phase which the truly alert trader can identify,especially with the aid of a computer. These are marked by insider and professionalselling which creates increasing volume with Reversal Days occurring in manystocks and Gaps and Runaway down days. Almost always these conditions will bepreceded by many top formations among key stocks — double and triple tops andheads and shoulders and v-tops. Eternal vigilance is the cost of freedom. It is also the cost of investing success. AU3772_book.fm Page 608 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

609 chapter forty-three Stick to Your Guns It has often been pointed out that any of several different plans of operation, if followed consistently over a period of years, would have produced con-sistently a net gain on market operations. The methods we have discussedin this book (representing the technical approach) are a case in point. The fact is, however, that many traders, not having set up a basic strategy and having no sound philosophy of what the market is doing and why, areat the mercy of every Panic, boom, rumor, tip, in fact, of every wind thatblows. And since the market, by its very nature, is a meeting place of con-ﬂicting and competing forces, they are constantly torn by worry, uncertainty,and doubt. As a result, they often drop their good holdings for a loss on a sudden dip or shakeout; they can be scared out of their short commitments by a wave of optimistic news; they spend their days picking up gossip,passing on rumors, trying to conﬁrm their beliefs or alleviate their fears; andthey spend their nights weighing and balancing, checking and questioning,in a welter of bright hopes and dark fears. Furthermore, a trader of this type is in continual danger of getting caught in a situation that might be truly ruinous. Since he has no ﬁxed guides ordanger points to tell him when a commitment has gone bad and it is timeto get out with a small loss, he is prone to let stocks run entirely past thered light, hoping that the adverse move will soon be over, and that therewill be a “chance to get out even,” a chance that often never comes. And,even should stocks be moving in the right direction and showing him aproﬁt, he is not in a much happier position, since he has no guide as to thepoint at which to take these proﬁts. The result is he is likely to get out toosoon and lose most of his possible gain, or overstay the market and lose partor all of the expected proﬁts. If you have followed the preceding chapters carefully, you will have realized that none of the technical formations and signals is certain andunfailing. The chart action of a stock discounts and records all presently known information about that stock (which includes all matters of dividends declared or expected, split-ups, and mergers that are known to be planned,political angles as they affect the market, world affairs, management, earningrecords, etc.). The chart does not and cannot forecast unforeseeable events,matters that are completely unknown to anybody. In a majority of cases, thecharts are dependable. If you are not satisﬁed that this is true, you shouldstudy further, or else plan not to use charts at all. AU3772_book.fm Page 609 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
On the other hand, if you have satisﬁed yourself that the charts are, for

you, the most dependable indication of the probable future course of stock prices, then you should follow explicitly the signals given on your charts,either according to the rules we suggest here, or according to such otherrules and modiﬁcations as your experience dictates. But while you are fol-lowing any set of rules and policies, follow them to the letter. It is the onlyway they can help you. If you do this, you will have certain large advantages, right at the start: (1) you will never be caught in a situation where a single stock commitmentcan wipe out your entire capital and ruin you; (2) you will not ﬁnd yourselffrozen in a market that has turned against you badly, with a large accumu-lated loss and your capital tied up, so that you cannot use it in the reversedtrend to make new and potentially proﬁtable commitments; and (3) you canmake your decisions calmly, knowing exactly what you will be looking foras a signal to take proﬁts, and knowing also that your losses, at the veryworst, will be limited to a certain deﬁnite amount. All of this means that you will have peace of mind. You will take losses and you will make gains. In neither case will you have to take your notebookshome and lie awake worrying. You will have made certain decisions. Ifdevelopments prove you were right, you will, at the proper point, take yourproﬁt. And if it turns out that you were wrong, then you can take yourcomparatively small loss, and start looking for a better situation, with yourcapital still largely intact, liquid, and available. Your job, as a speculator, is to provide liquidity in the market, and to counteract the irrational excesses of market-in-motion. Part of that job is tokeep yourself free to become liquid whenever it is necessary, in order toreverse your position. And to keep yourself free from irrational and excessiveemotional actions. If you do this intelligently and consistently, you will beperforming a useful and necessary service to the general economic welfare,and you will ﬁnd that the market offers as good or better returns for yourefforts as any other line of endeavor. EN9: With the 9 th Edition I expect the reader will have some powerful new guns to stick to: the Turtle trading manual (which has applications to stocks, as Robert Colbyhas shown); new lessons in Basing Points which show what a powerful procedureit can be; new analyses of Dow Theory which refresh and reinforce the validity andpersuasiveness not just of the Theory but of long-term investing as such. Goodtrading and stick to all your guns! AU3772_book.fm Page 610 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

611 appendix A Chapter A (Magee’s Original Chapter 24 from the Seventh Edition) The Probable Moves of Your Stocks At ﬁrst glance, all stocks appear to move helter-skelter without rhyme or reason, all over the lot. All stocks go up at times, and all go down at times —not always at the same time. But we already have seen that in these risesand falls, stocks do follow trends, make various typical patterns, and behavein a not completely disorderly manner. It is also true that each stock has its own habits and characteristics, which are more or less stable from year to year. Certain stocks normally respond to a Bullish Phase of the market with a very large upsurge, while others,perhaps in the same price class, will make only moderate moves. You willﬁnd that the same stocks which make wide upward swings are also the ones which make large declines in Bear Markets, whereas the ones that make less spectacular up-moves are more resistant to downside breaks in the market. In Appendix A, Chapter B you will ﬁnd in a discussion of Composite Lever-age that there are stocks which ordinarily move many, many times as fastas others. We do not know, for example, whether a year from now GlennMartin (EN: Read, Microsoft) will be moving up or down, but we do know, and it is one of the most dependable things we know, that whichever wayit is going, it will be covering ground much faster than American Telephoneand Telegraph. These differences of habit, of course, are due to the size ofissue, ﬂoating supply, nature of business, and leverage in the capital struc-ture, matters we have touched on brieﬂy before. As a matter of fact, we arenot especially concerned with why the differences exist. We are interested mainly in what the differences are, and how we can determine them. This is important: stocks which habitually move in a narrow range, although excellent for investment purposes where stability and income arethe chief desiderata, are not good trading stocks. A fairly high degree of sensitivity (EN: volatility), with wide percentage moves, is necessary in order to make possible proﬁtable commitments that will cover costs and leave anet gain. In order to be in a position to make a proﬁt, you should see theprobability of at least a 15% move in your stock. How then are you going to tell which stocks are most sensitive and potentially most proﬁtable? AU3772_book.fm Page 611 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
By examining the record of a certain stock for a number of years back,

and comparing the percentage moves it has made with the percentage moves of the market as a whole, you can obtain a fair picture of that stock’s habits.You will not be able to say, at any particular moment, “This stock is nowgoing to move up 25%,” but you can say, with a good deal of conﬁdence,“If the market as a whole makes an advance of 10%, this stock will probablyadvance about 25%.” Or, conversely, of course, “If the market goes down10%, this stock will very likely go down at least 25%.” Many methods have been used for measuring and checking these per centage-move habits, differing only in detail. Indexes on several hundredimportant stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange have been com-puted by the authors and are presented in Appendix A, Chapter D, Sensi-tivity Indexes. EN: Current day betas may be compared with these and/or substituted for them in other computations suggested in this book, for example in Composite Leverageformulas. The reader may read in the following text “beta” for “Sensitivity Index”and avoid the annoyance of excessive notation by the editor.

The Indexes are relative. They show that stocks with a high Sensitivity Index (EN: beta) will move much faster in either Bull Markets or Bear Markets than stocks with low Indexes, and about how much faster, relative to theother stocks. (EN9: The general investor who in the 21st century operates with a computer and the Internet will not ﬁnd the following necessary reading.) In order to compute the Sensitivity Indexes, the range of each stock from high closing to lowclosing, each sheet of the chart is marked with a dotted blue (top) and red(bottom) line in the left-hand margin of the next chart sheet for that particularstock. At the end of each series of chart sheets, this price range for each stockin the period covered by the chart sheet just ﬁnished is measured from top(blue) line to red (bottom) line, and these ranges, expressed in eighths of aninch, are added together and divided by the total number of stocks charted.This gives you an average range for the period, representing the composite or average movement of the entire group of stocks. An arbitrary “normal”average range is permanently selected (on the basis of the average range fora number of series of charts for several years),* and as each series of newcharts is completed, this “normal” average range is divided by the averagerange for the new series, to arrive at a decimal fraction which represents thereciprocal of that market movement for the period. (Thus, a period of widemarket activity would show a small decimal less than 1, such as 0.65, whereasa period of dull and inactive markets would result in a larger ﬁgure, suchas 1.49.) We will call this (just to give it a handy name for future reference)the Market Reciprocal for this period or series of charts. * Theoretically, the “normal” average range should be adjusted continuously at the close of each period. Practically, there is no need for such reﬁnement. AU3772_book.fm Page 612 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix A 613_
Now the price range, expressed in eighths of an inch, for each stock in

turn, is divided by the range corresponding to the “normal” or average range for a stock at that price (see Range-for-Price table, Appendix A, Chapter C),and this fraction is multiplied by the Market Reciprocal. The resulting ﬁgureis the fractional Sensitivity Index covering the action of this particular stockfor this particular market period. In order to obtain the overall or long-termSensitivity Index for a stock, we simply add the fractional indexes for eachperiod together and divide by the number of periods. As new chart sheetsare completed, we add the new fractions and compute the new index. Asingle fractional index is, as you might expect, unreliable and rather mean-ingless as regards the future. The second, third, and fourth series fractionswill revise and “smooth” the Index. As time goes on and new series areadded, these Sensitivity Indexes will settle down to fairly constant ﬁgures;corrections, if any, will be slight as new series are added. And these Indexesare very reliable in forecasting the probable future sensitivity of each stock. The measuring of price ranges in eighths of an inch, in order to get ﬁgures representing percentage moves, implies of course that you are usinga ratio chart paper. With other types of paper, you would have to computethe percentage price range for each period from the high and low closingprices on your charts. We have outlined this method in some detail so that you can, if you wish, compute your own Sensitivity Indexes. EN: As previously mentioned, the modern reader will probably wish to obtain betas, if interested, from sources docu-mented in Resources (Appendix D). It is not necessary that your stocks all be from the New York Stock Exchange. Using this method, you can includeothers from other exchanges, averaging them all together and treating yourentire portfolio as a group in determining your Market Reciprocals. You will ﬁnd that sensitivity runs from over 2.00 (which we would speak of as 200%) in the case of highly speculative issues, down to 0.20 (20%, thatis) or less on ultraconservative investment stocks. Roughly, you may considerthat stocks with a Sensitivity Index of 50% or less are extremely conservative,50% to 100% moderately conservative, 100% to 150% speculative, and any-thing over 150% highly speculative. Chapter B (Magee’s original Chapter 42 in the Seventh Edition) A Discussion of Composite Leverage EN: The general reader may expect more than a little difﬁculty in comprehending this chapter. The editor has kindly supplied some comments as an endnote, whichwill aid those interested in Magee’s thinking. As the chapter predates much workin risk analysis and portfolio management theory, I have left it “as is.” In concept,it certainly has more than historical value and can in fact be used by the manualchart-keeping investor. The concern of the chapter, namely measuring portfolio risk,is addressed for the computerized investor in Chapter 42.

AU3772_book.fm Page 613 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
As we suggested in the preceding chapter, there is some relation between

the state or stage of a Major Market and its potentialities for proﬁt. There are many mechanical plans and systems for coping with the problem, butwe do not believe it can be fully solved by mechanical means alone. Wementioned one plan by which the commitments were governed accordingto the consensus of trends in an entire portfolio of charts. (EN: The Magee Evaluative Index.) There are other plans which depend on pyramiding the commitment as the trend proceeds; and still others which are based onaveraging costs by increasing the commitment working against the trend,that is, by buying on a scale-down at progressively lower levels in a BearMarket, and selling on a scale-up in Bull Markets. None of the plans, taken by themselves, are adequate to answer the questions of when to buy and when to sell. The primary purpose of thisbook is to study the technical phenomena of individual stocks. If we canlearn from the charts at what points to buy and under what conditions tosell, we have acquired the basic machinery for successful trading. On theother hand, obviously, if your buying and selling are at points which moreoften than not result in net losses, then it makes no difference how you divideup your capital or apply it in the market, for it will be bound to shrink until,eventually, it has all disappeared. EN: An investor who ﬁnds himself in this situation should set a benchmark. He should decide that if he loses 50% of his capital,he will quit trading and put his money in mutual funds. They can certainly do noworse than that.

The ﬁrst problem, then, is to learn to use the technical tools, patterns, trends, Supports, Resistances, etc. Then we can consider how much moneywe will risk and in what way. We have already seen that it makes a difference, sometimes a great difference, how we apply our capital. The various factors of price level,sensitivity, and margin enter into the concept we are going to call the Com-posite Leverage Index. In the latter part of this chapter, we will give adeﬁnition of this. Meanwhile, we have said enough so you will understandwhat we are driving at if we use the term in connection with your marketcommitments. You realize, of course, that you do not want to be so conservative that you will rule out practically all opportunities for making gains. If you decidenever to oppose the Primary Trend, you will have to be inactive during longSecondary Trends, and may be left waiting, sometimes for weeks on end,for a continuation of the Primary Move. Naturally, you will pass up all weaksignals and convergent trends, and shun new commitments after very activeblow-offs or Panic Climaxes. You could, no doubt, carry your reﬁnement ofcaution so far that your percentage of success, instead of being a mere 60,70, or 80%, might approach 90%; you might actually be right 95% of the timein your decisions. But this extreme conservatism would also mean that youwould trade only in the very ﬁnest possible situations, when every factor AU3772_book.fm Page 614 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix A 615_
was clean-cut and favorable. You would not have such opportunities very

often. The result might be a proﬁt, but too small a proﬁt to justify all thework and study you would be putting into your charts — for you can obtainnominally respectable returns on your capital without very much study andwithout much risk, and you must expect a much higher rate of return if yourefforts are to be worthwhile. EN: These “nominally respectable” returns are obtained by investing in T Bonds and similar instruments. Bond traders and investors traditionally consider theseinvestments “risk free,” which is, of course, another form of the denial of reality. Inreality as David Dreman has demonstrated, bonds are a wasting asset due to theunarrestable deterioration in the commodity denominated value of currency. In order to put your charts to work, you have to avail yourself of the higher-leveraged stocks, stocks which carry more opportunity for gain and,hence, more risk of loss. You have to accept, deliberately, a greater risk thanthe man who is content to buy a “safe” security, put it in the box, and forget it. By maintaining your Composite Leverage (EN: Portfolio Risk) at or near some constant level which your experience and judgment tells you is safefor the particular state of the market, you will be protected against overcau-tion. More important, if you maintain this Composite Leverage in youroperations, you will be protected against unconsciously overtrading. This isa fault more common than extreme caution, and can be a dangerous enemyeven when your percentage of theoretical trading gains is high. When youselect a deﬁnite Composite Leverage and adhere to it in your trading com-mitments, changing it as necessary to meet changed conditions, you will beforced to restrain your enthusiasm within safe limits, and you will be con-tinually aware of the risks you are taking. Overtrading — and a Paradox This leads to another point. A series of identical percentage gains and losses on your capital does not give you a series of equal gains and losses in dollarsand cents. This is a serious problem, worth understanding — for a traderwho is greatly overextended is intensifying this problem (which exists inany case, but which does not need to cause him too much worry if he hasplanned his program). You can understand the paradoxical statement that percentage gains and losses are not equal if you take the extreme case, ﬁrst, of a man, who, inevery business venture he enters, risks his entire capital with the expectationof either a 100% gain or a 100% loss. If this ﬁrst venture is a loss, he loses100%. He is ﬁnished, because he cannot gain by making 100% on nothing.However, if the ﬁrst venture is successful and he then uses his entire capital,including the new proﬁts, again on the same terms, and the second ventureis a failure, he will be wiped out completely. No matter how many successes AU3772_book.fm Page 615 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
he may have, he stands to lose everything on his ﬁrst failure. EN: This is, of

course, the problem of “gambler’s ruin,” which has been admirably analyzed by a number of writers, including Niederhoffer with the most delightful illustration.

See Resources (Appendix D) for the formula. In a lesser degree, this is the situation we are speaking of. You would not risk all of your capital on a basis of doubling your money or losing all.But suppose you were extended, continually, to a point where you weretaking the risk of a 40% net loss on each transaction, with the hope of a 40%net gain. Should you start with $1000 and have a succession of 10 losses,you would wind up with about $6. Now suppose the very next 10 transac-tions were all successful. You would ﬁnally come out, after 10 losses and10 gains, each of 40%, with capital of less than $100. It would not be necessaryeither that these 10 losses and 10 gains come in the order given. You mighthave the 10 gains ﬁrst, or three gains, four losses, seven gains, and then sixlosses. The result would be the same. After 10 gains and losses, in any order,you would have lost more than 90% of your capital. On the other hand, if you risked your entire capital each time on 20 ventures, in 10 of which you took an 8% net gain and in 10 an 8% netloss, your $1000 after the 10 gains and losses would be reduced only to $937.You would still have about 94% of your original capital. Therefore, in thiscase (and 8% is a fair average ﬁgure for short-term transactions resulting ina loss, in fact, a rather liberal ﬁgure according to extensive tabulations ofactual transactions), you would have a handicap due to this paradox of onlyabout ⅓ of 1% on each trade. Now it is conceivable that 10 successive trades might go wrong, though that would be an unusual (EN: but perfectly predictable) condition. There was one period of 10 months between the actual turn of the market and the DowSignal for a Reversal of the Primary Trend. True, the resulting new trend,once established, ran far and long, and would have made up all losses andproduced ﬁne proﬁts. But during the 10 hard months, allowing the fairaverage time of 30 days per transaction, it is possible that 10 successivewrong-way trades might have been stopped out for losses, reducing theoriginal $1000 to $434. The important thing here is that the next 10 successful trades would have brought this $434 back to $937; in other words, you could have rightedthe boat and sailed right on if you were working on the 8% basis, whereasif you had been following the 40% basis we gave previously as an example,you would have been sunk without a trace, a victim of overtrading. Therefore, by maintaining a sane Composite Leverage Index and letting the law of averages work for you and with you, you will be on solid math-ematical ground. Your technical studies will have every opportunity to makeyou a proﬁt. Otherwise you can, simply by unwise overextension of yourtrading, prevent even the best technical analysis from producing a net proﬁt. AU3772_book.fm Page 616 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix A 617_
Composite Leverage Index of a Single Stock

If you keep a record of sensitivity as outlined in ( EN: original Chapter 24, Chapter A of this Appendix) and have computed the Sensitivity Indexes for your stocks, then you can set down the Composite Leverage of any purchase or short sale as follows: • Let S represent the Sensitivity Index of the stock. • Let N represent the Normal Range-for-Price, based on the price at the time of the original commitment. • Let T represent the Total Net Paid or received on the original trans action. • Let C represent the Capital reserved to ﬁnance this commitment. In the case of outright cash purchases or 100% margin short transac tions, this ﬁgure cancels out against T in the numerator. Then (15.5 is the Normal Range for a stock selling at a price of 25, and is simply an arbitrary selection to serve as a ﬁxed point of reference in determiningratios.) Composite Leverage on an Entire Portfolio The Composite Leverage on the entire account is a summation of the risksof the component stocks, and can be ﬁgured in this way: * Let us add one more striking example of the importance of Composite Leverage. At a time when stocks could be bought on a 30% margin, it wouldhave been possible to buy, with $1000, $3300 worth of a highly speculativestock, Standard Gas and Electric $4 Preferred, then listed on the New YorkStock Exchange. Let us assume that the price at that time was $25 a share.The Composite Leverage, then, on your $1000 capital would be 693% using * Sum of SNT means that you ﬁgure S × N × T for each stock in the portfolio separately, and add all these ﬁgures together.Composite Leverage = SNT 15.5 C× Total Composite Leverage = Sum of SNT* 15.5×TTotal Capital or Net Worth AU3772_book.fm Page 617 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
the methods we have just outlined in determining this Composite Leverage. At this same time, using the same methods of ﬁguring, an outright purchaseof $1000 worth of Celanese 4

¾ % 1st Preferred at 106 would give a Composite Leverage of only 11.8%. Comparing these two transactions, your purchaseof “SG Pr” provided a leverage of 693 to 11.8 as compared to the purchaseof “CZ 1st Pr” or approximately 60 to 1 (58.7 to 1). Presumably, and basedon the past history of the stocks, your chances of capital gain or loss wereabout 60 times as great in the “SG Pr” as in the “CZ 1st Pr.” The method proposed here gives you a means of knowing at least approximately how much risk you are assuming in a stock or in a group ofstocks. It can help you to avoid exposing yourself unwittingly to an inordi-nate degree of risk or, on the other hand, restricting unduly your opportu-nities for gain. Investment Account Policy Ordinarily, investment account management is based largely on consider-ations of the “fundamentals,” and not to any great extent on technical indi-cations. Furthermore, such accounts would normally be set up on a moreconservative basis, and would not try to use Bear Markets for short sales. EN: Magee refers here to what he considered “the long-term investor” or, one whomoved only when major fault lines shook — i.e., major changes in the Dow or somesuch. As strikingly illustrated by the long-term record of the Dow in Chapter 5 and5.1, this can be a successful strategy but this editor feels strongly that short salesand Bear strategies ﬁt well with even the most conservative of investment portfolios.MPT (implicitly) encourages it and any investor who had some shorts in his portfolioon October 19, 1987 (or September 11, 2001), felt a lot better on following mornings. Nevertheless, the matter of Composite Leverage ﬁgured on the entire account is a help in determining the overall nature of the investment. Itwould be a help in determining whether the account should be placed in amore conservative position, or whether it could stand a change in the direc-tion of somewhat more speculative holdings. These decisions would, natu-rally, depend on the size of the account, the condition and requirements ofthe owner, and on the general condition of business and the market itself.However the Composite Leverage Index will provide a useful gauge forappraising the character of the account as a whole at any particular time. (EN9: Cf. Portfolio Operating Risk computations in Chapter 42.) Negative Composite Leverage From what we have said about the “insurance” function of short sales in aBull Market (and purchases in a Bear Market), where these “contrary” trans-actions are used to achieve balance by means of the Evaluative Index, it mustbe clear that such short sales or protective purchases must tend to reduce AU3772_book.fm Page 618 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix A 619_
the Composite Leverage or total risk of the account, which is exactly why

they would be used. It might seem that by considering the contrary transactions as negative, and those in line with the presumed Major Trend as positive, this sum couldbe reduced to zero, or at least to a point where there was no substantial totalrisk at all. This is not quite possible, since we are dealing, at best, with roughapproximations, and also because we are dealing with more or less indepen-dent variables which may, and will, at times, make erratic moves. EN: In fact, after the development of the Black–Scholes formula for calculating options values, some very astute traders developed the “Delta Neutral” method ofarbitraging options. Among the most sophisticated of these was Blair Hull, theeditor’s boss at Options Research, Inc. Delta Neutral means that over very shorttime periods market price movement, up or down, should not, theoretically, affectthe value of options arbitrage portfolios. Large fortunes have been made by market-makers practicing this method. See Schwager’s books on the Market Wizards.

However, it is true that we can greatly reduce the total risk and that the contrary moves do, in a real sense, “subtract” risk from the total account. This “subtraction” of risk appears in commodity accounts, where it is customary for brokers to reduce the margin required on total commitmentsif some of these commitments are “contrary,” that is, if there are some shortsalong with a majority of long positions, or vice versa. EN: Modern Portfolio Theorists have sagaciously adopted some of these con cepts, probably like the Russians, discovering them for themselves or at least notcrediting Magee if they learned of the concepts from his work. Chapter 42 exploresthe idea which Magee is concerned with here — that of measuring portfolio risk and proﬁt opportunity. He is concerned not just with risk but also with opportunity, and maintaining a balance between them. He also wants to maintain a consistentstance to the market, exposing his capital to most risk and opportunity when heanalyzes the market to present most promise, and keeping a lower proﬁle at timesof uncertainty and at turning points.

The procedures presented here are still workable by the dedicated manual tech nician and, if I am not mistaken, are still effective, if cumbersome in the age ofcomputers. All of the data, tables, and Indexes necessary are included in this Appen-dix. Computer-oriented analysts will probably ﬁnd the procedures outlined in themain sections of the book to be somewhat more convenient and also sufﬁcient.

Chapter C Normal Range-for-Price Indexes The ﬁgures in this table represent that particular component of the CompositeLeverage of a stock which is a function of its price level. They are based onactual tabulations from 3800 stock charts. They state the relative proportion or percentage range of movement of a stock in each price range through anaverage 6-month period. AU3772_book.fm Page 619 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Price Normal Range Price Normal Range Price Normal Range

1 ¼ 38.0 32 14.5 68 11.7 1 ½ 35.0 33 14.4 69 11.6 1 ¾ 33.0 34 14.3 70 11.6 2 31.5 35 14.2 71 11.5 2 ¼ 30.0 36 14.1 72 11.5 2 ½ 29.2 37 14.0 73 11.4 3 27.6 38 13.9 74 11.43 ½ 26.5 39 13.8 75 11.3 4 25.3 40 13.7 76 11.35 24.0 41 13.6 77 11.26 22.8 42 13.5 78 11.27 22.0 43 13.4 79 11.18 21.2 44 13.3 80 11.19 20.4 45 13.2 81 11.1 10 19.8 46 13.1 82 11.011 19.2 47 13.0 83 11.012 18.7 48 12.9 84 11.013 18.4 49 12.8 85 10.914 18.0 50 12.7 86 10.915 17.6 51 12.7 87 10.916 17.3 52 12.6 88 10.817 17.0 53 12.6 89 10.818 16.8 54 12.5 90 10.819 16.6 55 12.5 91 10.720 16.5 56 12.4 92 10.721 16.3 57 12.4 93 10.722 16.1 58 12.3 94 10.623 15.9 59 12.2 95 10.624 15.7 60 12.1 96 10.625 15.5 61 12.0 97 10.526 15.3 62 12.0 98 10.527 15.2 63 11.9 99 10.528 15.1 64 11.9 100 10.429 14.9 65 11.8 150 9.030 14.7 66 11.8 200 8.031 14.6 67 11.7 250 7.0 AU3772_book.fm Page 620 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix A 621_
Chapter D

Sensitivity Indexes of Stocks* Although it is not possible to predict the advance or decline of a stock over the years in the future, it is possible to make a reasonable estimate of themost likely “degree” of advance or decline, based on its long-term markethistory. Barring major changes in corporate structure or in the nature of thecompany’s product, we can assume that the relatively conservative stockwill usually continue to move conservatively, and that the relatively specu-lative stock will continue to be subject to wide swings of advance or decline. This new table of Sensitivity Indexes shows the approximate relative sensitivity of stocks, based on the percentage price range of each stock for each year over the period from 1964 to 1973 inclusive, and the median priceof each stock in each year. The values are adjusted for major split-ups andprice level, and also for the overall range of the market in each year. For thiscorrection, we have used a Market Reciprocal which is inversely proportionalto the total price range of all the stocks considered, and this makes it possibleto set up the annual Sensitivity Indexes from which the 10-year ﬁgures usedin the table are obtained. Since some students may want to work out their own relative sensitivity ﬁgures or use this data in other ways, we are giving here the Market Recip rocals used for each of the years in these computations: * Prepared by Cynthia Magee and Paul B. Coombs of the Technical Staff of John Magee Inc. 1964 1.544 1969 0.953 1965 1.320 1970 0.861 1966 1.089 1971 1.075 1967 1.027 1972 1.238 1968 1.122 1973 0.786 Abbott Laboratories.948 Allegheny Ludlum Industries 1.192 ACF Industries, Inc. 1.095 Allied Chemical Corp..916Adams Express Co..535 Allied Stores Corp. 1.045Addressograph-Multigraph 1.593 Allis-Chalmers Corp. 1.195Aetna Life & Casualty Co..967 Alpha Portland Industries.922Air Producers & Chemicals.844 Aluminum Co. of America 1.069Airco, Inc..842 AMAX Inc..830Akzona, Inc. 1.031 AMBAC Industries 1.184Alcan Aluminum Ltd..889 Amerada Hess Corp. 1.332Allegheny Corp. 1.084 American Air Filter 1.365 AU3772_book.fm Page 621 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
American Airlines Inc. 1.440 Briggs & Stratton Corp..975

American Brands Inc..724 Bristol-Myers Company.961American Broadcasting Cos. 1.401 British Petroleum.878American Can Company.834 Brunswick Corp. 1.315American Chain & Cable.746 Bucyrus-Erie Co. 1.170American Cyanamid Company.874 Budd Company 1.047American District Telegraph 1.238 Bulova Watch Co., Inc. 1.172American Home Products.888 Burlington Industries 1.076American Hospital Supply 1.050 Burlington Northern, Inc. 1.033American Motors Corp..972 Burroughs Corporation 1.683American Standard Inc. 1.112 Campbell Soup Co..677American Sterilizer Co. 1.056 Canadian Paciﬁc Limited.502American Stores Co..956 Capital Cities Commun. Inc. 1.195Ametek, Inc. 1.087 Carborundum Company 1.044AMF, Inc. 1.429 Carnation Company 1.090AMP Inc. 1.011 Carpenter Technology.916Amstar Corp..958 Carrier Corporation 1.284Amsted Industries.886 Caterpillar Tractor Co. 1.078Anaconda Company 1.260 CBS Inc. 1.724Anchor Hocking Corp. 1.078 Celanese Corporation 1.20]Anderson Clayton & Co..860 Cenco Instruments 1.221ARA Services, Inc. 1.418 Central Soya Co..710Archer-Daniels-Midland.928 Cerro Corporation 1.221Armco Steel Corp..736 Champion International 1.062Armstrong Cork Co..939 Champion Spark Plug Co..789ASA Ltd. 1.509 Chase Manhattan Corp..735ASARCO Inc. 1.090 Chemetron Corporation 1.034 Ashland Oil Inc. 1.022 Chesebrough-Ponds, Inc..986 Associated Dry Goods 1.094 Chessie System Inc..869Atlantic Richﬁeld Co. 1.399 Chicago Milwaukee Corp. 1.938Automatic Data Processing 1.473 Chicago Pneumatic Tool Co. 1.047Avco Corporation 1.154 Chicago Rock Island & Paciﬁc RR 1.406Avery Products Corp. 1.087 Chrysler Corporation 1.393Avnet Inc. 1.409 Cincinnati Milacron Inc. 1.195Avon Products, Inc. 1.278 CIT Financial Corp..819Babcock & Wilcox Co. 1.172 CITICORP.856Baker Oil Tools, Inc. 1.192 Cities Service Company.947Barber Oil Corp. 1.299 Clark Equipment Company.961Bath Industries, Inc. 1.538 Clorox Company 1.530Bausch & Lomb, Inc. 2.287 Cluett, Peabody & Co., Inc. 1.069Baxter Laboratories 1.197 Coastal States Gas Corp. 1.312Beatrice Foods Co..788 Coca-Cola Bot. Co. of N.Y. 1.253Beckman Instruments Inc. 1.362 Coca-Cola Co..983Becton Dickinson & Co. 1.148 Colgate-Palmolive Co..867Bell & Howell Co. 1.501 Colt Industries, Inc. 1.724Bendix Corporation 1.143 Combustion Engineering Inc. 1.218Beneﬁcial Corp. 1.092 Commonwealth Oil 1.140Bethlehem Steel Corp..768 Communications Satellite 1.577Black & Decker Mfg. 1.145 Conrac Corp. 1.633Boeing Company 1.705 Consolidated Foods Corp..952Boise Cascade Corp. 1.563 Consolidated Freightways, Inc. 1.198Bond Industries 1.006 Continental Air Lines, Inc. 1.557Borden, Inc..766 Continental Can Company.880Borg Warner.833 Continental Corp..727Braniff Int’l 1.649 Continental Oil Co..787 AU3772_book.fm Page 622 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix A 623_
Control Data Corp. 1.847 Freeport Minerals Co. 1.388

Cooper Industries 1.451 Fruehauf Corporation.872Corning Glass Works 1.353 Gamble-Skogmo, Inc. 1.143CPC International, Inc..956 Gardner-Denver Co..908Crane Company 1.037 Gen. Am. Investors Co., Inc..919Creole Petroleum.841 Gen. Am. Transportation Corp..878Crown Cork & Seal Co. Inc..931 General Cable Corp. 1.195Crown Zellerbach Corp. 1.050 General Dynamics Corp. 1.362CTS Corporation 1.022 General Electric Co..914Cummins Engine Company.911 General Foods Corp..757Curtiss Wright Corp. 1.373 General Instrument Corp. 1.393Cutler Hammer Inc. 1.245 General Mills, Inc..874Cyprus Mines Corp. 1.000 General Motors Corp. 1.020Damon Corporation 1.644 General Portland Inc..939Dana Corporation.796 General Signal Corp. 1.106Dayco Corporation.905 General Tire & Rubber Co..994Deere & Company 1.056 Genesco Inc. 1.270Delta Air Lines, Inc. 1.373 Genuine Parts Co. 1.050Diamond International.783 Georgia-Paciﬁc Corp. 1.086Diamond Shamrock Corp..860 Getty Oil Co. 1.427Digital Equipment Corp. 1.566 Gillette Company, (The) 1.127Disney (Walt) Productions 1.867 Goodrich (B.F.) Company.948Distillers Corp.-Seagrams Ltd..753 Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co..810Dome Mines Ltd. 1.376 Gould, Inc. 1.147Dow Chemical Company 1.012 Grace (W.R.) & Co..955Dow–Jones Rail Averages 1.434 Graniteville Co..931Dr. Pepper Company.919 Grant (W.T.) Co. 1.343 Dresser Industries, Inc. 1.072 Great A & P Tea Co., Inc..875 du Pond (E.I.) Inc. 1.050 Great Northern Iron Ore.566Eastern Air Lines, Inc. 1.669 Great Northern Nekoosa Corp..867Eastern Gas & Fuel Associates 1.396 Great Western Financial Corp. 1.253Eastman Kodak Company 1.098 Greyhound Corp..777Echlin Manufacturing 1.353 Grumman Corp. 1.376Eckerd (Jack) Corp. 1.170 Gulf & Western Industries Inc. 1.523Eltra Corporation 1.209 Gulf Oil Corporation.774Emerson Electric Company.872 Halliburton Co. 1.379Emery Air Freight Corp..989 Hammermill Paper Co..942Englehard Minerals & Chem. 1.253 Harris Corporation 1.176Esmark Inc. 1.014 Helca Mining Co. 1.104Ex-Cell-O Corp. 1.019 Helmerich & Payne, Inc. 1.267Exxon Corp..772 Hercules Inc..927Faberge, Inc. 1.303 Hershey Foods Corp..735Fairchild Camera & Instruments 2.640 Hewlett-Packard Co. 1.420Fansteel Inc. 1.453 High Voltage Engineering 1.488Federal National Mortgage 1.055 Hilton Hotels Corp. 1.613Federated Department Stores.961 Holiday Inns, Inc. 1.610Fibreboard Corp. 1.187 Homestake Mining Co. 1.349Firestone Tire & Rubber Co..830 Honeywell Inc. 1.532First Charter Financial 1.103 Houdaille Industries, Inc..903Flintkote Co..956 Household Finance Corp..872Fluor Corporation 1.276 Howard Johnson Co. 1.399FMC Corporation.835 Howmet Corp. 1.315Ford Motor Company.903 Hudson Bay Min. & Smelt. Co..875Foremost-McKesson, Inc. 1.067 Ideal Basic Industries, Inc..718Foster Wheeler Corp. 1.236 Illinois Central Industries, Inc. 1.271 AU3772_book.fm Page 623 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Imperial Oil Ltd..866 Marriott Corp. 1.221

INA Corporation 1.268 Marshall Field & Co..942Ingersoll-Rand Co..947 Martin-Marietta Corp..835Inland Steel Company.677 Masco Corp. 1.151Inspiration Consol. Copper.869 Masonite Corp. 1.041Interco Inc. 1.062 Massey-Ferguson Ltd..917Internat. Flavors & Frag. Inc..864 Matsushita Electric ADR 1.098Internat. Minerals & Chem..900 May Department Stores Co. 1.229International Bus. Machines 1.811 McDermott (J.R.) & Co., Inc. 1.697International Harvester Co..903 McDonald’s Corp. 1.533International Nickel Co. of Canada.813 McDonnell-Douglas Corp. 1.374International Paper Company.846 McGraw-Edison Co..981International Tel & Tel. Corp. 1.033 McGraw-Hill Inc. 1.165Jefferson-Pilot Corp..934 McIntyre Mines Ltd. 1.407Jewel Companies, Inc..931 Mead Corp..880Johns-Manville Corporation.919 Melville Shoe Corp. 1.108Johnson & Johnson 1.299 Merck & Co., Inc..944Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp. 1.070 Mesta Machine Co. 1.160Joy Manufacturing Co. 1.321 Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc. 1.279Kaiser Aluminum & Chemical 1.154 Metromedia, Inc. 1.580Kansas City Southern Ind. 1.002 MGIC Investment Corp. 1.984Kaufman & Broad, Inc. 1.688 Microdot Inc. 1.435Kawecki Berylco Inc. 1.097 Microwave Associates, Inc. 1.668Kellogg Company.613 Midland-Ross Corp. 1.025Kennecott Copper Corp. 1.065 Minnesota Mining & Mfg..914Kerr McGee Corp. 1.287 Missouri Paciﬁc R.R. Co..846Kimberly-Clark Corporation.908 Mobil Oil Corp..991 KLM Royal Dutch Airlines 1.906 Molycorp Inc. 1.538 Koppers Co., Inc..963 Monroe Auto Equipment Co. 1.363Kraftco Corp..672 Monsanto Co. 1.131Kresge (S.S.) Co. 1.315 Morgan (J.P.) & Co..891Kroger Company 1.017 Morton-Norwich Products, Inc. 1.037Lehigh Portland Cement Co..888 Motorola Inc. 1.889Libbey-Owens-Ford Co..897 Murphy Oil Corp. 1.056Libby McNeil & Libby.816 N.L. Industries, Inc..792Liggett & Myers Inc..894 Nabisco, Inc..629Lilly (Eli) & Co..799 Nalco Chemical Co..914Litton Industries 1.512 National Airlines, Inc. 1.649Lockheed Aircraft Corp. 1.320 National Aviation Corp..736Loews Corp. 1.909 National Can Corp. 1.170Lone Star Industries.807 National Chemsearch Corp..972Louisiana Land & Exploration Co..986 National Distillers & Chem..601LTV Corporation 2.109 National Gypsum Company.864Lubrizol Corp. 1.045 National Semiconductor Corp. 1.591Lukens Steel Co. 1.468 National Steel Corp..852Macmillan Inc. 1.268 National Tea Company.641Macy (R.H.) & Co., Inc..987 Natomas Co. 2.368Madison Fund, Inc..719 NCR Corp. 1.359Magnavox Co. 1.226 Neptune International Corp..924Mallory, (P. R.) & Co., Inc. 1.058 Newmont Mining Corp. 1.006Marathon Oil Co. 1.329 Norfolk & Western Ry. Co..951Marcor, Inc. 1.150 Northrop Corp. 1.139Maremont Corp. 1.858 Northwest Airlines, Inc. 1.599Marine Midland Banks, Inc..675 Northwest Industries 1.285Marion Laboratories, Inc. 1.251 Norton Simon Inc. 1.256 AU3772_book.fm Page 624 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix A 625_
Occidental Petroleum Corp..948 St. Joe Minerals Corp..888

Olin Corp. 1.067 St. Louis-San Francisco Bay Co..972Otis Elevator Co. 1.011 St. Regis Paper Company.763Outboard Marine Corp. 1.312 Santa Fe Industries Inc..807Owens-Corning Fiberglass Corp..936 Schering-Plough Corp. 1.034Owens-Illinois Inc..992 Schlitz (Jos.) Brewing Co. 1.125Paciﬁc Petroleums Ltd. 1.058 Schlumberger N.V. 1.309Pan American World Airways 1.510 SCM Corporation 1.275Papercraft Corp. 1.218 Scott Paper Co..816Pasco Int. 1.332 Scott, Foresman & Co..980Peabody Galion Corp. 1.490 Seaboard Coast Line Industries 1.256Penn-Dixie Industries 1.126 Searle (G.D.) & Co. 1.209Penney (J.C.) Co. 1.027 Sears, Roebuck & Co..947Pennwalt Corp. 1.016 Sedco, Inc. 1.298Pennzoil Co. 1.326 Shell Oil Co..880PepsiCo, Inc..980 Sheller-Globe Corp. 1.377Perkin-Elmer Corp. 1.147 Sherwin-Williams Co..902Pﬁzer, Inc..869 Signal Companies Inc..986Phelps Dodge Corp..827 Simmons Company 1.006Philip Morris, Inc. 1.023 Simplicity Pattern Co. 1.356Phillips Petroleum Co..885 Singer Company 1.153Pillsbury Company 1.008 Skelly Oil Co..978Pitney-Bowes, Inc..961 Smith (A.O.) Corp. 1.058Pittston Co. 1.100 Smith Kline Corp..884Polaroid Corp. 1.588 Sony Corporation ADR 1.449Ponderosa Systems, Inc. 2.588 Southern Paciﬁc Co..973PPG Industries, Inc..909 Southern Railway Co..905 Prentice-Hall Int. 1.137 Sperry Rand Corp. 1.379 Procter & Gamble Co..870 Sprague Electric Co. 1.582Pullman Inc. 1.045 Square D. Company.905Quaker Oats Co..148 Squibb Corp..989Quaker State Oil 1.223 Standard Brands, Inc..887Ralston Purina Co..704 Standard Oil Co. California.860Rapid American Corp. 1.176 Standard Oil Co. Indiana.891Raytheon Co. 1.416 Standard Oil Co. Ohio 1.098RCA Corp. 1.047 Stauffer Chemical Co..852Reed Tool Co. 1.323 Sterling Drug Inc..777Republic Steel Corp..878 Stevens (O.P.) & Co., Inc. 1.301Research-Cottrell 1.714 Stewart-Warner Corp..769Revco D.S., Inc. 1.203 Stokely-Van Camp, Inc. 1.164Revlon Inc..995 Stone & Webster, Inc..928Reynolds (R.J.) Industries Inc..927 Stop & Shop Companies, Inc..973Reynolds Metals Co. 1.126 Storer Broadcasting Co. 1.496Richardson-Merrell Inc..945 Stovill Manufacturing Co. 1.137Rio Grande Industries Inc..978 Studebaker-Worthington Inc. 1.512Rite Aid Corp. 1.858 Sun Oil Company.880Robertshaw Controls Co. 1.062 Sunbeam Corp..963Robins (A.H.) Co. 1.214 Sundstrand Corp. 1.608Rockwell International Corp..775 Sunshine Mining Co. 1.543Rohm & Haas Co. 1.215 Syntex Corporation 2.279Rosario Resources Corp. 1.239 Taft Broadcasting Co. 1.523Royal Crown Cola Co. 1.314 Technicolor Inc. 1.487Royal Dutch Petroleum Co..878 Tektronix, Inc. 1.739Ryder Systems Inc. 1.209 Teledyne Inc. 1.738Safeway Stores, Inc..743 Tesoro Petroleum Corp. l.416 AU3772_book.fm Page 625 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Texaco Inc..858 Universal Oil Products 1.201

Texas Instruments, Inc. 1.557 Upjohn Company 1.122Texasgulf Inc. 1.646 USLIFE Corp. 1.051Textron Inc. 1.098 USM Corporation 1.184Thiokol Corporation 1.216 Utah International, Inc..847Tiger International, Inc. 1.501 UV Industries, Inc. 1.502Time Inc. 1.474 Varian Associates 1.273Timken Co..722 Vendo Company 1.265Trane Co. 1.103 Victor Comptometer Corp. 1.708Trans-Union Corp. 1.122 Walgreen Company.973Trans-World Airlines, Inc. 1.724 Walker (Hiram).782Transamerica Corp. 1.223 Wallace-Murray Corp. 1.064Transway International Corp. 1.072 Warner Communications Inc. 1.332Tri-Continental Corp..630 Warner-Lambert Co..891Tropicana Producers, Inc. 1.794 Warner & Swasey Co. 1.282TRW Inc. 1.128 West Point-Pepperell 1.153Twentieth Cent.-Fox Film 1.257 Western Air Lines, Inc. 1.406U.S. Gypsum Co..931 Western Bancorporation.747U.S. Industries 1.260 Westinghouse Electric Corp. 1.081U.S. Shoe Corporation.945 Westvaco Corp..956U.S. Steel Corporation.774 Weyerhaeuser Co. 1.050U.S. Tobacco Company.789 Whirlpool Corp..886UAL, Inc. 1.498 Williams Companies 1.284UMC Industries, Inc. 1.221 Winn-Dixie Stores, Inc..700Union Camp Corp..870 Woolworth (F.W.) Co. 1.030Union Carbide Corp..755 Wrigley (Wm.) Jr. Co..791Union Oil Corp. 1.078 Xerox Corp. 1.359 Union Paciﬁc Corp..956 Xtra, Inc. 1.359 Uniroyal, Inc..886 Zale Corp. 1.259United Brands Co. 1.334 Zapata Corp. 1.725United Corp..479 Zenith Radio Corp. 1.264United Merchants & Mfg..849 Zurn Industries 1.494United Technologies 1.529 UTILITY STOCKS Allegheny Power System, Int..534 Detroit Edison Co..532American Electric Power Co. Inc..607 D.J. Utility Average.613American Natural Gas Co..744 El Paso Natural Gas.649American Tel. & Tel Co..591 Florida Power Corp..933Arizona Public Service Co..777 Florida Power & Light Co..732Arkansas Louisiana Gas Co..707 General Public Utilities Corp..616Baltimore Gas & Electric Co..580 General Tel. & Electronics Corp..725Boston Edison Co..554 Gulf States Utilities Co..657Brooklyn Union Gas Co..498 Houston Lighting & Power Co..713Central & South West Corp..651 Idaho Power Co..619Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co..565 Lone Star Gas Co..780Cleveland Electric Illum. Co..557 Long Island Lighting Co..602Columbia Gas System Inc..552 Middle South Utilities, Inc..683Commonwealth Edison Co..630 Mississippi River Corp..866Consolidated Edison New York.538 New England Electric System.544Consolidated Natural Gas Co..529 Nevada Power Co. 1.041Consumers Power Co..693 Niagara Mohawk Power Corp..465Delmarva Power & Light Co..599 Northern Natural Gas Co..746 AU3772_book.fm Page 626 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix A 627_
Northern States Power Co..557 Southern California Edison.696

Ohio Edison Co..548 Southern Company.599Oklahoma Gas & Electric Co..693 Southern Natural Resources, Inc..977Paciﬁc Gas & Electric Co..635 Tenneco Inc..747Paciﬁc Lighting Corp..510 Texas Eastern Transmission Corp. 1.075Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Co..780 Texas Utilities Co..641Pennsylvania Power & Light Co..597 UGI Corp..696Peoples Gas Co..658 Unitel Inc..722Philadelphia Electric Co..499 Virginia Electric Power Co..716Public Service Electric & Gas Co..611 Western Union Corp. 1.317 AU3772_book.fm Page 627 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 628 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

629 appendix B Section 1 Magee’s Original Chapter 23in the Fifth and Seventh Editions The Mechanics of Building a Chart You are now ready to start building your set of charts, which will in time, if faithfully kept, provide you with an invaluable working tool or “capitalasset.” You have before you a supply of whatever type of chart paper you have decided to use, the binder or binders for the charts, pencils, triangle, ruler,and the stock page of the daily newspaper. You will have these thingsarranged on a large, cleared, well-lighted working area; and you will be leftfree to work undisturbed. You have already chosen the list of stocks youintend to chart. Fill out a chart form for each stock. In the upper left-hand corner, put the dates covered by the 52 weeks or whatever period of time is to be coveredby the chart sheet. It would be a good idea, right from the start, to divideyour charts into four groups. All stocks from A to C inclusive might havechart sheets dated January through December 1957, for example (if you areusing the full-year charting paper), followed on their completion by sheetsdated January through December 1958. Then all stocks from D to I inclusivewill be on charts dated April 1957 through March 1958, and these will befollowed on their completion by sheets dated April 1958 through March1959. Similarly, a third group will include stocks from J through R, datedJuly 1957 through June 1958, and a fourth group will include the remainingissues from S through Z, dated October 1957 through September 1958. Thus,each 3 months, a quarter of your charts will run out and call for new pages,and at no time will all your charts come to the ends of their sheets simulta-neously. If the date on which you are starting a chart happens to fall inAugust, set up the sheet dated as for other stocks in its alphabetical group,leaving blank whatever months lie before the start of your chart. Then youwill be on the right track from the beginning and will never have anyconfusion as to the dating of chart sheets. Put the name of the company in the title space at the center of the top; put the dates covered by the sheet to the left, and the ticker symbol to theright. Then ﬁll in the scale of prices on the vertical left margin. If you areusing arithmetic paper, you can simply write the ﬁgures representing prices AU3772_book.fm Page 629 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
up and down from the center, letting the center come at or near the stock’s

market price at the time of starting the chart. With square-root paper orlogarithmic (ratio) paper, place the scale, so that the center of the paper willbe as near as possible to the present price. ( Note: if you are using the TEKNIPLAT chart paper, which is a ratio paper, you will ﬁnd a detailedoutline of procedure in Appendix B, Section 2, though if you are familiarwith ratio scale, you will have no difﬁculty in setting up the chart.) From chart examples in this book, you will see how charts may be titled, dated, and scaled. You will also notice that on sheets especially printed forcharting stock prices, each sixth vertical line is somewhat heavier than itsneighbors; this represents a Saturday, on which you will have no entry sincethe market does not operate on Saturday. However, this slight break eachweek will not affect your trends and other technical indications materially,and serves to provide a space between the weeks, making it easier for theeye to pick out a particular day of the week quickly in charting. It is impor-tant to make your ﬁrst entry on the correct vertical line for the day of theweek, so that the ending of the ﬁrst week will come on a “Saturday” line. Ifa month should start on Monday, start your chart on the ﬁrst line immedi-ately to the right of the left border. If the month should start on Thursday,begin three small spaces farther to the right, so that Saturday falls on theﬁrst heavier line. Finally, you will have a volume scale near the bottom of the chart and a time scale along the very bottom showing the date of each Saturday overthe period covered by the chart sheet. There are four ﬁgures you must pick up for charting from the newspaper you are following. At ﬁrst, you will ﬁnd it necessary to look back and forthseveral times, taking the high, low, closing price, and day’s volume sepa-rately. With practice, and by making a conscious effort to train your eyesand mind, you will ﬁnd it possible to grasp the four ﬁgures in one single“grab,” ﬁxing them in your mind for the few seconds it takes to mark themin on the chart sheet. This knack, when you have mastered it, can cut downthe time needed for charting 50% or more; it is well worth a bit of extra effort. Holidays–Ex-Dividend Days When a holiday occurs or when for any reason the market is closed, simplyskip that day, leaving blank the space (vertical line) where you would haveentered it. When there are no sales of a stock on a particular day, mark asmall “0” in the volume scale. If you happen to be watching a particularsituation in a stock closely, you might want to indicate by a dotted line theapproximate level between the closing bid and the offer prices on the dayno sale occurred. But there is no need to make this a regular procedure. Ex-dividend dates can be indicated by an “x” along the bottom margin of the volume scale, and any data about dividends can then be written in AU3772_book.fm Page 630 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix B 631_
on the extreme bottom margin; for example, “$.5D Unchanged Quarterly”

or “Payable in American funds, $1.00.” Or the amount of the dividend maybe written in vertically right on the face of the chart on the line representingthe ex-dividend date. Stock dividends and rights should be entered in thesame way, and their market value indicated. When stocks go ex-dividend,especially if the dividend is a large one, there may be a price gap which cansometimes appear to change or spoil a technical chart pattern. An Ex-Divi-dend Gap is not a signiﬁcant gap in the technical sense, and if it is no largerthan the amount of the dividend (or rights or other beneﬁt), it may bedisregarded. The newspaper tabulation of stock prices takes this intoaccount. For example, if a stock goes ex-dividend 50 cents and closes ⅜ of a point lower than the previous day, the paper will report the stock “plus ⅛ ” not “minus ⅜.” In the case of Ex-Dividend Caps, you may, if you wish, extend the price range of the stock by a dotted line equal to the amount of the dividend; andyou should, on the day of ex-dividend or similar distribution, move downstop-order levels, limit orders, trendlines, etc. Very often the stock will con-tinue in the (adjusted) pattern or trend even though its level has beenchanged on the ex-dividend day. Stock split-ups or other changes in capitalization cause extra work in charting. Where the split is two-for-one or four-for-one, there is no problembecause the entire scale from that point on is simply changed to the newprice by halving or quartering each horizontal line’s previous value. Yourescale the chart and continue. The chart may, and probably will, becomemore active as to volume (because of the larger number of shares outstand-ing) and may develop “coarser texture” in its patterns from this point on,but it will respect the (adjusted) Resistance and Support Levels, trends, etc.,previously established. Where a split-up is not 2-for-1 or 4-for-1, but someodd ﬁgure such as 3-for-1 or 4-for-7, you will usually have to start a newsheet, plotting the chart at the new prices, and then extending it back a fewweeks by dividing the previous prices by 3 or by 4 / 7, and plotting them on the new scale. You may ﬁnd it convenient to mark on your charts special information on certain companies — purchases of subsidiaries, reduction of bond issues,earnings or other important data — although, in this work, we do notconcentrate on these “fundamental” matters, but on the chart itself. When the Chart Goes Off the Paper When one of your stocks which has been selling in the neighborhood of20 moves up close to 40 and appears likely to rise through 40, it will be wellto rescale the center of the chart at 40. For a time, you can chart the stockon both scales simultaneously, so that if it should proceed up through the40 level, you will have a few weeks of the chart in centered position all ready AU3772_book.fm Page 631 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
to continue. If, on the other hand, the stock recedes to 35 or so, the new

auxiliary chart may be dropped for the time being. Naturally, when such asituation exists, where you are carrying the same stock on two scales simul-taneously, the next following chart sheet will be scaled to continue only thechart on which the price trend is nearer the center of the paper. The Chart Record of Transactions It would be possible to give a good deal of space to the interesting study of“paper accounts” in which theoretical trades are marked and recorded onthe charts, without actually making commitments in real cash. Detailedsuggestions for this work were outlined, and it was planned to include achapter on the subject, but the authors decided that very few readers wouldbe willing to carry out the detailed study, records, and analysis which, to beof any value, would require as much work as actual trading. However, it should be pointed out that anyone who contemplates further research or original work in technical analysis, or who intends to make hiscareer in the stock market, will need a great many more cases for tabulationthan his own actual trades will supply. He will need hundreds of situationsin order to strike an average, so that he can say, “This particular idea seemsto work out in 75% of the cases,” or, “That plan does not provide, on theaverage, enough gain to justify the risk and the costs of taxes, commissions,etc.” The important thing about theoretical trading is that the buying or selling points should be clearly marked on the chart before the expected move hasoccurred, and theoretical orders should be assumed to have been executedexactly as they would have been in a broker’s ofﬁce, with proper deductionmade from the ﬁnal gross gain (or additions to the loss) to cover broker’scommissions, odd-lot fractions, dividends or rights received, and (in case ofshort sales) dividends or rights paid. It does not pay to cheat at solitaire,and the only possible value of such “paper trading” is a record of experiencethat represents exactly what would have happened in an actual account. By recording every promising situation and the action to be taken as it unfolds, an analyst will maintain an alertness to possible opportunities foractual trading. He will be ready to seize opportunities as they appear, andhe will acquire conﬁdence as he sees his own predictions materializing. Ifhe keeps a careful and honest record of his theoretical trades, and tabulatesall of these on the completion of each series of charts, he will have a yardstickfor studying his own improvement, and the comparison between his theo-retical work and his actual results. Furthermore, he will have source materialfor almost any type of advanced research he may want to delve into. For the beginner (although these words will fall mostly on deaf ears), it will pay to make all trades “on paper” for a number of months beforeventuring any actual capital in the market. If good opportunities for proﬁtoccur, there is no need to feel that this or that situation is the last good chance AU3772_book.fm Page 632 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix B 633_
the market will offer. The market will be there next month and next year;

there will be other opportunities just as good. Meanwhile, it is possible toappraise a situation, indicate what you would like to do, and study whatsubsequently happens. If only more novices had the patience to experimentin this way for a time before risking their money, they could avoid many ofthe pitfalls and traps that so often lead to losses and discouragement. Supplementary Memoranda on the Chart There are several special marks to go on the chart which should be men-tioned. We have already spoken of keeping (on the chart itself) a record ofpossible buys and sells, and of theoretical trades — when bought, when sold,time of holding, net gain or loss after commissions and after dividends,etc. You should also record any actual purchases or sales, noting the num-ber of shares, price, broker (if you carry more than one account), etc. Thisrecord can be kept near the top of the sheet, perhaps in blue if long andred if short, extending from the date of original commitment to the dateof closing out. On starting a new (continuation) chart sheet, transfer to its left margin any notes as to actual or theoretical commitments that are still open, stoporders, etc. Also, it would be a good idea to mark all sheets covering a certain52-week period with an identifying series number or letter (“A,” “B,” etc.)in the upper left corner. This would make it easy to reﬁle charts in theirproper chronological folder after they have been taken out for study. In the left-hand margin, at the proper price levels, mark the highest closing price of the previous sheet with a dotted blue line. Also mark thelowest closing price of the previous page with a dotted red line. These levelsgive you important high and low points, violation of which often meansimportant further moves in the same direction. They also give you the“range” of the stock in the preceding 52-week period, which is essential inﬁguring its velocity, or what we call the sensitivity of the stock during thatperiod. We will use this range in making the longer-term Sensitivity Indexwhich is a factor in determining Composite Leverage ratios. One last point on chart mechanics: the longer you keep a record of a stock, the more useful your chart will be. Do not make unnecessary changesin your chart portfolio, but add and drop stocks only gradually and whenyou feel certain the change will improve the group. When you ﬁrst start anew chart, mark it “New,” showing that it is an addition to your portfolio.Then you will not waste time later on looking for a previous sheet on thatstock. Also, a new chart may well have to be carried along for a number ofweeks or even months before you have enough deﬁnite chart informationto enable you to trade in it. If it seems desirable to make a commitment ina stock you do not now chart, it would be best to run back a chart for atleast 3 months from your ﬁles of the ﬁnancial pages, which we hope youcherish and keep to meet just this need. AU3772_book.fm Page 633 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
EN: Alternatively you can get the data from the Internet, which saves all the

space which used to be dedicated to years of The Wall Street Journal yellowing in the corner.

Section 2 TEKNIPLAT Chart Paper If you have never kept charts on this type of paper, known as semilogarith mic, ratio, or proportion, these instructions will help you to read and under-stand the charts more easily, and they will help you in getting started if youare setting up charts of your own. There will be no problem here for the engineer or the experienced char tist, but many people who have not kept charts before, or who are familiaronly with the arithmetic price scale where the intervals are uniform through-out, may be puzzled at ﬁrst by the continually changing vertical spaces. Asyou will discover, however, this very feature makes for easier and fastercharting, because the various prices always lie at the same point in one ofthe “banks,” and the eye becomes adept in placing the point needed auto-matically, without reference to the index ﬁgures along the left margin. On many simple charts, showing hours of work, temperature changes, depth of water, etc., it is perfectly satisfactory to use ordinary cross-sectionpaper, so that each “hour,” “degree,” or “foot” is represented by the samevertical distance on the chart. The difference between 5 feet and 10 feet isthe same as the distance between 105 feet and 110 feet. But this is not a good way to represent the differences in stock prices. It is perfectly true that the difference in market value between a stock sellingat $5 a share and one selling at $10 a share is $5, or $500 on a block of100 shares. And that the difference between the value of a stock selling at100 and one at 105 is also $5, or $500 on a block of 100 shares. But in thislatter case, there is a great deal more of your capital involved. For example, if you put $1000 into a stock at 5, you would get (disre garding commission) 200 shares. And if you sold these at 10, you wouldreceive $2000. You would have a proﬁt of $1000, or 100%. But if you putyour $1000 into a stock selling at 105, you would be able to buy only 9 shares.And when you sold ﬁve points higher at 110, your proﬁt would be only $45,or 4 ½ %. It will give you a better comparison of the percentages of proﬁt in various stock transactions if the price scale of your chart is designed to show equalpercentages of advance or decline of equal vertical distances, regardless ofthe price of the stock. This is exactly what the TEKNIPLAT charting paperdoes. A certain vertical distance on the paper will always indicate the samepercentage change, and a trend moving at a certain angle will always indicatethe same rate of percentage change, no matter what the price of the stockmay be. AU3772_book.fm Page 634 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix B 635_
Obviously, one point of advance or decline is much more important to

you in a stock selling at $5 or $6 a share than in one selling at $100. So it should not surprise you that the interval between 5 and 6 is much largerthan that between 100 and 101. And since the stocks at lower prices makelarger percentage moves for each point, or half point, or one-eighth point,these moves will show up more plainly on their charts. Actually, it is notpossible on the TEKNIPLAT paper to show a single eighth of change for astock selling as high as 100. But this is just another way of saying that asingle eighth is not important at that price. You might well be concernedabout the difference between 1 ¼ and 1 ⅜. But you would not care too much whether you sold at 103 or 103 ⅛. Since all your stocks will be plotted on a proportion basis, you can compare directly the action of any one stock with any other as to pattern,trend, etc. Thus, a stock selling at 16 can be compared with a stock sellingat 56. However, although the percentage moves will be strictly comparable,it should be pointed out that, typically, the very high-priced issues makesmaller percentage moves than the low-priced ones. The price scale on TEKNIPLAT paper consists of two “banks,” occupying the upper and lower halves of the main chart space. These two banks areexactly alike. Each represents a doubling of prices from its bottom to its top,so that whatever value is assigned to the center line, the top line will betwice that ﬁgure and the bottom line will be half of it. Let us say the centerpoint is marked 20; then the top will be 40, and the 9 Intermediate lines willbe 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32, 34, 36, and 38, reading from center to top, with eachof the smallest spaces representing ¼ point. In the lower half of the chart, the bottom line will be 10, the Intermediate heavy lines to the center will be11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, and 19, and each of the smallest spaces will be ⅛ point. Since the spaces get smaller as one goes up the chart, one bank shades into the next, making a continuous scale. Obviously, you could have20 at the top, 10 at the center, and 5 at the bottom; or 10 at the top, 5 at thecenter, and 2 ½ at the bottom. At ﬁrst you may have some trouble with the different values assigned to the small spaces at different price levels; you may wonder whether asingle small space represents ¼ or ⅛ or perhaps a full point. Do not let this bother you. You can see from the scale where 19 is and where 20 is, andobviously 19 ½ is the midpoint, 19 ¼ is one quarter of the way up, and so on. Very quickly, you will ﬁnd that your mind and your eye adjust almostinstantly without any conscious thought or effort. Where a stock goes off the top or bottom of the paper, it is a simple matter to rescale by moving the chart scale down one bank. If the chart runsoff the top at 40, mark the center of the paper 40; from then on, the topbecomes 80 and the bottom, 20. For uniformity, and because the paper is ruled to divide either bank of the heavy Intermediate lines into 10 parts, with smaller spaces representingstandard stock-trading fractions of these main divisions, you must use theﬁgures 5, 10, 20, etc., as the values for the center lines, tops, and bottoms of AU3772_book.fm Page 635 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
DIAGRAM 11. A sheet of TEKNIPLAT chart paper cut away to show six price scales most fr equently used. SCALE FOR

STOCKS FROM 31 2TO 14SCALE FOR STOCKS FROM

## _7 TO 14SCALE FOR_
STOCKS

FROM

## _14 TO 28SCALE FOR_
STOCKS

FROM

## _28 TO 56SCALE FOR_
STOCKS

FROM

## _56 TO 112SCALE FOR_
STOCKS

FROM

## _112 TO 224PRICE SCALES FOR TEKNIPLAT CH ART PAPER_
9

8 7 6 5 4 4 31 2 31 219 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 1038 36 3432 30 28 26 24 22 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1176 72 68 64 60 56 4852 44 40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22152 144 136128 120 112 96104 88 80 76 72 68 64 60 56 52 48 44304 288 272 256 240 224 192208 176 160 152 144 136 128 120 112 104 96 889 8 7 6TEKNIPLAT Chart Paper Published and Distributed by JOHN MAGEE, Inc. Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, 360 Worthington Street, Springﬁeld 3, Massach usettsType RUCOPYRIGHT 1961 BY JOHN MAGEE, SPRINGFIELD, MASS. AU3772_book.fm Page 636 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix B 637_
charts. For selection of scales on stocks for which you are starting new charts,

use this table. Note: This table can, of course, be continued up or down as far as necessary by multiplying or dividing the key ﬁgures by two. The Time Scale The paper provides for a full year of charting. The sheet is divided into53 weeks, each consisting of 6 days in which the heavier line represents aSaturday, and this is ordinarily left blank since the major markets are notopen on Saturday. However, the heavier line will serve to make it easier tolocate a day within a week, quickly. The omission of the Saturday will notperceptibly affect the trend of the technical patterns. Holidays, when they occur, are skipped. Usually, a small “H” is inserted at the bottom of the chart to note the holiday and explain the break in thechart. Many technicians start their charts as of the ﬁrst of a calendar year, ﬁlling in the dates of Saturdays marking the end of each week at the bottom of thepaper in the spaces provided, and immediately above these dates, themonths. There is no reason, however, that charts cannot be started at anytime, and if you keep a large number of charts, it may be a help to start someof these in each calendar quarter. Thus, you might start all charts from A toF in January, from G to M in April, from N to S in July, and from T to Z inOctober. The volume scale that has proved most satisfactory is arithmetic, that is, each unit measured vertically represents the same number of sharestraded. Space for volume entries is provided in a special section above thedates. At one time, a logarithmic volume scale was used, but it was givenup because the highly signiﬁcant volumes on very active days tended to becompressed, while low volume in periods of dullness was given too muchemphasis. If the stock now Center line sells between will be Top Bottom 224 and 448 320 640 160 112 and 224 160 320 8056 and 112 80 160 4028 and 56 40 80 2014 and 28 20 40 107 and 14 10 20 53 ½ and 7 5 10 2 ½ 1 ¾ and 3 ½ 2 ½ 51 ¼ AU3772_book.fm Page 637 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
It is necessary to determine the proper ﬁgures for the volume scale. No

rule for this can be suggested. It is simply a matter of trial and error. With a little experience, you will be able to estimate, from your knowledge of thestock you are about to chart, about how much volume is likely to appear onvery active days, and you can set up a volume scale that will allow for themaximum expected peak. What you want to avoid is the situation wherevolume too frequently runs beyond the top of the volume section; it shoulddo this only at times of unusual activity. Where a stock is new to you, and you have no knowledge of its habits, it may be best to mark a tentative volume scale, lightly and in pencil, andkeep the volume on this scale for a few weeks. Then if it is necessary tochange the scale, you can do so without having to draw the entire chart over. Ex-Dividends and Split-Ups When a stock goes “ex-dividend,” “ex-rights,” etc., the price will usuallydrop approximately the amount of the beneﬁt that was “ex.” A note shouldbe made on the chart on this day, and this can be entered conveniently atthe very bottom, below the dates, showing the amount of the dividend,approximate value of the rights, or other beneﬁts. If the amount involvedwas substantial and the price drop is large enough to require explanation,a dotted line may be drawn vertically on that date from the old price to the“ex” price, showing that this drop was not a market ﬂuctuation, but merelythe adjustment of price to the distribution. In the case of a split-up, spin-off, or other capital change, a similar procedure is followed. If the stock is split three-shares-for one, for example,the price level will change, and the chart will be continued at a new level.A dotted vertical line plus an explanatory note will make clear what hap-pened. In order to get continuity of the chart in such a case, the previousprice pattern can be traced and then transferred with carbon paper in thecorrect position to give a continuous chart adjusted to the new basis for asfar back as you need it. However, if a stock is split two-shares-for-one or four-for-one, you will not have to make any change in the chart except to note the fact on the split,and to change the scale by dividing all ﬁgures by 2 or 4, as the case may be.In other words, if a stock has been selling at 80 and is split 2-for-1, we simplyrescale the chart with the price at 40 and carry on. Very often it will help torule a vertical red line through the date on which a split-up or other capitaladjustment takes effect. EN: As the reader is aware by now, most of the charts in this book are drawn on TEKNIPLAT paper. Figure 246 offers a full view of the form. Readers interestedin manual charting may purchase TEKNIPLAT paper at www.edwards-magee.com. AU3772_book.fm Page 638 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

639 appendix C Technical Analysis of Futures Charts (Using Number Driven Methods) EN: This Appendix is an edited version of Chapter 16 from the seventh edition by the redoubtable editor of that edition, Richard McDermott. It will serve as a handybrief introduction to some of the concepts of number-driven analysis. For an excellent(and highly recommended) work on the technical analysis of futures see Jack Schwager’s On Futures, Technical Analysis. EN9: The reader should understand clearly the purpose and intent of this Appendix and of all treatments of number-driven methods in this book. This Appendix is not intended to be a comprehensive treatment of number-driven technical analysis inthe futures area. It is presented to give the reader a brief survey of some of themethods used by this breed of analysts. The original authors of this work (and thepresent editor) were and are chart analysts and practitioners of natural systems.AND I believe that the methods presented here can be better used when practicedby a competent chart analyst. Commodities Futures Futures (a standardized instrument allowing the investor to buy at currentprices for future delivery) are traded on commodities such as agriculturalproducts (e.g., corn, oats, wheat, soybeans, livestock); metals (e.g., gold,silver, platinum, palladium); forest, ﬁber, and food (e.g., lumber, cotton,orange juice, sugar, cocoa, coffee); energy, (e.g., crude oil, heating oil, gaso-line, natural gas); ﬁnancial and other derivative markets (e.g., debt instru-ments such as U.S. Treasury Bonds, stock indexes, currencies). The futures industry began in the United States in the early 1800s as a way to stabilize crop producers’ and buyers’ incomes by locking in a currentcommodity price for delivery at a later date. As the futures market developedand became standardized, the primary investment strategies of hedging andspeculation evolved. Trading of futures and options has expanded to numer-ous types of investment products and, in recent years, has become global. Empirical experience demonstrates that chart patterns exist for equity shares of stock and also for other ﬁnancial instruments traded on publicexchanges. Commodities trading is another place to look for indicativechart patterns. Price trends of actively traded properties, limited only by AU3772_book.fm Page 639 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
the constraints of supply and demand, also illustrate meaningful patterns

when plotted on a graph. Rising or Declining Trends, Congestion, Consoli dation, and Reversals will be evident, similar to the pattern formation createdby shares of common stock. Activities of the speculators and the underlyinginvestor psychology are similar, whether the securities are stock shares orfutures contracts. Principles of technical analysis apply to any of the active commodity futures such as: corn, cotton, cocoa, coffee, wheat, and others. Some allow-ance must be made for the intrinsic differences between commodity futurescontracts and equity stocks or bonds, of which four are noted here. 1. Limited Life — One of the most prominent differences is the fact that commodity futures have a limited life; they expire on a set date.Although each futures contract has a certain life of its own, it willtend to trade in a pattern similar to cash for delivery prices andsimilar to other comparable contracts. The limited independent lifehas consequences of long-term Support and Resistance Levels whichhave less value for analysis, although they have some value for theshort term. 2. Hedging — Another important difference between commodity and stock analysis is the fact that many investors are using futures forhedging, a conservative strategy, rather than speculating. The resultof this situation is the fact that near-term levels of Support or Resis-tance have less meaning than with equities. Futures with commodi-ties grown as crops can also have seasonal inﬂuences which areobserved and evaluated by both hedgers and speculators. Seasonalfactors can have an effect on the reliability of signals in the technicalanalysis of commodities. 3. Volume — A third major difference is volume. Volume’s relation to stock trading is not complex. A speciﬁc number of shares exist fortrading. Changes in the total number of shares available must gothrough an approval process and be well publicized. Average dailyvolumes can be calculated and used as a benchmark to show suddenincreases or declines. With futures, there is virtually no limit to thetotal number of contracts which can be bought or sold for futuredelivery on any one commodity, although there are limits on thenumber of contracts a single investor can buy or sell on a speciﬁcfutures contract. It is possible for the open interest to exceed theamount of an underlying commodity actually delivered. In fact, mostcontracts are closed out before the delivery date. 4. Weather — A ﬁnal major difference is the fact that weather news regarding such things as droughts, ﬂoods, etc., can impact the com-modity crop and change the trend of the futures market immediatelyand dramatically. The stock market has few such inﬂuences. EN: Except for Alan Greenspan and the Federal Reserve Board. AU3772_book.fm Page 640 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix C 641_
Observable Patterns

With the differences accounted for, under normal market conditions, chart patterns can still be observed and used for analysis of commodities, as theyare used with common stocks, such as: • Head-and-Shoulder Formations• Rounding Tops and Bottoms Basic Trendlines can be observed and plotted. Other patterns, common with equities, like Triangles, Rectangles, Flags, etc., appear less frequently in commodities and tend to be unreliable in forecasting many directionalchanges of some commodity futures prices. Support and Resistance Levelsseem to be accurate at times and insigniﬁcant at other times (probably dueto supply and demand factors outside the patterns established by hedge andspeculative trading). Price gaps also seem to have less meaning. Triangle patterns occur less frequently in commodities and aren’t as reliable as with equities, but they do occur. Breaks tend to be stronger initiallywhen they do not occur at the apex of the Triangle, which is the sametendency as with stock chart patterns. FIGURE 180. Corn Futures, March 1997. A declining market. A rally from Support (the Double Bottom in July–August). Resistance met at 360, and a reversal. As the price declines areas of Support become Resistance. Note the Support Line from earlyNovember, well into December. (See Chapters 13 and 30 for more on Support andResistance.) CORN – CBOT MARCH 1997 Resistance Support Resistance Support9 DAY MOVING AVERAGE

## _18 DAY MOVING AVERAGE 400_
380360340320300280

VOL & O.I 400000 200000 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC¢/BUSHEL AU3772_book.fm Page 641 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Successful speculation in commodities futures requires an extensive back

ground in understanding the inﬂuences on their prices. Although chart patterns can be observed, as shown here, reliability of signals due to inherent differencesbetween stocks and commodities should be approached with caution. Importance of Stop-Loss Orders A stop-loss order is a closing transaction for an open order. It is an order tosell at the current market price, if the stop price is traded on or through, orif the opening transaction was a buy (long position). It is an order to buy atthe current market price, if the stop price is traded on or through or if the opening transaction was a sell (short position). Whereas stop orders are much debated in the equities market, any pro fessional commodities trader will acknowledge their importance to avoid catastrophic losses. The 1990s served witness to incidents where public andprivate institutions lost billions of dollars in the futures and other deriva-tives. Where were their stop-loss orders? The essential stop-loss order is aninsurance policy which should be considered part of the cost of doing busi-ness. An ideal stop-loss is placed far enough away from the current trading range in order to not be activated by normal market ﬂuctuations, yet be therefor a Major Reversal. But, the market is not an ideal universe. Reality saysthe orders will be placed too close or too far away. Of those two alternatives,too far away is preferable for many. Too close leads to frustration andincreased transaction costs. Left with only two alternatives, most investorswould lean toward the least frustrating, that of being too far away. Multipletransactions can also cause confusion and thereby increase risk. The too-far-away stop can be further honed and reﬁned by mathematical analysis (e.g., standard deviation) or simple observation of the chart pattern,including levels of Support and Resistance. Placing the stop-loss away fromcurrent trading will cause the order to be activated only if trading violatesthe range. The too-far-away method can be improved with practice. Thesedistant stops do avoid reentry problems as well as keep slippage and trans-action fees under control; however, the overall portfolio risk is greater.Whichever system is used, the primary caution is to avoid switching backand forth between too close and too far away. In some markets, ﬂip-ﬂoppingcould easily lead to whipsawing by cutting proﬁts both ways. (SeeChapter 27, Stop Orders.) Weekly Charts The detail of the daily price chart is important, but it is also important todouble-check the daily chart by comparing it to the weekly or monthly pricechart. The longer-term charts give “the bigger picture” and help to explainthe development of current trends. “The Trend Is Your Friend” can be astrue in commodities trading as it is in equity trading. AU3772_book.fm Page 642 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix C 643_
Trends

Trends usually endure for comparatively long periods of time and a trading position that doesn’t ﬁght the trend ordinarily does better. As with equity chartpatterns, Uptrend Lines are drawn under the lows and Downtrend Lines aredrawn across the highs. Many chartists draw trendlines on both sides of thetrend to indicate the Trading Channel. Trendlines can be drawn through highsand lows or through closing prices shown by the dots on the right side of eachhigh–low bar (a dot to the left of a high–low bar indicates an opening price). If a commodity trendline isn’t broken, it remains, usually until at least two closing breaks occur. Many times a market will go sideways near the Bottomof a downtrend. The sideways trend gives traders time to believe the down-trend is over. For this reason they appear most often at the Bottom, and, thelonger Consolidating sideways trends continue, the stronger the next rally willbe. False turns happen most often at the Top where everyone gets nervous.Although the most reliable trendlines move at or near a 45-degree angle, anytrendline running consistently for more than 4 weeks tends to continue. FIGURE 181. Corn Futures, March 1997. Although the patterns shown here are clear, there is a possibility that the downturn in July is the end of a Broad Head-and Shoulders Pattern (including the head and right shoulder). Notice the decline involume during August. The lower volume is possibly under a right shoulder. It isimportant to determine if this was from a Head-and-Shoulders Formation (see weeklychart Figure 183). Triangle formations here seem to be quite accurate. (See Chapter 8for more on Triangles and Chapters 14, 15, and 40 for more on trendlines.) Noticehow the Downtrend Line aligns itself with the apex of a Triangle. Chart courtesy ofMarket Research, Inc. (www.barchart.com). CORN – CBOT MARCH 1997 9 DAY MOVING AVERAGE

## _18 DAY MOVING AVERAGE400_
380360340320300280

VOL & O.I 400000 200000 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DECTrendline¢/BUSHEL AU3772_book.fm Page 643 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Market Timing Indicators

The reliability of chart trend patterns can be enhanced and improved by observing other market timing indicators which have a track record forproducing reliable signals in the commodities markets. Often times suchindicators need conﬁrmation of another system to enhance the timing ofbuys and sells. Chart patterns and other timing indicators ﬁt together well. Moving Averages Moving Averages are some of the oldest technical indicators, and remainsome of the most useful indicators for market analysts. A Moving Averageis the average price of a security at a speciﬁc point in time. A Moving Averageshows a trend. The purpose of the Moving Average is to show the trend ina “smoothed” manner, with less apparent volatility. Although a smoothed FIGURE 182. Standard & Poor’s 500 Index (Cash). Although the weekly chart gives more history to a trend, it will look at cash prices instead of futures prices, simply because of the narrowly deﬁned futures life which has a beginning and an end. Thetrend in the 1996 market was unmistakably Bullish. After the July correction Resis-tance was continually penetrated and Support held ﬁrm until December. The De-cember break was signiﬁcant, but, at this point, appears to be a correction and notnecessarily a Reversal. (See Chapters 14, 15, and 40 for more on trendlines.) Chartcourtesy of Market Research, Inc. (www.barchart.com). S&P; 500 INDEX FUTURES CASH Break TrendlineINDEX VALUE

## _9 DAY MOVING AVERAGE_
## _18 DAY MOVING AVERAGE775_
750725700675650

625 VOL & O.I VALUE 400000 200000 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC AU3772_book.fm Page 644 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix C 645_
trend can be considered a chart pattern

(EN: i.e., trendline), Moving Averages give unique signals that can be used in conjunction with other traditional chart patterns. Time Span The user selects the time span. For stocks, the most common time periodsare 10-day, 30-day, 50-day, 100-day, and 200-day Moving Averages. Mosttechnicians, however, use variations of these numbers to suit their individualneeds. There isn’t just one “right” time frame. Moving Averages with differ-ent time spans show different stories. The shorter the time span, the moresensitive the Moving Average will be to price changes. The longer the timespan, the less sensitive or the more smoothed the Moving Average willappear. The other factor to deﬁne is the price used in computations. The most common price used is the close for a particular day. However, technicians FIGURE 183. Weekly Corn Prices (Cash). As was suspected in the corn daily futures price chart (Figure 181), a broad, 9-month Head-and-Shoulders Topping/Pattern formed in the corn market. The left shoulder occurred in mid-December 1995, withthe head in May–June of 1996, and ﬁnally the right shoulder (on lower volume) inAugust. Although the Consolidation could be the Bottom, it appears to be viewedwith some caution in the November–December area. (See Chapters 6, 7, and 8 formore information on Head-and-Shoulders Formation and measuring.) Chart courtesyof Market Research, Inc. (www.barchart.com). NecklineS SHAS OF: 12/20/96 1995 1996CORN – CBOT

## _9 WEEK MOVING AVERAGE_
## _18 WEEK MOVING AVERAGE550_
500

450 400 350 300 250 VOL & O.I 1000000 500000 JASON DJ F M A MJ JA SON D A SO N D JF M A M JJ¢/BUSHEL AU3772_book.fm Page 645 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
use several other variations. They are (high + low)/2; (close + high + low)/3;

(open + close + high + low)/4; and the weighted variation is (high + low +close + close)/4. Closing prices are signiﬁcant because they represent posi-tions that investors are willing to carry overnight. Single Moving Average Perhaps the best way to understand a Moving Average is with an example.Assume we have been tracking the closing price of IBM for the past 100 daysand want to create a 50-day Moving Average. First, add the closing pricestogether for the ﬁrst 50 days. Then divide this amount by 50. This is the ﬁrstpoint plotted on the chart. Then add the closing prices together for Day 2through Day 51. Next, divide this amount by 50, establishing the secondpoint on the chart. Then add the closing prices for Days 3 through 52 togetherand divide the number by 50, etc. Connect all the points plotted together ina line and run it through the price bars. FIGURE 184. 30-Year Treasury Bond Futures (March 1997). Here again are Triangle patterns indicating approaching market breaks. The ﬁrst in July broke signiﬁcantly to the upside with an accompanying increase in volume. The second break in mid-August had a decline, as did the break in late November. Although the October breakshowed a slight increase in volume, September’s break only had a Minor increase.Support held well in four instances: June, July, and two in September. Resistancefrom July–August held in early October, but when penetrated later in the month hada signiﬁcant Rally. (See Chapter 7 for more on Triangle formations.) Chart courtesyof Market Research, Inc. (www.barchart.com).

## _30 YEAR TREASURY BONDS_
MARCH 19979 DAY MOVING AVERAGE

## _18 DAY MOVING AVERAGE118_
116114112110

108 106 VOL & O.I 1000000 500000 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DECPOINTS AU3772_book.fm Page 646 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix C 647_
Dual Moving Averages

Moving Averages can become more powerful when multiple Moving Aver ages are plotted. One combination is to plot a 9-day Moving Average andan 18-day Moving Average on the same chart. A buy signal is given whenthe 9-day Moving Average crosses above the 18-day Moving Average andboth Moving Averages are in an upward direction. A sell signal is givenwhen the 9-day Moving Average crosses below the 18-day Moving Averageand both Moving Averages are declining. Although any number of Moving Averages can be used, the use of three or four is not uncommon. Dual Moving Averages appeal to many technicalanalysts. Research shows using two averages tends to be the most effective.Like many other indicators, averages can be unreliable or difﬁcult to tradein fast markets. They contain data not within the current range of volatility;the data never reach the present. The averages do call attention to the currentmovement in relation to the past. False signals can be given when prices ﬂuctuate in a Broad Sideways Pattern. To compensate, technicians use other indicators to conﬁrm the direc-tion of price. Looking to the chart patterns can be the indicator of choice for FIGURE 185. IBM 1996, 50-Day Moving Average (Exponentially Smoothed). The plotted Moving Average shows a smoothed price trend. A buy signal is given when price crosses above the Moving Average and the Moving Average is directed upward.A sell signal is given when price drops below the Moving Average and the MovingAverage is directed downward. Buy and sell signals are not given when the MovingAverage changes direction but price does not cross above or below the MovingAverage. Chart courtesy of AIQ MarketExpert (www.aiqsystems.com). IBM (Daily) 120 116112108104100 9692 VolumeAMJ J A 131072 9830465536 32768 AU3772_book.fm Page 647 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
these occasions. Pattern Formations will be Rectangles, Triangles, Pennants,

or other Consolidations. Seeing them on a chart can clarify the MovingAverage signals. (See Chapter 11 on Consolidation Formations.) Weighted and Exponential Moving Averages There are two other types of Moving Averages, the Weighted Moving Aver-age and the Exponential Moving Average. If a simple Moving Average iscentered, the signal is delayed. To overcome this, many technicians use aWeighted Moving Average where the data are weighted in favor of the morerecent data. A Weighted Moving Average reverses direction more quicklythan a simple Moving Average. The most frequently used method to weight a Moving Average is, for a 5-day Moving Average, multiply the ﬁrst observation by 1; the second obser-vation by 2; the third observation by 3; the fourth observation by 4; the ﬁfthobservation by 5. Then divide this sum by the sum of the weights. In thiscase, the divisor is 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 = 15. The sum in the ﬁrst part of theequation is divided by 15. With a Weighted Moving Average, a buy or sellsignal is given when the Weighted Moving Average changes direction. FIGURE 186. Soybean Futures, January 1997. A chart with four buy signals and four sel1 signals, some with only minor gains. Watchers of Moving Averages need to establish which signals are signiﬁcant enough for them to make a trade. (SeeChapter 36, Automated Trendline: The Moving Average.) Chart courtesy of MarketResearch, Inc. (www.barchart.com). Buy SellBuy Sell Buy SellSOYBEANS – CBOT JANUARY 19979 DAY MOVING AVERAGE

## _18 DAY MOVING AVERAGE825_
800775750725700675

VOL & O.I 200000 100000 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC¢/BUSHEL AU3772_book.fm Page 648 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix C 649_
An Exponential Moving Average is a form of a Weighted Moving Aver

age. To construct a 20-day Exponential Moving Average, ﬁrst construct a 20-day Simple Moving Average. The Simple Moving Average becomes thestarting point. Assume the Simple Moving Average value for Day 20 is 42;the Simple Moving Average value for Day 21 is 43; and the Simple MovingAverage value for Day 22 is 44. We then subtract the Day 20 Moving Averagevalue from Day 21 Simple Moving Average value and get a difference of1.00. This value (1.00) is multiplied by an exponent. In this case, the exponentis 0.1. Next, add 0.1 to the Simple Moving Average value of Day 20. TheExponential Moving Average value of Day 20 now becomes 42.100. And thisgoes on indeﬁnitely. To calculate the exponent, divide 2 by the time period.In our case, we divided 2 by 20 to arrive at 0.1. The average itself can act as an area of Support and Resistance. The more times a Moving Average is touched, the greater the signiﬁcance of a violation.A penetration of a Moving Average is a signal that a change in trend maybe taking place. Conﬁrmations of trend changes should be conﬁrmed fromalternative sources. Generally, the longer the time frame of the MovingAverage, the greater the signiﬁcance of a crossover. Moving Average Caveat The largest difﬁculty with Moving Averages is their reliance on trendingmarkets. Flat or Consolidating markets will create similar Moving AverageLines (see Chapter 11, Consolidation Formations). Another annoyance is fora quick-turning market to be well ahead of the turn in the Moving Averages,which are buoyed up by the numbers from previous dates. AlthoughWeighted or Exponential Averages partly get around being buoyed, theytend to whipsaw with the market and the smoothing factor is lost. These arereasons for not being dependent on Moving Averages alone. Traditional chartpatterns can be useful in combination with Moving Averages. EN9: Without a doubt one of the most important contributions chart analysis can make to a mechanical system is to make the user aware of the state of the market.A competent analyst should recognize the difference between trading and trendingmarkets and adjust his tactics accordingly. Unfortunately few traders seem to usethis “hybrid” approach. They fear “discretionary trading,” not trusting their ownemotional strength to deal with the enormous stress of futures trading. Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD) MACD, an oscillator, is derived by dividing one Moving Average by another.Basically, it combines three Moving Averages into two lines. In today’s com-puter programs, the Moving Averages are usually exponentially weighted,thus giving more weight to the more recent data. It is plotted on a chart witha horizontal equilibrium line. The equilibrium line is important. When the two Moving Averages cross below the equilibrium line, it means that the shorter EMA is at a value less AU3772_book.fm Page 649 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
than the longer EMA. This is a Bearish signal. When the EMAs are above

the equilibrium line, it means that the shorter EMA has a value greater thanthe longer EMA. This is a Bullish signal. The ﬁrst line is the difference between a 12-period Exponential Moving Average and a 26-period Exponential Moving Average. The second line(signal line) is an approximate exponential equivalent of a 9-period MovingAverage of the ﬁrst line. The exponential values being 0.15, 0.075, and 0.20.A MACD can be displayed as a line oscillator or a histogram. Software allows a user to change values when calculating MACD. Some systems require the entering of exponential values, and others use the actualnumber of periods for the three Moving Averages. There is a caution onchanging original values of MACD to curve ﬁt the data. It is recommendedthat two differing sets of values be used, one for the buy-side and anotherfor the sell-side. Both use a 9-period (0.20) signal line, but the 0.15, 0.075combination is for the sell-side only. The buy-side values are 8-period (0.22)and 17-period (0.11). The sell-side formula is normally slower (EN: with the intention of buying quickly and letting proﬁts run). It is probably best to stay with the standard sell-side formula in the commodities market; even thoughslower, it should be more reliable in most situations. FIGURE 187. Standard & Poor’s 500 Index 1996, MACD. Buy signals are generated when the faster line crosses the slower line from below. Sell signals come from the opposite, when the faster line crosses the slower line from above. It is easy to see someof the difﬁculties and risks involved with mechanically trading every buy and sell signalfrom MACD. Using different periods for buy and sell can help overcome some of thedifﬁculties, but using other indicators, such as trendlines drawn on the MACD line, canalso assist the trader in selecting entry and exit points. The use of trendlines here changesthe number of trades from nine to three and they are all on the right side of the market.Chart Courtesy of AIQ MarketExpert (www.aiqsystems.com). S & P 500(Daily) MACD678.40 665.60652.80640.00627.20614.40601.60588.80 8.00 4.000.00(4.00)(8.00)FM M AJ JA AU3772_book.fm Page 650 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix C 651_
Buy and Sell Signals

Buy signals are generated when the faster line crosses the slower line from below. Sell signals come from the opposite, that is, when the faster linecrosses the slower line from above. Beware of mechanically trading everyMACD crossover, as it can lead to whipsaws and substantial drawdowns.The fact is, narrow trading ranges give many false signals which can beavoided with additional interpretation. EN9: This additional interpretation being conscientious observance of the bar charts. MACD Overbought–Oversold Gerald Appel, who originally developed MACD in 1979 (as a stock markettiming device), sets the overbought and oversold signals for the S&P; Indexas a plus or minus 2.50 on the MACD scale. With the NYSE Index he recommends plus or minus 1.20. When the Differential Line crosses into these areas, a signal is generated for buy or sell. Similar levels can beobserved and established for any market, thereby eliminating the whipsaw-ing of short price swings. MACD is best used as a long-term analysis tool. MACD Trendlines, Divergences, and Combinations Drawing a trendline along the MACD and trading when the trendline isviolated can often precede a change in the market. MACD crossovers havemore signiﬁcance when they are preceded by, or are in conjunction with, aviolation of the trendline. Aggressive traders can use the trendline break asan action signal and cautious traders can wait for further conﬁrmation.However, it is possible to have a trendline break and a delayed crossover,which can be frustrating. Divergence is one of the most common and effective patterns in technical analysis. Patterns where the MACD shows Divergence from what the pricesare doing can be an important signal, although the pattern needs time todevelop and should not be anticipated. Combining crossovers with other technical patterns can make the MACD system more reliable as a system for trading. Major Trends are identiﬁed byusing a long-term MACD to conﬁrm the short-term MACD. A monthlyMACD can be used to conﬁrm weekly patterns, the weekly pattern canconﬁrm the daily, and the daily can be used for conﬁrmation of intraday.Shorter-term signals can be traded in the direction of longer-term MACD;this helps avoid problems of whipsawing markets. As with other commod-ities trading systems, the use of stop-loss orders is recommended. AU3772_book.fm Page 651 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Reversals

Reversals in the direction of a Moving Average are usually more reliable than a Moving Average Crossover. In an uptrend, the following conditionsapply: • Long positions are maintained as long as price remains above the Moving Average. • If price crosses above the Moving Average, a buy signal is generated.• If price falls to the Moving Average but doesn’t cross it and then moves back up, a buy signal is generated. If a price drops sharply below the Moving Average Line a rebound toward the Moving Average Line may occur, resulting in a whipsaw action.In a downtrend, short positions are held as long as price remains below theMoving Average. A sell signal is generated when price moves above a declin-ing Moving Average Line. If price moves up to the Moving Average Linebut doesn’t cross it and drops down again, a sell signal is generated.* Bollinger Bands (BB) Developed by John Bollinger (as the Financial News Network’s Chief Tech-nical Analyst), Bollinger Bands are Alpha–Beta bands positioned two stan-dard deviations from a 20-day Moving Average. They were developed in anattempt to improve on the concept of ﬁxed-width trading bands (tradingbands drawn parallel, at a ﬁxed distance to a Moving Average). Bollingerselected standard deviations because the calculation involves squaring fromthe average; it makes the system responsive to the short-term price changes. Overbought or Oversold The primary purpose of the developed Bollinger Bands is to indicate whetherprices are relatively too high or too low. Once the determination is made,the trader can turn to other indicators for trading signals (such as a RelativeStrength Indicator). Customizing The standard deviation value can be altered. Some traders increase the valueof the standard deviation from two standard deviations to 2.5 standard * “The Moving Average Convergence–Divergence Trading Method” from Technical Toolbox, a special monthly feature of Technical Traders Bulletin, January 1990. AU3772_book.fm Page 652 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix C 653_
deviations away from the Moving Average when using a 50-day Moving

Average. Conversely, many technicians lower the value of the standard devi-ation from two to 1.5 standard deviations away from the Moving Averagewhen using a 10-day Moving Average. Any alteration should have the bandscontaining most but not all of the data. Bollinger Bands with Other Indicators Since Bollinger Bands do not generate buy and sell signals alone, they areused with other indicators, such as a Relative Strength Index (RSI) or chartpatterns. When price touches one of the bands, it can indicate a continuationof the trend; or it might indicate a Reversal. Bollinger Bands need buy andsell signals from other sources (see Chapter 30, Support and Resistance). When combined with an indicator such as RSI and chart patterns, Bol linger Bands can become quite powerful. RSI is an excellent indicator withrespect to overbought and oversold conditions. When price touches theupper Bollinger Band, and RSI is below 70, it is an indication that the trendwill continue. Conversely, when price touches the lower Bollinger Band, andRSI is above 30, it indicates the trend should continue. FIGURE 188. Standard & Poor’s 500 Index 1996, Bollinger Bands. John Bollinger’s

> “Bollinger Bands” have gained an excellent reputation as a reliable indicator for stock
trading and commodities trading. Bollinger’s intent was to create a system wherebythe market would tell him what it was doing, rather than his trying to impose anexternal discipline on the market. The bands indicate overbought and oversold, butrely on other indicators for buy and sell signals. Here with RSI Wilder, as discussedin text. Chart Courtesy of AIQ MarketExpert (www.aiqsystems.com). S & P 500(Daily) RSI Wilder678.40 665.60652.80640.00627.20614.40 601.60 588.80 96.00 80.0064.0048.0032.0016.000.00FM AM J J A AU3772_book.fm Page 653 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
If a price touches the upper Bollinger Band and RSI is above 70 (possibly

approaching 80) the trend may reverse and decline. On the other hand, if a price touches the lower Bollinger Band and RSI is below 30 (possiblyapproaching 20) it indicates the trend may reverse and move upward. Driven by Market Variables The logic behind Bollinger Bands was to create a system driven by marketvariables, rather than trying to impose an external discipline on the market.It asks the market what is happening, rather than trying to tell the marketwhat it is doing. Charting follows the same line of reasoning and can beeffectively used with the bands.* Stochastics The Stochastic Oscillator, developed by George Lane, compares a security’sprice closing level to its price range over a speciﬁc period of time. With thisindicator, Lane theorized, in an upward-trending market, prices tend to closenear their high; and during a downward-trending market, prices tend toclose near their low. As an upward trend matures, prices tend to close furtheraway from their high; as a downward trend matures, prices tend to closeaway from their low. Clusters The Stochastic Indicator attempts to determine when prices start to clusteraround their low of the day in an uptrending market, and cluster aroundtheir high in a downtrend. Lane theorizes these conditions indicate a TrendReversal is beginning to occur. %D Line and %K Line The Stochastic Indicator is plotted as two lines, the %D Line and %K Line.The %D Line is more important than the %K Line. The stochastic is plottedon a chart with values ranging from 0 to 100. The value can never fall below0 or above 100. Readings above 80 are considered strong and indicate a priceis closing near its high. * “Bollinger Bands,” TTB Interviews John Bollinger, from Technical Traders Bulletin, July 1990. AU3772_book.fm Page 654 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix C 655_
Readings below 20 are strong and indicate a price is closing near its low. Ordinarily, the %K Line will change direction before the %D Line. However,

when the %D Line changes direction prior to the %K Line, a slow and steadyReversal is often indicated. When both %K and %D Lines change direction, and the faster %K Line changes direction to retest a crossing of the %D Line, though doesn’t crossit, the incident conﬁrms stability of the prior Reversal. A powerful move isunder way when the indicator reaches its extremes around 0 and 100. Fol-lowing a Pullback in price, if the indicator retests extremes, a good entrypoint is indicated. Many times, when the %K or %D Lines begin to ﬂattenout, the action becomes an indication the trend will reverse during the nexttrading range. Periodicity of D For commodities, the number of periods to use in stochastics is based on thecycle of the commodity being traded. First, determine the cycle of the com-modity, then use the number of bars for stochastics corresponding to onehalf of the period of the cycle. If an 18-day cycle is observed, 9-day stochasticsare used. Shorter-term stochastics should be used to ﬁne-tune an entry orexit at the point of decision. However, the analyst should immediately revertback to the optimum stochastic and be certain to trade with the trend.* Divergence Quite often Divergence appears on the chart. The price may be makinghigher highs, but the Stochastic Oscillator is making lower lows. Or, con-versely, price may be making lower highs, and the Stochastic Oscillator ismaking higher highs. In either case, the indicator is often demonstrating achange in price before price itself is changing. The Stochastic Oscillator analysis system was originally developed by George Lane back in the mid-1950s. At ﬁrst, he believed the only valid signalwas the Divergence between %D and the securities price. Later, he recantedand stated this was not strictly true and, furthermore, adherence to theoriginal could get a beginning analyst into trouble. In an uptrending market, Lane has learned, many congested Tops, often Double Tops or Triple Tops (see Chapter 9, Important Reversal Patterns, formore information on Double and Triple Tops), can take several time periodsto turn down and approach the bottom trendline. He refers to them as“Garbage Tops.” * “Stochastics Revisited” by George C. Lane, Technical Toolbox, a special monthly feature of Technical Traders Bulletin, December 1990. AU3772_book.fm Page 655 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
When prices ﬁnally do turn down, they often bottom quickly and turn

right back up again, creating “Spike Bottoms.” These are to be expected in an uptrending market. Knowledge of them can be helpful in strong trendingmarkets. The 0% and 100% Misunderstandings A misunderstanding some stochastic analysts have refers to the %K reachingthe extremes of 100% or 0%. When the %K Line reaches 100%, it does notmean that the prices can’t go higher. Conversely, even though the %K is atzero, prices can still go lower. Zero is not necessarily a Bottom; in fact, theopposite could be true. The extremes denote strength at the 100% level andextreme weakness at zero.* The misunderstanding comes from levels com-monly believed to indicate “overbought” or “oversold.” When the %Kand %D Lines rise above 75%, it is considered an overbought situation. FIGURE 189. Oats Futures (with stochastic chart), May 1997. Reversals were sig naled when the %D changed direction prior to %K’s change in late August and early October. Prices closed near their lows in mid-July, late September. Late October toearly November prices also closed near their lows, as shown by both %K and %DLines being at the bottom of their range. Chart courtesy of Market Research, Inc.(www.barchart.com). * “Stochastics Revisited” by George C. Lane, Technical Toolbox, a special monthly feature of Technical Traders Bulletin, December 1990. %D changed direction before %K Prices closing near lows %K %DOATS – CBOT MARCH 1997

## _9 DAY MOVING AVERAGE_
## _18 DAY MOVING AVERAGE_
## _14 DAY STOCHASTIC %K_
## _14 DAY STOCHASTIC %D260_
240220

200180160140 PERCENT 100 50 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC¢/BUSHEL AU3772_book.fm Page 656 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

##  _Appendix C 657_
Conversely, if they drop below 25%, it is considered oversold (some traders

use 80% and 20% for the indicator levels). When the move is a sustainedmove, the price decline can continue for an extended period, with the oscil-lator remaining near the bottom. Check the Weekly/Monthly Stochastics, as well as trend charting, should always look at the biggerpicture as well as the tight focus. If a daily chart is followed, it should becompared to a weekly chart for a better understanding of what is happeningin the longer term. The longer-term trend chart helps the analyst to under-stand developments leading up to the current market situation. Stochastics, used in combination with conventional charting techniques and common sense, can work well. For example, if an unviolated trend isin force, with no Consolidations or Reversal Patterns forming, the stochasticsignal is likely false. If, however, a Symmetrical Triangle is forming and atrend is being violated, the signal is conﬁrmed. FIGURE 190. Corn Futures, March 1997. Even though the Stochastic Lines are nearly zero, many would consider this oversold. The price of the corn futures con tinues to decline. Some erroneously believe a Reversal is imminent when the linesare near zero. Near zero signiﬁes extreme weakness. In a sustained move, the valuescan remain in the below 25% area for some time. In this example, the oscillatorremained low from early September through early November. Chart courtesy ofMarket Research, Inc. (www.barchart.com). Near ZeroOverbought 75%CORN – CBOT MARCH 19979 DAY MOVING AVERAGE

## _18 DAY MOVING AVERAGE_
## _14 DAY STOCHASTIC %K_
## _14 DAY STOCHASTIC %D400_
380360340320300280

PERCENT 100 50 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DECOversold 25%¢/BUSHEL AU3772_book.fm Page 657 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

743 Glossary EN: The Glossary is the work of the distinguished editor of the seventh edition, Richard McDermott. Minor changes are so noted. EN9: Some entries are written by other analysts, whose names are noted.While it requires the use of the human brain and some discrimination and judgment the great virtue of Magee chart analysis is that it allows the practitioner to evaluatehow well number driven indicators function. As, for example, use of a movingaverage to identify the trend works wonderfully well in a trending market. And, ifused as a signal generator in a trading market results in whip-saws. Similarly,oscillators often are useful in trading markets, but can mislead the trader when themarket begins to trend. The reasonably accomplished chart analyst can recognizethe state of the market and view the performance of number driven indicators froma more informed perspective. Thus the reader should keep this in mind while readingabout ADXs and suchlike. ACCUMULATION — The ﬁrst phase of a Bull Market. The period whenfarsighted investors begin to buy shares from discouraged or distressedsellers. Financial reports are usually at their worst and the public is com-pletely disgusted with the stock market. Volume is only moderate, but begin-ning to increase on the rallies. ACTIVITY — See Volume.ADX (Average Directional Movement Index) — The ADX is a trend-follow ing indicator devised by Welles Wilder (RSI Wilder) and is based on theconcept of directional movement. It is designed to evaluate the trendingcharacteristics of a security. The ADX is frequently used to avoid trendlessmarkets, and signals when a trend reaches a proﬁtable trading level. In atrendless market, the ADX indicates avoidance. Directional movement is a measure of the net total price movement during a set period of time. First, the positive and negative directionalmovements are determined by summing the daily up and down moves. Thevalues obtained are next normalized by dividing them by the “True Range,”the absolute value of the total move for the period; this difference betweennormalized values (expressed as a percentage) is the directional movement. The ADX is then obtained from directional movement by the use of exponential average and ratios. The ADX is often charted with a second line,the ADXR Indicator. ADXR is a smoothed average of the ADX. A rising ADX indicates signiﬁcant directional movement and the begin ning of a good trading period. The declining ADX is shown during a poorperiod for trend following. Normally, an ADX Indicator above 25 signalssigniﬁcant directional movement and good trading. AU3772_book.fm Page 743 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
APEX — The highest point; the pointed end, tip, of a Triangle. ARBITRAGE — The simultaneous buying and selling of two different, but

closely related instruments to take advantage of a disparity in their pricesin one market or different markets. EN: Those who buy the acquirer and sell the acquired in takeover situations — sometimes called “arbs” or arbitrageurs — areersatz or faux arbitrageurs. They are really spreaders. Arbitrageur is a solecism usedin that sense. It is also a false cognate to the French. AREA GAP — See Common Gap. AREA PATTERN — When a stock or commodity’s upward or downward momentum has been temporarily exhausted, the ensuing sideways move-ment in the price usually traces out a design or arrangement of form calledan Area Pattern. The shape of some of these Area Patterns, or Formations,have predictive value under certain conditions. (See also Ascending Triangle,Broadening Formations, Descending Triangle, Diamond, Flag,Head-and-Shoulders, Inverted Triangle, Pennant, Rectangle, Right-AngleTriangles, Symmetrical Triangles, and Wedges.) ARITHMETIC SCALE — Price or volume scale where the distance on the vertical axis (i.e., space between horizontal lines) represents equal amountsof dollars or number of shares. ASCENDING (PARALLEL) TREND CHANNEL — When the tops of the rallies composing an advance develop along a line (sometimes called aReturn Line), which is also parallel to the basic up trendline (i.e., the linewhich slopes up across the wave bottoms in an advance); the area betweenthe two lines is called an Ascending or Up Channel. ASCENDING (UP) TRENDLINE — The advancing wave in a stock or com modity is composed of a series of ripples. When the bottoms of these ripplesform on, or very close to, an upward slanting straight line, a basic Ascendingor Up Trendline is formed. ASCENDING TRIANGLE — One of a class of Area Patterns called Right-Angle Triangles. The class is distinguished by the fact that one of thetwo boundary lines is practically horizontal, while the other slants towardit. If the top line is horizontal and the lower slants upward to an intersectionpoint to the right, the resulting Area Pattern is called Ascending Triangle.The implication is bullish, with the expectant breakout through the horizon-tal line. Measuring Formula: add the broadest part of triangle to the breakoutpoint. AT-THE-MONEY — An option, the strike price of which is equal to the market price of the underlying instrument. AVERAGES — See Dow–Jones Industrial Averages, Moving Averages, Dow–Jones Transportation Averages, and Dow–Jones Utility Averages. AU3772_book.fm Page 744 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary 745 AVERAGING COST — An investing technique where the investor buys a stock or commodity at successively lower prices, thereby “averaging down”his average cost of each stock share or commodity contract. Purchases atsuccessively higher prices would “average up” the price of stock shares orcommodity contracts. EN: A very foolish technique for the amateur. AXIS — In the graphic sense, an axis is a straight line for measurement orreference. It is also the line, real or imagined, on which a formation isregarded as rotating. BALANCED PROGRAM — Proportioning capital, or a certain part of capital, equally between the long side and the short side of the market. BAR CHART — Also called a Line Chart. A graphic representation of prices using a vertical bar to connect the highest price in the time period to thelowest price. Opening prices are noted with a small horizontal line to theleft. Closing prices are shown with a small horizontal line to the right. Barcharts can be constructed for any time period in which prices are available.The most common time periods found in bar charts are hourly, daily, weekly,and monthly. However, with the growing number of personal computersand the availability of “real-time” quotes, it is not unusual for traders to usesome period of minutes to construct a bar chart. BASIC TRENDLINES — See Trendlines.BASING POINT — The price level in the chart which determines where a stop-loss point is placed. As technical conditions change, the Basing Point,and stops, can be advanced (in a rising market), or lowered (in a fallingmarket). (See Progressive Stops.) BASIS POINTS — The measure of yields on bonds and notes. One Basis Point equals 0.01% of yield. BASKET TRADES — Large transactions made up of a number of various stocks. BEAR MARKET — In its simplest form, a Bear Market is a period when prices are primarily declining, usually for a long period of time. Bear Marketsgenerally consist of three phases. The ﬁrst phase is distribution, the secondis panic, and the third is akin to a washout, where those investors who haveheld through the ﬁrst two phases ﬁnally give up and liquidate. BENT NECKLINE — See Neckline.BETA — A measurement of an individual stock’s sensitivity to market swings. BETA (COEFFICIENT) — A measure of the market or nondiversiﬁable risk associated with any given security in the market. BLOCK TRADES — Large transactions of a particular stock sold as a unit. AU3772_book.fm Page 745 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
BLOW-OFF — See Climactic Top. BLUE CHIPS — The nickname given to high-priced companies with good

records of earnings and price stability. Also called gilt-edged securities.Examples: IBM, AT&T;, General Motors, and General Electric. BLUE PARALLEL — A line drawn parallel to the trendline (Blue Trendline) which connects at least two highs. The Blue Parallel is started off a low andused to estimate the next low point. BLUE TRENDLINE — A straight line connecting two or more Tops together. To avoid confusion, Edwards and Magee use a blue line for Top Trendlinesand a red line for Bottom Trendlines. BOLLINGER BANDS (BB) — An envelope, in the form of two lines, which surrounds the price bars on a chart. Bollinger Bands are plotted two standarddeviations away from a Simple Moving Average. This is the primary differ-ence between Bollinger Bands and other envelopes. Envelopes are plotted aﬁxed percentage above and below a Moving Average. As standard deviationis a measure of volatility, Bollinger Bands adjust themselves to differingmarket conditions. The bands grow wider during volatile market periodsand narrower during less volatile periods. Bollinger’s premise is to ask the market what it is doing, rather than tell it what to do. He focused on volatility with the use of standard deviation toset the band width. The bands are normally plotted two deviations awayfrom the standard deviation, which is effectively a 20-day Moving AverageLine. The plot is valid if an average acts as a Support Line on marketcorrections. If the average is penetrated on corrections, it is too short. Bol-linger recommends 10-day Moving Averages for short-term trading, 20-dayfor intermediate-term trading, and 50-day for longer-term trading. Devia-tions also need to be adjusted: 10 days can use 1.5 deviations, 20 days usetwo deviations, and 50 days use 2.5 deviations. The nature of the time periodsdoes not matter; the bands can be used on monthly, weekly, daily, and evenintraday ﬁgures. Bollinger Bands do not usually generate buy and sell signals alone. Most often they provide a framework within which price may be related to otherindicators. Bollinger recommends using the bands in relation to other buyand sell signals. However, the bands can be an integral part of the signal. Ifa price touches an upper band and indicator action conﬁrms it, no sell signalis generated (it is a continuation signal if a buy signal was in effect). If aprice touches an upper band and an indicator does not conﬁrm (diverges),it is a sell signal. If a Top Price Chart Formation is formed outside the bandsand is followed by a second Top inside the bands, a sell signal is generated.The exact opposite is true on the buy side. When combined with other indicators, such as the RSI, the Bollinger Bands become quite powerful. RSI is an excellent indicator with respect tooverbought and oversold conditions. Generally, when price touches the AU3772_book.fm Page 746 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary 747 upper Bollinger Band and RSI is below 70, it is an indication that the trend will continue. Conversely, when price touches the lower Bollinger Band, andRSI is above 30, it is an indication the trend should continue. If a situationoccurs where price touches the upper Bollinger Band and RSI is above 70(possibly approaching 80), it is an indication that the trend may reverse itselfand move downward. On the other hand, if price touches the lower BollingerBand and RSI is below 30 (possibly approaching 20), the trend may reverseitself and move upward. (See also Multicolincarity, Percent B, Wilder RSI.) BOOK VALUE — The conventional accounting measure of what a stock is worth based on the value of the company’s assets less the company’s debt.Eminently manipulable. BOTTOM — See Ascending Triangle, Dormant Bottom, Double Bottom, Head-and-Shoulders Bottom, Rounding Bottom, and Selling Climax. BOUNDARY — The edges of a pattern.BOWL — See Rounding Bottom.BRACKETING — A trading range market or a price area that is nontrending.BREAKAWAY GAP — The hole or gap in the chart created when a stock or commodity breaks out of an Area Pattern. BREAKOUT — When a stock or commodity exits an area pattern.BROADENING FORMATION — Sometimes called Inverted Triangles, these are formations which start with narrow ﬂuctuations that widen out betweendiverging, rather than converging, boundary lines. (See also Right-AngledBroadening Formations, Broadening Top, Head-and-Shoulders, and Dia-mond Patterns.) BROADENING TOP — An Area Reversal Pattern which may evolve in any one of three forms, comparable in shape, respectively, to inverted Symmet-rical, Ascending, or Descending Triangles. Unlike Triangles, however, theTops and Bottoms of these patterns do not necessarily stop at clearly markeddiverging boundary lines. Volume, rather than diminishing in triangles,tends to be unusually high and irregular throughout pattern construction.No Measuring Formula is available. BULL MARKET — A period when prices are primarily rising, normally for an extended period. Usually, but not always, divisible into three phases. Theﬁrst phase is accumulation. The second phase is one of fairly steady advancewith increasing volume. The third phase is marked by considerable activityas the public begins to recognize and attempt to proﬁt from the rising market. CALL OPTION — An option that gives the buyer the right to buy the underlying contract at a speciﬁc price within a certain period, and thatobligates the seller to sell the contract for the premium received beforeexpiration of the designated time period. AU3772_book.fm Page 747 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
CANDLESTICKS — A Japanese graphical representation of price action

using the same data as bar charts, but which adds color to the candlestick(or data) to indicate the direction of prices from the opening. Cf. Nison,Bibliography. CATS AND DOGS — Low-priced stocks of no investment value.CHANNEL — If the Tops of the rallies and Bottoms of the reactions develop lines which are approximately parallel to one another, the area between theselines is called a Channel. (See also Ascending Trend Channel, DescendingTrend Channel, and Horizontal Trend Channel.) CHART — A graphic representation of a stock or commodity in terms of price and/or volume. (See also Bar Chart and Point & Figure Chart.) CLEAN-OUT DAY — See Selling Climax.CLIMACTIC TOP — A sharp advance, accompanied by extraordinary vol ume, i.e., much larger volume than the normal increase, which signals theﬁnal “blow-off” of the trend, followed by either a Reversal, or at least by aperiod of stagnation, formation of Consolidation Pattern, or a Correction. CLIMAX DAY — See One-Day Reversal.CLIMAX, SELLING — See Selling Climax.CLOSING PRICE — The last sale price of the trading session for a stock. In a commodity, it represents an ofﬁcial price determined from a range of pricesdeemed to have traded at or on the close; also called a settlement price. CLOSING THE GAP — When a stock or commodity returns to a previous gap and retraces the range of the gap. Also called covering the gap or ﬁllingthe gap. (See also Gap.) COIL — Another term for a Symmetrical Triangle.COMMISSION — The amount charged by a brokerage house to execute a trade in a stock, option, or commodity. In a stock, option, or commodity, acommission is charged for each purchase and each sale. In a commodity, acommission is charged only when the original entry trade has been closedwith an offsetting trade. This is called a round turn commission. COMMON GAP — Also called Area Gap. Any hole or gap in the chart occurring within an Area Pattern. The forecasting signiﬁcance of the Com-mon Gap is nil. (See also Gap.) COMPARATIVE RELATIVE STRENGTH — Compares the price movement of a stock with that of its competitors, industry group, or the whole market. COMPLEX HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS — Also called Multiple Head-and-Shoulders. It is a Head-and-Shoulders Pattern with more than oneright and left shoulder and/or head. (See also Head-and-Shoulders.) AU3772_book.fm Page 748 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary 749 COMPOSITE AVERAGE — A stock average composed of the 65 stocks which make up the Dow–Jones Industrial Average and the Dow–JonesUtility Average. COMPOSITE LEVERAGE — In Edwards and Magee, it is a formula for combining the principal factors affecting a given sum of capital used (i.e.,sensitivity, price, and margin) into one index ﬁgure. CONFIRMATION — In a pattern, it is the point at which a stock or com modity exits an Area Pattern in the expected direction by an amount of priceand volume sufﬁcient to meet minimum pattern requirements for a bona ﬁde breakout. In the Dow Theory, it means both the Industrial Average and the Transportation Average have registered new highs or lows during the same advance or decline. If only one of the Averages establishes a new high (orlow) and the other one does not, it would be a nonconﬁrmation, or Diver-gence. This is also true of oscillators. To conﬁrm a new high (or low) in astock or commodity, an oscillator needs to reach a new high (or low) as well.Failure of the oscillator to conﬁrm a new high (or low) is called a Divergenceand would be considered an early indication of a potential Reversal indirection. CONGESTION — The sideways trading from which Area Patterns evolve. Not all Congestion periods produce a recognizable pattern, however. CONSOLIDATION PATTERN — Also called a Continuation Pattern, it is an Area Pattern which breaks out in the direction of the previous trend. (Seealso Ascending Triangle, Descending Triangle, Hag, Head-and-ShouldersContinuation, Pennant, Rectangle, Scallop, and Symmetrical Triangle.) CONTINUATION GAP — See Runaway Gap.CONTINUATION PATTERN — See Consolidation Pattern.CONVERGENT PATTERN (TREND) — Those patterns with upper and lower boundary lines which meet, or converge, at some point if extended tothe right. (See also Ascending Triangle, Descending Triangle, SymmetricalTriangle, Wedges, and Pennants.) CORRECTION — A move in a commodity or stock which is opposite to the prevailing trend, but not sufﬁcient to change that trend. Called a rally in adowntrend and a reaction in an uptrend. In the Dow Theory, a Correctionis a Secondary Trend against the Primary Trend, which usually lasts from 3weeks to 3 months and retraces from one third to two thirds of the precedingswing in the Primary Direction. COVERING THE GAP — See Closing the Gap.CRADLE — The intersection of the two converging boundary lines of a Symmetrical Triangle. (See also Apex.) AU3772_book.fm Page 749 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
DAILY RANGE — The difference between the high and low price during

one trading day. DEMAND — Buying interest for a stock at a given price.DESCENDING (PARALLEL) TREND CHANNEL — When the Bottoms of the reactions comprising a decline develop along a line (sometimes called aReturn Line), which is also parallel to the basic down trendlines (i.e., the linewhich slopes down across the wave tops in a decline), the area between thetwo lines is called a Descending or Down Channel. DESCENDING TRENDLINE — The declining wave in a stock or commodity is composed of a series of ripples. When the tops of these ripples form on,or very close to, a downward slanting straight line, a basic Descending orDown Trendline is formed. DESCENDING TRIANGLE — One of a class of Area Patterns called Right-Angle Triangles. The class is distinguished by the fact that one of thetwo boundary lines is practically horizontal, while the other slants towardit. If the bottom line is horizontal and the upper slants downward to anintersection point to the right, the resulting Area Pattern is called a Descend-ing Triangle. The implication is Bearish, with the expectant breakout throughthe ﬂat (horizontal) side. Minimum Measuring Formula: add the broadestpart of the Triangle to the breakout point. DIAMOND — Usually a Reversal Pattern, but it will also be found as a Continuation Pattern. It could be described as a Complex Head-and-Shoul-ders Pattern with a V-shaped (bent) Neckline, or a Broadening Pattern which,after two or three swings, changes into a regular Triangle. The overall shapeis a four-point Diamond. Since it requires a fairly active market, it is moreoften found at Major Tops. Many Complex Head-and-Shoulders Tops areborderline Diamond Patterns. The major difference is in the right side of thepattern. It should clearly show two converging lines with diminishing vol-ume as in a Symmetrical Triangle. Minimum Measuring Formula: add thegreatest width of the pattern to the breakout point. DISTRIBUTION — The ﬁrst phase of a Bear Market, which really begins in the last stage of a Bull Market. The period when farsighted investors sensethat the market has outrun its fundamentals and begin to unload theirholdings at an increasing pace. Trading volume is still high; however, it tendsto diminish on rallies. The public is still active, but beginning to show signsof caution as hoped-for proﬁts fade away. DIVERGENCE — When new highs (or lows) in one indicator are not realized in another comparable indicator. (See also Conﬁrmation.) DIVERGENT PATTERN (TREND) — Those patterns with upper and lower boundary lines which meet at some point if extended to the left. (See alsoBroadening Formation.) AU3772_book.fm Page 750 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary 751 DIVERSIFICATION — The concept of placing your funds in different indus try groups and investment vehicles to spread risk. Not to put all yourﬁnancial eggs in one basket. DIVIDENDS — A share of the proﬁts, in cash or stock equivalent, which is paid to stockholders. DORMANT BOTTOM — A variation of a Rounding (Bowl) Bottom, but in an extended, ﬂat-bottomed form. It usually appears in “thin” stocks, (i.e.,those issues with a small number of shares outstanding) and characteristi-cally will show lengthy periods during which no sales will be registered fordays at a time. The chart will appear “ﬂy-specked” due to the missing days.The technical implication is for an upside breakout. DOUBLE BOTTOM — Reversal Pattern. A Bottom formed on relatively high volume which is followed by a rally (of at least 15%), and then a secondBottom (possibly rounded) at the same level (plus or minus 3%) as the ﬁrstBottom on lower volume. A rally back though the apex of the interveningrally conﬁrms the Reversal. More than a month should separate the twoBottoms. Minimum Measuring Formula: take the distance from the lowestbottom to the apex of the intervening rally and add it to the apex. DOUBLE TOP — A high-volume Top is formed, followed by a reaction (of at least 15%) on diminishing activity. Another rally back to the previous high(plus or minus 3%) is made, but on lower volume than the ﬁrst high. Adecline through the low of the reaction conﬁrms the Reversal. The two highsshould be more than a month apart. Minimum Measuring Formula: add tothe breakout point the distance from the highest peak to the low of thereaction. Also called an “M” Formation. DOUBLE TRENDLINE — When two relatively close Parallel Trendlines are needed to deﬁne the true trend pattern. (See also Trendline.) DOW–JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE — Developed by Charles Dow in 1885 to study market trends. Originally composed of 14 companies (12railroads and 2 industrials), the rails, by 1897, were separated into their ownAverage, and 12 industrial companies of the day were selected for the Indus-trial Average. The number was increased to 20 in 1916, and to 30 in 1928.The stocks included in this Average have been changed from time to timeto keep the list up to date, or to accommodate a merger. The only originalissue still in the Average is General Electric. DOW–JONES TRANSPORTATION AVERAGE — Established at the turn of the century with the new Industrial Average, it was originally called the RailAverage and was composed of 20 railroad companies. With the advent ofthe airlines industry, the Average was updated in 1970 and the name changedto Transportation Average. AU3772_book.fm Page 751 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
DOW–JONES UTILITY AVERAGE — In 1929, utility companies were

dropped from the Industrial Average and a new Utility Average of 20 compa-nies was created. In 1938, the number of issues was reduced to the present 15. DOWNTICK — A securities transaction which is at a price that is lower than the preceding transaction. DOWNTREND — See Descending Trendline and Trend.DRAWDOWN or RETRACEMENT — The ebb, or loss, of a portfolio’s equity from a relative high to a relative low. Maximum drawdown equals retrace-ment from maximum high point to minimum low point. END RUN — When a breakout of a Symmetrical Triangle Pattern reverses its direction and trades back through axis Support (if an upside breakout) or Resistance (if a downside breakout), it is termed an end run around the line, or end run for short. The term is sometimes used to denote breakout failure in general. EQUILIBRIUM MARKET — A price area that represents a balance between demand and supply. EX-DIVIDEND — The day when the dividend is subtracted from the price of the stock. EX-DIVIDEND GAP — The gap in price caused when the price of a stock is adjusted downward after the dividend payment is deducted. EXERCISE — The means by which the holder of an option purchases or sells shares of the underlying security. EXHAUSTION GAP — Relatively wide gap in the price of a stock or com modity which occurs near the end of a strong directional move in the price.These gaps are quickly closed, most often within 2 to 5 days, which helpsto distinguish them from Runaway Gaps, which are not usually covered fora considerable length of time. An Exhaustion Gap cannot be read as a MajorReversal, or even necessarily a Reversal. It signals a halt in the prevailingtrend, which is ordinarily followed by some sort of area pattern development. EXPIRATION — The last day on which an option can be exercised.EXPONENTIAL SMOOTHING — A mathematical method of forecasting which assumes future price action may be forecast by using a weightedaverage of past periods; a mathematical series in which greater weight isgiven to more recent price action. A method of trend identiﬁcation. FALLING WEDGE — An Area Pattern with two downward slanting, con verging trendlines. Normally, it takes more than 3 weeks to complete, andvolume will diminish as prices move toward the apex of the pattern. Theanticipated direction of the breakout in a Falling Wedge is up. MinimumMeasuring Formula: a retracement of all the ground lost within the Wedge.(See also Wedge.) AU3772_book.fm Page 752 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary 753 FALSE BREAKOUT or FALSE SIGNAL— A breakout which is conﬁrmed but which quickly reverses and eventually leads the stock or commodity toa breakout in the opposite direction. Indistinguishable from premature brea-kout or genuine breakout when it occurs. FAN LINES — A set of three secondary trendlines drawn from the same starting high or low, which spread out in a Fan shape. In a Primary Uptrend,the fan would be along the tops of the Secondary (Intermediate) Reaction.In a Primary Downtrend, the fan would be along the bottoms of the Second-ary (Intermediate) Rally. When the third Fan Line is broken, it signals theresumption of the Primary Trend. 50-DAY MOVING AVERAGE LINE — Is determined by taking the closing price over the past 50 trading days and dividing by 50. EN: Simple moving average for n days consists of summing prices for n days and dividing by n. Onn+1 drop the ﬁrst day and add the new day to the formula, etc. FIVE-POINT REVERSAL — See Broadening Pattern. FLAG — A Continuation Pattern. A ﬂag is a period of congestion, less than 4 weeks in duration, which forms after a sharp, near vertical, change in price.The upper and lower boundary lines of the pattern are parallel, though bothmay slant up, down, or sideways. In an uptrend, the pattern resembles aFlag ﬂying from a mast, hence the name. Flags are also called Measuring orHalfMast Patterns because they tend to form at the midpoint of the rally orreaction. Volume tends to diminish during the formation, and increase onthe breakout. Minimum Measuring Formula: add the distance from thebreakout point, which started the preceding “Mast” rally or reaction, to thebreakout point of the Flag. FLOATING SUPPLY — The number of shares available for trading at any given time. Generally, the outstanding number of shares less shares closelyheld and likely to be unavailable to the public. Shares of a company held byits employee pension fund, for example, would not generally enter thetrading stream and could be subtracted from the outstanding shares. FORMATION — See Area Pattern.FRONT-MONTH — The ﬁrst expiration month in a series of months.FUNDAMENTALS — Information on a stock pertaining to the business of the company and how it relates to earnings and dividends. In a commodity,it would be information on any factor which would affect supply or demand. EN: Also, earnings, proﬁts, proﬁt margins, cash ﬂow, sales, and other statisticssometimes used to obfuscate the value of the issue. GAP — A hole in the price range which occurs when either (1) the lowestprice at which a stock or commodity is traded during any time period ishigher than the highest price at which it was traded on the preceding timeperiod, or (2) the highest price of one time period is lower than the lowest AU3772_book.fm Page 753 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
price of the preceding time period. When the ranges of the two time periods

are plotted, they will not overlap or touch the same horizontal level on thechart — there will be a price gap between them. (See also Common or AreaGap, Ex-Dividend Gap, Breakaway Gap, Runaway Gap, Exhaustion Gap,and Island Reversal.) GRAPH — See Chart.HALF-MAST: — See Flag. Edwards said “The ﬂag ﬂies at half-mast” refer ring to the tendency of prices to consolidate half way through a surgingvertical run. HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS PATTERN — Although occasionally an Inverted Head-and-Shoulders Pattern (called a Consolidation Head-and-Shoulders)will form, which is a Continuation Pattern, in its normal form, this patternis one of the more common and more reliable of the Major Reversal Patterns.It consists of the following four elements (a Head-and-Shoulders Top willbe described for illustration): (1) a rally which ends a more or less extensiveadvance on heavy volume, and which is then followed by a Minor Reactionon less volume; this is the left shoulder; (2) another high-volume advancewhich exceeds the high of the left shoulder, followed by another low-volumereaction which takes prices down to near the bottom of the preceding reac-tion, and below the top of the left shoulder high; this is the head; (3) a thirdrally, but on decidedly less volume than accompanied either of the ﬁrst twoadvances, and which fails to exceed the high established on the head; thisis the right shoulder; and (4) a decline through a line drawn across theproceeding two reaction lows (the neckline), and a close below that lineequivalent to 3% of the stock’s market price. This is the conﬁrmation of thebreakout. A Head-and-Shoulders Bottom, or any other combinationHeadand-Shoulders Pattern, contains the same four elements. The maindifference between a Top Formation and a Bottom Formation is in the volumepatterns. The breakout in a Top can be on low volume. The breakout in aBottom must show a “conspicuous burst of activity.” Minimum MeasuringFormula: add the distance between the head and neckline to the breakoutpoint. HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS BOTTOM — Area Pattern which reverses a decline. (See also Head-and-Shoulders Pattern.) EN: An upside down name for an upside down pattern. See Kilroy Bottom. HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS CONSOLIDATION — Area Pattern which con-tinues the previous trend. (See also Head-and-Shoulders Pattern.) HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS TOP — Area Pattern which reverses an advance. (See also Head-and-Shoulders Pattern.) HEAVY VOLUME — The expression “heavy volume,” as used by Edwards and Magee, means heavy only with respect to the recent volume of sales inthe stock you are watching. AU3772_book.fm Page 754 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary 755 HEDGING — To try to lessen risk by making a counterbalancing investment. In a stock portfolio, an example of a hedge would be to buy 100 shares ofXYZ stock, and to buy one put option of the same stock. The put would helpprotect against a decline in the stock, but it would also limit potential gainson the upside. See Natural Hedge. HISTORICAL DATA — A series of past daily, weekly, or monthly market prices.HOOK DAY — A trading day in which the open is above/below prior day’s high/low and the close is below/above prior day’s close with narrow range. HORIZONTAL CHANNEL — When the Tops of the rallies and Bottoms of the reactions form along lines which are horizontal and parallel to oneanother, the area in between is called a Horizontal Trend Channel. It mayalso be called a Rectangle during the early stages of formation. HORIZONTAL TRENDLINE — A horizontal line drawn across either the Tops or Bottoms in a sideways trending market. HYBRID HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS — A small Head-and-Shoulders Pat tern within a larger Head-and-Shoulders Pattern. (See also Head-and-Shoul-ders Pattern.) INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE — See Dow–Jones Industrial Average.INSIDE DAY — A day in which the daily price range is totally within the prior day’s daily price range. INSIDERS — Individuals who possess fundamental information likely to affect the price of a stock, but which is unavailable to the public. An examplewould be an individual who knows about a merger before it is announcedto the public. Trading by insiders on this type of information is illegal. IPO — Initial Public Offering. INTERMEDIATE TREND — In Edwards and Magee, the term Intermediate or Secondary refers to a trend (or pattern indicating a trend) against thePrimary (Major) Trend which is likely to last from 3 weeks to 3 months, andwhich may retrace one third to two thirds of the previous Primary Advanceor Decline. INVERTED BOWL — See Rounding Top.INVERTED TRIANGLE — See Right-Angled Broadening Triangle.ISLAND REVERSAL — A compact trading range, usually formed after a fast rally or reaction, which is separated from the previous move by anExhaustion Gap, and from the move in the opposite direction which followsby a Breakaway Gap. The result is an Island of prices detached by a gapbefore and after. If the trading range contains only one day, it is called aOne-Day Island Reversal. The two gaps usually occur at approximately thesame level. By itself, the pattern is not of major signiﬁcance; but it does AU3772_book.fm Page 755 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
frequently send prices back for a complete retracement of the Minor Move

which preceded it. KILROY BOTTOM — The Editor’s contribution to the nomenclature. A more descriptive term for the undescriptive “Head-and-Shoulders Bottom”. LADDERING — A practice some Wall Street underwriters used in the tuli pomania of the 1990s. Consists of selling IPO shares for the pre-openingprice to insider customers in exchange for their agreement to buy more inthe public offering at higher prices. Caused extreme volatility and big runups in early days of IPOs. An unethical form of price manipulation. LEVERAGE — Using a smaller amount of capital to control an investment of greater value. For example, exclusive of interest and commission costs, ifyou buy a stock on 50% margin, you control $1 of stock for every 50 centsinvested or leverage of 2-to-1. LIMIT MOVE — A change in price which exceeds the limits set by the exchange on which the futures contract is traded. LIMIT ORDER — A buy or sell order which is limited in some way, usually in price. For example, if you placed a limit order to buy IBM at 100, thebroker would not ﬁll the order unless he could do so at your price or better,i.e., at 100 or lower. LIMIT UP, LIMIT DOWN — Commodity exchange restrictions on the max imum upward or downward movements permitted in the price for a com-modity during any trading session day. LINE, DOW THEORY — A Line in the Dow Theory is an Intermediate Sideways Movement in one or both of the Averages (Industrial and/orTransportation)in the course of which prices ﬂuctuate within a range of 5%(of mean price) or less. LOGARITHMIC SCALE — See Semilogarithmic Scale.MAJOR TREND — In Edwards and Magee, the term Major (or Primary) refers to a trend (or pattern leading to such a trend) which lasts at least oneyear, and shows a rise or decline of at least 20%. MARGIN — The minimum amount of capital required to buy or sell a stock. The rate, 50% of value in 2005, is set by the government. In a commodity,margin is also the minimum, usually about 10%, needed to buy or sell acontract. But the rate is set by the individual exchanges. The two differ incost as well. In a stock, the broker lends the investor the balance of the moneydue and charges interest for the loan. In a commodity, margin is treated asa good faith payment. The broker does not lend the difference, so no interestexpense is incurred. MARKET ON CLOSE — An order speciﬁcation which requires the broker to get the best price available on the close of trading. AU3772_book.fm Page 756 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary 757 MARKET ORDER — An instruction to buy or sell at the price prevailing when the order reaches the ﬂoor of the exchange. MARKET RECIPROCAL — Normal average range of a stock based on the average range for a number of years, divided by the current average range.The result is the reciprocal of the market movement for the period. Widemarket activity, for example, would show a small decimal, less than 1. Dulltrading would be a larger number. MAST — The vertical rally or reaction preceding a Flag or Pennant Formation.McCLELLAN OSCILLATOR — An Index based on New York Stock Exchange net advances over declines. It provides a measure of such condi-tions as overbought/oversold and market direction on a short- to interme-diate-term basis. The McClellan Oscillator measures a Bear Market SellingClimax when registering a very negative reading like –150. A sharp buyingpulse in the market is indicated by a very positive reading, well above 100. MEASURING FORMULAE — There are certain patterns which do allow the chartist the opportunity to project at least an interim target level of thedirection of the Primary Trend. The most important of these patterns arefound to be Triangles, Rectangles, Head-and-Shoulders, Pennants and Flags. Triangles — When a stock breaks out of a Symmetrical Triangle (either up or down), the ensuing move should carry at least as far as theheight of the Triangle as measured along its ﬁrst reaction. Rectangles — The minimum you would expect from a breakout (up or down) out of a Rectangle Pattern would be the distance equal to theheight of the formation. Head-and-Shoulders Tops/Bottoms — The Head-and-Shoulders Pattern has one of the better measuring sticks. In either a Top or Bottom, theinterim target, once the neckline is penetrated, is the distance fromthe Top (or Bottom) of the head to the level of the neckline directlybelow (above) the head. Pennants and Flags — The one thing to remember about these Contin uation Patterns is that they “ﬂy at half-mast.” In other words, the legin equals the leg out. MEASURING GAP — See Runaway Gap. MEGAPHONES — Megaphones are Broadening Tops. The Broadening For mation may evolve in any one of the three forms comparable, respectively,to Inverted Symmetrical, Inverted Ascending, or Descending Triangles. Thesymmetrical type, for example, consists of a series of price ﬂuctuations acrossa horizontal axis, with each Minor Top higher and each Minor Bottom lowerthan its predecessor. The pattern may thus be roughly marked off by twodiverging lines, the upper sloping up from left to right, the lower slopingdown. These Broadening Patterns are characteristically loose and irregular, AU3772_book.fm Page 757 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
whereas Symmetrical Triangles are regular and compact. The converging

boundary lines of Symmetrical Triangles are clearly deﬁned, as a rule. Topsand Bottoms within the formation tend to fall within fair precision on theseboundary lines. In the Broadening Formation, the rallies and declines usuallydo not all stop at clearly marked boundary lines and are subject to spikes.We could call this a Megaphone Spike because the formation keeps oncrowding at the lines to look like a megaphone. It has a tendency to spikedown more than up. MINOR TREND — In Edwards and Magee, the term Minor refers to brief ﬂuctuations (usually less than 6 days and rarely longer than 3 weeks) which,in total, make up the Intermediate Trend. MOMENTUM INDICATOR — A market indicator which utilizes volume statistics for predicting the strength or weakness of a current market andany overbought or oversold conditions, and to distinguish turning pointswithin the market. MOVING AVERAGE — A mathematical technique to smooth data. It is called moving because the number of elements are ﬁxed, but the time intervaladvances. Old data must be removed when new data is added, which causesthe average to “move along” with the progression of the stock or commodity. EN: Simple moving average for n days consists of summing prices for n days anddividing by n. On n+1, drop the ﬁrst day and add the new day to the formula, etc. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE/DIVERGENCE (MACD) — MACD,an oscillator derived by dividing one Moving Average by another. Basically,it combines three Moving Averages into two lines. In today’s computerprograms, the Moving Averages are usually exponentially weighted, thusgiving more weight to the more recent data. It is plotted in a chart with ahorizontal Equilibrium Line. The Equilibrium Line is important. When the two Moving Averages cross below the Equilibrium Line, it means that the shorter EMA is at a value lessthan the longer EMA. This is a Bearish signal. When the EMAs are abovethe Equilibrium Line, it means that the shorter EMA has a value greater thanthe longer EMA. This is a Bullish signal. The ﬁrst line is the difference between a 12-period Exponential Moving Average and a 26-period Exponential Moving Average. The second line(signal line) is an approximate exponential equivalent of a 9-period MovingAverage of the ﬁrst line. The exponential values being 0.15, 0.075, and 0.20.An MACD can be displayed as a line oscillator or a histogram. Buy signals are generated when the faster Moving Average Line crosses the slower Moving Average Line from below. Sell signals come from theopposite, when the faster line crosses the slower line from above. Beware ofmechanically trading every MACD crossover; it can lead to whipsaws anddrawdowns with substance. The fact is, narrow trading ranges give manyfalse signals which can be avoided with additional interpretation. (See alsoAppendix C.) AU3772_book.fm Page 758 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary 759 MOVING AVERAGE CROSSOVERS — The point where the various Moving Average Lines pass through or over each other. MULTICOLINCARITY — The incorrect procedure of using the identical data to supply different types of indicators. The indicators will all conﬁrm eachother since they are based on the same data. Combining RSI, Moving AverageConvergence/Divergence (MACD), and rate of change (where all indicatorsuse the same closing prices and relative time periods) should provide thesame signals, but they could easily be incorrect. Multicolincarity can beavoided by using one indicator based on closing prices, another from vol-ume, and a third from price ranges. It can also be avoided by using datagenerated indicators compared to chart patterns. (See also Bollinger Bands,MACD, Wilder RSI.) MULTIPLE HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS PATTERN — See Complex Head and-Shoulders. NARROW RANGE DAY — A trading day with a narrower price range relative to the previous day’s price range. NATURAL and UNNATURAL Methods or Systems — Bassetti’s half humor ous identiﬁcation of “natural methods” of analysis, such as chart analysis,which looks directly at market data, as opposed to “unnatural methods”which place an algorithm between the data and the analysis, such as movingaverages, oscillators, etc. NATURAL HEDGE — Bassetti’s formulation of a technique recommended by Magee whereby a portfolio is always somewhat long and somewhat short.It is an imperfect hedge intended to cushion downside (or upside) risks. E.g.,long the DIA and short its members (or their proxies) which are in downtrends. NECKLINE — In a Head-and-Shoulders Pattern, it is the line drawn across the two reaction lows (in a Top), or two rally highs (in a Bottom), whichoccur before and after the head. This line must be broken by 3% to conﬁrmthe Reversal. In a Diamond Pattern, which is similar to a Head-and-Shoul-ders Pattern, the neckline is bent in the shape of a V or inverted V. (See alsoDiamond and Head-and-Shoulders.) NEGATIVE DIVERGENCE — When two or more Averages, indexes, or indicators fail to show conﬁrming trends. NORMAL RANGE FOR PRICE — EN: An analytical tool invented by Magee for measuring the volatility of stocks. Cumbersome in the modern context, but interesting. Cf. Appendix A. ODD LOT — A block of stock consisting of less than 100 shares. ON BALANCE VOLUME (OBV) — OBV is a popular Volume Indicator, developed by Joseph Granville. Constructing an OBV line is very simple:the total volume for each day is assigned a positive or negative value depend-ing on whether prices closed higher or lower that day. A higher close results AU3772_book.fm Page 759 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
in the volume for that day getting a positive value, while a lower close results

in a negative value. A running total is kept by adding or subtracting eachday’s volume based on the direction of the close. The direction of the OBVline is watched, not the actual volume numbers. Formula: • If Today’s Close > Yesterday’s Close, then OBV = Yesterday’s OBV + Today’s Volume • If Today’s Close < Yesterday’s Close, then OBV = Yesterday’s OBV – Today’s Volume • If Today’s Close = Yesterday’s Close, then OBV = Yesterday’s OBV ONE-DAY REVERSAL — See Island Reversal.OPTION — The right granted to one investor by another to buy (called a call option) or sell (called a put option) 100 shares of stock, or one contractof a commodity, at a ﬁxed price for a ﬁxed period of time. The investorgranting the right (the seller of the option) is paid a nonrefundable premiumby the buyer of the option. ORDER — See Limit Order, Market Order, and Stop Order.OPTIONS RESEARCH, INC. — Founded by Blair Hull, later of Hull Trading Co. The ﬁrst company to computerize the Black–Scholes Model. OSCILLATOR — A form of momentum or rate-of-change indicator which is usually valued from +1 to –1 or from 0% to 100%. OVERBOUGHT — Market prices that have risen too steeply and too quickly.OVERBOUGHT/OVERSOLD INDICATOR — An indicator that attempts to deﬁne when prices have moved too far and too quickly in either direction,and thus are liable to a reaction. OVERSOLD — Market prices that have declined too steeply and too quickly.PANIC — The second stage of a Bear Market when buyers thin out and sellers sell at any price. The downward trend of prices suddenly acceleratesinto an almost vertical drop while volume rises to climactic proportions. (Seealso Bear Market.) PANIC BOTTOM — See Selling Climax.PATTERN — See Area Pattern.PEAK — See Top.PENETRATION — The breaking of a pattern boundary line, trendline, or Support and Resistance Level. PENNANT — A Pennant is a Flag with converging, rather than parallel, boundary lines. (See also Flag.) AU3772_book.fm Page 760 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary 761 POINT & FIGURE CHART — A method of charting believed to have been created by Charles Dow. Each day the price moves by a speciﬁc amount (thearbitrary box size), an X (if up) or O (if down) is placed on a vertical columnof squared paper. As long as prices do not change direction by a speciﬁedamount (the Reversal), the trend is considered to be in force and no newcolumn is made. If a Reversal takes place, another vertical column is startedimmediately to the right of the ﬁrst, but in the opposite direction. There isno provision for time on a Point & Figure Chart. PREMATURE BREAKOUT — A breakout of an Area Pattern, then a retreat back into the pattern. Eventually, the trend will break out again and proceedin the same direction. At the time they occur, false breakouts and prematurebreakouts are indistinguishable from each other, or a genuine breakout. PRICE EARNINGS RATIO — Price of stock divided by earnings (which may or may not be real) to give the p/e ratio. Sometimes an unnatural, or imag-inary, number. PRIMARY TREND — See Major Trend.PROGRAM TRADING — Trades based on signals from various computer programs, usually entered directly from the trader’s computer to the mar-ket’s computer system. EN: Usually indicates large volume transactions on large baskets of stocks by professional traders. PROGRESSIVE STOP — A stop order which follows the market up or down.(See also Stop.) PROTECTIVE STOP — A stop order used to protect gains or limit losses in an existing position. (See also Stop.) PULLBACK — Return of prices to the boundary line of the pattern after a breakout to the downside. Return after an upside breakout is called a Throw-back. PUT — An option to sell a speciﬁed amount of a stock or commodity at an agreed time at the stated exercise price. RAIL AVERAGE — See Dow–Jones Transportation Average.RALLY — An increase in price which retraces part of the previous price decline. RALLY TOPS — A price level that ﬁnishes a short-term rally in an ongoing trend. RANGE — The difference between the high and low during a speciﬁc time period. REACTION — A decline in price which retraces part of the previous price advance. RECIPROCAL, MARKET — See Market Reciprocal. AU3772_book.fm Page 761 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
RECOVERY — See Rally. RECTANGLE — A trading area which is bounded on the Top and the Bottom

with horizontal, or near horizontal, lines. A Rectangle can be either a Reversalor Continuation Pattern depending on the direction of the breakout. Mini-mum Measuring Formula: add the width (difference between Top and Bot-tom) of the Rectangle to the breakout point. RED PARALLEL — A line drawn parallel to the trendline (Red Trendline) which connects at least two Bottoms. The Red Parallel (basically a ReturnLine) is started off a high and used to estimate the next high point. RED TRENDLINE — A straight line connecting two or more Bottoms together. To avoid confusion, Edwards and Magee use a red line for BottomTrendlines and a blue line for Top Trendlines. RELATIVE STRENGTH (RS or RS INDEX) — A stock’s price movement over the past year as compared to a market index (most often the Standard &Poor;’s 500 Index). Value below 1 means the stock shows relative weaknessin price movement (underperformed the market); a value above 1 means thestock shows relative strength over the 1-year period. Equation for Relative Strength: Current Stock Price/Year-Ago Stock PriceCurrent S&P; 500/Year-Ago S&P; 500 (See also Wilder Relative Strength Index.) RESISTANCE LEVEL — A price level at which a sufﬁcient supply of stockis forthcoming to stop, and possibly turn back for a time, an uptrend. RETRACEMENT — A price movement in the opposite direction of the previous trend. RETURN LINE — See Ascending or Descending Trend Channels.REVERSAL GAP — A chart formation where the low of the last day is above the previous day’s range, with the close above midrange and above the open. REVERSAL PATTERN — An Area Pattern which breaks out in a direction opposite to the previous trend. (See also Ascending Triangle, BroadeningFormation, Broadening Top, Descending Triangle, Diamond, Dormant Bot-tom, Double Bottom or Top, Triple Bottom or Top, Head-and-Shoulders,Rectangle, Rounding Bottom or Top, Saucer, Symmetrical Triangle, and Ris-ing or Falling Wedge.) RIGHT-ANGLED BROADENING TRIANGLE — Area Pattern with one boundary line horizontal and the other at an angle which, when extended,will converge with the horizontal line at some point to the left of the pattern.Similar in shape to Ascending and Descending Triangles, except they areinverted and look like Flat-Topped or Bottomed Megaphones. Right-AngledBroadening Formations generally carry Bearish implications regardless of AU3772_book.fm Page 762 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary 763 which side is ﬂat. But any decisive breakout (3% or more) through the horizontal boundary line has the same forceful signiﬁcance as does a brea-kout in an Ascending or Descending Triangle. RIGHT-ANGLE TRIANGLES — See Ascending and Descending Triangles.RISING WEDGE — An Area Pattern with two upward-slanting, converging trendlines. Normally, it takes more than 3 weeks to complete, and volumewill diminish as prices move toward the apex of the pattern. The anticipateddirection of the breakout in a Rising Wedge is down. Minimum MeasuringFormula: a retracement of all the ground gained within the wedge. ROUND LOT — A block of stock consisting of 100 shares of stock.ROUND TRIP — The cost of one complete stock or commodity transaction, i.e., the entry cost and the offset cost combined. ROUNDING BOTTOM — An Area Pattern which pictures a gradual, pro gressive, and fairly symmetrical change in the trend from down to up. Boththe Price Pattern (along its lows) and the Volume Pattern show a concaveshape often called a Bowl or Saucer. There is no minimum measuring for-mula associated with this Reversal Pattern. ROUNDING TOP — An Area Pattern which pictures a gradual, progressive, and fairly symmetrical change in the trend from up to down. The PricePattern, along its highs, shows a convex shape sometimes called an InvertedBowl. The Volume Pattern is concave shaped (a bowl) as trading activitydeclines into the peak of the Price Pattern, and increases when prices beginto fall. There is no measuring formula associated with this Reversal Pattern. RUNAWAY GAP — A relatively wide gap in prices which occurs in an advance or decline gathering momentum. Also called a “Measuring Gap,”since it frequently occurs at just about the halfway point between the brea-kout which started the move and the Reversal Day which calls an end to it.Minimum Measuring Formula: take the distance from the original breakoutpoint to the start of the gap, and add it to the other side of the gap. RUNNING MARKET — A market wherein prices are moving rapidly in one direction with very few or no price changes in the opposite direction. SAUCER — See Rounding Bottom and Scallop.SCALLOPS — A series of Rounding Bottom (Saucer) Patterns where the rising end always carries prices a little higher than the preceding Top at thebeginning of the pattern. Net gains will vary from stock to stock, but thereis a strong tendency for it to amount to 10–15% of the price. The total reaction,from the left-hand Top of each Saucer to its Bottom, is usually in the 20–30%area. Individual Saucers in a Scallop series are normally 5 to 7 weeks long,and rarely less than 3 weeks. The volume will show a convex or Bowl Pattern. SECONDARY TREND — See Intermediate Trend. AU3772_book.fm Page 763 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
SELLING CLIMAX — A period of extraordinary volume which comes at the

end of a rapid and comprehensive decline which exhausts the margin reservesof many speculators or patience of investors. Total volume turnover may exceedany single day’s volume during the previous upswing as Panic Selling sweepsthrough the stock or commodity. Also called a Clean-Out Day, a Selling Climaxreverses the technical conditions of the market. Although it is a form of aOne-Day Reversal, it can take more than one day to complete. SEMILOGARITHMIC SCALE — Price or volume scale where the distance on the vertical axis (i.e., space between horizontal lines) represents equalpercentage changes. SENSITIVITY — An index used by Edwards and Magee to measure the probable percentage movement (sensitivity) of a stock during a speciﬁedpercentage move in the stock market as a whole. EN: More or less equivalent, or with the same intent as beta. SHAKEOUT — A corrective move large enough to “shake out” nervousinvestors before the Primary Trend resumes. SHORT INTEREST — The number of shares that have been sold short and not yet repurchased. This information is published monthly by the New YorkStock Exchange. SHORT SALE — A transaction where the entry position is to sell a stock or commodity ﬁrst and to repurchase it (hopefully at a lower price) at a laterdate. In the stock market, shares you do not own can be sold by borrowingshares from the broker, and replacing them when the offsetting repurchasetakes place. In the commodity market, contracts are created when a buyerand seller get together through a ﬂoor broker. As a result, the procedure tosell in the commodity market is the same as it is to buy. SHOULDER — See Head-and-Shoulders Patterns.SMOOTHING — A mathematical approach that removes excess data vari ability while maintaining a correct appraisal of the underlying trend. SPIKE — A sharp rise in price in a single day or two.STOCHASTIC — Literally means random.STOCHASTICS — The Stochastic Oscillator, developed by George Lane, compares a security’s price closing level to its price range over a speciﬁcperiod of time. This indicator shows, Lane theorized, that in an upwardlytrending market, prices tend to close near their high; and during a downwardtrending market, prices tend to close near their low. As an upward trendmatures, prices tend to close further away from their high; as a downwardtrend matures, prices tend to close away from their low. The StochasticIndicator attempts to determine when prices start to cluster around theirlow of the day in an uptrending market, and cluster around their high in adowntrend. Lane theorizes these conditions indicate a Trend Reversal is AU3772_book.fm Page 764 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary 765 beginning to occur. The Stochastic Indicator is plotted as two lines, the %D Line and %K Line. The %D Line is more important than the %K Line. TheStochastic is plotted on a chart with values ranging from 0 to 100. The valuecan never fall below 0 or above 100. Readings above 80 are considered strongand indicate a price is closing near its high. Readings below 20 are strongand indicate a price is closing near its low. Ordinarily, the %K Line willchange direction before the %D Line. However, when the %D Line changesdirection prior to the %K Line, a slow and steady Reversal is often indicated.When both %K and %D Lines change direction, and the faster %K Linechanges direction to retest a crossing of the %D Line, though doesn’t crossit, the incident conﬁrms stability of the prior Reversal. A powerful move isunder way when the Indicator reaches its extremes around 0 and 100. Fol-lowing a Pullback in price, if the Indicator retests extremes, a good entrypoint is indicated. Many times, when the %K or %D Lines begin to ﬂattenout, the action becomes an indication the trend will reverse during the nexttrading range. (See also Appendix C.) STOCK SPLIT — A procedure used by management to establish a different market price for its shares by changing the common stock structure of thecompany. Usually a lower price is desired, and established by canceling theoutstanding shares and reissuing a larger number of new certiﬁcates tocurrent shareholders. The most common ratios are 2-to-1, 3-to-1, and 3-to-2.Occasionally, a higher price is desired and a reverse split takes place whereone new share is issued for some multiple number of old shares. STOP — A contingency order which is placed above the current market price if it is to buy, or below the current market price if it is to sell. A stop orderbecomes a market order only when the stock or commodity moves up to theprice of the buy stop, or down to the price of a sell stop. A stop can be usedto enter a new position or exit an old position. (See also Protective or Pro-gressive Stop.) STOP LOSS — See Protective Stop.SUPPLY — Amount of stock available at a given price.SUPPLY LINE — See Resistance.SUPPORT LEVEL — The price level at which a sufﬁcient amount of demand is forthcoming to stop, and possibly turn higher for a time, a downtrend. SYMMETRICAL TRIANGLE — Also called a Coil. Can be a Reversal or Continuation Pattern. A sideways congestion where each Minor Top fails toattain the height of the previous rally and each Minor Bottom stops abovethe level of the previous low. The result is upper and lower boundary lineswhich converge, if extended, to a point on the right. The upper boundary linemust slant down and the lower boundary line must slant up, or it would be avariety of a Wedge. Volume tends to diminish during formation. MinimumFormula: add the widest distance within the Triangle to its breakout point. AU3772_book.fm Page 765 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
TANGENT — See Trendline. TAPE READER — One who makes trading decisions by watching the ﬂow

of New York Stock Exchange and American Stock Exchange price and vol-ume data coming across the electronic ticker tape. TEKNIPLAT PAPER — A specially formatted, two-cycle, semilogarithmic graph paper, with sixth-line vertical accents, used to chart stock or commod-ity prices. Check the web site: www.edwards-magee.com. TEST — A term used to describe the activity of a stock or commodity when it returns to, or “tests,” the validity of a previous trendline, or Support orResistance Level. THIN ISSUE — A stock which has a low number of ﬂoating shares and is lightly traded. THREE-DAY-AWAY RULE — An arbitrary time period used by Edwards and Magee in marking suspected Minor Tops or Bottoms. THROWBACK — Return of prices to the boundary line of the pattern after a breakout to the upside. Return after a downside breakout is called aPullback. TOP — See Broadening Top, Descending Triangle, Double Top, Head-and-Shoulders Top, Triple Top, and Rounding Top. TREND — The movement of prices in the same general direction, or the tendency or proclivity to move in a straight line. (See also Ascending,Descending, and Horizontal Parallel Trend Channels, Convergent Trend,Divergent Trend, Intermediate Trend, Major Trend, and Minor Trend.) TREND CHANNEL — A parallel probable price range centered about the most likely price line. TRENDING MARKET — Price continues to move in a single direction, usually closing strongly for the day. TRENDLINE — If we actually apply a ruler to a number of charted price trends, we quickly discover the line that most often is really straight in anuptrend is a line connecting the lower extremes of the Minor Recessionswithin these lines. In other words, an advancing wave in the stock marketis composed of a series of ripples, and the bottoms of each of these ripplestend to form on, or very close to, an upward slanting straight line. The topsof the ripples are usually less even; sometimes they also can be deﬁned bya straight line, but more often, they vary slightly in amplitude, and so anyline connecting their upper tips would be more or less crooked. On adescending price trend, the line most likely to be straight is the one thatconnects the tops of the Minor Rallies within it, while the Minor Bottomsmay or may not fall along a straight edge. These two lines — the one thatslants up along the successive wave bottoms within a broad up-move and AU3772_book.fm Page 766 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary 767 the one that slants down across successive wave tops within a broad down move — are the Basic Trendlines. You draw an Up Trendline by drawing theline on the inner side. You draw a Down Trendline by drawing it on theoutside. You draw a Sideways Trendline on the bottom. TRIANGLE — See Ascending Triangle, Descending Triangle, Right-Angled Broadening Triangle, and Symmetrical Triangle. TRIPLE BOTTOM — Similar to a ﬂat Head-and-Shoulders Bottom, or Rect angle, the three Bottoms in a Triple Bottom. TRIPLE TOP — An Area Pattern with three Tops which are widely spaced and with quite deep, and usually rounding, reactions between them. Lessvolume occurs on the second peak than the ﬁrst peak, and still less on thethird peak. Sometimes called a “W” Pattern, particularly if the second peakis below the ﬁrst and third. The Triple Top is conﬁrmed when the declinefrom the third Top penetrates the Bottom of the lowest valley between thethree peaks. 200-DAY MOVING AVERAGE LINE — Is determined by taking the closing price over the past 200 trading days and dividing by 200, then repeating theprocess each succeeding day, always dropping off the earliest day. UPTICK — A securities transaction which is made at a price higher than the preceding transaction. UPTREND — See Ascending Trendline and Trend.UTILITY AVERAGE — See Dow–Jones Utility Average.V/D VOLUME — Is the ratio between the daily up-volume to the daily downvolume. It is a 50-day ratio which is determined by dividing the totalvolume on those days when the stock closed up from the prior day by thetotal volume on days when the stock closed down. VALIDITY OF TRENDLINE PENETRATION — The application of the fol lowing three tests when a trendline is broken to determine whether the breakis valid, or whether the trendline is still basically intact: (1) the extent of thepenetration, (2) the volume of trading on the penetration, and (3) the tradingaction after the penetration. VALLEY — The V-shaped price action which occurs between two peaks. (See also Double Top and Triple Top.) VOLATILITY — A measure of a stock’s tendency to move up and down in price, based on its daily price history over the latest 12-month period. EN: See formula in Resources. VOLUME — The number of shares in stocks or contracts in commoditieswhich are traded over a speciﬁed period of time.

> “W” FORMATION — See Triple Top.
AU3772_book.fm Page 767 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

## Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
WEDGE — A chart formation in which the price ﬂuctuations are conﬁned

within converging straight (or practically straight) lines. WILDER RELATIVE STRENGTH INDICATOR (RSI) — Although relative strength, comparing a security price to a benchmark index price, has beenaround for some time, this indicator was developed by J. Welles Wilder, asexplained in his 1978 book, New Concepts in Technical Trading. Relative Strength is often used to identify price Tops and Bottoms by keying on speciﬁc levels (usually “30” and “70”) on the RSI chart, which isscaled from 0-100. The RSI can also be useful to show: 1. Movement which might not be as readily apparent on the bar chart. 2. Failure Swings above 70 or below 30, warning of coming Reversals.3. Support and Resistance Levels appear with greater clarity.4. Divergence between the RSI and price can often be a useful Reversal indicator. The Relative Strength Index requires a certain amount of lead-up time in order to operate successfully. AU3772_book.fm Page 768 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM
<|endoftext|>
