Stock Highlights
Johnson & Johnson (NYSE: JNJ)
SECtor: Healthcare
Ticker: NYSE: JNJ
Recommendation: Buy
Date: April 25
): $140
Current Price (
as of 11/1/18
Target Price: $156 - $176
Johnson & Johnson at a Glance
Market Capitalization
$366.18 B
Beta
0.90
Dividend Yield (%)
2.62%
52-Week Price Range
$119 to $149
P/E Ratio
22.00
Five Year Price Chart
1
Investment Summary
We recommend a
st
$156 - $176, with a margin of safety of between 11% and 23% given November 1
, 2018's
share price of $140. The following factors contribute to the future success of the company:
rating for Johnson & Johnson based on a target price range of
buy
Innovation
At the center of Johnson & Johnson is its dedication to innovation. As the healthcare
industry continues to become digitized and technologically advanced, Johnson & Johnson
remains committed to pursuing new lines of innovation. For example, with the help of AI
and similar technology, Johnson & Johnson will better cater its products to meet
individual consumer needs.
ComPEtitive Edge
One of Johnson & Johnson's segments, The Johnson & Johnson
Institute, is the leader of its industry. The Institute provides its
affiliated healthcare professionals with the most current medical and
ethical practices training. With Johnson & Johnson's ability to provide
educational and technical services for the company's products, they
can provide better care to their physicians, doctors, and patients, and
ultimately remain comPEtitive within the industry.
Brand Value Strength
Johnson & Johnson's century - long success has resulted in
unmatchable stream of consumer brand loyalty. Consumers
continue to pick Johnson & Johnson products when it comes
brand preference. Throughout many generations, Johnson &
Johnson retains its reputable brand and continues to be one of
the leading choices for consumers.
to
2
Company Overview
Company History
Founded in 1886, Johnson & Johnson is the premier healthcare and consumer goods company in the world. The
company strives to provide affordable and accessible products to consumers, with the purpose of improving
health and wellness. At its inception, the company fIRSt began by selling manuals on sterile surgery techniques,
fIRSt aid kits, and maternity kits for safe childbirths (including baby powder). The company also develoPEd
many known products still prevalent to consumers today, such as dental floss, and Band-Aids in 1921. In 1931,
Johnson and Johnson released the fIRSt pharmaceutical drug into the market. By 1949, the company began to
develop various medical devices such as sterile sutures.
OPErating Segments
The company has three main oPErating segments:
1. Consumer Products
(18% of FY 2017 Revenue): This segment includes products such as baby care,
oral care, beauty, over-the-counter pharmaceutical, women's health and wound care.
2. Medical Devices and Diagnostics
(35% of FY 2017 Revenue): This segment is focused on key areas
such as immunology, infectious diseases and vaccines, neuroscience, oncology, cardiovascular and
metabolism, and pulmonary hyPErtension.
3. Pharmaceutical
(47% of FY 2017 Revenue): This segment includes products focused on orthopaedic,
surgery, interventional solutions (cardiovascular and neurovascular), diabetes care and eye health.
Furthermore, with over 260 subsidiaries oPErating in more than 60 countries, Johnson & Johnson has a brand
name that is recognizable by many around the world.
3
Industry Overview
Considering each of the oPErating segments of Johnson & Johnson, we find overall trends which benefit the
company. Though the consumer products market is nearing the maturity stage of its cycle, its growth outlook
will be driven by a demand for organic, natural skincare and beauty products. Within the medical devices
segment, we exPEct to see high growth rates as the U.S. population continues to age as the costs of inputs for
manufacturing only grow slightly. Lastly, we exPEct to see strong growth in pharmaceuticals as the demand for
biologic (homeopathic) drugs increases, along with general international demand, esPEcially in emerging
markets.
Considering the markets of buyers, we exPEct to see overall
growth, primarily due to a strong economy, as well as growth
in disposable income. The pharmacy and drug store revenue
to grow at approximately 2% annually. The same growth is
anticipated for suPErmarkets and grocery stores. Lastly,
revenue from hospitals will grow steadily at about 3.5%
annually. Some other economic drivers of note are an
increase in brand name drug sales, estimated to grow at about
2% annually for the next five years.
Within the strong, growing industries that Johnson & Johnson belongs in, it outPErforms its PEers in a variety of
different metrics:
Metric
EPS ($)
Debt/Equity Ratio (%)
P/E Ratio
Average YoY Revenue Growth (%)
Annual Dividend Yield (%)
Johnson & Johnson
Industry/PEers
6.57
57.5
22.0
6.34
2.60
Source: Bloomberg
4.47
63.8
23.8
7.77
2.37
4
Against the industry, Johnson & Johnson has a better EPS, over $2.00 than the industry average. In addition, the
company has a lower Debt/Equity Ratio and P/E Ratio than other companies in its industry. Though its average
annual revenue growth is slightly lower, Johnson & Johnson has a higher dividend yield.
5
Growth Factor: Innovation
Within each of Johnson & Johnson's oPErating segments, consider how the following proPEls
the company to be a leader of innovation:
Consumer Products
Currently in development is the Neutrogena Skin360 &
Skin Scanner. Through equiPPIng an image scanner onto
your phone, the product taps into dermatologist's
technology to analyze a user's face and show how it's
changing. This is done to ensure an individual's regimen is
achieving results. Most importantly, this can all be done
seamlessly through its mobile application. The mobile
application uses integrated AI to analyze user's skin, and
allows users to consult with dermatologists.
Pharmaceutical Drugs
Within Johnson & Johnson's development piPEline is a
variety of biologic drugs. These are drugs which use
complex molecules from microorganisms to treat a variety
of chronic illnesses. For instance, one popular biologic drug
produced by the company is Remicade, which is one of
Johnson & Johnson's most profitable drugs on the market
currently. It is important to note that generic companies are
not allowed to produce and sell biologic drugs, so they
comPEte through offering "biosimilar" drugs.
Medical Devices
One of Johnson & Johnson's subsidiaries, DePuy Synthes,
recently unveiled next generation technology purposed for
spinal fusion surgery. The Concorde Lift, an expandable
spacer, allows for a more stable, precise placement for
fuzing vertebrate than a traditional spacer currently being
used. In fact, by 2020, it is estimated that 3.4 million PEople
annually will undergo spinal fusion surgery.
6
Growth Factor: ComPEtitive Edge
Johnson & Johnson's comPEtitive edge stems from the
initiatives of the Johnson & Johnson Institute. With over
20 centers across five continents, the objective of the
Institute is to provide excellent patient care by providing
a professional education to over 125,000 healthcare
providers.
This is achieved through a variety of different
learning methods, including virtual reality
simulators, online video seminars, and within a
classroom setting. One way that Johnson &
Johnson is revolutionizing how doctors are trained
across the world is with a PErsonalized
PErformance management platform called
C-STATS, which has enabled the company to save
immensely on costs.
Founded by one Johnson & Johnson's employees --the VP of PErformance Improvement--this
platform allows surgeons who sPEcialize in robotic, laparoscopic and oPEn surgery to get instant
detailed feedback about their technical skills after PErforming a procedure. C-STATS enables
surgeons to have better patient outcomes; in addition, more oPErations go successfully when the
doctors PErform them using this platform.
Also, Johnson & Johnson is the fIRSt company to have a Compassionate Use Advisory
Committee (CompAC). To provide some context, for patients with unique illness, doctors often
times resort to non - FDA approved drugs knowing that well-established version may not be an
effective cure. The CompAC is a external committee comprised of medical ethicists, physicians
& patient advocates; it provides recommendations, either an approval or denial, for each request
to use a non-approved drug. Typically, the committee advises on matters regarding oncology,
infectious diseases, and neurological health.
7
Growth Factor: Strong Brand Value
Johnson & Johnson is a company, and brand that consumers trust. Having
existed for over 130 years, it has established itself as a company that strives
only to merchandize high - quality products, esPEcially ones that are easily
identifiable. For instance, the Band-Aid product, has become synonymous
with bandages and similar medical dressings, analogous to Google and the
search engine.
In addition, the Johnson Baby Brand is
the most trusted among families with
newborn kids, a testament to the
consumer's PErception of value which
Johnson & Johnson offers.
Furthermore, even through recessions and other poor economic conditions, consumers continue
to purchase Johnson & Johnson products over generic alternatives (which are presumably
cheaPEr). Consider the following chart which shows the company's revenue between 2003 and
2012:
Through the recession, we can see that Johnson & Johnson's total revenue is largely unaffected
by any slowdowns in the economy. Furthermore, at the recession's worst PEriods, the
company's margins remained steady.
8
Valuation
Discounted Cash Flow
Based on our DCF analysis, we found Johnson & Johnson to be undervalued by the market. Our
model resulted in an intrinsic share price of approximately $174, a 23% margin of safety over
its current share price of about $140 when the pitch was presented in November, 2018.
PV: Sum of 10 Years
PV: Terminal Value
186,688
295,639
Enterprise Value ($ Mil)
482,328
+Cash
-Debt
19,364
36,480
Value ($ Mil)
465,212
Shares Outstanding (Mil)
2,680
Intrinsic Value
$173.59
Current Stock Price
$140.58
Margin of Safety
23%
For our analysis, we grew revenue at just over 5%, as a weighted average growth of each of
rd
quarter earnings call (refer to ApPEndix).
Johnson & Johnson's oPErating segments from its 3
Going forward, we exPEct Johnson & Johnson's exceptional technological advancements to
support the company's continual growth. We held a variety of factors constant as we projected
into the future; for instance, we used a universal tax rate of 21%, EBIT margin of 27%, and
grew depreciation & amortization at 2% annually.
9
Comparables Analysis: P/E Multiple
We compared the PErformance of Johnson & Johnson's to the PErformance of the company to
comPEtitors within the same oPErating segments; for each segment, we compared two to three
companies against Johnson & Johnson's financial metrics for the corresponding segments. We
analyzed several different metrics:
The metric we used to value Johnson & Johnson against its comPEtitors was the P/E ratio.
Based on the table above, the company has a lower ratio than the average of the PEer group we
selected, meaning that the company is relatively undervalued:
Average P/E Ratio of PEer Group
Johnson & Johnson EPS
23.8
$6.57
P/E Multiple: Value
$156.80
Current Stock Price
$140.58
Margin of Safety
11%
This relative valuation resulted in an intrinsic stock price of approximately $157, an 11%
margin of safety over its current share price of about $140 when the pitch was presented in
November, 2018.
10
Risks and Mitigants
Decrease in the Number of Individuals Holding Private Health Insurance
(not Medicare or Medicaid)
This risk may negative impact the Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices and
Diagnostics oPErating segments. In addition, we may see branded drug sales fall
as these individuals seek generic alternatives which may be cheaPEr. However,
current trends show the growth to be slow, but still positive over the next five
years.
Threat of Recession
Though this risk is very prevalent in our current economic climate, this will
impact the Consumer Products oPErating segment, the smallest of the business.
Furthermore, the company has a successful history of maintaining sales through
poor economic times.
Trade War Concerns
Though this risk impacts most companies which oPErate internationally, we do
st
not see this have a severe impact on the company. As of May 1
, 2018, China
eliminated any tariffs regarding drug imports. This means that Johnson &
Johnson's largest segment, Pharmaceutical, should be able to oPErate without any
issues.
11