Lockheed Martin (NASDAQ, LMT)
SECtor: Aerospace and Defense
Target Price Current Price 52 Week High 52 Week Low P/E Market Cap. Dividend Yield Beta
$303.01 $363.00 $283.21 20.4x $87.58 B 2.5% 1.13
s
$335.11
Business Description
Lockheed Martin Corp. engages in the research, design,
development, manufacturing, and sustainment of technology
systems, products, and services. It oPErates through four business
segments: Aeronautics, Missiles and Fire Control, Rotary and
Mission Systems, and Space. They are headquartered in Bethesda,
Maryland.
Industry Trend
The aerospace and defense segment of the industrials SECtor has
outPErformed the S&P 500 year to date due to several catalysts and
market trends. The largest trend comes from increases in
government sPEnding in the United States and abROAd. The
Department of Defense, Lockheed's largest customer, has increased
its sPEnding over the last few years, and is planning to continue this
trend. In addition, international governments have been increasing
their defense sPEnding as well, leading to further growth in the
industry. The industry has been consistently growing, but this
growth could slow if defense sPEnding begins to decrease.
Investment Thesis
Lockheed Martin can provide long-term sustainable growth through
its already profitable business model, significant growth
opportunities, strong relationship with the U.S. government, and
game changing innovation that has led to the creation of some of
the most high-tech products in the industry. Lockheed has
consistently PErformed highly and beaten exPEctations and won
many contracts with governments throughout the world. This
company-wide and industry-wide growth makes Lockheed a strong
stock pick with a high chance for growth and low risk.
Valuation Assumptions and Key Financials
WACC: 9%
Terminal Growth: 3.25% Intrinsic Value: $335.11
Upside: 10.52%
Sources: Bloomberg, Annual reports
Corporate Social Responsibility
-Employ over 21,000 veterans and donated $8.6M to vet programs
-Supports STEM education, esPEcially for minorities and females
-Since 2010, reduced energy use by 23%, water use by 22% and carbon
emissions by 33%
5-Year Stock PErformance
Current stock price: $303.21
ComPEtitive Analysis
Lockheed Martin's main comPEtitors include aerospace companies
like GE, Boeing and United Technologies along with defense
companies like Raytheon and Aerojet. While they comPEte in both
industries, their unmatched relationship with the U.S. Government
(esPEcially the DoD) sets them apart from the comPEtition. LMT is
the top government contractor by more than double the contracts as
the next closest comPEtitor (Boeing). Additionally, Lockheed's
innovative company culture has led to incredible inventions, like
the F-35, which are unmatched in today's marketplace. On top of
that, government sPEnding is increasing rapidly and is exPEcted to
continue to rise under the Trump administration.
ComPEtitive Advantages
LMT's unmatched relationship with the government sets them apart
when bidding for new and lucrative contracts. Additionally, their
innovative company mindset has led to game-changing innovation
like underwater mine locators, augmented reality combat training
software, autonomous war vehicles, and of course, the F-35. Their
strong position in contracts around the world makes them the
servicer of choice to many countries' jet fleets and leads to large
recurring revenue streams. Additionally, their exPErtise in space
exploration and communications systems positions them well to
help conquer the next frontier.
Risks
One of the biggest risks for Lockheed Martin is their large
concentration of contracts with the U.S. government. Nearly 70%
of their revenue is related to the defense budget, so if that was
slashed we would exPEct a large impact on the business.
Additionally, losing out on contracts is a large risk, as a win and a
loss means a difference in billions of dollars of revenue. As
comPEtition increases and bid protests hapPEn, this could pose a
threat to the company's exPEcted growth. However, their strong
relationship with the US government serves as a strong mitigator.
Finally, as they handle extremely classified data, any hacks or
breaches could result in serious sanctions and potential problems in
their strong relationship with the governments they serve. Luckily
enough, they are at the cutting edge of cyberSECurity, even
providing protective services to the US government itself.