Source: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/accretion.asp

Accretion is the increase in a company's assets or earnings following an expansion or acquisition.

In finance, accretion is the accumulation of the additional income an investor expects to receive after purchasing a bond at a discount and holding it until maturity.
The most well-known applications of financial accretion include zero-coupon bonds or cumulative preferred stock.
Accretion can also refer to the gradual growth of a company's assets and earnings.

Accretion is the process of gradual growth or increase, typically in relation to the value of an asset over time.

In finance, accretion refers to the increase in the value of an asset, often due to the accumulation of interest or the reinvestment of earnings.

Accretion can also apply to the valuation of a company, where the value of its assets increases over time, contributing to overall company growth.

Accretion refers to the gradual and incremental growth of assets.

In finance, accretion is also the accumulation of additional income an investor expects to receive after purchasing a bond at a discount and holding until maturity.

The accretion rate is determined by dividing a bond's discount by the number of years in its term to maturity.

In corporate finance, accretion is the creation of value through organic growth or through a transaction.

For example, when new assets are acquired at a discount or for a cost that is below their perceived current market value (CMV).

In securities markets, purchasing bonds below their face or par value is considered buying at a discount, whereas purchasing above the face value is known as buying at a premium.

In finance, accretion adjusts the cost basis from the purchase amount (discount) to the anticipated redemption amount at maturity.

As interest rates increase, the value of existing bonds declines, which means that bonds trading in the market decline in price to reflect the interest rate increase.

Since all bonds mature at the face amount, the investor recognizes additional income on a bond purchased at a discount, and that income is recognized using accretion.

The rate of accretion is determined by dividing the discount by the number of years in the term.

In the case of zero coupon bonds, the interest acquired is not compounding.

Assume that an investor purchased a $1,000 bond for $860 and the bond matures in 10 years.

Between the bond's purchase and maturity dates, the investor needs to recognize additional income of $140.

The earnings-per-share (EPS) ratio is defined as earnings available to common shareholders divided by average common shares outstanding, and accretion refers to an increase in a firm’s EPS due to an acquisition.

For example, assume that a firm generates $2,000,000 in available earnings for common shareholders and that 1,000,000 shares are outstanding; the EPS ratio is $2.

The company issues 200,000 shares to purchase a company that generates $600,000 in earnings for common shareholders.

The new EPS for the combined companies is computed by dividing its $2,600,000 earnings by 1,200,000 outstanding shares, or $2.17.

As another example, if a person purchases a bond with a value of $1,000 for the discounted price of $750 with the understanding it will be held for 10 years, the deal is considered accretive.

If the bond purchase is a zero-coupon bond, there is no interest accrual.

A primary example within corporate finance is the acquisition of one company by another.

The accretion of a discount is the increase in the value of a discounted instrument as time passes, and the maturity date looms closer.
<|endoftext|>
