Source: https://www.valuationresearch.com/insights/2q-2025-update-middle-market-credit-spreads-required-returns/

Lending’s high amounts of dry powder. However, the increased uncertainty is delaying more meaningful M&A deal flow as buyers and sellers cannot reach a consensus on valuations. Macroeconomic uncertainty, high borrowing costs, and purchase price mismatches are all contributing factors. Therefore, many market participants have revised their estimates for increased M&A activity to late 2025 or early 2026.

For existing portfolio investments, market participants expect performance to hold up with some relief from high cash interest expenses as reference rates decline. While idiosyncratic issues will continue, overall default rate expectations remain modest.

The overall tariff impact is expected to be limited to select industries, as most Middle Market businesses are more services-oriented and domestically focused.

From a valuation standpoint, the macroeconomic backdrop is more uncertain, although lending markets remain open and at aggressive terms for most non-tariff-exposed industries. Valuations for high-quality companies will continue to benefit from strong demand. However, troubled companies with relatively high leverage, tight interest coverage, and upcoming maturities remain in portfolios and may require workouts or other types of capital structure solutions, negatively affecting valuations. Overall, valuation analyses need to consider case-by-case situations, focusing on fundamental performance, outlook, debt affordability, and available liquidity. Therefore, some credits will continue to fare better than others.

Middle Market credit spreads remained relatively unchanged in the second quarter of 2025, despite initial tariff-driven market turmoil, due to high demand and limited new loan issuance.
Following April’s initial widening of credit spreads due to increased risk, the market’s rapid recovery and limited new deal flow ultimately led to a tightening of credit spreads, offsetting the earlier widening, resulting in no net change QoQ, with private credit firms continuing to deploy capital and drive competitive processes for high-quality deals.
Looking ahead to the remainder of 2025, the outlook is uncertain, with tariff delays and macroeconomic uncertainty expected to impact M &A activity and credit spreads.

In early April 2025, capital markets and market participants, while expecting some tariffs, were surprised by the level and breadth of the initial announcements.
Public markets reacted negatively, reaching their low points between April 4 and 9.
However, tariff delays and a softening tone by the U.S. Administration led the public markets to rebound through the end of the quarter, eventually surpassing March 2025 levels.

In April 2025, the exact impact on private markets was uncertain.
Early indications reflected a high level of uncertainty and price discovery, with market participants noting risk aversion to deals that might be exposed to tariffs directly or indirectly through second-order effects.
Despite the uncertainty, high-quality deals with low exposure continued to close as expected and generated competitive processes.
Deals with high exposure saw higher credit spreads and more conservative structures, all else equal, if done at all.
As a result, in April 2025, VRC widened credit spreads in its proprietary Middle Market matrix for 1st lien, 2nd lien, and unitranche loans by 25 bps from March 2025 levels.

In May and June 2025, the syndicated markets’ rapid recovery, limited new deal flow, and Private Credit’s need to deploy capital prevented material credit spread widening or decreases in leverage for regular-way credits in the Middle Market.
Therefore, VRC tightened its proprietary Middle Market matrix bands by 25 bps in June 2025.
This results in unchanged ranges from March.
However, for tariff-exposed companies, additional premiums or more conservative capital structures are still warranted.

Looking forward to the remainder of 2025, the outlook is more uncertain.
Tariffs have only been delayed.
How they ultimately unfold, their impact on GDP growth and inflation, and the path of interest rates are still to be determined.
Absent any major shocks, market participants expect credit spreads to remain tight and underwriting standards to be aggressive for high-quality companies.
This dynamic will likely persist until new deal activity increases, offsetting Direct
<|endoftext|>
