Source: https://www.valuationresearch.com/insights/2025-mid-year-deal-valuation-market-trends/

Valuation Research Corporation (VRC) is a full-service, independent, global valuation firm focusing exclusively on valuations and advisory services.

The 2025 mid-year deal market is characterized by a mix of optimism and caution, with deal activity expected to pick up in the coming months.
Tariffs and credit market fluctuations are impacting deal activity, with private equity firms adapting to these changes and focusing on providing liquidity to limited partners.
The current market requires careful consideration of deal structuring and valuation, with earnouts and seller notes decreasing in popularity and rollover equity and minority investments becoming more common.

Tariffs and tariff-related financial market volatility clearly took a toll on private dealmaking at the beginning of the second quarter, but we believe this slowdown is more akin to a temporary pause than a complete halt.
As market participants adjust to the evolving global trade landscape, they appear poised to regain momentum, deploying readily available capital and driving activity forward.
While the outlook for the second half of 2025 remains cautious, sentiment is generally positive, with many expecting a return to a steady pace of dealmaking once we have some clarity on tariffs.

Notwithstanding tariff turmoil, 2025 deal volumes are robust, multiples are stable, and both private equity and private credit markets are well-capitalized.
As we expected, the late 2024 market momentum carried over into the first months of 2025, propelling global M&A deal value for the quarter to just over $1.05 trillion across 12,000 transactions, marking the highest quarterly showing since Q2 2022.
North America accounted for $613 billion of that total—approximately two-thirds—with 4,900 deals.
Volume in North America was driven higher by several significant transactions in energy, telecommunications, and technology.
Deal multiples have stabilized, with global EV/EBITDA at 9.6x and EV/Revenue at 1.6x.
That is slightly softer than levels seen in the post-COVID era, but in line with pre-pandemic levels seen in 2017–2019.
Both large and smaller transactions remain active, with ongoing strength in add-on activity within private markets.

Private equity deal count in Q1 was just over 2,200, a 5.5% decrease quarter-over-quarter but a 12% increase year-over-year.
PE deal value rose to $259 billion, up 24% from the previous quarter and 36% year-over-year.
Notable sectors for PE activity include technology and healthcare, where AI is having a big impact on business strategies, and energy and industrials, which are generally less susceptible and in some cases are exempt from the fallout from the new reciprocal tariffs.
Despite all the public market volatility and the slight decrease in the number of PE-related deals, multiples have generally held steady: Larger deals (greater than $2.5 billion) showed a median EV/Revenue of 3.6x, while smaller add-ons are at 0.8x.
Median EV/EBITDA for both global and U.S. PE deals is 12.2x.
From our anecdotal perspective, there appears to be a modest narrowing of the bid-ask spread between the multiples that sellers are looking for and that buyers are ready to pay.

Varying degrees of complexity and achievability, reflecting an ongoing use of earnouts as a deal feature. Other deal features we have observed include: Add-on deals continue to dominate, comprising about three-quarters of all PE transactions, a slight increase from last year. This may be related to risk aversion among PE investors amidst macroeconomic volatility. Sponsors seem prepared to tinker at the margins with their existing portfolio of assets, while holding off for now on taking big bets on new businesses in the form of platform deals. There have been instances where we’ve seen minority investments, even by larger PE firms, and in some cases, large sponsors are standing up dedicated funds for taking minority stakes. There are signs of an uptick in take-private deals, which is often the case when public equity share prices are depressed by broad market sellers, creating opportunities for private investors to go bargain shopping. Private equity fundraising remains solid, with $56 billion raised in Q1 and dry powder slightly down but still around $1 trillion, indicating ample capital available for future deals.

The Deal With Private Credit—A spread reset After narrowing modestly during the first quarter on optimism about deregulation and robust lender demand, private credit lenders have slowed deal activity and anticipate an increase in spreads in the aftermath of the April 2 tariff announcement. As a baseline, across all portfolios it performs valuations on, VRC increased its standard spread assumption about 25 basis points wider for unitranche middle market loans (SOFR + 500-575) to reflect the general risk-off market environment that settled in across all public and private markets after the “Liberation Day” tariff announcements. That haircut was taken before considering the industry sector or impact on individual borrowers. To put a finer point on valuations, we bucketed credits in certain industries as low/minimum risk, in which case 25 basis points is appropriate; moderate risk, where spreads were pushed out wider; and industries that are highly susceptible to tariff impacts saw year-over-year increases of 100 basis points or more. Among the industries with significantly wider public loan spreads are, unsurprisingly, auto, building products, distributors, consumer staples, retail, and leisure products. More surprisingly, media also saw material widening. Even as tariffs might create a drag on what was already perceived as a slowing economy, we and the market participants we work closely with are not overly concerned about the prospects for a wave of defaults. Instead, struggling private debt borrowers—working with lenders and equity sponsors—can be expected to avail themselves of PIK toggles, new equity rounds, and various liability management strategies—to “kick the can down the road,” in hopes any slowdown or recession is short-lived.

GP/LP Dynamics—Of IPOs and vintages Traditional private equity exits remain hard to come by—there were signs of life in the IPO market in the first part of the year, but that was derailed for the time being by all the market volatility. Moreover, a deal vintage affect may be discouraging sponsors from exiting, as many current portfolio holdings were acquired around 2021, when multiples paid were some of the highest in recent memory. These 2021-era deals are coming up on the traditional four- to six-year life cycle for PE investments at a time when multiples are much lower than the inflated levels where they were bought, increasing the incentive for sponsors to want to hold on to these assets and continue developing them as they wait for the market tone to improve. Meanwhile, though, limited partners continue to pressure their private capital investment managers for liquidity. Continuation fund formation has continued apace, and some investors are also turning to the LP secondaries to raise cash. Dividend recaps remain another popular strategy for raising liquidity and in some instances, we have seen dividend recaps followed immediately by fresh private equity capital infusions from a different PE sponsor at a relatively high multiple.

Cross-Border—Waiting for the dust to settle As supply chains are reconfigured, a new global tariff regime might be expected to drive a lot of restructuring activity and potentially even strategic dealmaking on the part of companies with global businesses, but that process is unlikely until participants know exactly what the new regime looks like. The 90-day extension the White House declared for hammering out trade deals just a few days after the Liberation Day announcement has paused strategic supply-chain related initiatives for most multinationals, but that could change quickly once they have better visibility.

A Cautiously Optimistic Deal Outlook Private fund sponsors are flush with capital and first quarter deal activity was impressive. The major tariff announcement at the very beginning of Q2 definitely exacted an immediate toll on deal announcements. But in most cases, we think these transactions were paused, not completely stalled. There are many reasons to believe that when and if clarity emerges around tariffs, the deal engine could rev right back up to or even beyond Q1 levels, perhaps as early as this summer.
<|endoftext|>
