Source: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/social-sciences/purchasing-power

Purchasing power refers to the ability of an organization to acquire products and services based on the amount of available funds, which is influenced by factors such as currency exchange rates and collective purchasing efforts. It enables organizations to obtain more favorable purchasing conditions through larger pooled resources, often resulting in discounted prices.

While economic health may dictate how much funding is available for acquisitions, purchasing power also plays a role in the playing field. Purchasing power influences the spending capabilities of an organization in two ways. First, it affects the amount of products and services that can be purchased with available funds. This most commonly comes into play with currency exchange rates and interest rates. In the case of the former, items bought with a specific currency may have more or less buying power with a foreign vendor. For example, a Canadian library paying a price in U.S. dollars will have less buying power if the U.S. dollar is stronger. Purchasing power also refers to the ability to make more favorable purchases by participating in collective endeavors such as consortia or professional organizations. This is best seen when a library commits to making a joint purchase with other libraries. This allows the libraries to put together an overall larger pool of funding which in turn motivates vendors to offer a discounted price over list price in exchange for making a larger overall sale.

Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) is an economic model that postulates that the difference between the price level of a basket of goods in one country and the price level of an identical basket of goods in another country is due to the equilibrium FX rate between the two countries. The basket of goods chosen for comparison, however, needs to be a robust representative of the price level in that country. For example, the consumer price index (CPI) in the United States is a representative price level for a basket of goods. There are two forms of the Purchasing Power Parity: absolute and relative. Absolute Purchasing Power Parity: The equilibrium FX rate between two countries is equal to the ratio of the price levels in the two countries. Mathematically, the FX rate between the home and foreign country is R=PP* where R is the FX rate, P is the price level in the home country, and P* is the price level in the foreign country. Relative Purchasing Power Parity: The change in the equilibrium FX rate between two countries is proportional to the ratio of the change in price levels in the two countries. Mathematically, the FX rate between the home country and a foreign country is R1=P1/P0P1*/P0*⋅R0 where R1 and R0 are the exchange rates in period 1 and period 0 respectively, P1 and P0 are the price levels in the home country in period 1 and period 0 respectively, and P1* and P0* are the price levels in the foreign country in period 1 and period 0 respectively. The PPP exchange rate model has some limitations due to the difficulty in constructing identical baskets of goods across both countries. The prices in one country compared to another may differ due to the country’s natural resources, housing prices, and cultural differences (such as how much each country values entertainment prices or uses a certain good or service). People in different countries will typically consume different baskets of goods, and people in different countries will typically have different utility functions for identical baskets of goods. Thus, it is quite difficult to use these baskets as points of comparison for exchange rate reference. For the PPP theory to be able to provide a fair comparison of prices levels, we need to have identical basket of goods in each country, and the people of each country need to apply the same economic utility to these baskets of goods.

Purchasing power parity (PPP) is a form of exchange rate that takes into account the cost of a common basket of goods and services in the two countries compared. PPPs are often expressed in U.S. dollars.

be inappropriate and potentially misleading for making international comparisons. This is because exchange rates are determined by a multitude of factors and generally are not reliable measures of output. At any given time, many countries are known to have exchange rates that are either undervalued or overvalued, but are maintained by their governments for other considerations, such as export promotion or import substitution. The use of such exchange rates for international comparisons is likely to introduce distortions. As the World Bank acknowledges in the World Bank Development Report 2003, nominal exchange rates do not always reflect international differences in relative prices.

The proper measurement of national output is not an end in itself. As the following example illustrates, proper measurement of output assists the users in making more meaningful judgments about a wide range of economic and social phenomena in which the level of national output is directly or indirectly important—for example, climate change during the course of the 21st century. In 2001, the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released its Special Report on Emission Scenarios (SRES). The purpose of this report was to assess the extent to which emissions of greenhouse gases may lead to a rise in global temperatures on Earth. Because emissions of greenhouse gases in a country are a function of its economic growth, the IPCC made separate projections of economic growth in developing and developed countries over the period 1990–2100, and reported that, based on these projections of growth in national output, global temperatures were projected to increase between 1.4° and 5.8°C over the period 1990–2100. These projections subsequently became what The Economist (February 15, 2003) described as the most frequently cited numbers in the field of environmental policy, and quite possibly the most widely cited numbers in any field of public policy. Significantly, the main reason for the controversy that surrounded these numbers was related to the use (or the absence of the use, in this case) of PPPs in estimating national output. Critics of the IPCC projections argued that the SRES had calculated the rates of growth in the world GDP using market exchange rates. They further argued that, similar to the effect noted in Table I, the use of market exchange rates had the effect of understating the share of the economies of the developing countries in the world economy in 1990, and correspondingly overestimating the rates of GDP growth that the developing countries would achieve in catching up with the developed countries during the 21st century. Because higher rates of growth are associated with higher levels of emissions of greenhouse gases, overestimation of rates of growth by IPCC resulted in a corresponding overestimation of levels of emissions and mean temperatures. The authors of the SRES responded sharply to this critique, arguing that SRES did indeed use both PPPs and market exchange rates, and that market exchange rates are appropriate for certain relevant purposes.

Calculation of PPPs involves sophisticated and rigorous procedures for selecting the products to be compared, collecting prices of these products, deriving average prices for the whole of a country and a particular year, and determining weights in compiling price indices for groups of products that constitute appropriate headings (such as gross private consumption, gross agricultural or industrial output, and so on). The World Bank and the OECD now coordinate the compilation of PPPs under the International Comparison Program (ICP). The ICP Handbook 2004, published by the World Bank in 2003, provides more detail on the procedure for calculating PPPs.

Notwithstanding increasing acceptance and popularity, PPPs are not without limitations, and are not going to replace exchange rate-based comparisons of international data. PPP rates are based on a limited set of observations and are not free from sampling errors. The World Bank acknowledges that although efforts are made to correct for quality differences, the ICP faces the problem of matching “like with like,” which, in some areas, such as services, may be difficult. One problem is that in some cases, price surveys do not cover the entire country or the entire year. As a result, the prices used in PPP calculation may not reflect fully the average national price prevailing in the country under investigation. For nonbenchmark countries, PPP data are basically desk estimates based on regression equations. Consequently, more caution should be exercised when interpreting PPPs for services.

Opportunities to multiply purchasing power affords libraries a great opportunity to level the playing field and, in many instances, shift the negotiation in their favor. Vendors are in business to make money. Providing an opportunity for them to increase overall sales is a great way to reduce the cost for individual libraries. A library that belongs to a consortium or some other group can use this as way to gain concessions in exchange for advocating for a joint purchase. This can be especially effective if the library is well regarded in the consortium or is the flagship campus of a university system. Vendors will also use the purchasing power of libraries to their advantage by offering exclusive deals to such groups. The hope here is that libraries will be more motivated to purchase something due to a couple of reasons. First, the deal is “too good to pass up” and the libraries do not want to miss the opportunity to add something to their collection.

the exchange rate that would be required to purchase the same quantity of goods and services locally that cost $1 in the United States. Thus, the PPP between any two currencies is the measure of the actual purchasing power of those currencies at a given point in time for buying a given basket of goods and services. As the World Bank explained in its 2002 report _The International Comparison Programme and Purchasing Power Parities_, the PPP for, say, the Indonesian rupiah against the U.S. dollar is defined as the number of rupiahs needed to buy, in Indonesia, the same amount of goods and services as $1 (U.S.) would buy in the United States.

The Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)–Eurostat PPP program was first established at the OECD in 1980 with the aim of providing statistical measures for enabling price and volume comparisons of gross domestic product (GDP) and its components for the OECD member countries. Successive rounds in 1985, 1990, 1993, 1996, and 1999 have resulted in extended coverage from 18 to 43 countries. Procedures for collection of data have also been refined in the process. The OECD multilateral benchmark studies incorporate price and expenditure data from all the countries included in the comparisons. In addition to the goods and services on the markets being compared, PPPs take into account the economic structure and the market composition in each country. Complexities arise from the different markets for consumers and investments and from the variety of goods and services consumed in different countries. Parallel work is also proceeding through the World Bank and the Statistical Commission of the United Nations, under the auspices of the International Comparison Program (ICP), to extend the coverage of PPP countries not currently covered by the OECD–Eurostat PPP program. Originally launched in 1968 to cover only a small group of countries, the ICP now covers 160 countries in all regions of the world.

Over the past 20 years, the use of PPP-based conversions has grown rapidly, and many users, such as universities, research institutes, international banks, multinational companies and international organizations, have started to use PPPs in making international comparisons.

International comparisons of economic performance, standard of living, and productivity of labor force are made every day, for a variety of reasons, by international organizations (such as the United Nations, the World Bank, or the OECD), international banks, multinational companies, tourists and travelers, and researchers. The World Bank also publishes comparisons of national output, not only for individual countries but also for 'low-income' or 'high-income' groupings of countries. Aggregations and comparisons of this nature require that output be converted into a common currency, i.e., a common unit of value. Often, the U.S. dollar or the Euro is used as the common currency for this purpose. Conversion of national outputs of individual countries to the U.S. dollar basis, for example, is conventionally done by using market exchange rates, which are the rates at which national currencies are officially converted to the U.S. dollar at the relevant time. Because market exchange rates change all the time, generally an average of the exchange rates for a year may be used for representing annual figures. The World Bank irons out fluctuations in exchange rates by using a moving average of 3 years in its Atlas method of reporting.

In recent years, international organizations have also started to calculate and use purchasing power parities for converting variables such as national output or consumption to U.S. dollars. Thus, the World Bank now publishes figures for all countries based on both the exchange rate conversion and the PPPs in its annual _World Development Report_. For most countries, but particularly for the low-income countries, the amounts yielded by the two approaches are very different. Figures for a selected group of countries published in the _World Development Report 2003_ are presented in Table I for illustration. It should be noted from Table I that, when converted into PPP gross national income, figures for all countries except Japan, Singapore, and the United States increase in comparison to the exchange rate-based figures. Significantly, the PPP measures also have the consequence of narrowing the divergence between the low-income countries and the high-income countries. Instead of accounting for only 3.4% of the world economy, the low-income countries now account for 11% of the world economy.

Table I. Gross National Income 2001: Two Methods of Measurement
_a_ _Country_ | _Gross national income_ | _PPP gross national income_ _b_ ---|---|--- _Billion U.S.$_ | _% (of world)_ | _Billion U.S.$_ | _% (of world)_
Argentina | 261.0 | 0.83 | 438 | 0.94
Australia | 383.3 | 1.22 | 500 | 1.08
Bangladesh | 49.9 | 0.16 | 224 | 0.48
China | 1131.0 | 3.59 | 5415 | 11.67
Germany | 1948.0 | 6.18 | 2098 | 4.52
India | 474.3 | 1.51 | 2530 | 5.45
Japan | 4574.2 | 14.52 | 3487 | 7.51
Singapore | 99.4 | 0.32 | 100 | 0.22
United Kingdom | 1451.4 | 4.61 | 1466 | 3.16
United States | 9900.7 | 31.43 | 9902 | 21.34
Low income | 1069.1 | 3.39 | 5134 | 11.06
Middle income | 4922 | 15.63 | 15,235 | 32.83
High income | 25,506.4 | 80.97 | 26,431 | 56.96
World | 31,500 | 100.00 | 46,403 | 100.00
a Data from _World Development Report 2003_ (World Bank, 2003).
b PPP, purchasing power parity.

Purchasing power parity (PPP) is a form of exchange rate that takes into account the cost of a common basket of goods and services in the two countries compared. PPPs are often expressed in U.S. dollars. Therefore, the PPP between the U.S. dollar and another currency is the exchange rate that would be required to purchase the same quantity of goods and services locally that cost $1 in the United States. Thus, the PPP between any two currencies is the measure of the actual purchasing power of those currencies at a given point in time for buying a given basket of goods and services. As the World Bank explained in its 2002 report _The International Comparison Programme and Purchasing Power Parities_, the PPP for, say, the Indonesian rupiah against the U.S. dollar is defined as the number of rupiahs needed to buy, in Indonesia, the same amount of goods and services as $1 (U.S.) would buy in the United States.

The Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)–Eurostat PPP program was first established at the OECD in 1980 with the aim of providing statistical measures for enabling price and volume comparisons of gross domestic product (GDP) and its components for the OECD member countries. Successive rounds in 1985, 1990, 1993, 1996, and 1999 have resulted in extended coverage from 18 to 43 countries. Procedures for collection of data have also been refined in the process. The OECD multilateral benchmark studies incorporate price and expenditure data from all the countries included in the comparisons. In addition to the goods and services on the markets being compared, PPPs take into account the economic structure and the market composition in each country. Complexities arise from the different markets for consumers and investments and from the variety of goods and services consumed in different countries. Parallel work is also proceeding through the World Bank and the Statistical Commission of the United Nations, under the auspices of the International Comparison Program (ICP), to extend the coverage of PPP countries not currently covered by the OECD–Eurostat PPP program. Originally launched in 1968 to cover only a small group of countries, the ICP now covers 160 countries in all regions of the world. Over the past 20 years, the use of PPP-based conversions has grown rapidly, and many users, such as universities, research institutes, international banks, multinational companies and international organizations, have started to use PPPs in making international comparisons.

International comparisons of economic performance, standard of living, and productivity of labor force are made every day, for a variety of reasons, by international organizations (such as the United Nations, the World Bank, or the OECD), international banks, multinational companies, tourists and travelers, and researchers. The World Bank also publishes comparisons of national output, not only for individual countries but also for 'low-income' or 'high-income' groupings of countries. Aggregations and comparisons of this nature require that output be converted into a common currency, i.e., a common unit of value. Often, the U.S. dollar or the Euro is used as the common currency for this purpose. Conversion of national outputs of individual countries to the U.S. dollar basis, for example, is conventionally done by using market exchange rates, which are the rates at which national currencies are officially converted to the U.S. dollar at the relevant time. Because market exchange rates change all the time, generally an average of the exchange rates for a year may be used for representing annual figures. The World Bank irons out fluctuations in exchange rates by using a moving average of 3 years in its Atlas method of reporting. In recent years, international organizations have also started to calculate and use purchasing power parities for converting variables such as national output or consumption to U.S. dollars. Thus, the World Bank now publishes figures for all countries based on both the exchange rate conversion and the PPPs in its annual _World Development Report_. For most countries, but particularly for the low-income countries, the amounts yielded by the two approaches are very different. Figures for a selected group of countries published in the _World Development Report 2003_ are presented in Table I for illustration. It should be noted from Table I that, when converted into PPP gross national income, figures for all countries except Japan, Singapore, and the United States increase in comparison to the exchange rate-based figures. Significantly, the PPP measures also have the consequence of narrowing the divergence between the low-income countries and the high-income countries. Instead of accounting for only 3.4% of the world economy, the low-income countries now account for 11% of the world economy.

Table I. Gross National Income 2001: Two Methods of Measurement
_a_ _Country_ | _Gross national income_ | _PPP gross national income_ _b_ ---|---|--- _Billion U.S.$_ | _% (of world)_ | _Billion U.S.$_ | _% (of world)_
Argentina | 261.0 | 0.83 | 438 | 0.94
Australia | 383.3 | 1.22 | 500 | 1.08
Bangladesh | 49.9 | 0.16 | 224 | 0.48
China | 1131.0 | 3.59 | 5415 | 11.67
Germany | 1948.0 | 6.18 | 2098 | 4.52
India | 474.3 | 1.51 | 2530 | 5.45
Japan | 4574.2 | 14.52 | 3487 | 7.51
Singapore | 99.4 | 0.32 | 100 | 0.22
United Kingdom | 1451.4 | 4.61 | 1466 | 3.16
United States | 9900.7 | 31.43 | 9902 | 21.34
Low income | 1069.1 | 3.39 | 5134 | 11.06

In view of the deficiencies of international comparisons based on exchange rates, PPP is increasingly recognized as a more reliable measure for international comparisons of output, standard of living, and quality of life.
Measurements of output based on exchange rates are now increasingly considered to be inappropriate and potentially misleading for making international comparisons.
This is because exchange rates are determined by a multitude of factors and generally are not reliable measures of output.
At any given time, many countries are known to have exchange rates that are either undervalued or overvalued, but are maintained by their governments for other considerations, such as export promotion or import substitution.
The use of such exchange rates for international comparisons is likely to introduce distortions.
As the World Bank acknowledges in the World Bank Development Report 2003, nominal exchange rates do not always reflect international differences in relative prices.

The proper measurement of national output is not an end in itself.
As the following example illustrates, proper measurement of output assists the users in making more meaningful judgments about a wide range of economic and social phenomena in which the level of national output is directly or indirectly important—for example, climate change during the course of the 21st century.
In 2001, the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released its Special Report on Emission Scenarios (SRES).
The purpose of this report was to assess the extent to which emissions of greenhouse gases may lead to a rise in global temperatures on Earth.
Because emissions of greenhouse gases in a country are a function of its economic growth, the IPCC made separate projections of economic growth in developing and developed countries over the period 1990–2100, and reported that, based on these projections of growth in national output, global temperatures were projected to increase between 1.4° and 5.8°C over the period 1990–2100.
These projections subsequently became what The Economist described as the most frequently cited numbers in the field of environmental policy, and quite possibly the most widely cited numbers in any field of public policy.
Significantly, the main reason for the controversy that surrounded these numbers was related to the use (or the absence of the use, in this case) of PPPs in estimating national output.
Critics of the IPCC projections argued that the SRES had calculated the rates of growth in the world GDP using market exchange rates.
They further argued that, similar to the effect noted in Table I, the use of market exchange rates had the effect of understating the share of the economies of the developing countries in the world economy in 1990, and correspondingly overestimating the rates of GDP growth that the developing countries would achieve in catching up with the developed countries during the 21st century.
Because higher rates of growth are associated with higher levels of emissions of greenhouse gases, overestimation of rates of growth by IPCC resulted in a corresponding overestimation of levels of emissions and mean temperatures.
The authors of the SRES responded sharply to this critique, arguing that SRES did indeed use both PPPs and market exchange rates, and that market exchange rates are appropriate for certain relevant purposes.

Calculation of PPPs involves sophisticated and rigorous procedures for selecting the products to be compared, collecting prices of these products, deriving average prices for the whole of a country and a particular year, and determining weights in compiling price indices for groups of products that constitute appropriate headings (such as gross private consumption, gross agricultural or industrial output, and so on).
The World Bank and the OECD now coordinate the compilation of PPPs under the International Comparison Program (ICP).
The ICP Handbook 2004, published by the World Bank in 2003, provides more detail on the procedure for calculating PPPs.

Notwithstanding increasing acceptance and popularity, PPPs are not without limitations, and are not going to replace exchange rate-based comparisons of international data.
PPPs are based on a limited set of observations and are not free from sampling errors.
The World Bank acknowledges that although efforts are made to correct for quality differences, the ICP faces the problem of matching 'like with like,' which, in some areas, such as services, may be difficult.
One problem is that in some cases, price surveys do not cover the entire country or the entire year.
As a result, the prices used in PPP calculation may not reflect fully the average national price prevailing in the country under investigation.
For nonbenchmark countries, PPP data are basically desk estimates based on regression equations.
Consequently, more caution should be exercised when interpreting PPPs for services.

Sovereign credit risk ratings, which play a major role in modern international finance, are another example of social measurement in the field of international economics.
International movement of capital has been a key feature of globalization, as banks, superannuation funds, managed investment funds, and hedge funds all invest huge amounts in bonds and securities issued by borrowers from all parts of the world.
Both governments and firms borrow funds domestically and internationally to finance their investment projects.
The governments of all those countries that borrow funds in the international capital market are obliged to obtain credit risk ratings for their bonds because investors generally prefer to invest in rated rather that unrated securities.
Indeed, financial regulators in most developed countries allow their banks to invest only in investment-grade securities.
Accordingly, demand for credit ratings comes not only from both borrowers.

and lenders, but also from financial regulators, such as the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in the United States. Because the key function of sovereign credit ratings is to provide credible information about the risk involved in investment in underlying securities, the independence and the technical competence of the rating organizations are of paramount importance. The number of rating agencies in the business of assessing sovereign credit risk varies from time to time, but the business is dominated by three or four large international rating agencies, including Moody\'s Investor Services, Standard and Poor\'s Rating Services, Fitch International Services, and International Bank Credit Analysis. Although each rating agency follows its own distinctive methodology and procedures, in general, the process of credit rating involves reviewing a broad range of economic, financial, social, and political information on the sovereign and the country, with a view to assessing the ability of the sovereign to meet its debt obligations in a timely manner, according to the contractual conditions of the transaction. Typically, an international rating agency has branch offices around the world and its staff will interview government officials, business leaders, and others for assessing all factors that could affect the capacity of the sovereign in this regard. When the rating agency has formed a preliminary view about the rating to be assigned in a particular case, typically the sovereign is invited to respond confidentially to the assessment, including by making presentations to the rating agency personnel. Before the credit rating is finalized for publication, a final opportunity is provided to the sovereign for contesting the assessment, if necessary, by providing additional information or analysis. Once published, credit ratings are kept under regular review and are updated as warranted by any change in the underlying assumptions and conditions.

Lenders always take into account the risk of default or interruptions in repayments by borrowers. A government\'s potential inability to service its debt obligations is the main risk underlying sovereign risk. If a government suddenly stops repayments, a loss of income would occur for the bondholders. Sovereign defaults were more frequent in the 1920s and 1930s than they have been after World War II. Generally, outright repudiation of foreign debt is quite rare now and the most common form of default is a temporary disruption in repayments, which requires a rescheduling of debt. Thus, the real risk loss of income and/or capital that may occur is due to such rescheduling of debt.

A sovereign credit risk rating is an assessment of creditworthiness of a national government and it reflects the degree of confidence that creditors can place on the ability of that government to honor its international debt obligations as they fall due. Thus, for example, a triple-A rating assigned to a government indicates to the lenders that its creditworthiness is excellent and that securities issued by that government are investment grade. This assessment would in turn be reflected in the high yield that the lenders would expect from their investment in the bonds issued by such a sovereign. Table II. Typical Sovereign Credit Risk Ratings of Long-Term Debt _a_ _Moody\'s_ | _Standard and Poor\'s_ | _Basel II risk-weights_ | _Interpretation_ ---|---|---|--- Aaa | AAA | 0% | Highest quality Aa1 | AA+ | 0% | High quality Aa2 | AA | 0% | Aa3 | AA− | 0% | A1 | A+ | 20% | Strong payment capacity A2 | A | 20% | A3 | A− | 20% | Baa1 | BBB+ | 50% | Adequate payment capacity Baa2 | BBB | 50% | Baa3 | BBB− | 50% | Ba1 | BB+ | 100% | Speculative grade Ba2 | BB | 100% | Ba3 | BB− | 100% | Bl | B+ | 100% | High-risk obligations B2 | B | 100% | B3 | B− | 100% | _Note_ : To date, agencies have not assigned sovereign ratings below B3 or B−. a Data from Cantor and Packer (1996) and Claessens and Embrechts (2002).

Many of the factors taken into account by the rating agencies are not quantifiable. Even for those factors that are quantifiable, it is not always clear how relative weights to such factors ought to be assigned and what their influence on final ratings ought to be. In their desire to isolate the most crucial factors, some economists have attempted to second-guess the rating agencies by seeking to replicate the ratings of the rating agencies. For example, one study showed that it was possible to match closely the September 1995 sovereign ratings by Moody\'s and Standard and Poor\'s for a sample of countries. The study showed that high credit ratings were positively correlated with per capita income, GDP growth, price stability, and the absence of debt defaults. Although economic development (measured by the level of industrialization of a country) and external debt were also positively correlated, fiscal balance and external balance were not.

The Principle of Sovereign Ceiling Sovereign ceiling refers to a practice, followed with rare exceptions by international credit rating agencies, according to which any public or private organization from a country is not rated higher than the rating assigned to its sovereign. For example, if the sovereign of a nation has been rated at AA by Standard and Poor\'s or Aa2 by Moody\'s, none of the other entities from that country can be rated higher than that rating. The underlying logic of the sovereign ceiling principle is that a financially distressed sovereign government would be likely to impose exchange controls or otherwise interfere with the ability of domestic firms to service their external debt. An exception to this principle occurs, however, when an internationally oriented corporate borrower structures an offshore collateral arrangement under which borrowed funds would never enter the country in which the corporation is domiciled.

exceptions to the sovereign ceiling principle for a high-quality corporate issue domiciled in a low-rated country with a “dollarized” economy, such as Argentina.
Significance of Sovereign Credit Risk Ratings In addition to their impact on bond yield spreads, sovereign ratings also have an impact on stock prices in the countries for which the ratings are assessed.
Indeed, researchers have found that the impact of a ratings downgrade for a particular country may go well beyond the stock markets of that country, impacting those of the neighboring countries as well.
During the Asian financial crisis of 1997–1998, a contagion effect of this nature was seen to be the source of spreading the crisis from one country to another.
Sovereign ratings are also considered to be important indicators of fiscal discipline and of the ability of a government to manage the economy.
Thus, government ministers, officials, and media generally attach considerable importance to the level of and variations in an international credit rating.
Indeed, in Australia, employment contracts of some of the senior government officials have been known to include performance indicators involving the upgrading of the credit rating to the next higher level, the achievement of which would be rewarded by a predetermined bonus.
Because credit ratings are always used by lenders in conjunction with many other considerations, including their own internal credit assessments, and because credit ratings always leave room for subjective considerations, such as the ability of a government to defy trade union pressure for higher wages, the impact of sovereign credit ratings cannot be determined with any degree of precision.
It is difficult to say, for example, that a variation in credit ratings of a country was responsible for a particular event.
Consistent with this caveat, results of research on the causality from risk ratings to level of bond yields remain inconclusive.
Before the Asian financial crisis of 1997, it had been claimed that credit ratings appear to have some independent influence on yields over and above the other publicly available information.
One study showed that although rating announcements had a significant impact on spreads of speculative-grade sovereign bonds, no such influence was found on yields of investment-grade sovereign bonds.
The international credit rating agencies were widely criticized in the wake of the Asian financial crisis for failing to anticipate the crisis and forewarn investors.
Critics argue that most often credit ratings are grounded in the past and are inappropriate indicators of future events.
Indeed, it has been suggested that credit ratings are likely to exacerbate macroeconomic fluctuations, because they tend to be higher in the boom conditions and lower when economic conditions are bad.
This procyclical nature of credit ratings has been cited as a possible source of accentuations of business cycles.
For example, in one study, rating agencies were criticized for focusing on the “wrong” set of fundamentals, such as debt-to-export ratios, when it came to anticipating financial crises.
Similarly, others have observed that instead of leading the market, agencies lag the market and are rather slow to adjust their ratings.

Knowledge Economy, Knowledge Intensity, and International Trade
The Concept of the Knowledge Economy In times of rapid economic and social change, many new concepts emerge as attempts are made to describe and analyze the process of change.
In recent years, the term “knowledge economy” has been the focus of a great deal of comment and has been described variously as the global knowledge economy, knowledge-based economy, information economy, and new economy.
The concept of the knowledge economy describes fundamental aspects of the present period of economic change.
Quite new activities, structures, and arrangements are emerging on a global basis, characterized above all by rising knowledge intensity in, and increasing globalization of, processes for the creation, production, and distribution of goods and services.
This is described as the emergence of the knowledge economy.
The unique role of knowledge as a driving force in economic growth has been extensively discussed and is now widely accepted.
The extensive literature on the knowledge economy is concerned with many aspects of the subject, but two main strands deal with (1) the conceptual issues of what is meant by knowledge economy and the other associated terms; and (2) the policy implications for nations flowing from the concepts.
Defining the knowledge economy is important for several reasons.
First of all, by putting a circle around the factors or features constituting it, a clear definition helps to crystallize the scope of the knowledge economy.
Second, a clear definition would permit comparisons to be made between countries in terms of their standing and performance with respect to the knowledge economy.
Comparisons would also be possible in the future within a country, tracking its performance over time.
Third, and perhaps most importantly, a clear definition of the knowledge economy would sharpen the focus on the enabling reforms and policies and would help in prioritizing those reforms.
“A definition offers no shortcut strategy for reforms,” noted the APEC Economic Committee in its 2000 report, “but it is the correct starting point for deeper analysis of what the New Economy is and upon what it depends.”
Different people have defined the knowledge economy differently, conveying often a partial rather than complete picture of the underlying concept.
According to some scholars, the knowledge economy refers to the new overall structure that is emerging, together with its associated institutions, activities, and arrangements.
Attention is often given to individual aspects of the emerging economy, such as the new economy or the online economy, the network economy, the learning economy, and the information economy.
But these are specific aspects rather than the overall reality.
The Internet plays an important part in the knowledge economy, and networks of many different types are also vital.
Learning is clearly central to a knowledge economy, as is the rapid exchange of information.

Innovation, being the process of applying ideas new to the firm in many different areas, is clearly at the heart of a vibrant knowledge economy, Each of these concepts views the overall reality of the knowledge economy through a different lens, thereby illuminating an important part of the picture. According to the APEC Economic Committee, the four dimensions that characterize the knowledge-based economy (KBE) are (1) pervasive innovation and technological change, (2) pervasive human resource development, (3) efficient infrastructure, particularly in information and communications technology (ICT), and (4) a business environment supportive of enterprise and innovation.

The process of creating and applying economically relevant knowledge is called innovation, and it consists not only of the big discoveries and the high-technology industries, but of 'a million little things' that improve the operations of the firms and other economic institutions, to use Paul Romer's characterization in 'Two Strategies for Economic Development: Using Ideas and Producing Ideas,' published in the World Bank's Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 1992.

It is widely accepted that the process of research and development is only a part of technological innovation. The international standard for the measurement of innovation is the Oslo Manual, published by the OECD in 1992, which designates the following activities as components of technological innovation: design; research and development; acquisition of technology; tooling, start-up, and pre-production; training; and marketing new products.

In many OECD countries, research and development expenditure accounts for 30–50% of spending on innovation, and expenditures on product design and production start-up also constitute substantial proportions. The OECD ranks manufacturing industries based on their relative research and development intensity, which is measured in terms of the share of research and development spending in value added in each industry.

The high-technology and medium-high-technology industries have played a major role in international trade in the 1990s. Before the Asian economic crisis, between 1990 and 1996, exports of products of these industries by OECD countries increased at the annual average rate of 7%, as compared with 5% for other types of exports.

Purchasing power parity relates to a presumed equilibrium between exchange rates, based on price; without barriers to trade, the assumption is that identical goods will have the same price in different markets. For a given item, if the price in one country increases, then the demand for the currency of that country will decrease in the other country, and thus, the exchange rate will adjust until the relative price is the same once again for both countries for the good in question.

In practice, purchasing power parity is assessed for a 'basket of goods' (although there are similar comparisons with single items, such as the 'Big Mac Index,' or the 'Starbucks Tall Latte Index'). Indeed, there are usually significant differences between nominal exchange rates and the purchasing power parity rate; an often cited example is that in 2003, the GDP per capita in India was about US$1,700 based on nominal exchange rates, while it was US$3,600 based on a purchasing power parity.

Another key aspect of purchasing power parity involves the understanding that the nominal exchange rate and the purchasing power parity rate best represent certain types of goods and services. Tradable, nonperishable goods tend to trade nearer to the nominal exchange rate, while local nontradable goods and services fall closer to the purchasing power parity rates.

Hence, the implication is that there exists a sustainable cost advantage to produce tradable items in low income countries, not only because the worker cost is lower, but also because their pay goes further than in higher income countries. Further, for nontradable goods closer to the purchasing power parity rates, a cost advantage occurs with local plants, since while the product price is closer to purchasing power exchange rates, they can be paid for by cheaper nominal exchange rates, which would not be possible in richer countries.

Of note is that any transport costs or governmental intervention weakens purchasing power parity, since such costs diminish the relationship between exchange rates and the assumption that identical goods will have the same price in different markets.

(1993) have suggested that this oddity can be explained because Fisher, the reformer, got the better of Fisher, the scholar.

Purchase power parity is a concept where the price of a product or service is the same (assuming no trade barriers) in different markets, and the exchange rate adjusts to ensure equivalence.
The nominal exchange rate and the purchase power parity rate are not the same.
Tradable goods are more closely aligned with nominal exchange rates, while nontradable goods and services more closely align with purchasing power parity rates.

While products and brands have been stuffed full of interesting and useful new initiatives, deriving new revenues from these has proven more difficult.
Concentrated purchasing power, a fragmented and often modest-sized core audience, users who are accustomed to having information appear to be free and sizeable competing outlets (aggregators, proxy access and the like) all make it more difficult to directly commercialise new offerings.
Many publishers are seeking new purchasing outlets, reshaping or integrating products to appeal to different user groups (and, hence, different budgets) and investing in new product launches.
Many publishers now have a significant percentage of revenues coming from recent product development initiatives.
As Simon Waldman discusses in his book Creative Disruption, experimentation and innovation can be driven by economic necessity, an often overlooked factor in market evolutions.
The economic downturn of 2008–09 led many publishers to begin diversification efforts, which are now beginning to bear fruit.
In short, the pace of change has accelerated because of macro-economic pressures.

Purchasing power parity (PPP) plays a key role in decisions for naturally hedging currency risk.
Though the roots of PPP can be found in Adam Smith and early 19th-century classical political economy, the PPP theory is usually credited to Gustav Cassels, writing in the 1920s.
The earliest versions of PPP took the form of the Law of One Price: Assume a one-good world with no transactions or transportation costs; the price of that good denominated in different currencies will sell at the same price: Pt*St=Pt⇒St=Pt/Pt*.
Extending the Law of One Price using price indices instead of individual prices is known as absolute purchasing power parity (APPP).
Even in the unlikely event that the Law of One Price holds for each good individually, the APPP extension may be invalid if the index weights are not the same for both economies.
The problem of traded and untraded goods also creates significant difficulties.
Nevertheless, ignoring the various possible problems with APPP, substituting price index levels p* and p into the Law of One Price and taking logs produces: lnS=lnp−lnp*.
Hence, APPP holds that foreign exchange rate changes are determined by the difference between foreign and domestic inflation rates.
One implication of this appealing interpretation of exchange rate changes is that predicting domestic and foreign inflation rates will permit exchange rate changes to be forecasted accurately.

A more popular form for PPP to take is relative purchasing power parity (RPPP).
This is the version used to define the real exchange rate as the nominal exchange rate adjusted for changes in the relative purchasing power of each currency since some base period.
In a one-period framework, the relative form of the PPP condition can be expressed: St+1/St=pt+1/pt+1*pt/pt*.
The real exchange rate (st) notion is an attempt to convert observed exchange rates back to some base period.
Starting from some base year where S0 = s0, then: s1=S1/(1+p˙0,1*)(1+p˙0,1).
The multiperiod form of st involves compounding the inflation term over the time between the selected base year and the desired date.

Some evidence on the historical behavior of nominal and real foreign exchange rates is given Shapiro (1999, p. 217).
Casual examination of the empirical evidence reveals that real exchange rates for many currencies do deviate significantly from the PPP requirement that the real exchange rate must be relatively constant over time.
The basic approach of the PPP arguments is to attack the notion of exchange risk.
This follows from the PPP implication that, in the long run, the example of a Canadian sugar refiner selling output in Canadian dollars (C$) but purchasing sugar in U.S. dollars (US$).
The PPP argument indicates that a deterioration in the FX rate will be compensated for in price level increases.
If, say, the US$/C$ increased by 50% (C$/US$ falls), causing the cost of raw sugar inputs to increase proportionately, then PPP dictates that the Canadian inflation rate will be such that the price of refined sugar in Canada will increase to completely offset the Canadian dollar increase in input costs.
When appropriate assumptions are satisfied, PPP holds and the real foreign exchange rate is unchanged.
In this case, there are no real implications to nominal foreign exchange rate changes.

lead-lag time period for the relationship to hold makes PPP inconsistent with the typical types of business decision time frames; the greater applicability of PPP to tradeables than to nontradeables creates complications if the hedger is interested in nontradeables.
Slippage is created between the price index that underlies PPP and the specific prices that are of interest to the hedger. It is relative, not aggregate, prices that are of interest.
Financial and operating contracts are present that are fixed in nominal terms (i.e., cash flows that do not adjust when the aggregate price level changes).
In the context of an international firm, Shapiro (1984) has demonstrated that in the face of deviations from PPP (changes in real foreign exchange rates) a combination of forward exchange contracts, nominal debt, and fixed price sales are required in order to hedge against currency risk (composed of inflation and real exchange rate risk) and relative price risk.

The purchasing power parity theory states that the percentage difference in the forward rate relative to the spot rate should over time equal the difference in expected inflation rates between countries.
That is, one currency appreciates (depreciates) with respect to another currency according to the expected relative rates of inflation between the two countries such that an identical good in each country will have the same price.
To illustrate, the Dollar/Mexican peso exchange rate, ($/Peso)_n_, and the Mexican Peso/Dollar exchange rate, (Peso/$)_n_, _n_ periods from now (i.e., future exchange rates) is expected to change according to the following relationships: ($/Peso)n=[(1+PUS)n/(1+PMEX)n]×($/Peso)0 and (Peso/$)n=[(1+PMEX)n/(1+PUS)n]×(Peso/$)0 where _P_ US and _P_ MEX are the expected inflation rates in the United States and Mexico, respectively, and ($/Peso)0 and (Peso/$)0 are the dollar-to-peso and peso-to-dollar spot exchange rates, respectively.
If prices in the United States are expected to rise faster than those in Mexico for the same goods and services, other things equal, holders of pesos will buy dollars.

Exhibit 18.2 Converting peso-denominated into dollar-denominated free cash flows to the firm using the purchasing power parity theory
Target’s Peso-Denominated FCFF Cash Flows (Millions of Pesos): P1050.5, P1124.7, P1202.7
Current Mexican Expected Inflation Rate = 6%
Current US Expected Inflation Rate = 4%
Current Spot Rate ($/Peso) = 0.0877
Projected Spot Rate ($/Peso): 0.0860, 0.0844, 0.0828
Target’s Dollar-Denominated FCFF Cash Flows (Millions of $): $90.34, $94.92, $99.58
Note: Calculating the projected spot rate using Eq. (18.3): ($/Peso)2012 = {(1.04)/(1.06)} × 0.0877 = 0.0860 ($/Peso)2013 = {(1.04)2/(1.06)2} × 0.0877 = 0.0844 ($/Peso)2014 = {(1.04)3/(1.06)3} × 0.0877 = 0.0828

The Purchasing Power of Money (1911) was conceived as an exercise in establishing the validity and usefulness of the quantity theory of money, a doctrine that had been politically contaminated in the polemics over ‘free silver’ in the 1890s.
In Fisher’s formulation, ‘the equation of exchange’ was written as MV + M′V′ = PT. (In this expression, M represented the quantity of cash and V the velocity of its circulation; M′ stood for total deposits subject to check and V′ for the average velocity of their circulation; P was defined as an average price and T as the volume of trade.)
This book was a vigorously monetarist document in which Fisher maintained that changes in the general price level were linked to proportionate changes in the money supply.
This was true in the ‘normal period,’ defined as a state of equilibrium in which the values of T and the V’s were constant.
His choice of terminology on this point bred misunderstandings: he recognized readily that economic reality was typified by ‘transition periods’ – when adjustments to disturbances were being worked out – in which the constancies did not hold.
Fisher was not content to offer solely an analytic explanation for variations in the purchasing power of money.
Convinced as he was that monetary instability produced distributive injustices by distorting the relative positions of creditors and debtors, he felt obliged to suggest a corrective.
His proposed remedy prescribed that changes in the general price level should be offset by variations in the gold content of the dollar (i.e., the ‘compensated dollar’ plan).
But this policy recommendation did not mesh with the analysis presented in The Purchasing Power of Money.
The ‘compensated dollar’ scheme rested essentially on a ‘commodity theory of money’ in which the real value of money was determined by the value of its gold equivalent.
<|endoftext|>
