Chapter 3
OVERVIEW OF
ACCOUNTING ANALYSIS
T he purpose of accounting analysis is to evaluate the degree to which a firm's
accounting captures its underlying business reality.1 By identiFYing places where
there is accounting flexibility, and by evaluating the appropriateness of the
firm's accounting policies and estimates, analysts can assess the reliability of a firm's
accounting numbers. Having identified any accounting distortions, analysts can then
adjust a firm's accounting numbers using cash flow and footnote information to "undo"
the distortions. Sound accounting analysis improves the reliability of conclusions from
financial analysis, the next step in financial statement analysis.
THE INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR FINANCIAL REPORTING
There is typically a separation between ownership and management in public corporations. Financial statements serve as the vehicle through which owners keep track of
their firms' financial situation. On a PEriodic basis, firms typically produce three primary
financial reports: (1) an income statement that describes the oPErating PErformance during a time PEriod, (2) a balance sheet that states the firm's assets and how they are
financed, and (3) a cash flow statement (or in some countries, a funds flow statement)
that summarizes the cash (or fund) flows of the firm. These statements are accompanied
by footnotes that provide additional details on the financial statement line items, as well
as by management's narrative discussion of the firm's PErformance in the Management
Discussion and Analysis SECtion.
To evaluate effectively the quality of a firm's financial statement data, the analyst
needs to fIRSt understand the basic features of financial reporting and the institutional
framework that governs them, as discussed in the following SECtions.
Accrual Accounting
One of the fundamental features of corporate financial reports is that they are prepared
using accrual rather than cash accounting. Unlike cash accounting, accrual accounting
distinguishes between the recording of costs and benefits associated with economic activities and the actual payment and receipt of cash. Net income is the primary PEriodic PErformance index under accrual accounting. To compute net income,
the effects of
economic transactions are recorded on the basis of exPEcted, not necessarily actual, cash
receipts and payments. ExPEcted cash receipts from the delivery of products or services
are recognized as
revenues, and exPEcted cash outflows associated with these
revenues are recognized as exPEnses.
3-1
3-2 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
While there are many rules and conventions that govern the preparation of a firm's
financial statements, there are only a few conceptual building blocks that form the foundation of accrual accounting. The following definitions are critical to the income statement, which summarizes a firm's revenues and exPEnses:2
Revenues are economic resources earned during a time PEriod. Revenue recognition is governed by the realization principle, which establishes that revenues should
be recognized when (a) the firm has provided all, or substantially all, the goods or
services to be delivered to the customer and (b) the customer has paid cash or is
exPEcted to pay cash with a reasonable degree of certainty.3
ExPEnses are economic resources used up in a time PEriod. ExPEnse recognition is
governed by the matching and the conservatism principles. Under these principles,
exPEnses are resource costs (a) directly associated with revenues recognized in the
same PEriod, (b) associated with benefits that are consumed in this time PEriod, or
(c) whose future benefits are not reasonably certain.
Profit is the difference between a firm's revenues and exPEnses in a time PEriod.4
The following fundamental relationship is therefore reflected in a firm's income
statement:
Profit = Revenues - ExPEnses
In contrast, the balance sheet is a summary at one point in time. The principles that
define a firm's assets, liabilities, and equity are as follows:
Assets are economic resources owned by a firm that are (a) likely to produce future
economic benefits and (b) measurable with a reasonable degree of certainty.
Liabilities are economic obligations of a firm arising from benefits received in the
past that (a) are required to be met with a reasonable degree of certainty and
(b) whose timing is reasonably well defined.
Equity is the difference between a firm's assets and its liabilities.
The definitions of assets, liabilities, and equity lead to the fundamental relationship
that governs a firm's balance sheet:
Assets = Liabilities + Equity
Delegation of Reporting to Management
While the basic definitions of the elements of a firm's financial statements are simple, their
application in practice often involves complex judgments. For example, how should revenues be recognized when a firm sells land to customers and also provides customer financing? If revenue is recognized before cash is collected, how should potential defaults be
estimated? Are the outlays associated with research and development activities, whose payoffs are uncertain, assets or exPEnses when incurred? Are contractual commitments under
lease arrangements or post-retirement plans liabilities? If so, how should they be valued?
Because corporate managers have intimate knowledge of their firms' businesses, they
are entrusted with the primary task of making the appropriate judgments in portraying
myriad business transactions using the basic accrual accounting framework. The
accounting discretion granted to managers is potentially valuable because it allows them
to reflect inside information in reported financial statements. However, since investors
view profits as a measure of managers' PErformance, managers have an incentive to use
their accounting discretion to distort reported profits by making biased assumptions.
Further, the use of accounting numbers in contracts between the firm and outsiders provides a motivation for management manipulation of accounting numbers.
Overview of Accounting Analysis 3-3
This earnings management distorts financial accounting data, making it less valuable
to external financial statement users. Therefore, the delegation of financial reporting
decisions to managers has both costs and benefits. Accounting rules and auditing are
mechanisms designed to reduce the cost and preserve the benefit of delegating financial
reporting to corporate managers. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act increased the involvement of
the audit committee of a firm's board of directors and required the PErsonal certification
of the CEO and CFO as to the appropriateness of financial reports as a way of reducing
the costs of this delegation. The legal system is used to adjudicate disputes among managers, auditors, and investors.
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
Given that it is difficult for outside investors to determine whether managers have used
accounting flexibility to signal their proprietary information or merely to disguise reality,
a number of accounting conventions have evolved to mitigate the problem. For example,
in most countries financial statements are prepared using the historical cost convention,
where assets and liabilities are recorded at historical exchange prices rather than fair
values, replacement values, or values in use. This reduces managers' ability to overstate
the value of the assets that they have acquired or develoPEd, or to understate the value of
liabilities. Of course, historical cost also limits the information that is available to investors about the potential of the firm's assets, since past exchange prices are usually different from fair values or values in use. In recognition of this, the world's major standard
setters have increasingly required the use of fair value accounting in their resPEctive
standards.
INTRODUCTION OF FAIR VALUE ACCOUNTING
U.S. and international accounting standards require firms to use fair value accounting
(FVA) to value certain financial assets. The rules sPEciFY which tyPEs of assets are to be
recorded at fair values, and which are to be valued at cost. They also define how to
record the unrealized gains and losses from using fair values, and how to measure fair
values.
Under the rules, marketable SECurities and derivatives are required to be valued at
their fair value. Financial instruments (such as debt SECurities) are reported at fair value
if management anticipates that they will be traded in the future, or if they are potentially
available to be traded. In contrast, debt instruments that managers anticipate holding to
maturity are reported at cost.
The standards also sPEciFY whether gains or losses from revisions in fair values should
apPEar in the income statement or be directly included in equity. Unrealized gains and
losses on marketable SECurities, traded financial instruments, and derivatives that are not
held for hedging purposes are included in net income. For financial instruments that are
available for sale or derivatives held as part of a hedging arrangement, any unrealized
gains or losses go directly to owners' equity and do not flow through the income
statement.
Finally, standard setters have recognized that reporting financial assets at their fair
values involves varying levels of subjectivity dePEnding on the liquidity and transparency
of the asset market in question. The standards have established a hierarchy for measuring the fair value of financial assets. Instruments that are traded in a liquid and orderly
market are called Level One instruments and are valued using the latest market prices.
Financial assets that are not traded in liquid markets, but which can be valued using
3-4 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
financial models whose inputs are available from liquid markets, are called Level Two
assets and are valued using the financial model and the market input prices. Finally,
some instruments can be valued using financial models but require managers to estimate
the inputs. These are termed Level Three assets, and require considerable management
judgment to estimate their fair values.
The financial crisis of 2008 demonstrated the challenges in estimating fair values of
financial instruments when markets for the SECurities in question are highly illiquid.
Such was the case for mortgage-backed SECurities, which were claims on the cash flows
from residential mortgage loans created through a process known as SECuritization.
Many of these SECurities were owned by financial institutions throughout the world. As
uncertainty about mortgage loan default rates and declines in the value of the underlying
proPErties rose, the market for mortgage-backed SECurities became highly illiquid and
there was wide variation in their values reported on the balance sheets of the banks
and investment firms that owned the SECurities.
Accounting standards and rules also limit management's ability to misuse accounting
judgment by regulating how particular tyPEs of transactions are recorded. For example,
accounting standards for leases stipulate how firms are to record contractual arrangements to lease resources. Similarly, PEnsion and other post-employment benefit standards describe how firms are to record commitments to provide PEnsions and other
retirement benefits for employees. These accounting standards, which are designed to
convey quantitative information on a firm's PErformance, are complemented by a set of
disclosure principles. These disclosure principles guide the amount and kinds of information that is disclosed and require a firm to provide qualitative information related to
the assumptions, policies, and uncertainties that underlie the quantitative data presented.
In the United States, the SECurities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has the legal
authority to set accounting standards. The SEC typically relies on private SECtor accounting bodies to undertake this task. Since 1973 accounting standards in the United States
have been set by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB); Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles (GAAP) denote the standards, conventions, rules, and procedures
that FASB requires firms to apply in preparing their financial statements.
Similar private or public SECtor accounting standard-setting bodies have develoPEd
locally based accounting standards in many other countries. More recently, the Internathe International
tional Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and its predecessor,
Accounting Standards Committee (IASC), have promoted worldwide accounting standards. Those standards, the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), are
gaining increasing acceptance worldwide.
U.S. GAAP / IFRS CONVERGENCE5
Local accounting standards arose indePEndently over time in major capital markets with
little regard for, or need of, cross-border consistency. The concept of convergence of
these diverse standards fIRSt arose in the mid-twentieth century as post World War II
economic integration and increased international capital flows began to create demand
for greater comparability of financial information.
The IASC (International Accounting Standards Committee), established in 1973, was
the fIRSt international standards setting body and issued its fIRSt standard in 1974. The
IASC was reorganized in 2001 and renamed the IASB (International Accounting
Overview of Accounting Analysis 3-5
Standards Board). Its goal is to "develop, in the public interest, a single set of high quality global accounting standards."6 By 2011, IASB standards, known as IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards) were required or PErmitted in almost 120
countries. In addition, by 2011 all remaining major economies had established timelines
and programs to converge with or adopt IFRS.7
In 2002, the FASB in the United States and the IASB issued "The Norwalk Agreement" in which the two standard setters committed to the convergence of U.S. GAAP
and IFRS. The agreement described a shared goal of developing accounting standards
that could be used for both domestic and cross-border financial reporting and that
would reduce complexity and the cost of business in global capital markets. Since then,
there have been a number of important stEPS toward convergence. In 2007, the SEC
eliminated the requirement that foreign issuers that used IFRS and listed in the United
States provide financial statements reconciled to U.S. GAAP. During the same year,
FASB and IASB completed their fIRSt major joint project and issued converged standards
on business combinations. Subsequent discussions among the FASB, the IASB, and the
SEC have reaffirmed a commitment to standard convergence and set 2011 as the horizon
to determine whether it makes sense for U.S. companies to use IFRS.
In Chapter Four we discuss some of the remaining material differences between U.S.
GAAP and IFRS, and how to compare the PErformance of companies using the two
appROAches.
Uniform accounting standards attempt to reduce managers' ability to record similar
economic transactions in dissimilar ways, either over time or across firms. Thus they create a uniform accounting language and increase the credibility of financial statements by
limiting a firm's ability to distort them. Increased uniformity from accounting standards,
however, comes at the exPEnse of reduced flexibility for managers to reflect genuine
business differences in a firm's accounting decisions. Rigid accounting standards work
best for economic transactions whose accounting treatment is not predicated on managers' proprietary information. However, when there is significant business judgment
involved in assessing a transaction's economic consequences, rigid standards are likely
to be dysfunctional for some companies because they prevent managers from using
their suPErior knowledge of the business to determine how best to report the economics
of key business events. Further, if accounting standards are too rigid, they may induce
managers to exPEnd economic resources to restructure business transactions to achieve
a desired accounting result or to forgo transactions that may be difficult to report on.
External Auditing
External auditing, bROAdly defined as a verification of the integrity of the reported financial statements by someone other than the preparer, ensures that managers use accounting rules and conventions consistently over time, and that their accounting estimates
are reasonable. In all public markets,
listed companies are required to have their
financial statements audited by an indePEndent public accountant. In the United States,
the standards and procedures to be followed by indePEndent auditors are known as
Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS). Under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the
responsibility for overseeing audit firms and for ensuring that they are complying with
GAAS resides with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), a regulatory body established by the Act. All public accounting firms are required to register
with the PCAOB, which has the power to insPEct and investigate audit work, and--if
needed--to discipline auditors.
3-6 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act also sPEcifies the relationship between a company and its
external auditor, requiring auditors to report to, and be overseen by, a company's audit
committee rather than its management. In addition, the Act prohibits public accounting
firms from providing non-audit services, such as bookkeeping,
information systems
design and implementation, valuation and a range of other consulting services, to a company that it audits. Finally, the Act requires that audit firms rotate the lead and reviewing audit partner every five years.
While auditors issue an opinion on published financial statements, it is important to
remember that the primary responsibility for the statements still rests with corporate
managers. Auditing improves the quality and credibility of accounting data by limiting
a firm's ability to distort financial statements to suit its own purposes. However, as
audit failures at companies such as Enron and WorldCom, and more recently lawsuits
that allege audit failures at companies such as AIG, Bear Stearns, Countrywide Financial
Corp, Lehman Brothers, Washington Mutual,8 New Century Financial,9 and others suggest, auditing is imPErfect. Audits cannot review all of a firm's transactions. They can
also fail because of lapses in quality or in judgment by auditors who fail to challenge
management for fear of losing future business.
Third-party auditing may also reduce the quality of financial reporting because it can
constrain the kind of accounting rules and conventions that evolve over time. For example, the FASB considers the views of auditors in the standard-setting process. Auditors
are likely to argue against accounting standards that produce numbers that are difficult
to audit, even if the proposed rules provide relevant information for investors.
Legal Liability
The legal environment in which accounting disputes among managers, auditors, and investors are adjudicated can also have a significant effect on the quality of reported numbers.
The threat of lawsuits and PEnalties has the beneficial effect of improving the accuracy of
disclosure. However, the potential for significant legal liability might also discourage managers and auditors from supporting accounting proposals where management and auditor
judgment and increased complexity or nuance come into play. In addition, the SarbanesOxley Act enacted in 2002 has provisions that potentially increase this risk: managers must
PErsonally certiFY financial results, and auditors are subject to enhanced oversight and
potential PEnalties from the PCAOB (Public Company Accounting Oversight Board) created by SOX. Also, as can be seen from the numerous lawsuits filed against auditing firms
and management in the wake of the global financial crisis, the possibility of legal liability
represents a very significant and real risk to both company managers and audit firms.
FACTORS INFLUENCING ACCOUNTING QUALITY
Because the mechanisms that limit managers' ability to distort accounting data themselves add noise, it is not optimal to use accounting regulation to completely eliminate
managerial flexibility. Therefore, real-world accounting systems leave considerable room
for managers to influence financial statement data. The net result is that information in
corporate financial reports is noisy and biased, even in the presence of accounting regulation and external auditing.10 The objective of accounting analysis is to evaluate the
degree to which a firm's accounting captures its underlying business reality and to
"undo" any accounting distortions. When potential distortions are large, accounting
analysis can add considerable value.11
There are three potential sources of noise and bias in accounting data: (1) noise introduced by rigidity in accounting rules, (2) random forecast errors, and (3) systematic
Overview of Accounting Analysis 3-7
reporting choices made by corporate managers to achieve sPEcific objectives. Each of
these factors is discussed below.
Noise from Accounting Rules
Accounting rules introduce noise and bias because it is often difficult to restrict management discretion without reducing the information content of accounting data. For example, the Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 2 issued by the FASB
requires firms to exPEnse research and development outlays when they are incurred.
Clearly, some of these exPEnditures have future value while others do not. However,
because SFAS 2 does not allow firms to distinguish between the two tyPEs of exPEnditures, it leads to a systematic distortion of reported accounting numbers. Interestingly,
the IASB allows firms to capitalize development exPEnditures, which are presumed to
have future economic value, and like FASB requires research outlays to be exPEnsed
(IAS 38). Hence, bROAdly sPEaking, the degree of distortion introduced by accounting
standards dePEnds on how well uniform accounting standards capture the nature of a
firm's transactions.
Forecast Errors
Another source of noise in accounting data arises from pure forecast error, because managers cannot predict future consequences of current transactions PErfectly. For example,
when a firm sells products on credit, accrual accounting requires managers to make a
judgment about the probability of collecting payments from customers. If payments are
deemed "reasonably certain," the firm treats the transactions as sales, creating accounts
receivable on its balance sheet. Managers then make an estimate of the proportion of
receivables that will not be collected. Because managers do not have PErfect foresight,
actual customer defaults are likely to be different from estimated defaults, leading to a
forecast error. The extent of errors in managers' accounting forecasts dePEnds on a variety of factors including the complexity of the business transactions, the predictability of
the firm's environment, and unforeseen economy-wide changes.
Managers' Accounting Choices
Corporate managers also introduce noise and bias into accounting data through their
own accounting decisions. Managers have a variety of
incentives to exercise their
accounting discretion to achieve certain objectives:12
Accounting-based debt covenants. Managers may make accounting decisions to
meet certain contractual obligations in their debt covenants. For example, firms'
lending agreements with banks and other debt holders require them to meet covenants related to interest coverage, working capital ratios, and net worth, all defined
in terms of accounting numbers. Violation of these agreements may be costly
because lenders can trigger PEnalties including demanding immediate repayment
of their loans. Managers of firms close to violating debt covenants have an incentive to select accounting policies and estimates to reduce the probability of covenant violation. The debt covenant motivation for managers' accounting decisions
has been analyzed by a number of accounting researchers.13
Management comPEnsation. Another motivation for managers' accounting choice
comes from the fact that their comPEnsation and job SECurity are often tied to
reported profits. For example, many top managers receive bonus comPEnsation if
they exceed certain pre-sPEcified profit targets. This provides motivation for managers to choose accounting policies and estimates to maximize their exPEcted
3-8 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
comPEnsation.14 Stock option awards can also potentially induce managers to
manage earnings. Options provide managers with incentives to understate earnings
prior to option grants to lower the firm's current stock price and hence the option
exercise price, and to inflate earnings and stock prices at the time of option
exercise.15
Corporate control contests. In corporate control contests, including hostile takeovers and proxy fights, comPEting management groups attempt to win over the
firm's shareholders. Accounting numbers are used extensively in debating managers' PErformance in these contests. Therefore, managers may make accounting
decisions to influence investor PErceptions in corporate control contests.16
Tax considerations. Managers may also make reporting choices to trade off
between financial reporting and tax considerations. For example, U.S. firms are
required to use LIFO inventory accounting for shareholder reporting in order to
also use it for tax reporting. Under LIFO, when prices are rising, firms report
lower profits, thereby reducing tax payments. Some firms may forgo the tax reduction in order to report higher profits in their financial statements.17
Regulatory considerations. Since accounting numbers are used by regulators in a
variety of contexts, managers of some firms may make accounting decisions to
influence regulatory outcomes. Examples of regulatory situations where accounting
numbers are used include antitrust actions,
import tariffs to protect domestic
industries, and tax policies.18
Capital market considerations. Managers may make accounting decisions to influence the PErceptions of capital markets. When there are information asymmetries
between managers and outsiders, this strategy may succeed in influencing investor
PErceptions, at least temporarily.19
Stakeholder considerations. Managers may also make accounting decisions to influence the PErception of important stakeholders in the firm. For example, since labor
unions can use healthy profits as a basis for demanding wage increases, managers
may make accounting decisions to decrease income when they are facing union
contract negotiations. In countries like Germany, where labor unions are strong,
these considerations apPEar to play an important role in firms' accounting policy.
Other important stakeholders that firms may wish to influence through their
financial reports include suppliers and customers.20
ComPEtitive considerations. The dynamics of comPEtition in an industry might also
influence a firm's reporting choices. For example, a firm's segment disclosure decisions may be influenced by its concern that disaggregated disclosure may help
comPEtitors in their business decisions. Similarly, firms may not disclose data on
their margins by product line for fear of giving away proprietary information.
Finally, firms may discourage new entrants by making income-decreasing accounting choices.
In addition to accounting policy choices and estimates, the level of disclosure is also
an important determinant of a firm's accounting quality. Corporate managers can choose
disclosure policies that make it more or less costly for external users of financial reports
to understand the true economic picture of their businesses. Accounting regulations usually prescribe minimum disclosure requirements, but they do not restrict managers from
voluntarily providing additional disclosures. Managers can use various parts of the financial reports, including the Letter to the Shareholders, Management Discussion and Analysis, and footnotes, to describe the company's strategy, its accounting policies, and its
current PErformance. There is wide variation across firms in how managers use their disclosure flexibility.21
STEPS IN PERFORMING ACCOUNTING ANALYSIS
Overview of Accounting Analysis 3-9
In this SECtion we discuss a series of stEPS that an analyst can follow to evaluate a firm's
accounting quality.
Step 1: IdentiFY Principal Accounting Policies
As discussed in the chapter on business strategy analysis, a firm's industry characteristics
and its own comPEtitive strategy determine its key success factors and risks. One of the
goals of financial statement analysis is to evaluate how well these success factors and
risks are being managed by the firm. In accounting analysis, therefore, the analyst should
identiFY and evaluate the policies and the estimates the firm uses to measure its critical
factors and risks.
Key success factors in the banking industry include interest rate and credit risk management; in the retail industry, inventory management is important; and for a manufacturer
comPEting on product quality and innovation, research and development, and product
defects after sale are major areas of concern. A significant success factor in the leasing
business is to make accurate forecasts of residual values of the leased equipment at the
end of the lease terms. In each of these cases, the analyst has to identiFY the accounting
measures the firm uses to capture these business constructs, the policies that determine
how the measures are implemented, and the important estimates embedded in these policies. For example, the accounting measure a bank uses to capture credit risk is its loan loss
reserves, and the accounting measure that captures product quality for a manufacturer is
its warranty exPEnses and reserves. For a firm in the equipment leasing industry, one of
the most important accounting policies is the way residual values are recorded. Residual
values influence the company's reported profits and its asset base. If residual values are
overestimated, the firm runs the risk of having to take large write-offs in the future.
Step 2: Assess Accounting Flexibility
Not all firms have equal flexibility in choosing their accounting policies and estimates.
Some firms' accounting choice is severely constrained by accounting standards and conventions. For example, even though research and development is a key success factor for
biotechnology companies, managers in U.S. companies have no accounting discretion in
reporting on this activity. Similarly, even though marketing and brand building are
essential to the success of consumer goods firms, they are required to exPEnse all their
marketing outlays. In contrast, managing credit risk is one of the critical success factors
for banks, and bank managers have the freedom to estimate exPEcted defaults on their
loans. Similarly, software develoPErs have the flexibility to decide at what points in their
development cycles the outlays can be capitalized.
If managers have little flexibility in choosing accounting policies and estimates related
to their key success factors, accounting data are likely to be less informative for understanding the firm's economics. Such is likely to be the case for U.S. biotechnology firms
that are required to exPEnse research and development outlays. In contrast, if managers
have flexibility in choosing the policies and estimates (as in the case for banks in reporting on credit risk), accounting numbers have the potential to be informative, dePEnding
upon how managers exercise this flexibility.
Regardless of the degree of accounting flexibility a firm's managers have in measuring
their key success factors and risks, they have some flexibility with resPEct to other
accounting policies. For example, firms have to make choices with resPEct to depreciation policy (straight-line or accelerated methods), inventory accounting policy (LIFO for
U.S. firms, FIFO, or Average Cost), and policies regarding the estimation of PEnsion and
3-10 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
other post-employment benefits (exPEcted return on plan assets, discount rate for liabilities, and rate of increase in wages and health care costs). Since all these policy choices
can have a significant impact on the reported PErformance of a firm, they offer an
opportunity for the firm to manage its reported numbers and should be the focus of
analysis in this step.
Step 3: Evaluate Accounting Strategy
When managers have accounting flexibility, they can use it either to communicate their
firm's economic situation or to hide true PErformance. Some of the questions one could
ask in examining how managers exercise their accounting flexibility include the following:
How do the firm's accounting policies compare to the norms in the industry? If
they are dissimilar, is it because the firm's comPEtitive strategy is unique? For
example, consider a firm that reports a lower warranty allowance than the industry
average. One explanation is that the firm comPEtes on the basis of high quality and
has invested considerable resources to reduce the rate of product failure. An alternative explanation is that the firm is merely understating its warranty liabilities.
Do managers face strong incentives to use accounting discretion to manage earnings? For example, is the firm close to violating bond covenants? Or are the managers having difficulty meeting accounting-based bonus targets? Does management
own significant stock? Is the firm in the middle of a proxy fight or union negotiations? Managers may also make accounting decisions to reduce tax payments or to
influence the PErceptions of the firm's comPEtitors.
Has the firm changed any of its policies or estimates? What is the justification?
What is the impact of these changes? For example, if warranty exPEnses decreased,
is it because the firm made significant investments to improve quality?
Have the company's policies and estimates been realistic in the past? For example,
firms may overstate their revenues and understate their exPEnses during the year
by manipulating quarterly reports, which are not subject to a full-blown external
audit. However, the auditing process at the end of the fiscal year forces such companies to make large fourth-quarter adjustments, providing an opportunity for the
analyst to assess the quality of the firm's interim reporting. Similarly, firms that
depreciate fixed assets too slowly will be forced to take a large write-off later. A
history of write-offs may be, therefore, a sign of prior earnings management.
Does the firm structure any significant business transactions so that it can achieve
certain accounting objectives? For example, under current accounting standards,
leasing firms can alter lease terms (the length of the lease or the bargain purchase
option at the end of the lease term) so that the transactions qualiFY as sales-tyPE
leases for the lessors. Lehman Brothers used repurchase agreements called "Repo
105" transactions to window-dress its balance sheet. Under these agreements Lehman "sold" short-term loans immediately prior to its year-end and used the proceeds to pay down debt, making it apPEar less leveraged. After year-end,
it
borrowed cash and repurchased the loans.22 Such behaviors suggest that the
firm's managers are willing to exPEnd economic resources merely to achieve an
accounting objective.
Step 4: Evaluate the Quality of Disclosure
Managers can make it more or less easy for an analyst to assess the firm's accounting
quality and to use its financial statements to understand business reality. While accounting rules require a certain amount of minimum disclosure, managers have considerable
Overview of Accounting Analysis 3-11
choice in the matter. Disclosure quality, therefore, is an important dimension of a firm's
accounting quality.
In assessing a firm's disclosure quality, an analyst could ask the following questions:
Does the company provide adequate disclosures to assess the firm's business strategy and its economic consequences? For example, some firms use the Letter to the
Shareholders in their annual report to clearly lay out the firm's industry conditions, its comPEtitive position, and management's plans for the future. Others use
the letter to puff up the firm's financial PErformance and gloss over any comPEtitive difficulties the firm might be facing.
Do the footnotes adequately explain the key accounting policies and assumptions
and their logic? For example, if a firm's revenue and exPEnse recognition policies
differ from industry norms, the firm can explain its choices in a footnote. Similarly, when there are significant changes in a firm's policies, footnotes can be
used to disclose the reasons.
Does the firm adequately explain its current PErformance? The Management Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) SECtion of the annual report provides an opportunity to help analysts understand the reasons behind a firm's PErformance changes.
Some firms use this SECtion to link financial PErformance to business conditions.
For example, if profit margins went down in a PEriod, was it because of price comPEtition or because of increases in manufacturing costs? If the selling and general
administrative exPEnses went up, was it because the firm is investing in a differentiation strategy, or because unproductive overhead exPEnses were creeping up?
Based on a review of the Fortune 500 companies, in 2003 the SEC released a circular indicating that companies should provide more discussion in MD&A about
their critical accounting policies.23 Companies were encouraged to disclose the
most difficult and judgmental estimates and accounting policies they used, among
other guidance.
If accounting rules and conventions restrict the firm from measuring its key success factors appropriately, does the firm provide adequate additional disclosure to
help outsiders understand how these factors are being managed? For example, if a
firm invests in product quality and customer service, accounting rules do not allow
the management to capitalize these outlays, even when the future benefits are certain. The firm's MD&A can be used to highlight how these outlays are being managed and their PErformance consequences. For example, the firm can disclose
physical indexes of defect rates and customer satisfaction so that outsiders can
assess the progress being made in these areas and the future cash flow consequences of these actions.
If a firm is in multiple business segments, what is the quality of segment disclosure? Some firms provide excellent discussion of their PErformance by product segments and geographic segments. Others lump many different businesses into one
bROAd segment. The level of comPEtition in an industry and management's willingness to share desegregated PErformance data influence a firm's quality of segment
disclosure.
How forthcoming is the management with resPEct to bad news? A firm's disclosure
quality is most clearly revealed by the way management deals with bad news. Does
it adequately explain the reasons for poor PErformance? Does the company clearly
articulate its strategy, if any, to address the company's PErformance problems?
How good is the firm's investor relations program? Does the firm provide fact
books with detailed data on the firm's business and PErformance? Is management
accessible to analysts?
3-12 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
Step 5: IdentiFY Potential Red Flags
In addition to the preceding stEPS, a common appROAch to accounting quality analysis is
to look for "red flags" pointing to questionable accounting. These indicators suggest that
the analyst should examine certain items more closely or gather more information on
them. Some common red flags are the following:
Unexplained changes in accounting, esPEcially when PErformance is poor. This may
suggest that managers are using their accounting discretion to "dress up" their
financial statements.24
Unexplained transactions that boost profits. For example, firms might undertake
balance sheet transactions, such as asset sales or debt for equity swaps, to realize
gains in PEriods when oPErating PErformance is poor.25
Unusual increases in accounts receivable in relation to sales increases. This may
suggest that the company is relaxing its credit policies or artificially loading up its
distribution channels to record revenues during the current PEriod, a practice commonly referred to as "channel stuffing." If credit policies are relaxed unduly, the
firm may face receivable write-offs in subsequent PEriods as a result of customer
defaults. If the firm accelerates shipments to its distributors, it may face either
product returns or reduced shipments in subsequent PEriods.
Unusual increases in inventories in relation to sales increases. If the inventory
build-up is due to an increase in finished goods inventory, it could be a sign that
demand for the firm's products is slowing down, suggesting that the firm may be
forced to cut prices (and hence earn lower margins) or write down its inventory. A
build-up in work-in-progress inventory tends to be good news on average, probably signaling that managers exPEct an increase in sales. If the build-up is in raw
materials, it could suggest manufacturing or procurement inefficiencies, leading to
an increase in cost of goods sold (and hence lower margins).26
An increasing gap between a firm's reported income and its cash flow from oPErating
activities. While it is legitimate for accrual accounting numbers to differ from cash
flows, there is usually a steady relationship between the two if the company's
accounting policies remain the same. Therefore, any change in the relationship
between reported profits and oPErating cash flows might indicate subtle changes
in the firm's accrual estimates. For example, a firm undertaking large construction
contracts might use the PErcentage-of-completion method to record revenues.
While earnings and oPErating cash flows are likely to differ for such a firm, they
should bear a steady relationship to each other. Now suppose the firm increases
revenues in a PEriod through an aggressive application of
the PErcentageof-completion method. Then its earnings will go up, but its cash flow remains
unaffected. This change in the firm's accounting quality will be manifested by a
change in the relationship between the firm's earnings and cash flows.
An increasing gap between a firm's reported income and its tax income. Once again,
it is quite legitimate for a firm to follow different accounting policies for financial
reporting and tax accounting as long as the tax law allows it.27 However, the relationship between a firm's book and tax accounting is likely to remain stable over
time unless there are significant changes in tax rules or accounting standards.
Thus, an increasing gap between a firm's reported income and its tax income
may indicate that financial reporting to shareholders has become more aggressive.
For example, warranty exPEnses are estimated on an accrual basis for financial
reporting, but they are recorded on a cash basis for tax reporting. Unless there is
a big change in the firm's product quality, these two numbers bear a consistent
relationship to each other. Therefore, a change in this relationship can be an
Overview of Accounting Analysis 3-13
indication either that product quality is changing significantly or that financial
reporting estimates are changing.
A tendency to use financing mechanisms such as research and development partnerships, sPEcial-purpose entities, and the sale of receivables with recourse. While these
arrangements may have a sound business logic, they can also provide management
with an opportunity to understate the firm's liabilities and/or overstate its assets.28
UnexPEcted large asset write-offs. This may suggest that management is slow to
incorporate changing business circumstances into its accounting estimates. Asset
write-offs may also be a result of unexPEcted changes in business circumstances.29
Large fourth-quarter adjustments. A firm's annual reports are audited by the external auditors, but its interim financial statements are usually only reviewed. If a
firm's management is reluctant to make appropriate accounting estimates (such
as provisions for uncollectible receivables) in its interim statements, it could be
forced to make adjustments at the end of the year as a result of pressure from its
external auditors. A consistent pattern of fourth-quarter adjustments, therefore,
may indicate aggressive management of interim reporting.30
Qualified audit opinions or changes in indePEndent auditors that are not well justified. These may indicate a firm's aggressive attitude or a tendency to "opinion
shop."
Related-party transactions or transactions between related entities. These transactions may lack the objectivity of the marketplace, and managers' accounting estimates related to these transactions are likely to be more subjective and potentially
self-serving.31
Unexplained increases in contingencies and off-balance sheet transactions. These
tyPEs of transactions could signiFY an attempt by management to window-dress
the firm's balance sheet.
While the preceding list provides a number of red flags for potentially poor accounting
quality, it is important to do further analysis before reaching final conclusions. Each of the
red flags has multiple interpretations; some interpretations are based on sound business
reasons, and others indicate questionable accounting. It is, therefore, best to use the red
flag analysis as a starting point for further probing, not as an end point in itself.32
As we discussed in the previous chapter, it is important to also maintain a bROAd
strategic view of the company's markets, customers, suppliers, and overall macROEconomic trends that may be influencing the company's PErformance. Keeping this PErsPEctive while identiFYing red flags in the company's financial statements can help to
direct the analyst to areas of potential concern and provide an important context for
further analysis.
Step 6: Undo Accounting Distortions
If the accounting analysis suggests that the firm's reported numbers are misleading, analysts should attempt to restate the reported numbers to reduce the distortion to the
extent possible. It is, of course, virtually impossible to PErfectly undo the distortion
using outside information alone. However, some progress can be made in this direction
by using the cash flow statement and the financial statement footnotes.
A firm's cash flow statement provides a reconciliation of its PErformance based on
accrual accounting and cash accounting. If the analyst is unsure of the quality of the
firm's accrual accounting, the cash flow statement provides an alternative benchmark of
its PErformance. The cash flow statement also provides information on how individual
line items in the income statement diverge from the underlying cash flows. For example,
if an analyst is concerned that the firm is aggressively capitalizing certain costs that
3-14 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
should be exPEnsed, the information in the cash flow statement provides a basis to make
the necessary adjustment.
Financial statement footnotes also provide information that is potentially useful in
restating reported accounting numbers. For example, when a firm changes its accounting
policies, it provides a footnote indicating the effect of that change if it is material. Similarly, some firms provide information on the details of accrual estimates such as the
allowance for bad debts. The tax footnote usually provides information on the differences
between a firm's accounting policies for shareholder reporting and tax reporting. Since
tax reporting is often more conservative than shareholder reporting, the information in
the tax footnote can be used to estimate what the earnings reported to shareholders
would be under more conservative policies.
In Chapter 4, we show how to make accounting adjustments for some of the most
common tyPEs of accounting distortions.
ACCOUNTING ANALYSIS PITFALLS
There are several potential pitfalls and common misconceptions in accounting analysis
that an analyst should avoid.
1. Conservative Accounting Is Not "Good" Accounting
Some firms take the appROAch that it pays to be conservative in financial reporting and
to set aside as much as possible for contingencies. This logic is commonly used to justiFY
the exPEnsing of R&D and advertising, and the rapid write-down of intangible assets. It
is also used to support large loss reserves for insurance companies, for merger exPEnses,
and for restructuring charges.
From the standpoint of a financial statement user, it is important to recognize that
conservative accounting is not the same as "good" accounting. Financial statement users
want to evaluate how well a firm's accounting captures business PErformance in an unbiased manner, and conservative accounting can be just as misleading as aggressive
accounting in this resPEct.
It is certainly true that it can be difficult to estimate the economic benefits from many
intangibles. However, the intangible nature of some assets does not mean that they do
not have value. Indeed, for many firms these tyPEs of assets are their most valued. For
example, the two most valuable assets for pharmaceutical companies, such as Pfizer,
Merck, and Novartis, are the research capabilities that PErmit them to generate new
drugs and their sales forces that enable them to sell those drugs to doctors. Yet neither
is recorded on their balance sheets. From the investors' point of view, accountants' reluctance to value intangible assets does not diminish their importance. If they are not
included in financial statements, investors must look to alternative sources of information on these assets.
Further, conservative accounting often provides managers with opportunities for
"income smoothing," which may prevent analysts from recognizing poor PErformance
in a timely fashion. Finally, over time investors are likely to figure out which firms are
conservative and may discount their management's disclosures and communications.
2. Not All Unusual Accounting Is Questionable
It is easy to confuse unusual accounting with questionable accounting. While unusual
accounting choices might make a firm's PErformance difficult to compare with other
firms' PErformance, such an accounting choice might be justified if the company's business is unusual. For example, firms that follow differentiated strategies or firms that
Overview of Accounting Analysis 3-15
structure their business in an innovative manner to take advantage of particular market
situations may make unusual accounting choices to proPErly reflect their business.
Therefore, it is important to evaluate a company's accounting choices in the context of
its business strategy.
Similarly, it is important not to automatically attribute all changes in a firm's accounting policies and accruals to earnings management motives.33 Accounting changes can
also reflect changed business circumstances. For example, as already discussed, a firm
that shows unusual increases in its inventory might be preparing for a new product
introduction. Similarly, unusual increases in receivables might merely be due to changes
in a firm's sales strategy. Unusual decreases in the allowance for uncollectible receivables
might reflect a firm's changed customer focus. It is therefore important for an analyst to
consider all possible explanations for accounting changes and investigate them using the
qualitative information available in a firm's financial statements.
VALUE OF ACCOUNTING DATA AND ACCOUNTING ANALYSIS
What is the value of accounting information and accounting analysis? Given the incentives and opportunities for managers to affect their firms' reported accounting numbers,
some have argued that accounting data and accounting analysis are not likely to be useful for investors.
Researchers have examined the value of earnings and return on equity (ROE) by comparing stock returns that could be earned by a hypothetical investor who has PErfect
foresight of firms' earnings, return on equity (ROE), and cash flows for the following
year.34 To assess the importance of earnings, the hypothetical investor is assumed to
buy stocks of firms that have earnings increases for the subsequent year and to sell stocks
of firms with subsequent earnings decreases. If this strategy is followed consistently, the
hypothetical investor would have earned over a 40-year PEriod an average return of
37.5 PErcent PEr year. If a similar investment strategy is followed using ROE, buying
stocks with subsequent increases in ROE and selling stocks with ROE decreases, an
even higher annual return of 43 PErcent would be earned. In contrast, cash flow data
apPEar to be considerably less valuable than earnings or ROE information. Annual
returns generated from buying stocks with increased subsequent cash flows from oPErations and selling stocks with cash flow decreases would be only 9 PErcent. This suggests
that next PEriod's earnings and ROE PErformance are more relevant information for
investors than cash flow PErformance.
Overall, this research suggests that the institutional arrangements and conventions
created to mitigate potential misuse of accounting by managers are generally effective
in providing assurance to investors. The research indicates that investors do not view
earnings management as so PErvasive as to make earnings data completely unreliable.
A number of research studies have examined whether accounting analysis is a valuable
activity. By and large, this evidence indicates that there are opportunities for suPErior analysts to earn positive stock returns. Studies show that companies criticized in the financial
press for misleading financial reporting subsequently suffered an average stock price drop
of 8 PErcent.35 Firms where managers apPEared to inflate reported earnings prior to an
equity issue and subsequently reported poor earnings PErformance had more negative
stock PErformance after the offer than firms with no apparent earnings management.36
Finally, firms subject to SEC investigation for earnings management showed an average
stock price decline of 9 PErcent when the earnings management was fIRSt announced, and
they continued to have poor stock PErformance for up to two years.37
These findings imply that analysts who are able to identiFY firms with misleading
accounting are able to create value for investors. The findings also indicate that the
3-16 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
SUMMARY
stock market ultimately sees through earnings management. In most cases, earnings
management is eventually uncovered and the stock price responds negatively to evidence
that firms have inflated prior earnings through misleading accounting.
In summary, accounting analysis is an important step in the process of analyzing corporate financial reports. The purpose of accounting analysis is to evaluate the degree to
which a firm's accounting captures its underlying business reality. Sound accounting
analysis improves the reliability of conclusions from financial analysis, the next step in
financial statement analysis.
There are six principal stEPS in accounting analysis. The analyst begins by identiFYing
the key accounting policies and estimates given the firm's industry and its business strategy. The SECond step is to evaluate the degree of flexibility available to managers given
the accounting rules and conventions. Next, the analyst evaluates how managers exercise
their accounting flexibility and the likely motivations behind managers' accounting strategy. The fourth step involves assessing the depth and quality of a firm's disclosures. The
analyst should next identiFY any red flags, indicating a need for further investigation. The
final step in accounting analysis is to restate accounting numbers to remove any noise
and bias introduced by the accounting rules and management decisions.
The next chapter discusses how to implement these concepts and shows how to make
some of the most common tyPEs of adjustments.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. A finance student states, "I don't understand why anyone pays any attention to
accounting earnings numbers, given that a 'clean' number like cash from oPErations
is readily available." Do you agree? Why or why not?
2. Fred argues, "The standards that I like most are the ones that eliminate all management discretion in reporting--that way I get uniform numbers across all companies
and don't have to worry about doing accounting analysis." Do you agree? Why or
why not?
3. Bill Simon says, "We should get rid of the FASB and SEC since free market forces
will make sure that companies report reliable information." Do you agree? Why or
why not?
4. Many firms recognize revenues at the point of shipment. This provides an incentive
to accelerate revenues by shiPPIng goods at the end of the quarter. Consider two
companies, one of which ships its product evenly throughout the quarter, and the
SECond, which ships all its products in the last two weeks of the quarter. Each company's customers pay 30 days after receiving shipment. Using accounting ratios, how
can you distinguish these companies?
5. a. If management reports truthfully, what economic events are likely to prompt the
Increase in the estimated life of depreciable assets
following accounting changes?
Decrease in the uncollectible allowance as a PErcentage of gross receivables
Recognition of revenues at the point of delivery rather than at the point cash is
received
Capitalization of a higher proportion of software R&D costs
b. What features of accounting, if any, would make it costly for dishonest managers
to make the same changes without any corresponding economic changes?
NOTES
Overview of Accounting Analysis 3-17
6. The conservatism principle arises because of concerns about management's incentives to overstate the firm's PErformance. Joe Banks argues, "We could get rid of
conservatism and make accounting numbers more useful if we delegated financial
reporting to indePEndent auditors rather than to corporate managers." Do you
agree? Why or why not?
7. A fund manager states, "I refuse to buy any company that makes a voluntary
accounting change, since it's certainly a case of management trying to hide bad
news." Can you think of any alternative interpretation?
8. Fair value accounting attempts to make financial
information more relevant to
financial statement users, at the risk of greater subjectivity. What factors would you
examine to evaluate the reliability of fair valued assets?
1. Accounting analysis is sometimes also called "quality of earnings analysis." We prefer to use the term accounting analysis since we are discussing a bROAder concept
than merely a firm's earnings quality.
2. These definitions paraphrase those of the Financial Accounting Standards Board
(FASB), Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 6, "Elements of Financial
Statements" (1985). Our intent is to present the definitions at a conceptual, not technical, level. For a more complete discussion of these and related concepts, see the
FASB's Statements of Financial Accounting Concepts (http://www.fasb.org).
3. SEC rules state that these criteria are satisfied when (i) there is PErsuasive evidence
that an arrangement exists, (ii) delivery has occurred or services have been rendered,
(iii) the selling price is fixed or determinable, and (iv) collectibility is reasonably
assured (see SAB 104).
4. Strictly sPEaking, the comprehensive net income of a firm also includes gains and
losses from increases and decreases in equity from non-oPErating activities or
extraordinary items.
5. Background information on the history of U.S. GAAP / IFRS convergence from
Financial Accounting Standards Board, "International Convergence of Accounting
Standards--A Brief History," Financial Accounting Standards Board website, http://
www.fasb.org/jsp/FASB/Page/SECtionPage&cid=1176156304264, accessed February
2011.