FINANCIAL REPORTING QUALITY
Study Session 9
EXAM FOCUS
Here we cover the quality of a firm's financial statements, which, together with the
quality of reported earnings, determines what is defined as the overall quality of the
firm's financial reports. Candidates must understand how choices about several
accounting methods and estimates can affect reported earnings, financial position, and
the classification of cash flows. You should learn the additional disclosures required
when non-GAAP measures are reported and the warning signs that management may
be manipulating financial reports through biased reporting choices and estimates.
LOS 32.a: Distinguish between financial reporting quality and quality of reported
results (including quality of earnings, cash flow, and balance sheet items).
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 667
Financial reporting quality refers to the characteristics of a firm's financial statements.
The primary criterion for judging financial reporting quality is adherence to generally
accepted accounting principles (GAAP) in the jurisdiction in which the firm oPErates.
However, given that GAAP provide choices of methods, estimates, and sPEcific
treatment of many items, compliance with GAAP by itself does not necessarily result in
financial reporting of the highest quality.
High quality financial reporting must be decision useful. Two characteristics of
decision-useful financial reporting are relevance and faithful representation. Relevance
refers to the fact that information presented in the financial statements is useful to
users of financial statements in making decisions. Relevant information must also be
material in that knowledge of it would likely affect the decisions of users of financial
statements. Faithful representation encompasses the qualities of completeness,
neutrality, and the ABSence of errors. We develop the concept of neutrality of financial
reports later in this topic review.
The quality of earnings is, in many resPEcts, a separate issue. The quality of reported
earnings (not the quality of earnings reports) can be judged based on the sustainability
of the earnings as well as on their level. Sustainability can be evaluated by determining
the proportion of reported earnings that can be exPEcted to continue in the future.
Increases in reported earnings resulting from changes in exchange rates or by sales of
assets that have appreciated over many PEriods are not typically sustainable, whereas
higher profits from increased efficiency or increasing market share would generally be
considered sustainable.
One dollar of high-quality earnings is exPEcted to add more value to a company than
one dollar of low-quality earnings, based on the criterion of sustainability. The higher
probability that high-quality earnings will continue in future PEriods increases their
impact on the value of the firm, calculated as the present value of exPEcted future
earnings. At the other end of the sustainability sPEctrum, a one-time gain of a dollar
from favorable currency exchange rate movements is not likely to be rePEated and,
therefore, has a smaller impact on estimates of a company's value.
The importance of the level of earnings is that reported earnings must be high enough
to sustain the company's oPErations and existence over time, as well as high enough to
provide an adequate return to the company's investors. Both of these concerns are
important in determining the quality of a company's reported earnings. Sustainability
of reported cash flows is also a consideration in determining the quality of reported
earnings, as are the value of items reported on the balance sheet. Inadequate accruals
for probable liabilities and overstatement of asset values can both decrease the quality
of reported earnings and bring sustainability into question.
From our discussion here, we can see that it is quite possible that a firm has high
financial reporting quality but a low quality of reported earnings. Reported earnings
may be GAAP-compliant and relevant, represent the company's economic activities
faithfully, and be decision useful as a result, but have low sustainability or be low
enough in amount that the provision of adequate investor returns or the sustainability
of the company itself are called into question.
LOS 32.b: Describe a sPEctrum for assessing financial reporting quality.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 668
Combining both financial reporting quality and the quality of reported earnings, we
can categorize the quality of financial reports along a sPEctrum from best to worst. At
the high-quality end of the sPEctrum, we have financial reports that are compliant with
GAAP, decision useful, and report earnings that are sustainable and represent an
adequate return on invested capital. At the opposite end of the sPEctrum are financial
reports that are essentially fictitious (fraudulent). When reporting quality is that low,
the quality of the reported earnings themselves is impossible to assess. We can
identiFY several levels of quality between these two extremes.
Here is one possible categorization of the quality levels of financial reports, from best
to worst:
1. Reporting is compliant with GAAP and decision useful; earnings are sustainable
and adequate.
2. Reporting is compliant with GAAP and decision useful, but earnings quality is
low (earnings are not sustainable or not adequate).
3. Reporting is compliant with GAAP, but earnings quality is low and reporting
choices and estimates are biased.
4. Reporting is compliant with GAAP, but the amount of earnings is actively
managed to increase, decrease, or smooth reported earnings.
5. Reporting is not compliant with GAAP, although the numbers presented are
based on the company's actual economic activities.
6. Reporting is not compliant and includes numbers that are essentially fictitious
or fraudulent.
LOS 32.c: Distinguish between conservative and aggressive accounting.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 678
Ideally, financial statements should be neutral or unbiased in order to offer the most
value to analysts. In general, we describe the choices made within GAAP with resPEct
to reported earnings as conservative accounting if they tend to decrease the
company's reported earnings and financial position (on the balance sheet) for the
current PEriod. We describe choices that increase reported earnings or improve the
financial position for the current PEriod as aggressive accounting.
Aggressive accounting often results in decreased earnings in future PEriods, while
conservative accounting will tend to increase future PEriod earnings. Both these tyPEs
of bias are sometimes used by management, for different PEriods, in an attempt to
smooth earnings over time because greater earnings volatility tends to reduce the
value of a company's shares. Often earnings smoothing is accomplished through
adjustment of accrued liabilities that are based on management estimates. During
PEriods of higher-than-exPEcted earnings, management may employ a conservative
bias by adjusting an accrued liability upward to reduce reported earnings for that
PEriod. This effectively allows deferral of the recognition of these earnings to a future
PEriod for which earnings are less than exPEcted. In such a future PEriod, the accrued
liability is adjusted downward to increase reported earnings in that PEriod, PErhaps to
meet market exPEctations. Deferral of reported earnings through conservative bias in
financial reporting so they can be used opportunistically in a future PEriod is
sometimes referred to as putting earnings in the "cookie jar" (presumably to be
"enjoyed" later).
Some examples of conservative versus aggressive financial reporting based on
management choices and estimates are shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Aggressive and Conservative Accounting
Aggressive
Conservative
Capitalizing current PEriod costs
ExPEnsing current PEriod costs
Longer estimates of the lives of
depreciable assets
Shorter estimates of the lives of
depreciable assets
Higher estimates of salvage values
Lower estimates of salvage values
Straight-line depreciation
Accelerated depreciation
Delayed recognition of impairments
Early recognition of impairments
Less accrual of reserves for bad debt
More accrual of reserves for bad debt
Smaller valuation allowances on
deferred tax assets
Larger valuation allowances on
deferred tax assets
Bias can also be present in the way that financial results are presented. A company
may present transparent financial statements that help analysts and investors to
understand the results and the activities that led to them. Alternatively, a company
may provide minimal disclosure in an attempt to emphasize positive developments
and obscure information about negative developments.
We should avoid thinking about conservatism in financial reporting as "good" and
aggressive reporting as "bad." Conservative bias can also be considered as a deviation
from neutral reporting or faithful representation that reduces the usefulness of
financial statements to analysts and investors.
Sometimes GAAP themselves can introduce conservatism by imposing a higher
standard of verification for revenue and profit than for exPEnses and accrual of
liabilities. For example:
Research costs are typically exPEnsed in the PEriod incurred because of the
uncertainty about the future benefits to be provided from research activities,
while the associated revenue is not recognized until some future PEriod.
Accruals for legal liabilities are recorded when a future payment becomes
"probable," while the standard for recognizing increasing accrued asset value is
stricter.
Under U.S. GAAP, writedowns of inventory values are required when their
future value is likely impaired, but increases in inventory value may not be
recorded until the inventory is actually sold.
While conservative bias in financial reporting is not ideal for users of financial
statements, it may be beneficial in reducing the probability of future litigation from
users claiming they were misled, in reducing current PEriod tax liability (when
deductions for tax must also be deducted in the financial statements), and in
protecting the interests of those who have less complete information than company
management, such as buyers of the company's debt.
LOS 32.d: Describe motivations that might cause management to issue financial
reports that are not high quality.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 683
One important motivation for aggressive accounting choices is to meet or exceed a
benchmark number for earnings PEr share. SPEcifically, managers may be motivated to
report earnings that are greater than:
Earnings guidance offered earlier by management.
Consensus analyst exPEctations.
Those of the same PEriod in the prior year.
The manager's motivation here may be career oriented, seeking to enhance her
reputation and improve future career opportunities. Because beating certain
benchmarks is very important to subsequent stock price movements, managers may
be motivated by incentive comPEnsation (bonuses) that dePEnds on stock returns.
Other possible motivations are to gain credibility with equity market investors or
improve the way the company is viewed by its customers and suppliers.
For companies that are highly leveraged and unprofitable, aggressive accounting may
be motivated by a desire to avoid violating debt covenants.
When earnings exceed benchmark levels, managers may make conservative
accounting choices in ways that allow these earnings to be shown in future PEriods,
increasing the probability that future PEriod earnings will meet or exceed the relevant
benchmark amount.
LOS 32.e: Describe conditions that are conducive to issuing low-quality, or even
fraudulent, financial reports.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 684
Three factors that typically exist in cases where management provides low-quality
financial reporting are motivation, opportunity, and a rationalization of the behavior.
So to the sources of motivation previously listed, we can add conditions that increase
the opportunity to present low-quality financial reports. Circumstances in which lowquality, or even fraudulent, financial reporting is more probable are:
The company has weak internal controls.
The board of directors provides inadequate oversight.
Applicable accounting standards provide a large range of acceptable accounting
treatments, provide for inconsequential PEnalties in the case of accounting
fraud, or both.
The third likely element of low-quality financial reporting is rationalization by
management for less-than-ethical actions. Most PEople who do something they know
is wrong tell themselves a story that seems (at least to them) to justiFY breaking the
rules. Whether the story is "I'll fix it next PEriod" or "I have to do it to get my bonus
and pay for my parents' care," the resulting behavior is the same.
LOS 32.f: Describe mechanisms that discipline financial reporting quality and the
potential limitations of those mechanisms.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 684
Each country has its own regulatory body responsible for publicly traded SECurities and
the markets in which they trade. For example, in the United States, the regulatory
body is the SECurities and Exchange Commission (SEC). In the U.K., it is the Financial
Conduct Authority (FCA). The International Organization of SECurities Commissions
(IOSCO) coordinates SECurities regulation on an international basis with over 200
members, such as national SECurities regulators, stock exchanges, and regional
authorities. One such regional authority, the EuroPEan SECurities and Markets
Authority (ESMA), coordinates policy among the SECurities regulators of countries in
the EuroPEan Union.
SECurities regulations typically require:
A registration process for the issuance of new publicly traded SECurities.
SPEcific disclosure and reporting requirements, including PEriodic financial
statements and accompanying notes.
An indePEndent audit of financial reports.
A statement of financial condition (or management commentary) made by
management.
A signed statement by the PErson responsible for the preparation of the
financial reports.
A review process for newly registered SECurities and PEriodic reviews after
registration.
Enforcement actions by SECurities regulators may include fines, susPEnsion of
participation in issuance and trading of SECurities, and public disclosure of the results
of disciplinary proceedings. Regulators may also pursue criminal proSECution of
fraudulent or otherwise illegal activities.
In addition to the audit opinion, a requirement for SECurities that trade in the United
States is that management must include an assessment of the effectiveness of the
firm's internal controls.
Note that an unqualified or "clean" audit opinion is not a guarantee that no fraud has
occurred but only offers reasonable assurance that the financial reports (prepared the
under the direction of management) have been "fairly reported" with resPEct to the
applicable GAAP. The auditor is selected and paid by the firm being audited.
Another source of discipline on financial reporting quality is private contracts, such as
those with lenders. Such contracts will often sPEciFY how financial measures
referenced in the loan covenants will be calculated. The counterparties to private
contracts with the firm have an incentive to see that the firm produces high-quality
financial reports.
LOS 32.g: Describe presentation choices, including non-GAAP measures, that could
be used to influence an analyst's opinion.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 691
Firms will sometimes report accounting measures that are not defined or required
under GAAP. Such non-GAAP measures typically exclude some items in order to make
the firm's PErformance look better than it would using measures defined and required
by GAAP. The claim is often made that certain items are excluded because they are
one-time or nonoPErating costs that will not affect oPErating earnings going forward,
because the items are non-cash charges, or to "improve comparability with companies
that use different accounting methods" for depreciation or restructuring charges.
In the United States, companies that report non-GAAP measures in their financial
statements are required to:
Display the most comparable GAAP measure with equal prominence.
Provide an explanation by management as to why the non-GAAP measure is
thought to be useful.
Reconcile the differences between the non-GAAP measure and the most
comparable GAAP measure.
Disclose other purposes for which the firm uses the non-GAAP measure.
Include, in any non-GAAP measure, any items that are likely to recur in the
future, even those treated as nonrecurring, unusual, or infrequent in the
financial statements.
IFRS require that firms using non-IFRS measures in financial reports must:
Define and explain the relevance of such non-IFRS measures.
Reconcile the differences between the non-IFRS measure and the most
comparable IFRS measure.
Overall, the supposition is that firms use non-GAAP measures in an attempt to control
the metrics on which they are evaluated and to reduce the focus of analysts and
investors on GAAP measures.
LOS 32.h: Describe accounting methods (choices and estimates) that could be used to
manage earnings, cash flow, and balance sheet items.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 696
Revenue Recognition
One example of how a firm's choices affect the timing of revenue recognition is the
choice of where in the shiPPIng process the customer actually takes title to the goods.
A firm may choose terms with their customer of free-on-board (FOB) at the shiPPIng
point (the firm's loading dock) or FOB at the destination (the customer's location).
Choosing terms of FOB at the shiPPIng point will mean that revenue is recognized
earlier compared to FOB at the destination.
Firms can also manage the timing of revenue recognition by accelerating or delaying
the shipment of goods. If additional revenue is required to meet targets, firms can
offer discounts or sPEcial financing terms to increase orders in the current PEriod, or
ship goods to distributors without receiving an order. Overloading a distribution
channel with more goods than would normally be sold during a PEriod is referred to as
channel stuffing. In PEriods where high earnings are exPEcted, management may wish
to delay recognition of revenue to the next PEriod and hold or delay customer
shipments to achieve this.
In a bill-and-hold transaction, the customer buys the goods and receives an invoice
but requests that the firm keep the goods at their location for a PEriod of time. The use
of fictitious bill-and-hold transactions can increase earnings in the current PEriod by
recognizing revenue for goods that are actually still in inventory. Revenue for future
PEriods will be decreased as real customer orders for these bill-and-hold items are
filled but not recognized in revenue, offsetting the previous overstatement of revenue.
Estimates of Credit Losses
One example of accounting choices that affect financial reports is the estimation of
losses from uncollectable customer credit accounts. On the balance sheet, the reserve
for uncollectible debt is an offset to accounts receivable. If management determines
the probability that accounts receivable will be uncollectible is lower than their current
estimate, a decrease in the reserve for uncollectible accounts will increase net
receivables reported on the balance sheet, reduce exPEnses on the income statement,
and increase net income. An increase in the allowance for bad debt would have the
opposite effect, decreasing net receivables on the balance sheet, increasing exPEnses,
and decreasing net income.
A firm that simply underestimates the PErcentage of receivables that will be
uncollectible will report higher receivables and higher net income as a result. At some
point, when actual uncollectible accounts exceed the low estimate, the firm will report
an additional exPEnse that will reduce net income and net receivables.
Management can adjust the bad-debt reserve in order to smooth earnings. In PEriods
of high earnings, the allowance for bad debt is increased to reduce reported earnings,
in effect storing these earnings for later use. In subsequent PEriods, if earnings are
below benchmark values, the bad-debt reserve can be reduced to meet earnings
targets.
Other reserves recorded by a company, such as a reserve for warranty exPEnse, can
also be changed to manage reported earnings. A decrease in the estimated warranty
exPEnse as a PErcentage of sales will increase earnings, while an increase in the
reserve for warranty exPEnse will decrease earnings for the PEriod.
Valuation Allowance
Another example of a contra account that can be used to manage earnings is a
valuation allowance. Recall that a valuation allowance reduces the carrying value of a
deferred tax asset based on the probability it will not be realized. Similar to the effects
of an allowance for bad debt, increasing a valuation allowance will decrease the net
deferred tax asset on the balance sheet and reduce net income for the PEriod, while a
decrease in the valuation allowance will increase the net deferred tax asset and
increase net income for the PEriod.
As with the contra account for bad debt, the valuation allowance can be understated
to show higher asset values and it can also be adjusted over time to smooth earnings.
Depreciation Methods and Estimates
Compared to straight-line depreciation, using an accelerated method of depreciation
increases exPEnses, and decreases net income, in the early years of an asset's life. In
the later years of an asset's life, exPEnses are lower and net income higher when an
accelerated depreciation method is used. The carrying value of a depreciable asset on
the balance sheet will decrease more rapidly with accelerated depreciation than with
straight-line depreciation.
Estimates of the useful life of a depreciable asset and its salvage value upon disposal
can also affect net income and the carrying value of the asset. A greater salvage value
will slow depreciation so the carrying value of the asset is greater, depreciation
exPEnse is less, and net income is higher. A smaller salvage value will have the
opposite effects. If the salvage value of an asset is set higher than the actual sale price
at the end of the asset's life, a loss on the sale of the asset will decrease net income in
the PEriod in which the asset is sold.
Using a longer estimated useful life of a depreciable asset decreases the PEriodic
depreciation exPEnse and increases net income in the early years of the asset's life
compared to using a shorter estimated useful life.
Amortization and Impairment
Management choices and estimates regarding amortization of purchased intangible
assets are similar to those for depreciation of tangible assets. The intangible asset
goodwill is not amortized but is subject to a test for impairment. By ignoring or
delaying recognition of an impairment charge for goodwill, management can increase
earnings in the current PEriod.
Inventory Method
The choice of inventory cost flow methods can have significant effects on both
reported earnings and the balance sheet value of inventory. Consider the choice
between FIFO and weighted-average inventory costing methods. During PEriods of
rising prices, COGS under the FIFO method will be less than COGS under the weightedaverage costing method. Gross profit, gross margin, and earnings will all be greater
under the FIFO method than under the weighted-average method as a result. Balance
sheet inventory value will be greater under FIFO than under the weighted-average
method.
During PEriods of decreasing prices, the opposite is true; FIFO COGS are greater than
weighted-average COGS and FIFO gross profits, gross margin, and earnings less than
under the weighted-average method. With decreasing prices, balance sheet inventory
will be less under FIFO than under the weighted-average cost method.
In terms of relevance, in an environment of either increasing or decreasing prices, FIFO
results in more accurate balance sheet inventory values because inventory value is
closer to current replacement cost than under the weighted average cost method.
Conversely, COGS are closer to current (replacement) cost under the weighted-average
cost method so that gross profit and margin better reflect economic reality. Gross
profit under FIFO is distorted in that it includes gains from rising prices (or losses from
decreasing prices), so the weighted-average cost method produces "better"
information on the income statement. Financial reports that are transparent and
provide users with the information needed to understand how the choice of inventory
costing method affects income statement and balance sheet values are considered to
be higher quality.
Related-Party Transactions
If a public firm does business with a supplier that is private and controlled by
management, adjusting the price of goods supplied can shift profits either to or from
the private company to manage the earnings reported by the public company.
Capitalization
Any exPEnse that can be capitalized creates an asset on the balance sheet, and the
impact of the exPEnse on net income can be spread over many years. Consider a firm
that has a marketing exPEnse of $1.5 million and chooses to capitalize this exPEnse
and amortize it over three years. In the PEriod in which the exPEnse is incurred,
capitalization will reduce the exPEnse on the income statement from $1.5 million to
$0.5 million, increasing pretax income by $1 million. At the end of the year, the related
balance sheet asset is $1 million, and an amortization exPEnse of $0.5 million will be
taken (and reduce net income) in each of the following two years. Greater
capitalization of research and development costs will shift net income into the current
PEriod in the same way.
Capitalization also affects cash flow classifications. If an exPEnse is capitalized, the
entire amount is classified as an investing cash outflow so that oPErating cash flow is
increased by that amount.
Other Cash Flow Effects
Management can affect the classification of cash flows through other methods,
primarily with the goal of increasing reported cash flow from oPErations. Taking longer
to pay suppliers increases oPErating cash flows and is referred to as stretching
payables. Delaying payments that would normally be made near the end of a reporting
PEriod until the beginning of the next accounting PEriod will increase oPErating cash
flow in the current PEriod and reduce it in the subsequent PEriod. There is no effect on
reported earnings in the current PEriod from stretching payables.
Capitalizing interest exPEnse will decrease cash flow from investing and increase cash
flow from oPErations, along with its effects on the pattern of earnings from
depreciating the interest exPEnse over time rather than exPEnsing it all in the current
PEriod. More generally, the ability under IFRS to classiFY interest and dividends paid as
either CFO or CFF, and interest and dividends received as either CFO or CFI, gives
management an additional way to manage reported oPErating cash flow.
LOS 32.i: Describe accounting warning signs and methods for detecting manipulation
of information in financial reports.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 713
Below is a list of several warning signs that analysts should look for. The presence of
these issues does not indicate fraud or even earnings manipulation, but in each case,
the presence of one or more warning signs requires more analysis in order to
determine whether there is a real business reason for the item or if earnings
manipulation or fraud is driving the decisions and results. Avoiding investment in the
company is one alternative when analysts and investors cannot obtain satisfactory
answers to the questions raised when multiple warning signs are present.
Revenue Recognition
Changes in revenue recognition methods.
Use of bill-and-hold transactions.
Use of barter transactions.
Use of rebate programs that require estimation of the impact of rebates on net
revenue.
Lack of transparency with regard to how the various components of a customer
order are recorded as revenue.
Revenue growth out of line with PEer companies.
Receivables turnover is decreasing over multiple PEriods.
Decreases in total asset turnover, esPEcially when a company is growing
through acquisition of other companies.
Inclusion of nonoPErating items or significant one-time sales in revenue.
Inventories
Declining inventory turnover ratio.
LIFO liquidations--drawing down inventory levels when LIFO (U.S. GAAP only)
inventory costing is used so that COGS reflects the lower costs of items acquired
in past PEriods, which increases current PEriod earnings.
Capitalization Policies
Firm capitalizes costs that are not typically capitalized by firms in their industry.
Relationship of Revenue and Cash Flow
The ratio of oPErating cash flow to net income is PErsistently less than one or
declining over time.
Other Warning Signs
Depreciation methods, estimated asset lives, or estimates of salvage values are
out of line with those of PEer companies in the industry.
Fourth-quarter earnings show a pattern (either high or low) compared to the
seasonality of earnings in the industry or seasonality of revenue for the firm.
The firm has significant transactions with related parties (entities controlled by
management).
Certain exPEnses are classified as nonrecurring but apPEar regularly in financial
reports.
Gross or oPErating profit margins are noticeably higher than are typical for the
industry and PEer companies.
Management typically provides only minimal financial reporting information
and disclosure.
Management typically emphasizes non-GAAP earnings measures and uses
sPEcial or nonrecurring designations aggressively for charges.
Growth by purchasing a large number of businesses can provide many
opportunities to manipulate asset values and future depreciation and
amortization and make comparisons to prior PEriod earnings problematic.
Analysts should consider adjusting prior-PEriod earnings when large restructuring or
impairment charges are recognized. Analysts sometimes take such events to be good
news because they anticipate better firm PErformance going forward when poorly
PErforming assets are disposed of. Because the charges represent, to some extent,
"corrections" of previously understated exPEnses and overstated asset values, analysts
should consider spreading these costs across prior PEriods and restating prior earnings
to give a more realistic picture of true earnings trends.
KEY CONCEPTS
LOS 32.a
Financial reporting quality refers to the characteristics of a firm's financial statements.
High-quality financial reporting adheres to generally accepted accounting principles
(GAAP) and is decision useful in terms of relevance and faithful representation.
Quality of reported results refers to the level and sustainability of a firm's earnings,
cash flows, and balance sheet items. High-quality earnings are high enough to provide
the firm's investors with an adequate return and are sustainable in future PEriods.
LOS 32.b
A sPEctrum for assessing financial reporting quality considers both the quality of a
firm's financial statements and the quality of its earnings. One such sPEctrum, from
highest quality to lowest, is the following:
Reporting is compliant with GAAP and decision useful; earnings are sustainable
and adequate.
Reporting is compliant and decision useful, but earnings quality is low.
Reporting is compliant, but earnings quality is low and reporting choices and
estimates are biased.
Reporting is compliant, but earnings are actively managed.
Reporting is not compliant, but the numbers presented are based on the
company's actual economic activities.
Reporting is not compliant and includes numbers that are fictitious or
fraudulent.
LOS 32.c
Biased accounting choices that can be made within GAAP include conservative and
aggressive accounting. Conservative accounting choices tend to decrease the
company's reported earnings and financial position for the current PEriod. Aggressive
accounting choices tend to increase reported earnings or improve the financial
position for the current PEriod.
Some managers employ conservative bias during PEriods when earnings are above
target and aggressive bias during poor PEriods of below-target earnings to artificially
smooth earnings.
LOS 32.d
Motivations for firm managers to issue low-quality financial reports may include
pressure to meet or exceed earnings targets, career considerations, increasing their
comPEnsation, improving PErceptions of the firm among customers and suppliers, or
meeting the terms of debt covenants.
LOS 32.e
Conditions that are often present when managers issue low-quality financial reports
include motivations, opportunities, and rationalizations. Weak internal controls,
inadequate oversight by the board of directors, and wide ranges of acceptable
accounting treatments are among the factors that may provide opportunities for lowquality reporting.
LOS 32.f
Mechanisms that help to discipline financial reporting quality include regulation,
auditing, and private contracts. Regulators typically require public companies to
provide PEriodic financial statements and notes, including management commentary,
and obtain indePEndent audits.
A clean audit opinion offers reasonable assurance that financial statements are free
from material errors but does not guarantee the ABSence of error or fraud. The fact
that firms select and pay their auditors may limit the effectiveness of auditing to
discipline financial reporting quality.
LOS 32.g
Firms may attempt to influence analysts' valuations by presenting non-GAAP
measures, such as earnings that exclude certain nonrecurring items. IFRS requires
firms to define and explain the relevance of any non-GAAP measures and reconcile
them to the most comparable IFRS measure. Similar requirements apply to U.S. public
firms.
LOS 32.h
Accounting choices and estimates that can be used to manage earnings include:
Revenue recognition choices such as shiPPIng terms (FOB shiPPIng point versus
FOB destination), accelerating shipments (channel stuffing), and bill-and-hold
transactions.
Estimates of reserves for uncollectible accounts or warranty exPEnses.
Valuation allowances on deferred tax assets.
Depreciation methods, estimates of useful lives and salvage values, and
recognition of impairments.
Inventory cost flow methods.
Capitalization of exPEnses.
Related-party transactions.
LOS 32.i
Accounting warning signs that indicate a need for closer analysis may include:
Revenue growth out of line with comparable firms, changes in revenue
recognition methods, or lack of transparency about revenue recognition.
Decreases over time in turnover ratios (receivables, inventory, total asset).
Bill-and-hold, barter, or related-party transactions.
Net income not supported by oPErating cash flows.
Capitalization decisions, depreciation methods, useful lives, salvage values out
of line with comparable firms.
Fourth-quarter earnings patterns not caused by seasonality.
Frequent apPEarance of nonrecurring items.
Emphasis on non-GAAP measures, minimal information and disclosure in
financial reports.
CONCEPT CHECKERS
1. A firm reports net income of $40 million. The firm's financial statements
disclose in management's discussion and analysis that $30 million of net
income is attributable to a gain on the sale of assets. Based only on this
information, for this PEriod, the firm is best described as having high quality of:
A. financial reporting only.
B. both earnings and financial reporting.
C. neither earnings nor financial reporting.
2. Which of the following financial reports are considered to be of the lowest
quality? Financial reports that reflect:
A. unsustainable earnings.
B. biased accounting choices.
C. departures from accounting principles.
3. Financial reporting is most likely to be decision useful when management's
accounting choices are:
A. neutral.
B. aggressive.
C. conservative.
4. Which of the following is least likely to be a motivation to overreport earnings?
A. Reduce tax obligations.
B. Meet analyst exPEctations.
C. Remain in compliance with bond covenants.
5. With resPEct to conditions that may lead to low-quality financial reporting,
ineffective internal controls are best described as a(n):
A. motivation.
B. opportunity.
C. rationalization.
6. A limitation on the effectiveness of auditing in ensuring financial reporting
quality is that:
A. detecting fraud is not the objective of audits.
B. public firms are not required to obtain audit opinions.
C. auditors may only issue a qualified or unqualified opinion but do not
explain why.
7. Under IFRS, a firm that presents a nonstandard financial measure is least likely
required to:
A. provide the same measure for at least two prior PEriods.
B. explain the reasons for presenting the nonstandard measure.
C. reconcile the nonstandard measure to a comparable standard measure.
8. For the current PEriod, inappropriate capitalization is most likely to:
A. overstate revenues.
B. understate liabilities.
C. understate exPEnses.
9. A potential warning sign that a firm is engaging in channel stuffing is an unusual
increase in the firm's:
A. receivables turnover.
B. days of sales outstanding.
C. number of days of payables.
For more questions related to this topic review, log in to your Schweser online account
and launch SchweserPro(tm) QBank; and for video instruction covering each LOS in this
topic review, log in to your Schweser online account and launch the OnDemand video
lectures, if you have purchased these products.
ANSWERS - CONCEPT CHECKERS
1. A firm reports net income of $40 million. The firm's financial statements
disclose in management's discussion and analysis that $30 million of net
income is attributable to a gain on the sale of assets. Based only on this
information, for this PEriod, the firm is best described as having high quality of:
A. financial reporting only.
B. both earnings and financial reporting.
C. neither earnings nor financial reporting.
Because a large proportion of net income is due to a one-time gain, this
PEriod's earnings are likely not sustainable and the firm may be said to have
low quality of earnings for the PEriod. Clear disclosure of this fact in the
financial statements suggests high quality of financial reporting.
2. Which of the following financial reports are considered to be of the lowest
quality? Financial reports that reflect:
A. unsustainable earnings.
B. biased accounting choices.
C. departures from accounting principles.
In the sPEctrum of financial reporting quality, financial reports that depart from
generally accepted accounting principles are considered to be of lower quality
than those that reflect biased accounting choices. Financial reports that reflect
unsustainable earnings, such as one-time gains, can still be of high quality if
they state the situation clearly.
3. Financial reporting is most likely to be decision useful when management's
accounting choices are:
A. neutral.
B. aggressive.
C. conservative.
Financial reporting is most likely to be decision useful when accounting choices
are neutral. Either aggressive or conservative accounting choices by
management may be viewed as biases.
4. Which of the following is least likely to be a motivation to overreport earnings?
A. Reduce tax obligations.
B. Meet analyst exPEctations.
C. Remain in compliance with bond covenants.
Reducing tax obligations would be a reason to underreport earnings. The other
choices are motivations to overreport earnings.
5. With resPEct to conditions that may lead to low-quality financial reporting,
ineffective internal controls are best described as a(n):
A. motivation.
B. opportunity.
C. rationalization.
Ineffective internal controls are a condition that provides an opportunity for
low-quality financial reporting.
6. A limitation on the effectiveness of auditing in ensuring financial reporting
quality is that:
A. detecting fraud is not the objective of audits.
B. public firms are not required to obtain audit opinions.
C. auditors may only issue a qualified or unqualified opinion but do not
explain why.
The objective of audits is to provide reasonable assurance that financial
statements are presented fairly. A firm that is engaging in accounting fraud
may deceive its auditor. Regulators in most countries require publicly traded
firms to obtain indePEndent audits of their financial statements. Auditors may
issue a qualified opinion noting certain asPEcts of financial statements that are
inconsistent with accounting principles or an adverse opinion if they find that
financial statements are materially misstated and do not conform with GAAP.
7. Under IFRS, a firm that presents a nonstandard financial measure is least likely
required to:
A. provide the same measure for at least two prior PEriods.
B. explain the reasons for presenting the nonstandard measure.
C. reconcile the nonstandard measure to a comparable standard measure.
IFRS require a firm that presents a nonstandard financial measure to reconcile
that measure to an IFRS measure and explain why the firm believes the
nonstandard measure is relevant to users of the financial statements.
Presenting the nonstandard measure for prior PEriods is not a requirement.
8. For the current PEriod, inappropriate capitalization is most likely to:
A. overstate revenues.
B. understate liabilities.
C. understate exPEnses.
Management may make inappropriate capitalization decisions to understate
exPEnses by creating balance sheet assets for items that should instead be
recognized as exPEnses in the current PEriod, increasing net income in the
current PEriod. Revenues and liabilities are unlikely to be affected by
capitalization decisions.
9. A potential warning sign that a firm is engaging in channel stuffing is an unusual
increase in the firm's:
A. receivables turnover.
B. days of sales outstanding.
C. number of days of payables.
Channel stuffing, which includes activities such as accelerating deliveries to
distributors or sending customers unordered merchandise, would likely
increase accounts receivable as a PErcentage of revenues. This would decrease
the receivables turnover ratio and increase days of sales outstanding. Payables
would not be affected.
The following is a review of the Financial Reporting and Analysis principles designed to address the learning
outcome statements set forth by CFA Institute. Cross-Reference to CFA Institute Assigned Reading #33.
FINANCIAL STATEMENT ANALYSIS: APPLICATIONS
Study Session 9
EXAM FOCUS
In this topic review, we will apply the analytic methods detailed in the topic review of
Financial Analysis Techniques. Pay sPEcial attention to the method outlined for
forecasting cash flows. Memorize the four tyPEs of items important in the
determination of credit quality. Lastly, analyst adjustments to financial statements are
covered one more time. Understand the reasons for all the adjustments covered and
how the adjustments will affect financial ratios used for valuation and credit analysis.
LOS 33.a: Evaluate a company's past financial PErformance and explain how a
company's strategy is reflected in past financial PErformance.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 731
In the review of Financial Analysis Techniques, we introduced a number of financial
ratios that can be used to assess a company's profitability, leverage, solvency, and
oPErational efficiency. The analyst can evaluate trends in these ratios, as well as their
levels, to evaluate how the company has PErformed in these areas.
Trends in financial ratios and differences between a firm's financial ratios and those of
its comPEtitors or industry averages can indicate important asPEcts of a firm's business
strategy. Consider two firms in the PErsonal computer business. One builds relatively
high-end computers with cutting-edge features, and one comPEtes primarily on price
and produces computers with various configurations using readily available
technology. What differences in their financial statements would we exPEct to find?
Premium products are usually sold at higher gross margins than less differentiated
commodity-like products, so we should exPEct cost of goods sold to be a higher
proportion of sales for the latter. We might also exPEct the company with cutting-edge
features and high quality to sPEnd a higher proportion of sales on research and
development, which may be quite minimal for a firm purchasing improved
components from suppliers rather than developing new features and capabilities inhouse. The ratio of gross profits to oPErating profits will be larger for a firm that
sPEnds highly on research and development or on advertising.
In general, it is important for an analyst to understand a subject firm's business
strategy. If the firm claims it is going to improve earnings PEr share by cutting costs,
examination of oPErating ratios and gross margins over time will reveal whether the
firm has actually been able to implement such a strategy and whether sales have
suffered as a result.
LOS 33.b: Forecast a company's future net income and cash flow.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 739
A forecast of future net income and cash flow often begins with a forecast of future
sales. Over shorter horizons, the "top down" appROAch to forecasting sales is used. The
analyst begins with a forecast of GDP growth, often supplied by outside research or an
in-house economics group. Historical relationships can be used to estimate the
relationship between GDP growth and the growth of industry sales. If the subject firm's
market share is exPEcted to remain the same, the growth of firm sales will be the same
as the growth in industry sales. If the analyst has reason to believe the firm's market
share will increase or decrease next PEriod, the market share can be adjusted for this
change and then multiplied by estimated industry sales for the next PEriod to get the
forecast of firm sales for the PEriod.
In a simple forecasting model, some historical average or trend-adjusted measure of
profitability (oPErating margin, EBT margin, or net margin) can be used to forecast
earnings. In complex forecasting models, each item on an income statement and
balance sheet can be estimated based on separate assumptions about its growth in
relation to revenue growth. For multi-PEriod forecasts, the analyst typically employs a
single estimate of sales growth at some point that is exPEcted to continue indefinitely.
To estimate cash flows, the analyst must make assumptions about future sources and
uses of cash. The most important of these will be increases in working capital, capital
exPEnditures on new fixed assets, issuance or repayments of debt, and issuance or
repurchase of stock. A typical assumption is that noncash working capital as a
PErcentage of sales remains constant. A fIRSt-pass model might indicate a need for cash
in future PEriods, and these cash requirements can then be met by projecting
necessary borrowing in future PEriods. For consistency, interest exPEnse in future
PEriods must also be adjusted for any increase in debt.
Figure 1 illustrates this method. This projection assumes the company's sales increase
5% PEr year, its cost of goods sold is 35% of sales, and oPErating exPEnses are 55% of
sales. It also assumes noncash working capital stays constant at 85% of sales, and fixed
capital requirements will be 5% of sales in each year. Net income is projected to
increase over the forecast PEriod, but the analysis reveals that cash is exPEcted to
decrease, suggesting a need for financing.
Figure 1: Income and Cash Flow Projection
20X0
20X1
20X2
20X3
20X4
Sales @ +5% PEr year
86,145
90,452
94,975
99,724
104,710
Cost of goods sold @ 35%
of sales
OPErating exPEnses @
55% of sales
30,151
31,658
33,241
34,903
36,648
47,380
49,749
52,236
54,848
57,590
Pretax income
8,614
9,045
9,497
9,972
10,471
Taxes @ 35%
3,015
3,166
3,324
3,490
3,665
Net income
5,599
5,879
6,173
6,482
6,806
Cash (Borrowing)
8,615
6,311
3,891
1,350
(1,318)
Noncash working capital
@ 85% of sales
73,223
76,884
80,729
84,765
89,003
Current assets
81,838
83,195
84,620
86,116
87,685
Net income
5,599
5,879
6,173
6,482
6,806
- Investment in working
capital
- Investment in fixed
capital @ 5% of sales
3,478
3,661
3,844
4,036
4,238
4,307
4,523
4,749
4,986
5,235
Change in cash
(2,186)
(2,304)
(2,420)
(2,541)
(2,668)
Beginning cash
10,801
8,615
6,311
3,891
1,350
Ending cash
8,615
6,311
3,891
1,350
(1,318)
LOS 33.c: Describe the role of financial statement analysis in assessing the credit
quality of a potential debt investment.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 749
Traditionally, credit analysts have spoken of the "three Cs," "four Cs," or even the "five
Cs" of credit analysis. One version of the three Cs includes: Character, Collateral, and
Capacity to repay. Character refers to the firm management's professional reputation
and the firm's history of debt repayment. The ability to pledge sPEcific collateral
reduces lender risk. It is the third C, the capacity to repay, that requires close
examination of a firm's financial statements and ratios. Since some debt is for PEriods
of 30 years or longer, the credit analyst must take a very long-term view of the firm's
prosPEcts.
Credit rating agencies such as Moody's and Standard and Poor's employ formulas that
are essentially weighted averages of several sPEcific accounting ratios and business
characteristics. The sPEcific items used in the formula and their weights vary from
industry to industry, but the tyPEs of items considered can be separated into four
general categories:
1. Scale and diversification. Larger companies and those with a wider variety of
product lines and greater geographic diversification are better credit risks.
2. OPErational efficiency. Such items as oPErating ROA, oPErating margins, and
EBITDA margins fall into this category. Along with greater vertical
diversification, high oPErating efficiency is associated with better debt ratings.
3. Margin stability. Stability of the relevant profitability margins indicates a
higher probability of repayment (leads to a better debt rating and a lower
interest rate). Highly variable oPErating results make lenders nervous.
4. Leverage. Ratios of oPErating earnings, EBITDA, or some measure of free cash
flow to interest exPEnse or total debt make up the most important part of the
credit rating formula. Firms with greater earnings in relation to their debt and
in relation to their interest exPEnse are better credit risks.
Professor's Note: We discuss credit quality in more detail in our topic review of "Fundamentals of
Credit Analysis" in the Study Session on fixed income risk analysis.
LOS 33.d: Describe the use of financial statement analysis in screening for potential
equity investments.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 752
In many cases, an analyst must select portfolio stocks from the large universe of
potential equity investments. Whether the object is to select growth stocks, income
stocks, or value stocks, accounting items and ratios can be used to identiFY a
manageable subset of available stocks for further analysis.
Some investment strategies even have financial ratios in their names, such as low
price/earnings and low price/sales investing. Multiple criteria are used because a
screen based on a single factor can include firms with other undesirable
characteristics. For example, a company with a low price/earnings ratio may also have
oPErating losses, declining sales prosPEcts, or very high leverage.
Analysts should be aware that their equity screens will likely include and exclude many
or all of the firms in particular industries. A screen to identiFY firms with low P/E ratios
will likely exclude growth companies from the sample. A low price-to-book or high
dividend screen will likely include an inordinate proportion of financial services
companies.
Backtesting refers to using a sPEcific set of criteria to screen historical data to
determine how portfolios based on those criteria would have PErformed. There is, of
course, no guarantee that screening criteria that have identified stocks that
outPErformed in the past will continue to do so. Analysts must also pay sPEcial
attention to the potential effects of survivorship bias, data-mining bias, and look-ahead
bias (see the topic review of Sampling and Estimation) when evaluating the results of
backtesting.
LOS 33.e: Explain appropriate analyst adjustments to a company's financial
statements to facilitate comparison with another company.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 756
Because different companies choose different accounting methods, an analyst must be
prepared to adjust the financial statements of one company to make them comparable
to those of another company or group of companies. Differences in accounting
methods chosen by firms subject to the same standards, as well as differences in
accounting methods due to differences in local accounting standards, can make
comparisons between companies problematic.
Consider two companies in the same industry that have different depreciation
schedules. One company has selected straight-line depreciation even though physical
assets in its industry tend to lose most of their productive value early in their economic
lives. The analyst would need to adjust the depreciation of that firm so that the net
income figures for the firms are comparable. A change in a firm's financial statement
depreciation would lead to changes in gross profit, oPErating profit, and so on, down
to net profit and earnings PEr share.
Differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS require an analyst to adjust the financial
statements of firms from different countries before comparing their financial results.
Important differences between the two include their treatments of the effect of
exchange rate changes, certain SECurities held by the firm, and inventory cost flows.
Several adjustments to improve the comparability of firms' financial statements and
ratios are as follows.
Investments in SECurities
Because the classification of a firm's investment SECurities affects how changes in their
values are recorded, it can significantly affect reported earnings and assets. Recall that
unrealized gains and losses on held-for-trading SECurities are recorded in income, while
those on available-for-sale or held-to-maturity SECurities are not. Additionally, while
unrealized gains and losses on held-for-trading and available-for-sale SECurities are
reflected in balance sheet asset values, for held-to-maturity SECurities they are not.
When these differences in classifications lead to significant differences in reported net
income or balance sheet asset values for otherwise comparable companies, an analyst
can use disclosures to adjust net income and assets of one firm to what they would
have been had their classifications been the same.
One difference between IFRS and U.S. GAAP accounting for investment SECurities is
that under IFRS, unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale debt SECurities that
result from exchange rate fluctuations are recorded on the income statement. Because
they are not recorded as income under U.S. GAAP, an analyst should subtract (add) this
component of unrealized gains (losses) from the net income of the IFRS firm to
improve comparability.
Inventory Accounting Differences
As we covered in the topic review on inventory accounting, a firm using LIFO
(PErmitted only under U.S. GAAP) will report higher cost of goods sold, lower income,
and lower inventory compared to FIFO inventory accounting when costs are rising. The
LIFO reserve, which all LIFO firms must report, can be used to adjust LIFO cost of goods
and inventory to their FIFO-equivalent values.
Example: Adjusting for inventory accounting differences
Albart Industries reports the following using the LIFO inventory costing method at the end of 20X2:
Current assets
$10 million
Current liabilities
$5 million
20X1 LIFO reserve
$500,000
20X2 LIFO reserve
$700,000
A. What is the current ratio at the end of 20X2 before and after the appropriate adjustment for
comparability to a similar firm that reports using the FIFO inventory valuation method?
B. What is the appropriate adjustment to the firm's 20X2 COGS to make the firm's income statement
comparable to that of a firm that reports under the FIFO method?
Answer:
A. Before adjustment, current ratio = CA / CL = 10 / 5 = 2 at year-end 20X2.
Adding the LIFO reserve to current assets increases the current ratio:
adjusted current ratio = 10.7 / 5 = 2.14
B. The appropriate adjustment is to subtract the increase in the LIFO reserve from COGS. COGS should be
reduced by $700,000 - $500,000 = $200,000. This will increase gross profit, oPErating profit, and net
income compared to LIFO reporting.
Differences in Depreciation Methods and Estimates
Disclosures related to depreciation are not sPEcific enough to PErmit adjustments to
ensure comparability. However, some qualitative information for comparing
companies' methods can be obtained.
Over an asset's life, differences between depreciation methods, estimates of useful
lives, and estimates of salvage values used by otherwise comparable firms can lead to
significant differences in reported income and balance sheet asset values. A firm that is
aggressive in using higher estimates of useful asset lives or asset salvage values will
report lower annual depreciation exPEnse and higher net income, compared to a more
conservative firm that uses lower estimates of useful lives or salvage values. If the
analyst concludes that a firm's aggressive assumptions regarding asset lives, for
example, are increasing balance sheet net asset values and reported net income, an
adjustment to net income and fixed asset carrying values may be appropriate.
Note as well that upward revaluation of fixed asset values is PErmitted under IFRS but
not under U.S. GAAP. Such a revaluation will increase assets and equity, and in a case
where the upward revaluation reverses a previous downward revaluation, the increase
in value is also reported on the income statement.
An analyst can estimate the number of years' worth of depreciation a firm has
recognized by dividing accumulated depreciation from the balance sheet by
depreciation exPEnse from the income statement. The result can be interpreted as the
average age of the firm's assets. Similarly, an analyst can estimate the average useful
life of a firm's assets (gross proPErty, plant, and equipment divided by depreciation
exPEnse) and their average remaining useful life (net proPErty, plant, and equipment
divided by depreciation exPEnse). Comparing average ages and useful lives of assets
within an industry may reveal differences in firms' future capital sPEnding needs.
Off-Balance-Sheet Financing
Debt ratios should include liabilities for both capital (finance) leases and oPErating
leases. Firms include the estimated present value of future capital lease payments with
their financials, so that part is straightforward. Although firms must report payments
due under oPErating leases (each year for five years, and total beyond five years), the
present value of these is not a required item. To estimate the present value of
oPErating lease liabilities, an analyst can use the ratio of the present value of capital
lease obligations to the sum of these future payments, or make some assumption
about the timing of oPErating lease payments beyond five years and calculate a
discount rate to use when calculating the present value of oPErating lease payments.
We illustrate both methods in the following example.
Example: Present value of oPErating lease obligation
Abration Corp. reported the following for 20X1:
Present value of capital leases: $6.184 million
Estimate the present value of Abration's oPErating leases.
Answer:
Method 1: Assume oPErating leases have the same ratio of PV to payments as the firm's capital leases.
A total of $12 million in capital lease payments and $5.5 million in oPErating lease payments are due in
the future. The ratio of the PV of Abration's capital leases to its total future lease payments is $6.184
million / $12 million = 0.5153. Using this ratio, we can estimate the PV of their oPErating leases as 0.5153
x $5.5 million = $2.834 million.
Method 2: Estimate discount rate for capital leases and apply it to oPErating leases.
To calculate a single discount rate that would produce the reported PV of capital leases, we must make an
assumption about the timing of capital lease payments beyond 20X6. The annual payments, together with
the reported PV, can be used to estimate a discount rate to use when calculating the PV of the oPErating
lease payments.
Some alternatives are as follows: all paid at the end of Year 6, spread evenly over some sPEcific number of
years, or payments at the average of the prior five years until the obligation for future payments beyond
20X6 is met.
$7 million in Year 6:
CF0 = -6.184; C01 = 1; F01 = 5; C02 = 7; CPT IRR = 15.8%.
$1.4 million in Years 6 to 10:
CF0 = -6.184; C01 = 1; F01 = 5; C02 = 1.4; F02 = 5; CPT IRR = 13.0%.
$1 million in Years 6 to 12:
CF0 = -6.184; C01 = 1; F01 = 12; CPT IRR = 12.0%.
Note that the further in the future we assume the payments are made, the lower their discount rate given
the PV.
If we choose to assume that capital lease payments beyond 20X6 are spread evenly over five years ($1.4
million PEr year), we will use the discount rate 13%. Making the same assumption about lease payments
beyond 20X6 for the oPErating leases ($600,000 PEr year for five years), we can calculate the PV of these
payments, and, thus, the oPErating lease liability:
I/Y = 13; CF0 = 0; C01 = 500; F01 = 5; C02 = 600; F02 = 5; CPT NPV = 2,904
This amount, $2.904 million, should be added to the firm's liabilities and assets (equity need not be
adjusted) to better reflect the use of off-balance-sheet financing and to calculate solvency ratios such as
debt-to-equity and debt-to-assets.
Goodwill
Two companies with identical assets, but where one has grown through acquisition of
some business units while the other has grown internally by creating such business
units, will show different balance sheet values for the same assets. For the company
that has grown through acquisition:
Tangible assets of the acquired units will be recorded at fair value as of the
acquisition date, rather than at historical cost net of accumulated depreciation.
Identifiable intangible assets of the acquired units will be valued at their
acquisition cost, rather than not being included in balance sheet assets.
Goodwill, the excess of acquisition price over the fair value of acquired net
assets, will be shown on the balance sheet.
Two adjustments are typically made to goodwill to improve comparability in such a
case. FIRSt, goodwill should be subtracted from assets when calculating financial ratios.
SECond, any income statement exPEnse from impairment of goodwill in the current
PEriod should be reversed, increasing reported net income.
In calculating price to book value of equity PEr share, an analyst can remove goodwill
from assets and recalculate a lower adjusted book value, resulting in a price to
adjusted book value ratio that is greater.
Other Intangible Assets
Additional adjustment may be required for IFRS firms that revalue intangible assets
upward, which is not PErmitted under U.S. GAAP. As revaluations that do not reverse
previously reported impairment are taken directly to equity, an analyst can improve
comparability of financial ratios by reducing intangible asset values (and thereby
equity) by the cumulative amount of any such upward revaluations.
An alternative ratio, price to tangible book value, removes both goodwill and
intangible assets from equity to get tangible book value. This adjustment will reduce
assets and equity and produce a ratio that is not affected by differences in intangible
asset values resulting from differences in how the assets were acquired.
Analysts should also note that a firm's pre- and post-acquisition financial statements
may lack comparability when the acquisition method is used. The acquisition method
combines fair value estimates of identifiable assets with historical asset costs on the
balance sheet and adds the earnings of the purchased firm with no restatement of
prior results.
KEY CONCEPTS
LOS 33.a
Trends in a company's financial ratios and differences between its financial ratios and
those of its comPEtitors or industry average ratios can reveal important asPEcts of its
business strategy.
LOS 33.b
A company's future income and cash flows can be projected by forecasting sales
growth and using estimates of profit margins and the increases in working capital and
fixed assets necessary to support the forecast sales growth.
LOS 33.c
Credit analysis uses a firm's financial statements to assess its credit quality. Indicators
of a firm's creditworthiness include its scale and diversification, oPErational efficiency,
margin stability, and use of financial leverage.
LOS 33.d
Potentially attractive equity investments can be identified by screening a universe of
stocks, using minimum or maximum values of one or more ratios. Which (and how
many) ratios to use, what minimum or maximum values to use, and how much
importance to give each ratio all present challenges to the analyst.
LOS 33.e
When companies use different accounting methods or estimates relating to areas such
as inventory accounting, depreciation, capitalization, and off-balance-sheet financing,
analysts must adjust the financial statements for comparability.
LIFO ending inventory can be adjusted to a FIFO basis by adding the LIFO reserve. LIFO
cost of goods sold can be adjusted to a FIFO basis by subtracting the change in the LIFO
reserve.
When calculating solvency ratios, analysts should estimate the present value of
oPErating lease obligations and add it to the firm's liabilities.
CONCEPT CHECKERS
1. The table below shows selected data from a company's financial statements.
20X6
20X7
20X8
20X9
Sales
COGS
8,614
9,217
9,862
10,553
5,304
5,622
6,072
6,679
Purchases
5,257
5,572
6,018
6,620
Inventory
2,525
2,475
2,421
2,362
Accounts receivable
3,491
3,728
3,928
4,352
Accounts payable
1,913
2,102
2,311
2,539
Based on these results, what was this company's most likely strategy for
improving its oPErating activity during this PEriod?
A. Improve its inventory management.
B. Change its credit and collections policies with its customers.
C. Change the degree to which it uses trade credit from suppliers.
2. An analyst who is projecting a company's net income and cash flows is least
likely to assume a constant relationship between the company's sales and its:
A. interest exPEnses.
B. cost of goods sold.
C. noncash working capital.
3. Credit analysts are likely to consider a company's credit quality to be improving
if the company reduces its:
A. scale and diversification.
B. margin stability.
C. leverage.
4. Which of the following stock screens is most likely to identiFY stocks with high
earnings growth rates?
A. Dividend payout ratio greater than 30%.
B. Price to cash flow PEr share ratio less than 12.
C. Book value to market value ratio less than 25%.
5. An analyst needs to compare the financial statements of Firm X and Firm Y.
Which of the following differences in the two firms' financial reporting is least
likely to require the analyst to make an adjustment?
Firm X
A. Straight-line depreciation
B. Direct method cash flows
C. IFRS financial reporting
Firm Y
Accelerated depreciation
Indirect method cash flows
U.S. GAAP financial reporting
6. When comparing a firm that uses LIFO inventory accounting to firms that use
FIFO, an analyst should:
A. subtract the LIFO reserve from cost of sales.
B. add the change in the LIFO reserve to inventories.
C. subtract the change in the LIFO reserve from cost of sales.
7. The ratio of a firm's proPErty, plant, and equipment, net of accumulated
depreciation, to its annual depreciation exPEnse is best interpreted as an
estimate of the:
A. average age of the firm's assets.
B. average useful life of the firm's assets.
C. remaining useful life of the firm's assets.
8. How should an analyst most appropriately adjust the financial statements of a
firm that uses oPErating leases to finance its plant and equipment?
A. Increase liabilities.
B. Decrease long-lived assets.
C. Decrease shareholders' equity.
For more questions related to this topic review, log in to your Schweser online account
and launch SchweserPro(tm) QBank; and for video instruction covering each LOS in this
topic review, log in to your Schweser online account and launch the OnDemand video
lectures, if you have purchased these products.
ANSWERS - CONCEPT CHECKERS
1. The table below shows selected data from a company's financial statements.
20X6
20X7
20X8
20X9
Sales
COGS
8,614
9,217
9,862
10,553
5,304
5,622
6,072
6,679
Purchases
5,257
5,572
6,018
6,620
Inventory
2,525
2,475
2,421
2,362
Accounts receivable
3,491
3,728
3,928
4,352
Accounts payable
1,913
2,102
2,311
2,539
Based on these results, what was this company's most likely strategy for
improving its oPErating activity during this PEriod?
A. Improve its inventory management.
B. Change its credit and collections policies with its customers.
C. Change the degree to which it uses trade credit from suppliers.
To analyze this company's oPErating strategy, calculate its activity ratios:
20X7
20X8
20X9
Inventory turnover
2.25
2.48
2.79
Receivables turnover
2.55
2.58
2.55
Payables turnover
2.78
2.73
2.73
Days of inventory on hand
162
147
131
Days of sales outstanding
143
142
143
Number of days of payables
132
134
134
The ratios that have changed most significantly are the ones related to
inventory. Receivables and payables PErformance has remained steady,
suggesting no change in the company's use of supplier credit or extension of
customer credit.
2. An analyst who is projecting a company's net income and cash flows is least
likely to assume a constant relationship between the company's sales and its:
A. interest exPEnses.
B. cost of goods sold.
C. noncash working capital.
Projections of net income and cash flows are typically based on assumptions
that cost of goods sold, oPErating exPEnses, and noncash working capital
remain a constant PErcentage of sales. The projections then show whether
additional borrowing is needed during the forecast PEriod. If so, the analyst will
adjust the interest exPEnse to reflect the additional debt.
3. Credit analysts are likely to consider a company's credit quality to be improving
if the company reduces its:
A. scale and diversification.
B. margin stability.
C. leverage.
Lower leverage improves a company's creditworthiness. Larger scale, more
diversification, higher oPErating efficiency, and more stable margins also tend
to indicate better credit quality.
4. Which of the following stock screens is most likely to identiFY stocks with high
earnings growth rates?
A. Dividend payout ratio greater than 30%.
B. Price to cash flow PEr share ratio less than 12.
C. Book value to market value ratio less than 25%.
Firms with high growth rates will tend to have high market values relative to
the book value of their equity. Low price to cash flow ratios would tend to
identiFY value stocks rather than growth stocks. Screening for high dividend
payout ratios would tend to identiFY mature firms with relatively few growth
opportunities.
5. An analyst needs to compare the financial statements of Firm X and Firm Y.
Which of the following differences in the two firms' financial reporting is least
likely to require the analyst to make an adjustment?
Firm X
A. Straight-line depreciation
B. Direct method cash flows
C. IFRS financial reporting
Firm Y
Accelerated depreciation
Indirect method cash flows
U.S. GAAP financial reporting
Cash flows are the same under either method. Differences in depreciation
methods and IFRS versus U.S. GAAP reporting can require an analyst to adjust
financial statements to make them comparable.
6. When comparing a firm that uses LIFO inventory accounting to firms that use
FIFO, an analyst should:
A. subtract the LIFO reserve from cost of sales.
B. add the change in the LIFO reserve to inventories.
C. subtract the change in the LIFO reserve from cost of sales.
To adjust LIFO financial statement data to a FIFO basis, add the LIFO reserve to
inventories on the balance sheet and subtract the change in the LIFO reserve
from cost of sales on the income statement. Remember that the balance sheet
is cumulative (use the full LIFO reserve) while the income statement refers to
the most recent PEriod (use the change for the PEriod in the LIFO reserve).
7. The ratio of a firm's proPErty, plant, and equipment, net of accumulated
depreciation, to its annual depreciation exPEnse is best interpreted as an
estimate of the:
A. average age of the firm's assets.
B. average useful life of the firm's assets.
C. remaining useful life of the firm's assets.
Remaining useful life = net PP&E / depreciation exPEnse.
Average age of assets = accumulated depreciation / depreciation exPEnse.
Average useful life = gross PP&E / depreciation exPEnse.
8. How should an analyst most appropriately adjust the financial statements of a
firm that uses oPErating leases to finance its plant and equipment?
A. Increase liabilities.
B. Decrease long-lived assets.
C. Decrease shareholders' equity.
The appropriate adjustment for oPErating leases is to treat them as if they
were capital leases by estimating the present value of the future lease
obligations and adding that value to the firm's liabilities and long-lived assets.
SELF-TEST ASSESSMENT: FINANCIAL REPORTING AND ANALYSIS
You have now finished the Financial Reporting and Analysis topic SECtion. The following
Self-Test Assessment provides immediate feedback on how effective your study has
been for this material. The number of questions on this test is equal to the number of
questions for the topic on one-half of the actual Level I CFA exam. Questions are more
exam-like than typical Concept Checkers or QBank questions; a score of less than 70%
indicates that your study likely needs improvement. These tests are best taken timed;
allow 1.5 minutes PEr question.
After you've completed this Self-Test, you may additionally log in to your Schweser.com
online account and enter your answers in the Self-Test Assessments product. Select
"PErformance Tracker" to view a breakdown of your score. Select "Compare with
Others" to display how your score on the Self-Test compares to the scores of others
who entered their answers.
1. The fundamental qualitative characteristics of financial statements as
described by the IASB conceptual framework least likely include:
A. relevance.
B. reliability.
C. faithful representation.
2. A decrease in a firm's inventory turnover ratio is most likely to result from:
A. a write-down of inventory.
B. goods in inventory becoming obsolete.
C. decreasing purchases in a PEriod of stable sales.
3. Two firms are identical except that the fIRSt pays higher interest charges and
lower dividends, while the SECond pays higher dividends and lower interest
charges. Both prepare their financial statements under U.S. GAAP. Compared
to the fIRSt, the SECond will have cash flow from financing (CFF) and earnings
PEr share (EPS) that are:
CFF
A. The same
B. Lower
C. Lower
EPS
Higher
Higher
The same
4. Which of the following is an analyst least likely to be able to find on or calculate
from either a common-size income statement or a common-size balance
sheet?
A. Inventory turnover.
B. OPErating profit margin.
C. Debt-to-equity ratio.
5. If a firm's inventory turnover and number of days of payables both increase,
the effect on a firm's cash conversion cycle is:
A. to shorten it.
B. to lengthen it.
C. uncertain.
6. The following information is summarized from Famous, Inc.'s financial
statements for the year, which ended December 31, 20X0:
Sales were $800,000.
Net profit margin was 20%.
Sales to assets was 50%.
Equity multiplier wass 1.6.
Interest exPEnse was $30,000.
Dividends declared were $32,000.
Famous, Inc.'s sustainable growth rate based on results from this PEriod is
closest to:
A. 3.2%.
B. 8.0%.
C. 12.8%.
7. On January 1, Orange Computers issued employee stock options for 400,000
shares. Options on 200,000 shares have an exercise price of $18, and options
on the other 200,000 shares have an exercise price of $22. The year-end stock
price was $24, and the average stock price over the year was $20. The change
in the number of shares used to calculate diluted earnings PEr share for the
year due to these options is closest to:
A. 20,000 shares.
B. 67,000 shares.
C. 100,000 shares.
8. A snowmobile manufacturer that uses LIFO begins the year with an inventory
of 3,000 snowmobiles, at a carrying cost of $4,000 each. In January, the
company sells 2,000 snowmobiles at a price of $10,000 each. In July, the
company adds 4,000 snowmobiles to inventory at a cost of $5,000 each.
Compared to using a PErPEtual inventory system, using a PEriodic system for
the firm's annual financial statements would:
A. increase COGS by $2,000,000.
B. leave ending inventory unchanged.
C. decrease gross profit by $4,000,000.
9. Which of the following is least likely to result in low-quality financial
statements?
A. Unsustainable cash flows.
B. Activities that manage earnings.
C. Conservative accounting choices.
10. Train Company paid $8,000,000 to acquire a franchise at the beginning of 20X5
that was exPEnsed in 20X5. If Train had elected to capitalize the franchise as an
intangible asset and amortize the cost of the franchise over eight years, what
effect would this decision have on Train's 20X5 cash flow from oPErations
(CFO) and 20X6 debt-to-assets ratio?
A. Both would be higher with capitalization.
B. Both would be lower with capitalization.
C. One would be higher and one would be lower with capitalization.
11. Graphics, Inc. has a deferred tax asset of $4,000,000 on its books. As of
December 31, it is probable that $2,000,000 of the deferred tax asset's value
will never be realized because of the uncertainty about future income. Under
U.S. GAAP, Graphics, Inc. should:
A. reduce the deferred tax asset account by $2,000,000.
B. establish a valuation allowance of $2,000,000.
C. establish an offsetting deferred tax liability of $2,000,000.
12. Long-lived assets cease to be depreciated when the firm's management
decides to dispose of the assets by:
A. sale.
B. abandonment.
C. exchange for another asset.
13. If Lizard Inc., a lessee, treats a 5-year lease as a finance lease with straight-line
depreciation rather than as an oPErating lease:
A. it will have greater equity at lease inception.
B. its oPErating income will be less in the fIRSt year of the lease.
C. its CFO will be greater and CFF will be less in the SECond year of the
lease.
14. In the notes to its financial statements, Gilbert Company discloses a EUR400,000
reversal of an earlier write-down of inventory values, which increases this
inventory's carrying value to EUR2,000,000. It is most likely that:
A. the reasons for this reversal are also disclosed.
B. a gain of EUR400,000 apPEars on the income statement.
C. the net realizable value of this inventory is EUR2,000,000.
15. Taking an impairment charge due to a decrease in the value of a long-lived
depreciable asset is least likely, in the PEriod the impairment is recognized, to
reduce a firm's:
A. net income.
B. oPErating income.
C. taxes payable.
16. Under U.S. GAAP, firms are required to capitalize:
A. any asset with a useful economic life of more than 1 year.
B. interest paid on loans to finance construction of a long-lived asset.
C. research and development costs for a drug that will almost certainly
provide a revenue stream of 5 years or more.
17. If a firm's management wishes to use its discretion to increase oPErating cash
flows, it is most likely to:
A. capitalize an exPEnse.
B. decrease the allowance for uncollectible accounts.
C. change delivery terms from FOB destination to FOB shiPPIng point.
18. A firm that purchases a building that it intends to rent out for income would
report this asset as investment proPErty under:
A. U.S. GAAP only.
B. IFRS only.
C. both U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
19. When a company redeems bonds before they mature, the gain or loss on debt
extinguishment is calculated as the bonds' carrying amount minus the:
A. face or par value of the bonds.
B. amount required to redeem the bonds.
C. amortized historical cost of the bonds.
20. Victory Corp. received interest income from tax-exempt bonds of $40,000 in
the year 20X0. Its statutory tax rate is 40%. The effect of this difference
between taxable and pre-tax income is most likely :
A. a decrease in its effective tax rate to below 40%.
B. an increase in its deferred tax asset of $16,000.
C. an increase in its deferred tax liability of $16,000.
21. Under a defined contribution PEnsion plan, which of the following is recognized
as a PEnsion exPEnse?
A. Actuarial gains and losses.
B. PEriodic contributions to the plan.
C. Service costs incurred during the PEriod.
22. Which of the following terms from the extended DuPont equation would an
analyst least likely be able to obtain, given only a company's common-size
income statement and common-size balance sheet? The company's:
A. EBIT margin.
B. asset turnover.
C. financial leverage.
23. An analyst is comparing two firms, one that reports under IFRS and one that
reports under U.S. GAAP. An analyst is least likely to do which of the following
to facilitate a comparison of the companies?
A. Add the LIFO reserve to inventory for a United States-based firm that
uses LIFO.
B. Add the present values of each firm's future minimum oPErating lease
payments to both assets and liabilities.
C. Adjust the income statement of one of the firms if both have significant
unrealized gains or losses from changes in the fair values of trading
SECurities.
24. An analyst wants to compare the cash flows of two United States companies,
one that reports cash flow using the direct method and one that reports it
using the indirect method. The analyst is most likely to:
A. convert the indirect statement to the direct method to compare the
firms' cash exPEnditures.
B. adjust the reported CFO of the firm that reports under the direct method
for depreciation and amortization exPEnse.
C. increase CFI for any dividends reported as investing cash flows by the
firm reporting cash flow by the direct method.
SELF-TEST ASSESSMENT ANSWERS: FINANCIAL REPORTING AND ANALYSIS
1. The fundamental qualitative characteristics of financial statements as
described by the IASB conceptual framework least likely include:
A. relevance.
B. reliability.
C. faithful representation.
The fundamental qualitative characteristics of financial statements according
to the IASB are relevance and faithful representation.
(Study Session 6, LOS 23.d)
2. A decrease in a firm's inventory turnover ratio is most likely to result from:
A. a write-down of inventory.
B. goods in inventory becoming obsolete.
C. decreasing purchases in a PEriod of stable sales.
Obsolescence can cause goods in inventory to remain unsold, which tends to
reduce the inventory turnover ratio (COGS / average inventory). Write-downs
of inventory increase the inventory turnover ratio by decreasing the
denominator. If purchases decrease while sales remain stable, inventory
decreases, which increases the inventory turnover ratio.
(Study Session 7, LOS 27.b)
3. Two firms are identical except that the fIRSt pays higher interest charges and
lower dividends, while the SECond pays higher dividends and lower interest
charges. Both prepare their financial statements under U.S. GAAP. Compared
to the fIRSt, the SECond will have cash flow from financing (CFF) and earnings
PEr share (EPS) that are:
CFF
A. The same
B. Lower
C. Lower
EPS
Higher
Higher
The same
Interest paid is an oPErating cash flow, and dividends paid are a financing cash
flow, so the firm that pays higher dividends will have lower CFF. The firm with
lower interest exPEnse will have higher EPS.
(Study Session 7, LOS 26.e)
4. Which of the following is an analyst least likely to be able to find on or
calculate from either a common-size income statement or a common-size
balance sheet?
A. Inventory turnover.
B. OPErating profit margin.
C. Debt-to-equity ratio.
Inventory turnover involves sales (from the income statement) and average
inventory (from the balance sheet), so it cannot be calculated from commonsize statements. Debt to equity is debt/assets divided by equity/assets.
OPErating profits/sales can be read directly from the common-size income
statement.
(Study Session 7, LOS 27.a)
5. If a firm's inventory turnover and number of days of payables both increase,
the effect on a firm's cash conversion cycle is:
A. to shorten it.
B. to lengthen it.
C. uncertain.
Cash conversion cycle = collection PEriod + inventory PEriod - payables
PEriod.
An increase in inventory turnover will decrease the inventory PEriod and
shorten the cash conversion cycle. An increase in the payables PEriod will also
shorten the cash conversion cycle.
(Study Session 7, LOS 27.b)
6. The following information is summarized from Famous, Inc.'s financial
statements for the year, which ended December 31, 20X0:
Sales were $800,000.
Net profit margin was 20%.
Sales to assets was 50%.
Equity multiplier wass 1.6.
Interest exPEnse was $30,000.
Dividends declared were $32,000.
Famous, Inc.'s sustainable growth rate based on results from this PEriod is
closest to:
A. 3.2%.
B. 8.0%.
C. 12.8%.
Famous, Inc.'s sustainable growth rate = (retention rate)(ROE).
ROE = 0.20(800,000) / [(800,000 / 0.5)(1 / 1.6)] = 160,000 / 1,000,000 = 16%.
Alternatively:
ROE = (0.20)(0.50)(1.6) = 0.16 = 16%
Retention rate = (1 - dividend payout ratio) = 1 - {32,000 / [(0.20)(800,000)]} =
0.80.
Sustainable growth = 0.80 (16%) = 12.8%.
(Study Session 6, LOS 27.e)
7. On January 1, Orange Computers issued employee stock options for 400,000
shares. Options on 200,000 shares have an exercise price of $18, and options
on the other 200,000 shares have an exercise price of $22. The year-end stock
price was $24, and the average stock price over the year was $20. The change
in the number of shares used to calculate diluted earnings PEr share for the
year due to these options is closest to:
A. 20,000 shares.
B. 67,000 shares.
C. 100,000 shares.
Based on the average stock price, only the options at 18 are in the money (and
therefore dilutive). Using the treasury stock method, the average shares
outstanding for calculating diluted EPS would increase by [(20 - 18) / 20]
200,000 = 20,000 shares.
(Study Session 7, LOS 24.h)
8. A snowmobile manufacturer that uses LIFO begins the year with an inventory
of 3,000 snowmobiles, at a carrying cost of $4,000 each. In January, the
company sells 2,000 snowmobiles at a price of $10,000 each. In July, the
company adds 4,000 snowmobiles to inventory at a cost of $5,000 each.
Compared to using a PErPEtual inventory system, using a PEriodic system for
the firm's annual financial statements would:
A. increase COGS by $2,000,000.
B. leave ending inventory unchanged.
C. decrease gross profit by $4,000,000.
Under a PErPEtual inventory system, the snowmobiles sold in January are
associated with the $4,000 cost of the beginning inventory. Cost of sales is
$8,000,000, gross profit is $12,000,000, and end-of-year inventory is
$24,000,000. Under a PEriodic inventory system, the snowmobiles sold in
January would be associated with the $5,000 cost of the snowmobiles
manufactured in July. Cost of sales would be higher by $2,000,000, gross
profit would be lower by $2,000,000, and ending inventory would be lower by
$2,000,000.
(Study Session 8, LOS 28.c)
9. Which of the following is least likely to result in low-quality financial
statements?
A. Unsustainable cash flows.
B. Activities that manage earnings.
C. Conservative accounting choices.
Even if earnings or cash flows are unsustainable (i.e., low quality), the firm's
financial statements can still be high quality. Conservative accounting choices
are considered to be biased compared to the ideal of neutral accounting
choices. Earnings management is viewed as reducing the quality of a firm's
financial statements.
(Study Session 9, LOS 32.a)
10. Train Company paid $8,000,000 to acquire a franchise at the beginning of
20X5 that was exPEnsed in 20X5. If Train had elected to capitalize the
franchise as an intangible asset and amortize the cost of the franchise over
eight years, what effect would this decision have on Train's 20X5 cash flow
from oPErations (CFO) and 20X6 debt-to-assets ratio?
A. Both would be higher with capitalization.
B. Both would be lower with capitalization.
C. One would be higher and one would be lower with capitalization.
If the cost were amortized rather than exPEnsed, the $8 million cost of the
franchise would be classified as an investing cash flow rather than an
oPErating cash flow, so CFO would increase (and CFI decrease). The asset
created by capitalizing the cost would increase assets, so the debt-to-assets
ratio would decrease.
(Study Session 8, LOS 29.c)
11. Graphics, Inc. has a deferred tax asset of $4,000,000 on its books. As of
December 31, it is probable that $2,000,000 of the deferred tax asset's value
will never be realized because of the uncertainty about future income. Under
U.S. GAAP, Graphics, Inc. should:
A. reduce the deferred tax asset account by $2,000,000.
B. establish a valuation allowance of $2,000,000.
C. establish an offsetting deferred tax liability of $2,000,000.
If it becomes probable that a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be
realized, a valuation allowance should be established. A valuation allowance
serves to reduce the value of a deferred tax asset for the probability that it
will not be realized (the difference between tax payable and income tax
exPEnse will not reverse in future PEriods).
(Study Session 8, LOS 30.g)
12. Long-lived assets cease to be depreciated when the firm's management
decides to dispose of the assets by:
A. sale.
B. abandonment.
C. exchange for another asset.
Under both IFRS and U.S. GAAP, long-lived assets that are reclassified as held
for sale cease to be depreciated. Long-lived assets that are to be abandoned
or exchanged are classified as held for use until disposal and continue to be
depreciated.
(Study Session 8, LOS 29.j)
13. If Lizard Inc., a lessee, treats a 5-year lease as a finance lease with straight-line
depreciation rather than as an oPErating lease:
A. it will have greater equity at lease inception.
B. its oPErating income will be less in the fIRSt year of the lease.
C. its CFO will be greater and CFF will be less in the SECond year of the
lease.
With a finance lease, only the interest portion of the lease payment is
classified as CFO, so CFO will be greater than it would be with an equivalent
oPErating lease. CFF will be less for a finance lease because the principal
portion of each lease payment is classified as a financing cash outflow.
OPErating income (EBIT) will be reduced only by the (equal) annual
depreciation exPEnse with a finance lease, so oPErating income will be greater
for a finance lease than for an oPErating lease (for which the entire lease
payment will be an oPErating exPEnse). At inception, a finance lease will
increase assets and liabilities by the same amount so there is no effect on
equity.
(Study Session 8, LOS 31.g)
14. In the notes to its financial statements, Gilbert Company discloses a EUR400,000
reversal of an earlier write-down of inventory values, which increases this
inventory's carrying value to EUR2,000,000. It is most likely that:
A. the reasons for this reversal are also disclosed.
B. a gain of EUR400,000 apPEars on the income statement.
C. the net realizable value of this inventory is EUR2,000,000.
Required disclosures related to inventories under IFRS include the amount of
any reversal of previous write-downs and the circumstances that led to the
reversal. Under IFRS, the reversal of an inventory write-down is not
recognized as a gain, but instead as a reduction in the cost of sales for the
PEriod. From only the information given, we cannot conclude that the net
realizable value of the inventory is EUR2,000,000. This value may be the original
cost of the inventory.
(Study Session 8, LOS 28.i)
15. Taking an impairment charge due to a decrease in the value of a long-lived
depreciable asset is least likely, in the PEriod the impairment is recognized, to
reduce a firm's:
A. net income.
B. oPErating income.
C. taxes payable.
Impairment charges reduce oPErating income and net income in the PEriod of
the charge. Taxes are not affected because any loss in asset value will reduce
taxes only when the asset is disposed of and the loss is actually realized. The
debt-to-equity ratio increases in the PEriod of the charge because equity is
reduced.
(Study Session 8, LOS 29.i)
16. Under U.S. GAAP, firms are required to capitalize:
A. any asset with a useful economic life of more than 1 year.
B. interest paid on loans to finance construction of a long-lived asset.
C. research and development costs for a drug that will almost certainly
provide a revenue stream of 5 years or more.
Interest on loans that sPEcifically fund construction of long-lived assets must
be capitalized under U.S. GAAP. Assets of insignificant value (e.g., metal waste
basket) are typically exPEnsed even when their useful lives are many years.
R&D costs are exPEnsed under U.S. GAAP.
(Study Session 8, LOS 29.a)
17. If a firm's management wishes to use its discretion to increase oPErating cash
flows, it is most likely to:
A. capitalize an exPEnse.
B. decrease the allowance for uncollectible accounts.
C. change delivery terms from FOB destination to FOB shiPPIng point.
By capitalizing a purchase instead of recognizing it as an exPEnse in the
current PEriod, a firm increases oPErating cash flow by classiFYing the cash
outflow as CFI rather than CFO. Decreasing the allowance for uncollectible
accounts or changing delivery terms for shipments from FOB destination to
FOB shiPPIng point would increase earnings but would not affect oPErating
cash flows.
(Study Session 9, LOS 32.h)
18. A firm that purchases a building that it intends to rent out for income would
report this asset as investment proPErty under:
A. U.S. GAAP only.
B. IFRS only.
C. both U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
Under IFRS, the building is classified as investment proPErty. U.S. GAAP does
not distinguish investment proPErty from other tyPEs of long-lived assets.
(Study Session 8, LOS 29.n)
19. When a company redeems bonds before they mature, the gain or loss on debt
extinguishment is calculated as the bonds' carrying amount minus the:
A. face or par value of the bonds.
B. amount required to redeem the bonds.
C. amortized historical cost of the bonds.
Under IFRS, when a company redeems bonds before they mature, the
company records a gain or loss equal to the bonds' carrying amount minus the
cash amount required to redeem the bonds.
(Study Session 8, LOS 31.c)
20. Victory Corp. received interest income from tax-exempt bonds of $40,000 in
the year 20X0. Its statutory tax rate is 40%. The effect of this difference
between taxable and pre-tax income is most likely :
A. a decrease in its effective tax rate to below 40%.
B. an increase in its deferred tax asset of $16,000.
C. an increase in its deferred tax liability of $16,000.
The receipt of the tax-exempt interest income will create a PErmanent
difference between pretax income and taxable income. Since the tax-free
interest increases pre-tax income, but not income tax exPEnse, the effective
tax rate will be less than 40%. No deferred tax liability is created because the
difference between pretax and taxable income will never reverse.
(Study Session 8, LOS 30.f)
21. Under a defined contribution PEnsion plan, which of the following is
recognized as a PEnsion exPEnse?
A. Actuarial gains and losses.
B. PEriodic contributions to the plan.
C. Service costs incurred during the PEriod.
Under a defined contribution PEnsion plan, a company's only PEnsion
exPEnses are the predetermined contributions required to be made to the
plan for the PEriod.
(Study Session 8, LOS 31.j)
22. Which of the following terms from the extended DuPont equation would an
analyst least likely be able to obtain, given only a company's common-size
income statement and common-size balance sheet? The company's:
A. EBIT margin.
B. asset turnover.
C. financial leverage.
Asset turnover--revenue/assets --requires an item from the income
statement and an item from the balance sheet, so this ratio cannot be
obtained from the common-size statements. The EBIT margin--EBIT/revenue
(or sales)--would be on a common-size income statement. Financial leverage
--assets/equity--is the reciprocal of equity/assets, which would be shown on
a common-size balance sheet.
(Study Session 7, LOS 24.j, 25.g, 27.d)
23. An analyst is comparing two firms, one that reports under IFRS and one that
reports under U.S. GAAP. An analyst is least likely to do which of the following
to facilitate a comparison of the companies?
A. Add the LIFO reserve to inventory for a United States-based firm that
uses LIFO.
B. Add the present values of each firm's future minimum oPErating lease
payments to both assets and liabilities.
C. Adjust the income statement of one of the firms if both have
significant unrealized gains or losses from changes in the fair values of
trading SECurities.
Unrealized gains and losses on trading SECurities are reported in the income
statement under both U.S. and IFRS standards. Since LIFO is not PErmitted
under IFRS, adjusting the inventory amount for a LIFO firm is a likely
adjustment. To account for differences in how companies report leases,
adding the present value of future minimum oPErating lease payments to
both the assets and liabilities of a firm will remove the effects of lease
reporting methods from solvency and leverage ratios.
(Study Session 9, LOS 33.e)
24. An analyst wants to compare the cash flows of two United States companies,
one that reports cash flow using the direct method and one that reports it
using the indirect method. The analyst is most likely to:
A. convert the indirect statement to the direct method to compare the
firms' cash exPEnditures.
B. adjust the reported CFO of the firm that reports under the direct
method for depreciation and amortization exPEnse.
C. increase CFI for any dividends reported as investing cash flows by the
firm reporting cash flow by the direct method.
By converting a cash flow statement to the direct method, an analyst can view
cash exPEnses and receipts by category, which will facilitate a comparison of
two firms' cash outlays and receipts. CFO is correct under either method and
requires no adjustment. Neither dividends received nor dividends paid are
classified as CFI under U.S. GAAP.