FINANCIAL ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES
This topic review presents a "tool box" for an analyst. It would be nice if you could
calculate all these ratios, but it is imPErative that you understand what firm
characteristic each one is measuring, and even more important, that you know
whether a higher or lower ratio is better in each instance. Different analysts calculate
some ratios differently. It would be helpful if analysts were always careful to
distinguish between total liabilities, total interest-bearing debt, long-term debt, and
creditor and trade debt, but they do not. Some analysts routinely add deferred tax
liabilities to debt or exclude goodwill when calculating assets and equity; others do
not. Statistical reporting services almost always disclose how each of the ratios they
present was calculated. So do not get too tied up in the details of each ratio, but
understand what each one represents and what factors would likely lead to significant
changes in a particular ratio. The DuPont formulas have been with us a long time and
were in the curriculum when I took the exams back in the 1980s. Decomposing ROE
into its components is an important analytic technique and it should definitely be in
your tool box.
uses and limitations.
Various tools and techniques are used to convert financial statement data into formats
that facilitate analysis. These include ratio analysis, common-size analysis, graphical
analysis, and regression analysis.
Ratio Analysis
Ratios are useful tools for expressing relationships among data that can be used for
internal comparisons and comparisons across firms. They are often most useful in
identiFYing questions that need to be answered, rather than answering questions
directly. SPEcifically, ratios can be used to do the following:
Project future earnings and cash flow.
Evaluate a firm's flexibility (the ability to grow and meet obligations even when
unexPEcted circumstances arise).
Assess management's PErformance.
Evaluate changes in the firm and industry over time.
Compare the firm with industry comPEtitors.
Analysts must also be aware of the limitations of ratios, including the following:
Financial ratios are not useful when viewed in isolation. They are only
informative when compared to those of other firms or to the company's
historical PErformance.
Comparisons with other companies are made more difficult by different
accounting treatments. This is particularly important when comparing U.S. firms
to non-U.S. firms.
It is difficult to find comparable industry ratios when analyzing companies that
oPErate in multiple industries.
Conclusions cannot be made by calculating a single ratio. All ratios must be
viewed relative to one another.
Determining the target or comparison value for a ratio is difficult, requiring
some range of acceptable values.
It is important to understand that the definitions of ratios can vary widely among the
analytical community. For example, some analysts use all liabilities when measuring
leverage, while other analysts only use interest-bearing obligations. Consistency is
paramount. Analysts must also understand that reasonable values of ratios can differ
among industries.
Common-Size Analysis
Common-size statements normalize balance sheets and income statements and allow
the analyst to more easily compare PErformance across firms and for a single firm over
time.
A vertical common-size balance sheet expresses all balance sheet accounts as a
PErcentage of total assets.
A vertical common-size income statement expresses all income statement items
as a PErcentage of sales.
In addition to comparisons of financial data across firms and time, common-size
analysis is appropriate for quickly viewing certain financial ratios. For example, the
gross profit margin, oPErating profit margin, and net profit margin are all clearly
indicated within a common-size income statement. Vertical common-size income
statement ratios are esPEcially useful for studying trends in costs and profit margins.
vertical common-size income statement ratios =
Balance sheet accounts can also be converted to common-size ratios by dividing each
balance sheet item by total assets.
vertical common-size balance-sheet ratios =
Example: Constructing common-size statements
The common-size statements in Figure 1 show balance sheet items as PErcentages of assets, and income
statement items as PErcentages of sales.
You can convert all asset and liability amounts to their actual values by multiplying the
PErcentages listed below by their total assets of $57,100; $55,798; and $52,071, resPEctively for
20X6, 20X5, and 20X4 (data is USD millions).
Also, all income statement items can be converted to their actual values by multiplying the given
PErcentages by total sales, which were $29,723; $29,234; and $22,922, resPEctively, for 20X6,
20X5, and 20X4.
Figure 1: Vertical Common-Size Balance Sheet and Income Statement
Balance Sheet, fiscal year-end
20X6
20X5
20X4
Assets
Cash & cash equivalents
0.38%
0.29%
0.37%
Accounts receivable
5.46%
5.61%
6.20%
Inventories
5.92%
5.42%
5.84%
Deferred income taxes
0.89%
0.84%
0.97%
Other current assets
0.41%
0.40%
0.36%
Total current assets
13.06%
12.56%
13.74%
Gross fixed assets
25.31%
23.79%
25.05%
Accumulated depreciation
8.57%
7.46%
6.98%
Net gross fixed assets
16.74%
16.32%
18.06%
Other long-term assets
70.20%
71.12%
68.20%
Total assets
Liabilities
100.00% 100.00% 100.00%
Accounts payable
3.40%
3.40%
3.79%
Short-term debt
1.00%
2.19%
1.65%
Other current liabilities
8.16%
10.32%
9.14%
Total current liabilities
12.56%
15.91%
14.58%
Long-term debt
18.24%
14.58%
5.18%
Other long-term liabilities
23.96%
27.44%
53.27%
Total liabilities
54.76%
57.92%
73.02%
Preferred equity
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Common equity
45.24%
42.08%
26.98%
Total liabilities & equity
100.00% 100.00% 100.00%
Income Statement, fiscal year
20X6
20X5
20X4
Revenues
100.00% 100.00% 100.00%
Cost of goods sold
59.62%
60.09%
60.90%
Gross profit
40.38%
39.91%
39.10%
Selling, general & administrative
16.82%
17.34%
17.84%
Depreciation
Amortization
2.39%
2.33%
2.18%
0.02%
3.29%
2.33%
Other oPErating exPEnses
0.58%
0.25%
-0.75%
OPErating income
20.57%
16.71%
17.50%
Interest and other debt exPEnse
2.85%
4.92%
2.60%
Income before taxes
17.72%
11.79%
14.90%
Provision for income taxes
6.30%
5.35%
6.17%
Net income
11.42%
6.44%
8.73%
Even a cursory insPEction of the income statement in Figure 1 can be quite instructive.
Beginning at the bottom, we can see that the profitability of the company has
increased nicely in 20X6 after falling slightly in 20X5. We can examine the 20X6 income
statement values to find the source of this greatly improved profitability. Cost of goods
sold seems to be stable, with an improvement (decrease) in 20X6 of only 0.48%. SG&A
was down approximately one-half PErcent as well.
These improvements from (relative) cost reduction, however, only begin to explain the
5% increase in the net profit margin for 20X6. Improvements in two items,
"amortization" and "interest and other debt exPEnse," apPEar to be the most
significant factors in the firm's improved profitability in 20X6. Clearly the analyst must
investigate further in both areas to learn whether these improvements represent
PErmanent improvements or whether these items can be exPEcted to return to
previous PErcentage-of-sales levels in the future.
We can also note that interest exPEnse as a PErcentage of sales was approximately the
same in 20X4 and 20X6. We must investigate the reasons for the higher interest costs
in 20X5 to determine whether the current level of 2.85% can be exPEcted to continue
into the next PEriod. In addition, more than 3% of the 5% increase in net profit margin
in 20X6 is due to a decrease in amortization exPEnse. Since this is a noncash exPEnse,
the decrease may have no implications for cash flows looking forward.
This discussion should make clear that common-size analysis doesn't tell an analyst the
whole story about this company, but can certainly point the analyst in the right
direction to find out the circumstances that led to the increase in the net profit margin
and to determine the effects, if any, on firm cash flow going forward.
Another way to present financial statement data that is quite useful when analyzing
trends over time is a horizontal common-size balance sheet or income statement. The
divisor here is the fIRSt-year values, so they are all standardized to 1.0 by construction.
Figure 2 illustrates this appROAch.
Figure 2: Horizontal Common-Size Balance Sheet Data
20X4
20X5
20X6
Inventory
1.0
1.1
1.4
Cash and marketable SECurities
1.0
1.3
1.2
Long-term debt
1.0
1.6
1.8
PP&E (net of depreciation)
1.0
0.9
0.8
Trends in the values of these items, as well as the relative growth in these items, are
readily apparent from a horizontal common-size balance sheet.
Professor's Note: We have presented data in Figure 1 with information for the most recent PEriod
on the left, and in Figure 2 we have presented the historical values from left to right. Both
presentation methods are common, and on the exam you should pay sPEcial attention to which
method is used in the data presented for any question.
We can view the values in the common-size financial statements as ratios. Net income
is shown on the common-size income statement as net income/revenues, which is the
net profit margin, and tells the analyst the PErcentage of each dollar of sales that
remains for shareholders after all exPEnses related to the generation of those sales are
deducted. One measure of financial leverage, long-term debt to total assets, can be
read directly from the vertical common-size financial statements. SPEcific ratios
commonly used in financial analysis and interpretation of their values are covered in
detail in this review.
Graphical Analysis
Graphs can be used to visually present PErformance comparisons and composition of
financial statement elements over time.
A stacked column graph (also called a stacked bar graph) shows the changes in items
from year to year in graphical form. Figure 3 presents such data for a hypothetical
corporation.
Another alternative for graphic presentation of data is a line graph. Figure 4 presents
the same data as Figure 3, but as a line graph. The increase in trade payables and the
decrease in cash are evident in either format and would alert the analyst to potential
liquidity problems that require further investigation and analysis.
Regression Analysis
Regression analysis can be used to identiFY relationships between variables. The results
are often used for forecasting. For example, an analyst might use the relationship
between GDP and sales to prepare a sales forecast.
Financial ratios can be segregated into different classifications by the tyPE of
information about the company they provide. One such classification scheme is:
Activity ratios. This category includes several ratios also referred to asset
utilization or turnover ratios (e.g., inventory turnover, receivables turnover, and
total assets turnover). They often give indications of how well a firm utilizes
various assets such as inventory and fixed assets.
Liquidity ratios. Liquidity here refers to the ability to pay short-term obligations
as they come due.
Solvency ratios. Solvency ratios give the analyst information on the firm's
financial leverage and ability to meet its longer-term obligations.
Profitability ratios. Profitability ratios provide information on how well the
company generates oPErating profits and net profits from its sales.
Valuation ratios. Sales PEr share, earnings PEr share, and price to cash flow PEr
share are examples of ratios used in comparing the relative valuation of
companies.
Professor's Note: We examine valuation ratios in another LOS concerning equity analysis later in
this review, and in the Study Session on equity investments.
It should be noted that these categories are not mutually exclusive. An activity ratio
such as payables turnover may also provide information about the liquidity of a
company, for example. There is no one standard set of ratios for financial analysis.
Different analysts use different ratios and different calculation methods for similar
ratios. Some ratios are so commonly used that there is very little variation in how they
are defined and calculated. We will note some alternative treatments and alternative
terms for single ratios as we detail the commonly used ratios in each category.
Activity ratios (also known as asset utilization ratios or oPErating efficiency ratios)
measure how efficiently the firm is managing its assets.
A measure of accounts receivable turnover is receivables turnover:
Professor's Note: In most cases when a ratio compares a balance sheet account (such as
receivables) with an income or cash flow item (such as sales), the balance sheet item will be the
average of the account instead of simply the end-of-year balance. Averages are calculated by
adding the beginning-of-year account value to the end-of-year account value, then dividing the
sum by two.
It is considered desirable to have a receivables turnover figure close to the
industry norm.
The inverse of the receivables turnover times 365 is the average collection
PEriod, or days of sales outstanding, which is the average number of days it
takes for the company's customers to pay their bills:
It is considered desirable to have a collection PEriod (and receivables turnover)
close to the industry norm. The firm's credit terms are another important
benchmark used to interpret this ratio. A collection PEriod that is too high
might mean that customers are too slow in paying their bills, which means too
much capital is tied up in assets. A collection PEriod that is too low might
indicate that the firm's credit policy is too rigorous, which might be hamPEring
sales.
A measure of a firm's efficiency with resPEct to its processing and inventory
management is inventory turnover:
Professor's Note: Pay careful attention to the numerator in the turnover ratios. For inventory
turnover, be sure to use cost of goods sold, not sales.
The inverse of the inventory turnover times 365 is the average inventory
processing PEriod, number of days of inventory, or days of inventory on hand:
As is the case with accounts receivable, it is considered desirable to have days of
inventory on hand (and inventory turnover) close to the industry norm. A
processing PEriod that is too high might mean that too much capital is tied up in
inventory and could mean that the inventory is obsolete. A processing PEriod
that is too low might indicate that the firm has inadequate stock on hand, which
could hurt sales.
A measure of the use of trade credit by the firm is the payables turnover ratio:
Professor's Note: You can use the inventory equation to calculate purchases from the financial
statements. Purchases = ending inventory - beginning inventory + cost of goods sold.
The inverse of the payables turnover ratio multiplied by 365 is the payables
payment PEriod or number of days of payables, which is the average amount of
time it takes the company to pay its bills:
Professor's Note: We have shown days calculations for payables, receivables, and inventory based on
annual turnover and a 365-day year. If turnover ratios are for a quarter rather than a year, the number
of days in the quarter should be divided by the quarterly turnover ratios in order to get the "days"
form of these ratios.
The effectiveness of the firm's use of its total assets to create revenue is
measured by its total asset turnover:
Different tyPEs of industries might have considerably different turnover ratios.
Manufacturing businesses that are capital-intensive might have asset turnover
ratios near one, while retail businesses might have turnover ratios near 10. As
was the case with the current asset turnover ratios discussed previously, it is
desirable for the total asset turnover ratio to be close to the industry norm. Low
asset turnover ratios might mean that the company has too much capital tied
up in its asset base. A turnover ratio that is too high might imply that the firm
has too few assets for potential sales, or that the asset base is outdated.
The utilization of fixed assets is measured by the fixed asset turnover ratio:
As was the case with the total asset turnover ratio, it is desirable to have a fixed
asset turnover ratio close to the industry norm. Low fixed asset turnover might
mean that the company has too much capital tied up in its asset base or is using
the assets it has inefficiently. A turnover ratio that is too high might imply that
the firm has obsolete equipment, or at a minimum, that the firm will probably
have to incur capital exPEnditures in the near future to increase capacity to
support growing revenues. Since "net" here refers to net of accumulated
depreciation, firms with more recently acquired assets will typically have lower
fixed asset turnover ratios.
How effectively a company is using its working capital is measured by the
working capital turnover ratio:
Working capital (sometimes called net working capital) is current assets minus
current liabilities. The working capital turnover ratio gives us information about
the utilization of working capital in terms of dollars of sales PEr dollar of
working capital. Some firms may have very low working capital if outstanding
payables equal or exceed inventory and receivables. In this case the working
capital turnover ratio will be very large, may vary significantly from PEriod to
PEriod, and is less informative about changes in the firm's oPErating efficiency.
LIQUIDITY RATIOS
Liquidity ratios are employed by analysts to determine the firm's ability to pay its
short-term liabilities.
The current ratio is the best-known measure of liquidity:
The higher the current ratio, the more likely it is that the company will be able
to pay its short-term bills. A current ratio of less than one means that the
company has negative working capital and is probably facing a liquidity crisis.
Working capital equals current assets minus current liabilities.
The quick ratio is a more stringent measure of liquidity because it does not
include inventories and other assets that might not be very liquid:
The higher the quick ratio, the more likely it is that the company will be able to
pay its short-term bills. Marketable SECurities are short-term debt instruments,
typically liquid and of good credit quality.
The most conservative liquidity measure is the cash ratio:
The higher the cash ratio, the more likely it is that the company will be able to
pay its short-term bills.
The current, quick, and cash ratios differ only in the assumed liquidity of the
current assets that the analyst projects will be used to pay off current liabilities.
The defensive interval ratio is another measure of liquidity that indicates the
number of days of average cash exPEnditures the firm could pay with its current
liquid assets:
ExPEnditures here include cash exPEnses for costs of goods, SG&A, and research
and development. If these items are taken from the income statement, noncash
charges such as depreciation should be added back just as in the preparation of
a statement of cash flows by the indirect method.
The cash conversion cycle is the length of time it takes to turn the firm's cash
investment in inventory back into cash, in the form of collections from the sales
of that inventory. The cash conversion cycle is computed from days sales
outstanding, days of inventory on hand, and number of days of payables:
High cash conversion cycles are considered undesirable. A conversion cycle that
is too high implies that the company has an excessive amount of capital
investment in the sales process.
SOLVENCY RATIOS
Solvency ratios measure a firm's financial leverage and ability to meet its long-term
obligations. Solvency ratios include various debt ratios that are based on the balance
sheet and coverage ratios that are based on the income statement.
A measure of the firm's use of fixed-cost financing sources is the debt-to-equity
ratio:
Increases and decreases in this ratio suggest a greater or lesser reliance on debt
as a source of financing.
Total debt is calculated differently by different analysts and different providers
of financial information. Here, we will define it as long-term debt plus interestbearing short-term debt.
Some analysts include the present value of lease obligations and/or noninterest-bearing current liabilities, such as trade payables.
Another way of looking at the usage of debt is the debt-to-capital ratio:
Capital equals all short-term and long-term debt plus preferred stock and
equity. Increases and decreases in this ratio suggest a greater or lesser reliance
on debt as a source of financing.
A slightly different way of analyzing debt utilization is the debt-to-assets ratio:
Increases and decreases in this ratio suggest a greater or lesser reliance on debt
as a source of financing.
Another measure that is used as an indicator of a company's use of debt
financing is the financial leverage ratio (or leverage ratio):
Average here means the average of the values at the beginning and at the end
of the PEriod. Greater use of debt financing increases financial leverage and,
typically, risk to equity holders and bondholders alike.
The remaining risk ratios help determine the firm's ability to repay its debt
obligations. The fIRSt of these is the interest coverage ratio:
The lower this ratio, the more likely it is that the firm will have difficulty meeting
its debt payments.
A SECond ratio that is an indicator of a company's ability to meet its obligations
is the fixed charge coverage ratio:
Here, lease payments are added back to oPErating earnings in the numerator
and also added to interest payments in the denominator. Significant lease
obligations will reduce this ratio significantly compared to the interest coverage
ratio. Fixed charge coverage is the more meaningful measure for companies
that lease a large portion of their assets, such as some airlines.
Professor's Note: With all solvency ratios, the analyst must consider the variability of a firm's
cash flows when determining the reasonableness of the ratios. Firms with stable cash flows are
usually able to carry more debt.
PROFITABILITY RATIOS
Profitability ratios measure the overall PErformance of the firm relative to revenues,
assets, equity, and capital.
The net profit margin is the ratio of net income to revenue:
Analysts should be concerned if this ratio is too low. The net profit margin
should be based on net income from continuing oPErations, because analysts
should be primarily concerned about future exPEctations, and below-the-line
items such as discontinued oPErations will not affect the company in the future.
OPErating profitability ratios look at how good management is at turning their
efforts into profits. OPErating ratios compare the top of the income statement
(sales) to profits. The different ratios are designed to isolate sPEcific costs.
Know these terms:
gross profits = net sales - COGS
oPErating profits = earnings before interest and taxes = EBIT
net income = earnings after taxes but before dividends
total capital = long-term debt + short-term debt + common and preferred equity
total capital = total assets
Professor's Note: The difference between these two definitions of total capital is working capital
liabilities, such as accounts payable. Some analysts consider these liabilities a source of financing
for a firm and include them in total capital. Other analysts view total capital as the sum of a
firm's debt and equity.
How they relate in the income statement:
Net sales
Cost of goods sold
Gross profit
OPErating exPEnses
OPErating profit (EBIT)
Interest
Earnings before taxes (EBT)
Taxes
Earnings after taxes (EAT)
+/-
Below the line items adjusted for tax
Net income
Preferred dividends
Income available to common
The gross profit margin is the ratio of gross profit (sales less cost of goods sold)
to sales:
An analyst should be concerned if this ratio is too low. Gross profit can be
increased by raising prices or reducing costs. However, the ability to raise prices
may be limited by comPEtition.
The oPErating profit margin is the ratio of oPErating profit (gross profit less
selling, general, and administrative exPEnses) to sales. OPErating profit is also
referred to as earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT):
Strictly sPEaking, EBIT includes some nonoPErating items, such as gains on
investment. The analyst, as with other ratios with various formulations, must be
consistent in his calculation method and know how published ratios are
calculated. Analysts should be concerned if this ratio is too low. Some analysts
prefer to calculate the oPErating profit margin by adding back depreciation and
any amortization exPEnse to arrive at earnings before interest, taxes,
depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA).
Sometimes profitability is measured using earnings before tax (EBT), which can
be calculated by subtracting interest from EBIT or from oPErating earnings. The
pretax margin is calculated as:
Another set of profitability ratios measure profitability relative to funds
invested in the company by common stockholders, preferred stockholders, and
suppliers of debt financing. The fIRSt of these measures is the return on assets
(ROA). Typically, ROA is calculated using net income:
This measure is a bit misleading, however, because interest is excluded from
net income but total assets include debt as well as equity. Adding interest
adjusted for tax back to net income puts the returns to both equity and debt
holders in the numerator. The interest exPEnse that should be added back is
gross interest exPEnse, not net interest exPEnse (which is gross interest
exPEnse less interest income). This results in an alternative calculation for ROA:
A measure of return on assets that includes both taxes and interest in the
numerator is the oPErating return on assets:
The return on total capital (ROTC) is the ratio of net income before interest and
taxes to total capital:
Total capital includes short- and long-term debt, preferred equity, and common
equity. Analysts should be concerned if this ratio is too low.
An alternative method for computing ROTC is to include the present value of
oPErating leases on the balance sheet as a fixed asset and as a long-term
liability. This adjustment is esPEcially important for firms that are dePEndent on
oPErating leases as a major form of financing. Calculations related to leasing
will be discussed in the next Study Session.
The return on equity (ROE) is the ratio of net income to average total equity
(including preferred stock):
Analysts should be concerned if this ratio is too low. It is sometimes called
return on total equity.
A similar ratio to the return on equity is the return on common equity:
This ratio differs from the return on total equity in that it only measures the
accounting profits available to, and the capital invested by, common
stockholders, instead of common and preferred stockholders. That is why
preferred dividends are deducted from net income in the numerator. Analysts
should be concerned if this ratio is too low.
The return on common equity is often more thoroughly analyzed using the
DuPont decomposition, which is described later in this topic review.
Example: Using ratios to evaluate a company
A balance sheet and income statement for a hypothetical company are shown below for this year and the
previous year.
Using the company information provided, calculate the current year ratios. Discuss how these ratios
compare with the company's PErformance last year and with the industry's PErformance.
Sample Balance Sheet
Year
Assets
Cash and marketable SECurities
Receivables
Inventories
Total current assets
Current year
Previous year
$105
205
310
620
$95
195
290
580
Gross proPErty, plant, and equipment
1,800
$1,700
Accumulated depreciation
360
340
Net proPErty, plant, and equipment
1,440
1,360
Total assets
$2,060
$1,940
Liabilities
Payables
Short-term debt
Current portion of long-term debt
Current liabilities
Long-term debt
Deferred taxes
Common stock at par
Additional paid in capital
Retained earnings
$110
160
55
325
610
105
300
400
320
Common shareholders equity
1,020
$90
140
45
$275
$690
95
300
400
180
880
Total liabilities and equity
$2,060
$1,940
Sample Income Statement
Year
Current year
Sales
Cost of goods sold
Gross profit
OPErating exPEnses
OPErating profit
Interest exPEnse
Earnings before taxes
Taxes
Net income
Common dividends
Financial Ratio Template
Current ratio
Quick ratio
Days of sales outstanding
Inventory turnover
$4,000
3,000
1,000
650
350
50
300
100
200
60
Current Year
Last Year
Industry
2.1
1.1
1.5
0.9
18.9
18.0
10.7
12.0
2.3
2.4
Total asset turnover
Working capital turnover
Gross profit margin
Net profit margin
Return on total capital
Return on common equity
Debt-to-equity
Interest coverage
Answer:
current ratio =
14.5
11.8
27.4%
29.3%
5.8%
6.5%
21.1%
22.4%
24.1%
19.8%
99.4%
35.7%
5.9
9.2
The current ratio indicates lower liquidity levels when compared to last year and more liquidity
than the industry average.
quick ratio =
The quick ratio is lower than last year and is in line with the industry average.
DSO (days of sales outstanding) =
DSO =
The DSO is a bit lower relative to the company's past PErformance but slightly higher than the
industry average.
inventory turnover =
inventory turnover =
Inventory turnover is much lower than last year and the industry average. This suggests that
the company is not managing inventory efficiently and may have obsolete stock.
total asset turnover =
total asset turnover =
Total asset turnover is slightly lower than last year and the industry average.
working capital turnover =
beginning working capital = 580 - 275 = 305
ending working capital = 620 - 325 = 295
working capital turnover =
Working capital turnover is lower than last year, but still above the industry average.
gross profit margin =
gross profit margin =
The gross profit margin is lower than last year and much lower than the industry average.
net profit margin =
net profit margin =
The net profit margin is lower than last year and much lower than the industry average.
return on total capital =
beginning total capital = 140 + 45 + 690 + 880 = 1,755
ending total capital = 160 + 55 + 610 + 1,020 = 1,845
return on total capital =
The return on total capital is below last year and below the industry average. This suggests a
problem stemming from the low asset turnover and low profit margin.
return on common equity =
return on common equity =
The return on equity is lower than last year but better than the industry average. The reason it
is higher than the industry average is probably because of greater use of leverage.
debt-to-equity ratio =
debt-to-equity ratio =
Note that preferred equity would be included in the denominator if there were any, and that
we have included short-term debt and the current portion of long-term debt in calculating total
(interest-bearing) debt.
The debt-to-equity ratio is lower than last year but still much higher than the industry average.
This suggests the company is trying to get its debt level more in line with the industry.
interest coverage =
interest coverage =
The interest coverage is better than last year but still worse than the industry average. This,
along with the slip in profit margin and return on assets, might cause some concern.
The DuPont system of analysis is an appROAch that can be used to analyze return on
equity (ROE). It uses basic algebra to break down ROE into a function of different
ratios, so an analyst can see the impact of leverage, profit margins, and turnover on
shareholder returns. There are two variants of the DuPont system: The original threepart appROAch and the extended five-part system.
For the original appROAch, start with ROE defined as:
Average or year-end values for equity can be used. Multiplying ROE by
(revenue/revenue) and rearranging terms produces:
The fIRSt term is the profit margin, and the SECond term is the equity turnover:
We can expand this further by multiplying these terms by (assets/assets), and
rearranging terms:
The fIRSt term is still the profit margin, the SECond term is now asset turnover, and the
third term is a financial leverage ratio that will increase as the use of debt financing
increases:
Professor's Note: The leverage ratio is sometimes called the "equity multiplier."
This is the original DuPont equation. It is arguably the most important equation in ratio
analysis, since it breaks down a very important ratio (ROE) into three key components.
If ROE is relatively low, it must be that at least one of the following is true: The
company has a poor profit margin, the company has poor asset turnover, or the firm
has too little leverage.
Professor's Note: Often candidates get confused and think the DuPont method is a way to
calculate ROE. While you can calculate ROE given the components of either the original or
extended DuPont equations, this isn't necessary if you have the financial statements. If you have
net income and equity, you can calculate ROE. The DuPont method is a way to decompose ROE,
to better see what changes are driving the changes in ROE.
Example: Decomposition of ROE with original DuPont
Staret, Inc. has maintained a stable and relatively high ROE of approximately 18% over the last three
years. Use traditional DuPont analysis to decompose this ROE into its three components and comment on
trends in company PErformance.
Answer:
ROE 20X3: 21.5 / 119 =
20X4: 22.3 / 124 =
20X5: 21.9 / 126 =
18.1%
18.0%
17.4%
DuPont 20X3: 7.0% x 1.33 x 1.93
20X4: 6.4% x 1.21 x 2.34
20X5: 5.3% x 1.17 x 2.78
(some rounding in values)
While the ROE has dropPEd only slightly, both the total asset turnover and the net profit margin have
declined. The effects of declining net margins and turnover on ROE have been offset by a significant
increase in leverage. The analyst should be concerned about the net margin and determine the
combination of pricing pressure and/or increasing exPEnses that caused this. Note that the company has
become more risky due to increased debt financing.
Example: Computing ROE using original DuPont
A company has a net profit margin of 4%, asset turnover of 2.0, and a debt-to-assets ratio of 60%. What is
the ROE?
Answer:
Debt-to-assets = 60%, which means equity to assets is 40%; this implies assets to equity (the leverage
ratio) is 1 / 0.4 = 2.5
= (0.04)(2.00)(2.50) = 0.20, or 20%
The extended (5-way) DuPont equation takes the net profit margin and breaks it
down further.
Note that the fIRSt term in the 3-part DuPont equation, net profit margin, has been
decomposed into three terms:
We then have:
An increase in interest exPEnse as proportion of EBIT will increase the interest burden
(i.e., decrease the interest burden ratio). Increases in either the tax burden or the
interest burden (i.e., decreases in the ratios) will tend to decrease ROE.
EBIT in the SECond two expressions can be replaced by oPErating earnings. In this case,
we have the oPErating margin rather than the EBIT margin. The interest burden term
would then show the effects of nonoPErating income as well as the effect of interest
exPEnse.
Note that in general, high profit margins, leverage, and asset turnover will lead to high
levels of ROE. However, this version of the formula shows that more leverage does not
always lead to higher ROE. As leverage rises, so does the interest burden. Hence, the
positive effects of leverage can be offset by the higher interest payments that
accompany more debt. Note that higher taxes will always lead to lower levels of ROE.
An analyst has gathered data from two companies in the same industry. Calculation: 
Selected Income and Balance Sheet Data
Answer:
EBIT = EBIT / revenue
Company A: EBIT margin = 35 / 500 = 7.0%
Company B: EBIT margin = 100 / 900 = 11.1%
asset turnover = revenue / average assets
Company A: asset turnover = 500 / 250 = 2.0
Company B: asset turnover = 900 / 300 = 3.0
interest burden = EBT / EBIT
Company A: interest burden = 30 / 35 = 85.7%
Company B: interest burden = 100 / 100 = 1
financial leverage = average assets / average equity
Company A: financial leverage = 250 / 150 = 1.67
Company B: financial leverage = 300 / 250 = 1.2
tax burden = net income / EBT
Company A: tax burden = 20 / 30 = 66.7%
Company B: tax burden = 60 / 100 = 60.0%
Company A: ROE = 0.667 x 0.857 x 0.07 x 2.0 x 1.67 = 13.4%
Company B: ROE = 0.608 x 1.0 x 0.111 x 3.0 x 1.2 = 24%
Company B has a higher tax burden but a lower interest burden (a lower ratio indicates a higher burden).
Company B has better EBIT margins and better asset utilization (PErhaps management of inventory,
receivables, or payables, or a lower cost basis in its fixed assets due to their age), and less leverage. Its
higher EBIT margins and asset turnover are the main factors leading to its significantly higher ROE, which it
achieves with less leverage than Company A.
Valuation ratios are used in analysis for investment in common equity. The most
widely used valuation ratio is theprice-to-earnings (P/E) ratio, the ratio of the current
market price of a share of stock divided by the company's earnings PEr share. Related
measures based on price PEr share are the price-to-cash flow, the price-to-sales, and
the price-to-book value ratios.
Professor's Note: The use of the above valuation ratios is covered in the Study Session on equity
SECurities.
PEr-share valuation measures include earnings PEr share (EPS). Basic EPS is net income
available to common divided by the weighted average number of common shares
outstanding.
Diluted EPS is a "what if" value. It is calculated to be the lowest possible EPS that could
have been reported if all firm SECurities that can be converted into common stock, and
that would decrease basic EPS if they had been, were converted. That is, if all dilutive
SECurities had been converted. Potentially dilutive SECurities include convertible debt
and convertible preferred stock, as well as options and warrants issued by the
company. The numerator of diluted EPS is increased by the after-tax interest savings
on any dilutive debt SECurities and by the dividends on any dilutive convertible
preferred stock. The denominator is increased by the common shares that would result
from conversion or exchange of dilutive SECurities into common shares.
Professor's Note: Refer back to our topic review of Understanding Income Statements for details
and examples of how to calculate basic and diluted EPS.
Other PEr-share measures include cash flow PEr share, EBIT PEr share, and EBITDA PEr
share. PEr share measures are not comparable because the number of outstanding
shares differ among firms. For example, assume Firm A and Firm B both report net
income of $100. If Firm A has 100 shares outstanding, its EPS is $1 PEr share. If Firm B
has 20 shares outstanding, its EPS is $5 PEr share.
Dividends
Dividends are declared on a PEr-common-share basis. Total dividends on a firm-wide
basis are referred to as dividends declared. Neither EPS nor net income is reduced by
the payment of common stock dividends. Net income minus dividends declared is
retained earnings, the earnings that are used to grow the corporation rather than
being distributed to equity holders. The proportion of a firm's net income that is
retained to fund growth is an important determinant of the firm's sustainable growth
rate.
To estimate the sustainable growth rate for a firm, the rate of return on resources is
measured as the return on equity capital, or the ROE. The proportion of earnings
reinvested is known as the retention rate (RR).
The formula for the sustainable growth rate, which is how fast the firm can
grow without additional external equity issues while holding leverage constant,
is:
g = RR x ROE
The calculation of the retention rate is:
Example: Calculating sustainable growth
The following figure provides data for three companies.
Growth Analysis Data
Calculate the sustainable growth rate for each company.
Answer:
RR = 1 - (dividends / earnings)
Company A: RR = 1 - (1.50 / 3.00) = 0.500
Company B: RR = 1 - (1.00 / 4.00) = 0.750
Company C: RR = 1 - (2.00 / 5.00) = 0.600
g = RR x ROE
Company A: g = 0.500 x 14% = 7.0%
Company B: g = 0.750 x 12% = 9.0%
Company C: g = 0.600 x 10% = 6.0%
Some ratios have sPEcific applications in certain industries.
Net income PEr employee and sales PEr employee are used in the analysis and
valuation of service and consulting companies.
Growth in same-store sales is used in the restaurant and retail industries to indicate
growth without the effects of new locations that have been oPEned. It is a measure of
how well the firm is doing at attracting and keeping existing customers and, in the case
of locations with overlaPPIng markets, may indicate that new locations are taking
customers from existing ones.
Sales PEr square foot is another metric commonly used in the retail industry.
Business Risk
The standard deviation of revenue, standard deviation of oPErating income, and the
standard deviation of net income are all indicators of the variation in and the
uncertainty about a firm's PErformance. Since they all dePEnd on the size of the firm to
a great extent, analysts employ a size-adjusted measure of variation. The coefficient of
variation for a variable is its standard deviation divided by its exPEcted value.
Professor's Note: We saw this before as a measure of portfolio risk in Quantitative Methods.
Certainly, different industries have different levels of uncertainty about revenues,
exPEnses, taxes, and nonoPErating items. Comparing coefficients of variation for a firm
across time, or among a firm and its PEers, can aid the analyst in assessing both the
relative and ABSolute degree of risk a firm faces in generating income for its investors.
Banks, insurance companies, and other financial firms carry their own challenges for
analysts. Part of the challenge is to understand the commonly used terms and the
ratios they represent.
Capital adequacy typically refers to the ratio of some dollar measure of the risk, both
oPErational and financial, of the firm to its equity capital. Other measures of capital are
also used. A common measure of capital risk is value-at-risk, which is an estimate of
the dollar size of the loss that a firm will exceed only some sPEcific PErcent of the time,
over a sPEcific PEriod of time.
Banks are subject to minimum reserve requirements. Their ratios of various liabilities to
their central bank reserves must be above the minimums. The ratio of a bank's liquid
assets to certain liabilities is called the liquid asset requirement.
The PErformance of financial companies that lend funds is often summarized as the
net interest margin, which is simply interest income divided by the firm's interestearning assets.
Credit Analysis
Credit analysis is based on many of the ratios that we have already covered in this
review. In assessing a company's ability to service and repay its debt, analysts use
interest coverage ratios (calculated with EBIT or EBITDA), return on capital, and debtto-assets ratios. Other ratios focus on various measures of cash flow to total debt.
Ratios have been used to analyze and predict firm bankruptcies. ALTMan (2000)1
develoPEd a Z-score that is useful in predicting firm bankruptcies (a low score indicates
high probability of failure). The predictive model was based on a firm's working capital
to assets, retained earnings to assets, EBIT to assets, market to book value of a share
of stock, and revenues to assets.
Professor's Note: Credit analysis is covered in more detail in the Study Session on fixed income
risk analysis.
A business segment is a portion of a larger company that accounts for more than 10%
of the company's revenues or assets, and is distinguishable from the company's other
lines of business in terms of the risk and return characteristics of the segment.
Geographic segments are also identified when they meet the size criterion above and
the geographic unit has a business environment that is different from that of other
segments or the remainder of the company's business.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require companies to report segment data, but the required
disclosure items are only a subset of the required disclosures for the company as a
whole. Nonetheless, an analyst can prepare a more detailed analysis and forecast by
examining the PErformance of business or geographic segments separately. Segment
profit margins, asset utilization (turnover), and return on assets can be very useful in
gaining a clear picture of a firm's overall oPErations. For forecasting, growth rates of
segment revenues and profits can be used to estimate future sales and profits and to
determine the changes in company characteristics over time.
Figure 5 illustrates how Boeing broke down its results into business segments in its
2013 annual report (source: Boeing.com).
Figure 5: Boeing, Inc. Segment Reporting
Ratio analysis can be used in preparing pro forma financial statements that provide
estimates of financial statement items for one or more future PEriods. The preparation
of pro forma financial statements and related forecasts is covered in some detail in the
Study Session on corporate finance. Here, some examples will suffice.
A forecast of financial results that begins with an estimate of a firm's next-PEriod
revenues might use the most recent COGS, or an average of COGS, from a commonsize income statement. On a common-size income statement, COGS is calculated as a
PErcentage of revenue. If the analyst has no reason to believe that COGS in relation to
sales will change for the next PEriod, the COGS PErcentage from a common-size
income statement can be used in constructing a pro forma income statement for the
next PEriod based on the estimate of sales.
Similarly, the analyst may believe that certain ratios will remain the same or change in
one direction or the other for the next PEriod. In the ABSence of any information
indicating a change, an analyst may choose to incorporate the oPErating profit margin
from the prior PEriod into a pro forma income statement for the next PEriod.
Beginning with an estimate of next-PEriod sales, the estimated oPErating profit margin
can be used to forecast oPErating profits for the next PEriod.
Rather than point estimates of sales and net and oPErating margins, the analyst may
examine possible changes in order to create a range of possible values for key financial
variables.
Three methods of examining the variability of financial outcomes around point
estimates are: sensitivity analysis, scenario analysis, and simulation. Sensitivity analysis
is based on "what if" questions such as: What will be the effect on net income if sales
increase by 3% rather than the estimated 5%? Scenario analysis is based on sPEcific
scenarios (a sPEcific set of outcomes for key variables) and will also yield a range of
values for financial statement items. Simulation is a technique in which probability
distributions for key variables are selected and a computer is used to generate a
distribution of values for outcomes based on rePEated random selection of values for
the key variables.
Ratios can be used to project earnings and future cash flow, evaluate a firm's flexibility,
assess management's PErformance, evaluate changes in the firm and industry over
time, and compare the firm with industry comPEtitors.
Vertical common-size data are stated as a PErcentage of sales for income statements
or as a PErcentage of total assets for balance sheets. Horizontal common-size data
present each item as a PErcentage of its value in a base year.
Ratio analysis has limitations. Ratios are not useful when viewed in isolation and
require adjustments when different companies use different accounting treatments.
Comparable ratios may be hard to find for companies that oPErate in multiple
industries. Ratios must be analyzed relative to one another, and determining the range
of acceptable values for a ratio can be difficult.
Activity ratios indicate how well a firm uses its assets. They include receivables
turnover, days of sales outstanding, inventory turnover, days of inventory on hand,
payables turnover, payables payment PEriod, and turnover ratios for total assets, fixed
assets, and working capital.
Liquidity ratios indicate a firm's ability to meet its short-term obligations. They include
the current, quick, and cash ratios, the defensive interval, and the cash conversion
cycle.
Solvency ratios indicate a firm's ability to meet its long-term obligations. They include
the debt-to-equity, debt-to-capital, debt-to-assets, financial leverage, interest
coverage, and fixed charge coverage ratios.
Profitability ratios indicate how well a firm generates oPErating income and net
income. They include net, gross, and oPErating profit margins, pretax margin, return
on assets, oPErating return on assets, return on total capital, return on total equity,
and return on common equity.
Valuation ratios are used to compare the relative values of stocks. They include
earnings PEr share and price-to-earnings, price-to-sales, price-to-book value, and priceto-cash-flow ratios.
An analyst should use an appropriate combination of different ratios to evaluate a
company over time and relative to comparable companies. The interpretation of an
increase in ROE, for example, may be quite different for a firm that has significantly
increased its financial leverage compared to one that has maintained or decreased its
financial leverage.
Basic DuPont equation:
ROE =
Extended DuPont equation:
ROE =
Ratios used in equity analysis include price-to-earnings, price-to-cash flow, price-tosales, and price-to-book value ratios, and basic and diluted earnings PEr share. Other
ratios are relevant to sPEcific industries such as retail and financial services.
Credit analysis emphasizes interest coverage ratios, return on capital, debt-to-assets
ratios, and cash flow to total debt.
A business or geographic segment is a portion of a firm that has risk and return
characteristics distinguishable from the rest of the firm and accounts for more than
10% of the firm's sales or assets.
Firms are required to report some items for significant business and geographic
segments. Profitability, leverage, and turnover ratios by segment can give the analyst a
better understanding of the PErformance of the overall business.
Ratio analysis in conjunction with other techniques can be used to construct pro forma
financial statements based on a forecast of sales growth and assumptions about the
relation of changes in key income statement and balance sheet items to growth of
sales.
<|endoftext|>
