INCOME TAXES
EXAM FOCUS
Study Session 8
In many countries, financial reporting standards and tax reporting standards differ.
Candidates should be aware of the terminology that relates to each set of standards,
notably taxes payable, which are the taxes actually due to the government, and
income tax exPEnse, which is reported on the income statement and reflects taxes
payable plus any deferred income tax exPEnse. The timing of revenue and exPEnse
recognition in the income statement and the tax return may lead to the creation of
deferred tax liabilities, which the company may have to pay in the future, or deferred
tax assets, which may provide benefits in the future. For the exam, you should know
that some differences between taxable and pretax income are temporary, while some
are PErmanent and will never reverse. Be prepared to calculate taxes payable, tax
exPEnse, deferred tax liabilities and assets, and be able to make the necessary
adjustments for analytical purposes.
LOS 30.a: Describe the differences between accounting profit and taxable income
and define key terms, including deferred tax assets, deferred tax liabilities, valuation
allowance, taxes payable, and income tax exPEnse.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 566
Financial accounting standards (IFRS and U.S. GAAP) are often different than income
tax laws and regulations. As a result, the amount of income tax exPEnse recognized in
the income statement may differ from the actual taxes owed to the taxing authorities.
Tax Return Terminology
Taxable income. Income subject to tax based on the tax return.
Taxes payable. The tax liability caused by taxable income. This is also known as
current tax exPEnse, but do not confuse this with income tax exPEnse (see
below).
Income tax paid. The actual cash flow for income taxes including payments or
refunds from other years.
Tax loss carryforward. A current or past loss that can be used to reduce taxable
income (thus, taxes payable) in the future. Can result in a deferred tax asset.
Tax base. Net amount of an asset or liability used for tax reporting purposes.
Financial Reporting Terminology
Accounting profit. Pretax financial income based on financial accounting
standards. Also known as income before tax and earnings before tax.
Income tax exPEnse. ExPEnse recognized in the income statement that includes
taxes payable and changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities (DTA and DTL).
The income tax exPEnse equation is:
income tax exPEnse = taxes payable + DDTL - DDTA
Deferred tax liabilities. Balance sheet amounts that result from an excess of
income tax exPEnse over taxes payable that are exPEcted to result in future
cash outflows.
Deferred tax assets. Balance sheet amounts that result from an excess of taxes
payable over income tax exPEnse that are exPEcted to be recovered from future
oPErations. Can also result from tax loss carryforwards.
Valuation allowance. Reduction of deferred tax assets based on the likelihood
the assets will not be realized.
Carrying value. Net balance sheet value of an asset or liability.
PErmanent difference. A difference between taxable income (tax return) and
pretax income (income statement) that will not reverse in the future.
Temporary difference. A difference between the tax base and the carrying
value of an asset or liability that will result in either taxable amounts or
deductible amounts in the future. Several examples of how temporary
differences arise are presented later in this review.
LOS 30.b: Explain how deferred tax liabilities and assets are created and the factors
that determine how a company's deferred tax liabilities and assets should be treated
for the purposes of financial analysis.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 568
Differences between the treatment of an accounting item for tax reporting and for
financial reporting can occur when:
The timing of revenue and exPEnse recognition in the income statement and
the tax return differ.
Certain revenues and exPEnses are recognized in the income statement but
never on the tax return or vice-versa.
Assets and/or liabilities have different carrying amounts and tax bases.
Gain or loss recognition in the income statement differs from the tax return.
Tax losses from prior PEriods may offset future taxable income.
Financial statement adjustments may not affect the tax return or may be
recognized in different PEriods.
Deferred Tax Liabilities
A deferred tax liability is created when income tax exPEnse (income statement) is
greater than taxes payable (tax return) due to temporary differences. Deferred tax
liabilities occur when:
Revenues (or gains) are recognized in the income statement before they are
included on the tax return due to temporary differences.
ExPEnses (or losses) are tax deductible before they are recognized in the income
statement.
Deferred tax liabilities are exPEcted to reverse (i.e., they are caused by temporary
differences) and result in future cash outflows when the taxes are paid.
A deferred tax liability is most often created when an accelerated depreciation method
is used on the tax return and straight-line depreciation is used on the income
statement.
Deferred Tax Assets
A deferred tax asset is created when taxes payable (tax return) are greater than
income tax exPEnse (income statement) due to temporary differences. Deferred tax
assets occur when:
Revenues (or gains) are taxable before they are recognized in the income
statement.
ExPEnses (or losses) are recognized in the income statement before they are tax
deductible.
Tax loss carryforwards are available to reduce future taxable income.
Similar to deferred tax liabilities, deferred tax assets are exPEcted to reverse through
future oPErations. However, deferred tax assets are exPEcted to provide future tax
savings, while deferred tax liabilities are exPEcted to result in future cash outflows. A
firm that has taxable losses in excess of its taxable income can carry those excess
losses forward and use them to reduce taxable income (and taxes) in future PEriods.
Post-employment benefits, warranty exPEnses, and tax loss carryforwards are typical
causes of deferred tax assets.
Treatment for Analytical Purposes
If deferred tax liabilities are exPEcted to reverse in the future, they are best classified
by an analyst as liabilities. If, however, they are not exPEcted to reverse in the future,
they are best classified as equity (DTL decreased and equity increased by the same
amount). The key question is, "When or will the total deferred tax liability be reversed
in the future?" In practice, the treatment of deferred taxes for analytical purposes
varies. An analyst must decide on the appropriate treatment on a case-by-case basis.
LOS 30.c: Calculate the tax base of a company's assets and liabilities.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 571
Tax Base of Assets
An asset's tax base is the amount that will be deducted (exPEnsed) on the tax return in
the future as the economic benefits of the asset are realized. The carrying value is the
value of the asset reported on the financial statements, net of depreciation and
amortization.
Following are a few examples of calculating the tax bases of various assets.
Depreciable equipment. The cost of equipment is $100,000. In the income statement,
depreciation exPEnse of $10,000 is recognized each year for ten years. On the tax
return, the asset is depreciated at $20,000 PEr year for five years.
At the end of the fIRSt year, the tax base is $80,000 ($100,000 cost - $20,000
accumulated tax depreciation) and the carrying value is $90,000 ($100,000 cost -
$10,000 accumulated financial depreciation). A deferred tax liability ($10,000 x tax
rate) is created to account for the timing difference from different depreciation for tax
and for financial reporting.
Sale of the machine for $100,000, for example, would result in a gain of $10,000 on the
income statement and a gain of $20,000 on the tax return. This would reverse the
deferred tax liability.
Research and development. At the beginning of this year, $75,000 of R&D was
exPEnsed in the income statement. On the tax return, the R&D was capitalized and is
amortized on a straight-line basis over three years.
At the end of the fIRSt year, the tax base is $50,000 ($75,000 cost - $25,000
accumulated tax amortization) and the asset has no carrying value (does not apPEar on
the balance sheet) because the entire cost was exPEnsed. Note that amortization for
tax here leads to a deferred tax asset, since earnings before tax are less than taxable
income.
Accounts receivable. Gross receivables totaling $20,000 are outstanding at year-end.
Because collection is uncertain, the firm recognizes bad debt exPEnse of $1,500 in the
income statement. For tax purposes, bad debt exPEnse cannot be deducted until the
receivables are deemed worthless.
At the end of the year, the tax base of the receivables is $20,000 since no bad debt
exPEnse has been deducted on the tax return. The carrying value is $18,500 ($20,000 -
$1,500 bad debt exPEnse). Again, a deferred tax asset is the result.
Tax Base of Liabilities
A liability's tax base is the carrying value of the liability minus any amounts that will be
deductible on the tax return in the future. The tax base of revenue received in advance
is the carrying value minus the amount of revenue that will not be taxed in the future.
Following are a few examples of calculating the tax bases of various liabilities.
Customer advance. At year-end, $10,000 was received from a customer for goods that
will be shipPEd next year. On the tax return, revenue received in advance is taxable
when collected.
The carrying value of the liability is $10,000. The carrying value will be reduced when
the goods are shipPEd next year. For revenue received in advance, the tax base is
equal to the carrying value minus any amounts that will not be taxed in the future.
Since the customer advance has already been taxed, $10,000 will not be taxed in the
future. Thus, the customer advance liability has a tax base of zero ($10,000 carrying
value - $10,000 revenue not taxed in the future). Since the $10,000 has been taxed but
not yet reported as revenue on the income statement, a deferred tax asset is created.
Warranty liability. At year-end, a firm estimates that $5,000 of warranty exPEnse will
be required on goods already sold. On the tax return, warranty exPEnse is not
deductible until the warranty work is actually PErformed. The warranty work will be
PErformed next year.
The carrying value of the warranty liability is $5,000. The tax base is equal to the
carrying value minus the amount deductible in the future. Thus, the warranty liability
has a tax base of zero ($5,000 carrying value - $5,000 warranty exPEnse deductible in
the future). Delayed recognition of this exPEnse for tax results in a deferred tax asset.
Note payable. The firm has an outstanding promissory note with a principal balance of
$30,000. Interest accrues at 10% and is paid at the end of each quarter.
The promissory note is treated the same way on the tax return and in the financial
statements. Thus, the carrying value and the tax base are both $30,000. Interest paid is
included in both pre-tax income on the income statement and in taxable income on
the tax return. With no timing difference, no deferred tax items are created.
LOS 30.d: Calculate income tax exPEnse, income taxes payable, deferred tax assets,
and deferred tax liabilities, and calculate and interpret the adjustment to the
financial statements related to a change in the income tax rate.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 568
Professor's Note: The effects of changing tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities are
explained in the next LOS.
Example: Deferred tax liabilities
Assume the original cost of an asset is $600,000. The asset has a 3-year life and no salvage value is
exPEcted. For tax purposes, the asset is depreciated using an accelerated depreciation method with tax
return depreciation of $300,000 in year 1, $200,000 in year 2, and $100,000 in year 3. The firm recognizes
straight-line (SL) depreciation exPEnse of $200,000 each year in its income statements. Earnings before
interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA) is $500,000 each year. The firm's tax rate is 40%.
Calculate the firm's income tax exPEnse, taxes payable, and deferred tax liability for each year of the
asset's life.
Answer:
The following tables illustrate the calculation of taxes payable reported on the tax return and income tax
exPEnse reported in the income statement.
In year 1, the firm recognizes $120,000 of income tax exPEnse on the income statement but taxes payable
(tax return) are only $80,000. So, income tax exPEnse is initially higher than taxes payable. The $40,000
difference is deferred to a future PEriod by using an accelerated depreciation method for tax purposes.
The $40,000 is reported on the balance sheet by creating a DTL.
The tax base and the carrying value of the asset are used to calculate the balance of the DTL. At the end of
year 1, the carrying value of the asset is $400,000 and the tax base of the asset is $300,000. By multiplying
the $100,000 difference by the 40% tax rate, we get the balance of the DTL of $40,000.
We can reconcile income tax exPEnse and taxes payable with the change in the DTL. In this example, the
DTL increased $40,000 (from zero to $40,000) during year 1. Thus, income tax exPEnse in year 1 is
$120,000 ($80,000 taxes payable + $40,000 change in the DTL).
In year 2, depreciation exPEnse is the same on the tax return and the income statement. Thus, taxable
income is equal to pretax income and there is no change in the DTL. Income tax exPEnse in year 2 is
$120,000 ($120,000 taxes payable + zero change in the DTL).
In year 3, the firm recognizes income tax exPEnse of $120,000 on the income statement but $160,000 in
taxes payable (tax return). The $40,000 deferred tax liability recognized at the end of year 1 has reversed
as a result of lower depreciation exPEnse using the accelerated method on the tax return. In year 3,
income tax exPEnse is $120,000 [$160,000 taxes payable + (-$40,000 change in DTL)].
Note that over the useful life of the asset, total depreciation, total taxable (and pretax) income, and total
taxes payable (and income tax exPEnse) are the same on the financial statements and the tax return. Also,
at the end of year 3, both the tax base and the carrying value of the asset are equal to zero. By using
accelerated depreciation for tax purposes, the firm deferred $40,000 of taxes from year 1 to year 3.
Example: Deferred tax assets
Consider warranty guarantees and associated exPEnses. Pretax income (financial reporting) includes an
accrual for warranty exPEnse, but warranty cost is not deductible for taxable income until the firm has
made actual exPEnditures to meet warranty claims. Suppose:
A firm has sales of $5,000 for each of two years.
The firm estimates that warranty exPEnse will be 2% of annual sales ($100).
The actual exPEnditure of $200 to meet all warranty claims was not made until the SECond
year.
Assume a tax rate of 40%.
Calculate the firm's income tax exPEnse, taxes payable, and deferred tax assets for year 1 and year 2.
Answer:
For tax reporting, taxable income and taxes payable for two years are:
For financial reporting, pretax income and tax exPEnse are:
In year 1, the firm reports $1,960 of tax exPEnse in the income statement, but $2,000 of taxes payable are
reported on the tax return. In this example, taxes payable are initially higher than tax exPEnse and the $40
difference is reported on the balance sheet by creating a DTA.
The tax base and the carrying value of the warranty liability are used to calculate the balance of the DTA.
At the end of year 1, the carrying value of the warranty liability is $100 (the warranty exPEnse has been
recognized in the income statement but it has not been paid), and the tax base of the liability is zero (the
warranty exPEnse has not been recognized on the tax return). By multiplying the $100 difference by the
40% tax rate, we get the balance of the DTA of $40 [($100 carrying value - zero tax base) x 40%].
We can reconcile income tax exPEnse and taxes payable with the change in the DTA. In this example, the
DTA increased $40 (from zero to $40) during year 1. Thus, income tax exPEnse in year 1 is $1,960 ($2,000
taxes payable - $40 increase in the DTA).
In year 2, the firm recognizes $1,960 of tax exPEnse in the income statement but only $1,920 is reported
on the tax return (taxes payable). The $40 deferred tax asset recognized at the end of year 1 has reversed
as a result of the warranty exPEnse recognition on the tax return. So, in year 2, income tax exPEnse is
$1,960 ($1,920 taxes payable + $40 decrease in DTA).
Professor's Note: To summarize, if taxable income (on the tax return) is less than pretax income
(on the income statement) and the difference is exPEcted to reverse in future years, a deferred
tax liability is created. If taxable income is greater than pretax income and the difference is
exPEcted to reverse in future years, a deferred tax asset is created.
LOS 30.e: Evaluate the effect of tax rate changes on a company's financial statements
and ratios.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 575
When the income tax rate changes, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted to
reflect the new rate. The adjustment can also affect income tax exPEnse.
An increase in the tax rate will increase both deferred tax liabilities and deferred tax
assets. A decrease in the tax rate will decrease both deferred tax liabilities and
deferred tax assets.
DTL and DTA values on the balance sheet must be changed because the new tax rate is
the rate exPEcted to be in force when the associated reversals occur. If there is an
increase (decrease) in the tax rate, when previously deferred income is recognized for
tax, the tax due will be higher (lower), and when exPEnse items previously reported in
the financial statements are recognized for tax, the benefit will be greater (less).
Changes in the balance sheet values of DTLs and DTAs to account for a change in the
tax rate will affect income tax exPEnse in the current PEriod.
income tax exPEnse = taxes payable + DTL - DTA
If tax rates increase, the increase in the DTL is added to taxes payable and the increase
in the DTA is subtracted from taxes payable to arrive at income tax exPEnse.
If tax rates decrease, the decrease in the DTL would result in lower income tax exPEnse
and the decrease in the DTA would result in higher income tax exPEnse. In the case of
the DTL we are adding a negative change, and in the case of the DTA we are
subtracting a negative change.
The following example illustrates the effects of a change in the tax rate.
Example: Accounting effects of a change in a firm's tax rate
A firm owns equipment with a carrying value of $200,000 and a tax base of $160,000 at year-end. The tax
rate is 40%. In this case, the firm will report a DTL of $16,000 [($200,000 carrying value - $160,000 tax
base) x 40%]. The firm has recognized a bad debt exPEnse of $10,000 in its financial statements which is
not yet deductible for tax purposes. The bad debt exPEnse created a DTA of $4,000 [($10,000 tax base -
zero carrying value) x 40%]. Calculate the effect on the firm's income tax exPEnse if the tax rate decreases
to 30%.
Answer:
As a result of the decrease in tax rate, the balance of the DTL is reduced to $12,000 [($200,000 carrying
value - $160,000 tax base) x 30%]. Thus, due to the lower tax rate, the change in the DTL is -$4,000
($16,000 reported DTL - $12,000 adjusted DTL).
The balance of the DTA is reduced to $3,000 [($10,000 tax base - zero carrying value) x 30%]. Thus, due to
the lower tax rate, the DTA decreases by $1,000 ($4,000 reported DTA - $3,000 adjusted DTA).
Using the income tax equation, we can see that income tax exPEnse decreases by $3,000 (income tax
exPEnse = taxes payable + DTL - DTA).
LOS 30.f: Distinguish between temporary and PErmanent differences in pre-tax
accounting income and taxable income.
A PErmanent difference is a difference between taxable income and pretax income
that will not reverse in the future. PErmanent differences do not create deferred tax
assets or deferred tax liabilities. PErmanent differences can be caused by revenue that
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 576
is not taxable, exPEnses that are not deductible, or tax credits that result in a direct
reduction of taxes.
PErmanent differences will cause the firm's effective tax rate to differ from the
statutory tax rate. The statutory rate is the tax rate of the jurisdiction where the firm
oPErates. The effective tax rate is derived from the income statement.
The statutory rate and effective rate may also differ if the firm is oPErating in more
than one tax jurisdiction.
A temporary difference refers to a difference between the tax base and the carrying
value of an asset or liability that will result in taxable amounts or deductible amounts
in the future. If the temporary difference is exPEcted to reverse in the future and the
balance sheet item is exPEcted to provide future economic benefits, a DTA or DTL is
created.
Temporary differences can be taxable temporary differences that result in exPEcted
future taxable income or deductible temporary differences that result in exPEcted
future tax deductions.
Example: Temporary and PErmanent differences between taxes payable and income tax exPEnse
Using the following table and the examples of determining the tax base of assets and liabilities presented
earlier, identiFY the tyPE of difference (taxable temporary, deductible temporary, or PErmanent), and
determine if the difference creates a DTA or a DTL.
Answer:
Depreciable equipment. Accelerating depreciation exPEnse on the tax return will result in a taxable
temporary difference. Taxable income will be higher in the future because accelerated depreciation will
be lower when the reversal occurs. Since the carrying value of the asset is greater than the tax base, a DTL
is created.
Research and development. Capitalized R&D for tax purposes will result in a deductible temporary
difference as taxable income will be lower in the future when the reversal occurs. Since the tax base of the
asset is greater than the carrying value, a DTA is created.
Accounts receivable. Delaying bad debt exPEnse for tax purposes will result in a deductible temporary
difference as taxable income will be lower in the future when the reversal occurs. Since the tax base of the
asset is greater than the carrying value, a DTA is created.
Municipal bond interest. Since municipal bond interest is typically not taxable, it results in a PErmanent
difference. No deferred taxes are recognized.
Customer advance. Recognizing the customer advance on the tax return will result in a deductible
temporary difference as COGS is included in taxable income in the future when the goods are delivered.
Since the carrying value of the liability is greater than the tax base, a DTA is created.
Warranty liability. Delaying warranty exPEnse for tax purposes will result in a deductible temporary
difference as taxable income will be lower in the future when the reversal occurs. Since the carrying value
of the liability is greater than the tax base, a DTA is created.
Officers' life insurance. Since officers' life insurance is not tax deductible, it results in a PErmanent
difference. No deferred taxes are recognized.
Note payable and interest paid. No temporary differences result from the note payable or the interest
paid on the note. No deferred taxes are recognized.
Temporary differences leading to DTLs can arise from an investment in another firm
(e.g., subsidiaries, affiliates, branches, and joint ventures) when the parent company
recognizes earnings from the investment before dividends are received. However, if
the parent company can control the timing of the future reversal and it is probable the
temporary difference will not reverse, no DTL is reported.
A temporary difference from an investment will result in a DTA only if the temporary
difference is exPEcted to reverse in the future, and sufficient taxable profits are
exPEcted to exist when the reversal occurs.
LOS 30.g: Describe the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets--when it is
required and what effect it has on financial statements.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 583
Although deferred taxes are created from temporary differences that are exPEcted to
reverse in the future, neither deferred tax assets nor deferred tax liabilities are carried
on the balance sheet at their discounted present value. However, deferred tax assets
are assessed at each balance sheet date to determine the likelihood of sufficient future
taxable income to recover the tax assets. Without future taxable income, a DTA is
worthless.
According to U.S. GAAP, if it is more likely than not (greater than a 50% probability)
that some or all of a DTA will not be realized (insufficient future taxable income to
recover the tax asset), then the DTA must be reduced by a valuation allowance. The
valuation allowance is a contra account that reduces the net balance sheet value of the
DTA. Increasing the valuation allowance will decrease the net balance sheet DTA,
increasing income tax exPEnse and decreasing net income.
If circumstances change, the net DTA can be increased by decreasing the valuation
allowance. This would result in higher earnings.
It is up to management to defend the recognition of all deferred tax assets. If a
company has order backlogs or existing contracts which are exPEcted to generate
future taxable income, a valuation allowance might not be necessary. However, if a
company has cumulative losses over the past few years or a history of inability to use
tax loss carryforwards, then the company would need to use a valuation allowance to
reflect the likelihood that a deferred tax asset will never be realized.
Because an increase (decrease) in the valuation allowance will decrease (increase)
earnings, management can manipulate earnings by changing the valuation allowance.
Whenever a company reports substantial deferred tax assets, an analyst should review
the company's financial PErformance to determine the likelihood that those assets will
be realized. Analysts should also scrutinize changes in the valuation allowance to
determine whether those changes are economically justified.
Professor's Note: A valuation allowance account is only used for deferred tax assets. Under U.S.
GAAP, deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities apPEar separately on the balance sheet,
and they are not typically netted.
LOS 30.h: Explain recognition and measurement of current and deferred tax items.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 582
The measurement of deferred tax items dePEnds on the tax rate exPEcted to be in
force when the underlying temporary difference reverses. We previously noted the
effects of a change in the income tax rate on deferred tax assets and liabilities. In some
circumstances, the applicable tax rate will dePEnd on how the temporary difference
will be settled. As an example, consider a tax jurisdiction that has a capital gains tax
rate that is lower than the marginal tax rate. If, given its tax base, the currently
unrealized gains on an asset will be taxed at the capital gains rate when the asset is
disposed of, that rate should be used to calculate the deferred tax liability.
Another issue with the measurement of deferred tax items is whether a change in
asset value is recorded on the income statement or taken directly to equity. In a case
where the change that leads to a deferred tax item is taken directly to equity, the
deferred tax item should also be taken directly to equity.
Consider a company reporting under IFRS that revalues PP&E upward. The revaluation
gain is taken directly to equity without affecting either pretax income (on the income
statement) or taxes payable (the gain is unrealized) so balance sheet deferred tax
liabilities are not affected. Because the revaluation gain is taken directly to equity, the
related future tax liability should be taken to equity as well. The adjustment is to
reduce the amount of the gain added to revaluation surplus by the amount of the
future tax liability on the revaluation gain.
The upward revaluation of the asset on the balance sheet will increase depreciation in
subsequent PEriods, but will not affect the deferred tax liability. The tax liability on the
increase in book value is incorporated into the recognition of the increase in
revaluation surplus (rather than increasing the reported DTL). In each subsequent
PEriod, an amount equal to the additional depreciation from the upward revaluation of
the asset, less the tax liability on that portion of the revaluation, is transferred from
revaluation surplus to retained earnings. The previously unrealized gain in the asset's
value is realized over time through use of the asset. The addition to retained earnings
just offsets the after-tax decrease in net income (and retained earnings) from the
additional depreciation resulting from the upward revaluation of the asset's carrying
value.
LOS 30.i: Analyze disclosures relating to deferred tax items and the effective tax rate
reconciliation and explain how information included in these disclosures affects a
company's financial statements and financial ratios.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 586
Companies are required to disclose details on the source of the temporary differences
that cause the deferred tax assets and liabilities reported on the balance sheet.
Changes in those balance sheet accounts are reflected in income tax exPEnse on the
income statement. Here are some common examples of temporary differences you
may encounter:
A deferred tax liability results from using accelerated depreciation for tax
purposes and straight-line depreciation for the financial statements. The analyst
should consider the firm's growth rate and capital sPEnding levels when
determining whether the difference will actually reverse.
Impairments generally result in a deferred tax asset since the writedown is
recognized immediately in the income statement, but the deduction on the tax
return is generally not allowed until the asset is sold or disposed of.
Restructuring generates a deferred tax asset because the costs are recognized
for financial reporting purposes when the restructuring is announced, but not
deducted for tax purposes until actually paid. Note that restructuring usually
results in significant cash outflows (net of the tax savings) in the years after the
restructuring costs are reported.
In the United States, firms that use LIFO for their financial statements are
required to use LIFO for tax purposes, so no temporary differences result.
However, in countries where this is not a requirement, temporary differences
can result from the choice of inventory cost-flow method.
Post-employment benefits and deferred comPEnsation are both recognized for
financial reporting when earned by the employee but not deducted for tax
purposes until actually paid. These can result in a deferred tax asset that will be
reversed when the benefits or comPEnsation are paid.
A deferred tax adjustment is made to stockholders' equity to reflect the future
tax impact of unrealized gains or losses on available-for-sale marketable
SECurities that are taken directly to equity. No DTL is added to the balance sheet
for the future tax liability when gains/losses are realized.
Typically, the following deferred tax information is disclosed:
Deferred tax liabilities, deferred tax assets, any valuation allowance, and the net
change in the valuation allowance over the PEriod.
Any unrecognized deferred tax liability for undistributed earnings of subsidiaries
and joint ventures.
Current-year tax effect of each tyPE of temporary difference.
Components of income tax exPEnse.
Reconciliation of reported income tax exPEnse and the tax exPEnse based on
the statutory rate.
Tax loss carryforwards and credits.
Example: Analyzing deferred tax item disclosures
WCCO, Inc.'s income tax exPEnse has consistently been larger than taxes payable over the last three
years. WCCO disclosed in the footnotes to its 20X5 financial statements the major items recorded as
deferred tax assets and liabilities (in millions of dollars), as shown in the following table.
Deferred Tax Disclosures in Footnotes to WCCO, Inc., Financial Statements
Use the table above to explain why income tax exPEnse has exceeded taxes payable over the last three
years. Also explain the effect of the change in the valuation allowance on WCCO's earnings for 20X5.
Answer:
The company's deferred tax asset balance results from international tax loss carryforwards and employee
benefits (most likely PEnsion and other post-retirement benefits), offset by a valuation allowance. The
company's deferred tax liability balance results from proPErty, plant, and equipment (most likely from
using accelerated depreciation methods for tax purposes and straight-line on the financial statements)
and unrealized gains on SECurities classified as available-for-sale (because the unrealized gain is not
taxable until realized).
Income tax exPEnse is equal to taxes payable plus deferred income tax exPEnse. Because deferred tax
liabilities have been growing faster than deferred tax assets, deferred income tax exPEnse has been
positive, resulting in income tax exPEnse being higher than taxes payable.
Management decreased the valuation allowance by $33 million in 20X5. This resulted in a reduction in
deferred income tax exPEnse and an increase in reported earnings for 20X5.
Analyzing the Effective Tax Rate Reconciliation
Some firms' reported income tax exPEnse differs from the amount based on the
statutory income tax rate. Recall that the statutory rate is the tax rate of the
jurisdiction where the firm oPErates. The differences are generally the result of:
Different tax rates in different tax jurisdictions (countries).
PErmanent tax differences: tax credits, tax-exempt income, nondeductible
exPEnses, and tax differences between capital gains and oPErating income.
Changes in tax rates and legislation.
Deferred taxes provided on the reinvested earnings of foreign and
unconsolidated domestic affiliates.
Tax holidays in some countries (watch for sPEcial conditions such as termination
dates for the holiday or a requirement to pay the accumulated taxes at some
point in the future).
Understanding the differences between reported income tax exPEnse and the amount
based on the statutory income tax rate will enable the analyst to better estimate
future earnings and cash flow.
When estimating future earnings and cash flows, the analyst should understand each
element of the reconciliation, including its relative impact, how it has changed with
time, and how it is likely to change in the future.
In analyzing trends in tax rates, it is important to only include reconciliation items that
are continuous in nature rather than those that are sporadic. Items including different
rates in different countries, tax-exempt income, and non-deductible exPEnses tend to
be continuous. Other items are almost always sporadic, such as the occurrence of large
asset sales and tax holiday savings. The disclosures of each financial statement should
be reviewed based on the footnotes and management discussion and analysis.
Example: Analyzing the tax rate reconciliation
Novelty Distribution Company (NDC) does business in the United States and abROAd. The company's
reconciliation between effective and statutory tax rates for three years is provided in the following figure.
Analyze the trend in effective tax rates over the three years shown.
Statutory U.S. Federal Income Tax Rate Reconciliation
Answer:
For some trend analysis, the analyst may want to convert the reconciliation from PErcentages to ABSolute
numbers. However, for this example, the trends can be analyzed simply by using the PErcentages.
The effective tax rate is upward trending over the 3-year PEriod. Contributing to the upward trend is an
increase in the state income tax rate and the loss of benefits related to taxes on foreign income. In 20X4, a
loss related to the sale of assets partially offset an increase in taxes created by sPEcial items. In 20X3 and
20X5, the sPEcial items and the other items also offset each other. The fact that the sPEcial items and
other items are so volatile over the 3-year PEriod suggests that it will be difficult for an analyst to forecast
the effective tax rate for NDC for the foreseeable future without additional information. This volatility also
reduces comparability with other firms.
LOS 30.j: IdentiFY the key provisions of and differences between income tax
accounting under International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and US generally
accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 591
Accounting for income taxes under U.S. GAAP and IFRS is similar in most resPEcts.
However, there are some differences. Many differences relate to the different tax laws
and regulations of the different countries. Figure 1 is a summary of a few of the more
important differences.
Figure 1: Tax Accounting Differences, IFRS vs. U.S. GAAP
KEY CONCEPTS
LOS 30.a
Deferred tax terminology:
Taxable income. Income subject to tax based on the tax return.
Accounting profit. Pretax income from the income statement based on financial
accounting standards.
Deferred tax assets. Balance sheet asset value that results when taxes payable
(tax return) are greater than income tax exPEnse (income statement) and the
difference is exPEcted to reverse in future PEriods.
Deferred tax liabilities. Balance sheet liability value that results when income
tax exPEnse (income statement) is greater than taxes payable (tax return) and
the difference is exPEcted to reverse in future PEriods.
Valuation allowance. Reduction of deferred tax assets (contra account) based
on the likelihood that the future tax benefit will not be realized.
Taxes payable. The tax liability from the tax return. Note that this term also
refers to a liability that apPEars on the balance sheet for taxes due but not yet
paid.
Income tax exPEnse. ExPEnse recognized in the income statement that includes
taxes payable and changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities.
LOS 30.b
A deferred tax liability is created when income tax exPEnse (income statement) is
higher than taxes payable (tax return). Deferred tax liabilities occur when revenues (or
gains) are recognized in the income statement before they are taxable on the tax
return, or exPEnses (or losses) are tax deductible before they are recognized in the
income statement.
A deferred tax asset is created when taxes payable (tax return) are higher than income
tax exPEnse (income statement). Deferred tax assets are recorded when revenues (or
gains) are taxable before they are recognized in the income statement, when exPEnses
(or losses) are recognized in the income statement before they are tax deductible, or
when tax loss carryforwards are available to reduce future taxable income.
Deferred tax liabilities that are not exPEcted to reverse, typically because of exPEcted
continued growth in capital exPEnditures, should be treated for analytical purposes as
equity. If deferred tax liabilities are exPEcted to reverse, they should be treated for
analytical purposes as liabilities.
LOS 30.c
An asset's tax base is its value for tax purposes. The tax base for a depreciable fixed
asset is its cost minus any depreciation or amortization previously taken on the tax
return. When an asset is sold, the taxable gain or loss on the sale is equal to the sale
price minus the asset's tax base.
A liability's tax base is its value for tax purposes. When there is a difference between
the book value of a liability on a firm's financial statements and its tax base that will
result in future taxable gains or losses when the liability is settled, the firm will
recognize a deferred tax asset or liability to reflect this future tax or tax benefit.
LOS 30.d
If taxable income is less than pretax income and the cause of the difference is exPEcted
to reverse in future years, a DTL is created. If taxable income is greater than pretax
income and the difference is exPEcted to reverse in future years, a DTA is created.
The balance of the DTA or DTL is equal to the difference between the tax base and the
carrying value of the asset or liability, multiplied by the tax rate.
Income tax exPEnse and taxes payable are related through the change in the DTA and
the change in the DTL: income tax exPEnse = taxes payable + DDTL - DDTA.
LOS 30.e
When a firm's income tax rate increases (decreases), deferred tax assets and deferred
tax liabilities are both increased (decreased) to reflect the new rate. Changes in these
values will also affect income tax exPEnse.
An increase in the tax rate will increase both a firm's DTL and its income tax exPEnse. A
decrease in the tax rate will decrease both a firm's DTL and its income tax exPEnse.
An increase in the tax rate will increase a firm's DTA and decrease its income tax
exPEnse. A decrease in the tax rate will decrease a firm's DTA and increase its income
tax exPEnse.
LOS 30.f
A temporary difference is a difference between the tax base and the carrying value of
an asset or liability that will result in taxable amounts or deductible amounts in the
future.
A PErmanent difference is a difference between taxable income and pretax income
that will not reverse in the future. PErmanent differences do not create DTAs or DTLs.
LOS 30.g
If it is more likely than not that some or all of a DTA will not be realized (because of
insufficient future taxable income to recover the tax asset), then the DTA must be
reduced by a valuation allowance. The valuation allowance is a contra account that
reduces the DTA value on the balance sheet. Increasing the valuation allowance will
increase income tax exPEnse and reduce earnings. If circumstances change, the DTA
can be revalued upward by decreasing the valuation allowance, which would increase
earnings.
LOS 30.h
Measurement of deferred tax items dePEnds on the tax rate exPEcted to be in force
when the underlying temporary difference reverses. The applicable tax may dePEnd on
how the temporary difference will be settled (e.g., if a capital gains tax rate will apply).
If a change that leads to a deferred tax item is taken directly to equity, such as an
upward revaluation, the deferred tax item should also be taken directly to equity.
LOS 30.i
Firms are required to reconcile their effective income tax rate with the applicable
statutory rate in the country where the business is domiciled. Analyzing trends in
individual reconciliation items can aid in understanding past earnings trends and in
predicting future effective tax rates. Where adequate data is provided, they can also
be helpful in predicting future earnings and cash flows or for adjusting financial ratios.
LOS 30.j
The accounting treatment of income taxes under U.S. GAAP and their treatment under
IFRS are similar in most resPEcts. One major difference relates to the revaluation of
fixed assets and intangible assets. U.S. GAAP prohibits upward revaluations, but they
are PErmitted under IFRS and any resulting effects on deferred tax are recognized in
equity.
CONCEPT CHECKERS
1. Which of the following statements is most accurate? The difference between
taxes payable for the PEriod and the tax exPEnse recognized on the financial
statements results from differences:
A. in management control.
B. between basic and diluted earnings.
C. between financial and tax accounting.
2. Which of the following tax definitions is least accurate?
A. Taxable income is income based on the rules of the tax authorities.
B. Taxes payable are the amount due to the government.
C. Pretax income is income tax exPEnse divided by one minus the statutory
tax rate.
Use the following data to answer Questions 3 through 9.
A firm acquires an asset for $120,000 with a 4-year useful life and no salvage
value.
The asset will generate $50,000 of cash flow for all four years.
The tax rate is 40% each year.
The firm will depreciate the asset over three years on a straight-line (SL) basis
for tax purposes and over four years on a SL basis for financial reporting
purposes.
3. Taxable income in year 1 is:
A. $6,000.
B. $10,000.
C. $20,000.
4. Taxes payable in year 1 are:
A. $4,000.
B. $6,000.
C. $8,000.
5. Pretax income in year 4 is:
A. $6,000.
B. $10,000.
C. $20,000.
6. Income tax exPEnse in year 4 is:
A. $4,000.
B. $6,000.
C. $8,000.
7. Taxes payable in year 4 are:
A. $4,000.
B. $6,000.
C. $20,000.
8. At the end of year 2, the firm's balance sheet will report a deferred tax:
A. asset of $4,000.
B. asset of $8,000.
C. liability of $8,000.
9. Suppose tax rates rise during year 2 to 50%. At the end of year 2, the firm's
balance sheet will show a deferred tax liability of:
A. $5,000.
B. $6,000.
C. $10,000.
10. An increase in the tax rate causes the balance sheet value of a deferred tax
asset to:
A. decrease.
B. increase.
C. remain unchanged.
11. In its fIRSt year of oPErations, a firm produces taxable income of -$10,000. The
prevailing tax rate is 40%. The firm's balance sheet will report a deferred tax:
A. asset of $4,000.
B. asset of $10,000.
C. liability of $4,000.
12. An analyst is comparing a firm to its comPEtitors. The firm has a deferred tax
liability that results from accelerated depreciation for tax purposes. The firm is
exPEcted to continue to grow in the foreseeable future. How should the
liability be treated for analysis purposes?
A. It should be treated as equity at its full value.
B. It should be treated as a liability at its full value.
C. The present value should be treated as a liability with the remainder
being treated as equity.
13. Which one of the following statements is most accurate? Under the liability
method of accounting for deferred taxes, a decrease in the tax rate at the
beginning of the accounting PEriod will:
A. increase taxable income in the current PEriod.
B. increase a deferred tax asset.
C. reduce a deferred tax liability.
14. While reviewing a company, an analyst identifies a PErmanent difference
between taxable income and pretax income. Which of the following
statements most accurately identifies the appropriate financial statement
adjustment?
A. The amount of the tax implications of the difference should be added to
the deferred tax liabilities.
B. The present value of the amount of the tax implications of the difference
should be added to the deferred tax liabilities.
C. No financial statement adjustment is necessary.
15. An analyst is reviewing a company with a large deferred tax asset on its balance
sheet. She has determined that the firm has had cumulative losses for the last
three years and has a large amount of inventory that can only be sold at
sharply reduced prices. Which of the following adjustments should the analyst
make to account for the deferred tax assets?
A. Record a deferred tax liability to offset the effect of the deferred tax
asset on the firm's balance sheet.
B. Recognize a valuation allowance to reflect the fact that the deferred tax
asset is unlikely to be realized.
C. Do nothing. The difference between taxable and pretax income that
caused the deferred tax asset is likely to reverse in the future.
16. If the tax base of an asset exceeds the asset's carrying value and a reversal is
exPEcted in the future:
A. a deferred tax asset is created.
B. a deferred tax liability is created.
C. neither a deferred tax asset nor a deferred tax liability is created.
17. The author of a new textbook received a $100,000 advance from the publisher
this year. $40,000 of income taxes were paid on the advance when received.
The textbook will not be finished until next year. Determine the tax basis of the
advance at the end of this year.
A. $0.
B. $40,000.
C. $100,000.
18. According to IFRS, the deferred tax consequences of revaluing held-for-use
equipment upward is reported on the balance sheet:
A. as an asset.
B. as a liability.
C. in stockholders' equity.
19. KLH Company reported the following:
Gross DTA at the beginning of the year $10,500
Gross DTA at the end of the year $11,250
Valuation allowance at the beginning of the year $2,700
Valuation allowance at the end of the year $3,900
Which of the following statements best describes the exPEcted earnings of the
firm? Earnings are exPEcted to:
A. increase.
B. decrease.
C. remain relatively stable.
For more questions related to this topic review, log in to your Schweser online account
and launch SchweserPro(tm) QBank; and for video instruction covering each LOS in this
topic review, log in to your Schweser online account and launch the OnDemand video
lectures, if you have purchased these products.
ANSWERS - CONCEPT CHECKERS
1. Which of the following statements is most accurate? The difference between
taxes payable for the PEriod and the tax exPEnse recognized on the financial
statements results from differences:
A. in management control.
B. between basic and diluted earnings.
C. between financial and tax accounting.
The difference between taxes payable for the PEriod and the tax exPEnse
recognized on the financial statements results from differences between
financial and tax accounting.
2. Which of the following tax definitions is least accurate?
A. Taxable income is income based on the rules of the tax authorities.
B. Taxes payable are the amount due to the government.
C. Pretax income is income tax exPEnse divided by one minus the
statutory tax rate.
Pretax income and income tax exPEnse are not always linked because of
temporary and PErmanent differences.
Use the following data to answer Questions 3 through 9.
A firm acquires an asset for $120,000 with a 4-year useful life and no salvage
value.
The asset will generate $50,000 of cash flow for all four years.
The tax rate is 40% each year.
The firm will depreciate the asset over three years on a straight-line (SL) basis
for tax purposes and over four years on a SL basis for financial reporting
purposes.
3. Taxable income in year 1 is:
A. $6,000.
B. $10,000.
C. $20,000.
Annual depreciation exPEnse for tax purposes is ($120,000 cost - $0 salvage
value) / 3 years = $40,000. Taxable income is $50,000 - $40,000 = $10,000.
4. Taxes payable in year 1 are:
A. $4,000.
B. $6,000.
C. $8,000.
Taxes payable is taxable income x tax rate = $10,000 x 40% = $4,000. (The
$10,000 was calculated in question #3.)
5. Pretax income in year 4 is:
A. $6,000.
B. $10,000.
C. $20,000.
Annual depreciation exPEnse for financial purposes is ($120,000 cost - $0
salvage value) / 4 years = $30,000. Pretax income is $50,000 - $30,000 =
$20,000.
6. Income tax exPEnse in year 4 is:
A. $4,000.
B. $6,000.
C. $8,000.
Because there has been no change in the tax rate, income tax exPEnse is pretax
income x tax rate = $20,000 x 40% = $8,000. (The $20,000 was calculated in
question #5.)
7. Taxes payable in year 4 are:
A. $4,000.
B. $6,000.
C. $20,000.
Note that the asset was fully depreciated for tax purposes after year 3, so
taxable income is $50,000. Taxes payable for year 4 = taxable income x tax rate
= $50,000 x 40% = $20,000.
8. At the end of year 2, the firm's balance sheet will report a deferred tax:
A. asset of $4,000.
B. asset of $8,000.
C. liability of $8,000.
At the end of year 2, the tax base is $40,000 ($120,000 cost - $80,000
accumulated tax depreciation) and the carrying value is $60,000 ($120,000 cost
- $60,000 accumulated financial depreciation). Since the carrying value
exceeds the tax base, a DTL of $8,000 [($60,000 carrying value - $40,000 tax
base) x 40%] is reported.
9. Suppose tax rates rise during year 2 to 50%. At the end of year 2, the firm's
balance sheet will show a deferred tax liability of:
A. $5,000.
B. $6,000.
C. $10,000.
The deferred tax liability is now $10,000 [($60,000 carrying value - $40,000 tax
base) x 50%].
10. An increase in the tax rate causes the balance sheet value of a deferred tax
asset to:
A. decrease.
B. increase.
C. remain unchanged.
If tax rates increase, the balance sheet value of a deferred tax asset will also
increase.
11. In its fIRSt year of oPErations, a firm produces taxable income of -$10,000. The
prevailing tax rate is 40%. The firm's balance sheet will report a deferred tax:
A. asset of $4,000.
B. asset of $10,000.
C. liability of $4,000.
The tax loss carryforward results in a deferred tax asset equal to the loss
multiplied by the tax rate.
12. An analyst is comparing a firm to its comPEtitors. The firm has a deferred tax
liability that results from accelerated depreciation for tax purposes. The firm is
exPEcted to continue to grow in the foreseeable future. How should the
liability be treated for analysis purposes?
A. It should be treated as equity at its full value.
B. It should be treated as a liability at its full value.
C. The present value should be treated as a liability with the remainder
being treated as equity.
The DTL is not exPEcted to reverse in the foreseeable future because a growing
firm is exPEcted to continue to increase its investment in depreciable assets,
and accelerated depreciation for tax on the newly acquired assets delays the
reversal of the DTL. The liability should be treated as equity at its full value.
13. Which one of the following statements is most accurate? Under the liability
method of accounting for deferred taxes, a decrease in the tax rate at the
beginning of the accounting PEriod will:
A. increase taxable income in the current PEriod.
B. increase a deferred tax asset.
C. reduce a deferred tax liability.
If the tax rate decreases, balance sheet DTL and DTA are both reduced. Taxable
income is unaffected.
14. While reviewing a company, an analyst identifies a PErmanent difference
between taxable income and pretax income. Which of the following
statements most accurately identifies the appropriate financial statement
adjustment?
A. The amount of the tax implications of the difference should be added to
the deferred tax liabilities.
B. The present value of the amount of the tax implications of the difference
should be added to the deferred tax liabilities.
C. No financial statement adjustment is necessary.
No analyst adjustment is needed. If a PErmanent difference between taxable
income and pretax income is identifiable, the difference will be reflected in the
firm's effective tax rate.
15. An analyst is reviewing a company with a large deferred tax asset on its balance
sheet. She has determined that the firm has had cumulative losses for the last
three years and has a large amount of inventory that can only be sold at
sharply reduced prices. Which of the following adjustments should the analyst
make to account for the deferred tax assets?
A. Record a deferred tax liability to offset the effect of the deferred tax
asset on the firm's balance sheet.
B. Recognize a valuation allowance to reflect the fact that the deferred tax
asset is unlikely to be realized.
C. Do nothing. The difference between taxable and pretax income that
caused the deferred tax asset is likely to reverse in the future.
A valuation allowance is used to offset deferred tax assets if it is unlikely that
those assets will be realized. Because the company has a history of losses and
inventory that is unlikely to generate future profits, it is unlikely the company
will realize its deferred tax assets in full.
16. If the tax base of an asset exceeds the asset's carrying value and a reversal is
exPEcted in the future:
A. a deferred tax asset is created.
B. a deferred tax liability is created.
C. neither a deferred tax asset nor a deferred tax liability is created.
If the tax base of an asset exceeds the carrying value, a deferred tax asset is
created. Taxable income will be lower in the future when the reversal occurs.
17. The author of a new textbook received a $100,000 advance from the publisher
this year. $40,000 of income taxes were paid on the advance when received.
The textbook will not be finished until next year. Determine the tax basis of the
advance at the end of this year.
A. $0.
B. $40,000.
C. $100,000.
For revenue received in advance, the tax base is equal to the carrying value
minus any amounts that will not be taxed in the future. Since the advance has
already been taxed, $100,000 will not be taxed in the future. Thus, the
textbook advance liability has a tax base of $0 ($100,000 carrying value -
$100,000 revenue not taxed in the future).
18. According to IFRS, the deferred tax consequences of revaluing held-for-use
equipment upward is reported on the balance sheet:
A. as an asset.
B. as a liability.
C. in stockholders' equity.
The deferred tax consequences of revaluing an asset upward under IFRS are
reported in stockholders' equity.
19. KLH Company reported the following:
Gross DTA at the beginning of the year $10,500
Gross DTA at the end of the year $11,250
Valuation allowance at the beginning of the year $2,700
Valuation allowance at the end of the year $3,900
Which of the following statements best describes the exPEcted earnings of the
firm? Earnings are exPEcted to:
A. increase.
B. decrease.
C. remain relatively stable.
The valuation allowance account increased from $2,700 to $3,900. The most
likely explanation is the future earnings are exPEcted to decrease, thereby
reducing the value of the DTA.
The following is a review of the Financial Reporting and Analysis principles designed to address the learning
outcome statements set forth by CFA Institute. Cross-Reference to CFA Institute Assigned Reading #31.
NON-CURRENT (LONG-TERM) LIABILITIES
Study Session 8
EXAM FOCUS
Candidates must understand the financial statement effects of issuing a bond at par, at
a discount, or at a premium. You must be able to calculate the book value of the bond
and interest exPEnse at any point in time using the effective interest rate method.
Also, be able to calculate the gain or loss from retiring a bond before its maturity date.
You must thoroughly understand how the classification of a lease as either an
oPErating or finance lease affects the balance sheet, income statement, and cash flow
statement from both the lessee and lessor PErsPEctives. Be able to distinguish
between the two tyPEs of PEnsion plans and identiFY the financial statement reporting
of a defined benefit plan. Finally, be able to evaluate a firm's solvency using the various
leverage and coverage ratios.
FINANCING LIABILITIES
A bond is a contractual promise between a borrower (the bond issuer) and a lender
(the bondholder) that obligates the bond issuer to make payments to the bondholder
over the term of the bond. Typically, two tyPEs of payments are involved: (1) PEriodic
interest payments, and (2) repayment of principal at maturity.
Bond Terminology
The face value, also known as the maturity value or par value, is the amount of
principal that will be paid to the bondholder at maturity. The face value is used
to calculate the coupon payments.
The coupon rate is the interest rate stated in the bond that is used to calculate
the coupon payments.
The coupon payments are the PEriodic interest payments to the bondholders
and are calculated by multiplying the face value by the coupon rate.
The effective rate of interest is the interest rate that equates the present value
of the future cash flows of the bond and the issue price. The effective rate is the
market rate of interest required by bondholders and dePEnds on the bond's
risks (e.g., default risk, liquidity risk), as well as the overall structure of interest
rates and the timing of the bond's cash flows. Do not confuse the market rate of
interest with the coupon rate. The coupon rate is typically fixed for the term of
the bond. The market rate of interest on a firm's bonds, however, will likely
change over the bond's life, which changes the bond's market value as well.
The balance sheet liability of a bond is equal to the present value of its
remaining cash flows (coupon payments and face value), discounted at the
market rate of interest at issuance. At maturity, the liability will equal the face
value of the bond. The balance sheet liability is also known as the book value or
carrying value of the bond.
The interest exPEnse reported in the income statement is calculated by
multiplying the book value of the bond liability at the beginning of the PEriod by
the market rate of interest of the bond when it was issued.
At the date of issuance, the market rate of interest may be equal to, less than, or
greater than the coupon rate.
When the market rate is equal to the coupon rate, the bond is a par bond
(priced at face value).
When the market rate is greater than the coupon rate, the bond is a discount
bond (priced below par).
When the market rate is less than the coupon rate, the bond is a premium bond
(priced above par).
LOS 31.a: Determine the initial recognition, initial measurement and subsequent
measurement of bonds.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 604
Bonds Issued at Par
When a bond is issued at par, the bond's yield at issuance is equal to the coupon rate.
In this case, the present value of the coupon payments plus the present value of the
face amount is equal to the par value. The effects on the financial statements are
straightforward:
On the balance sheet, assets and liabilities increase by the bond proceeds (face
value). The book value of the bond liability will not change over the term of the
bond.
On the income statement, interest exPEnse for the PEriod is equal to the
coupon payment because the yield at issuance and the coupon rate are the
same.
On the cash flow statement, the issue proceeds are reported as a cash inflow
from financing activities and the coupon payments are reported as cash
outflows from oPErating activities (under U.S. GAAP; they may be reported as
CFO or CFF outflows under IFRS). At maturity, repayment of the face value is
reported as a cash outflow from financing activities.
Bonds Issued at a Discount or Premium
When the bond's yield at issuance is not equal to the coupon rate, the proceeds
received (the present value of the coupon payments plus the present value of the face
value) are not equal to par value. In this case, the bond is issued at a premium or a
discount. The premium or discount at the issue date is usually relatively small for
coupon bonds.
If the coupon rate is less than the bond's yield, the proceeds received will be less than
the face value. The difference is known as a discount. The coupon rate is lower than
the coupon rate that would make the market price of the bond equal to its par value.
Investors will pay less than face value because of the lower coupon rate. Such bonds
are known as discount bonds.
If the coupon rate is greater than the bond's yield, the bond price and the proceeds
received will be greater than face value. We refer to such bonds as premium bonds. In
this case, investors will pay more for the above-market coupon payments.
Balance Sheet Measurement
When a company issues a bond, assets and liabilities both initially increase by the bond
proceeds. At any point in time, the book value of the bond liability will equal the
present value of the remaining future cash flows (coupon payments and face value)
discounted at the bond's yield at issuance.
Professor's Note: Interest exPEnse and the book value of a bond liability are calculated using the
bond's yield at the time it was issued, not its yield today. This is a critical point.
A premium bond is reported on the balance sheet at more than its face value. As the
premium is amortized (reduced), the book value of the bond liability will decrease until
it reaches the face value of the bond at maturity.
A discount bond is reported on the balance sheet at less than its face value. As the
discount is amortized, the book value of the bond liability will increase until it reaches
face value at maturity.
LOS 31.b: Describe the effective interest method and calculate interest exPEnse,
amortisation of bond discounts/premiums, and interest payments.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 604
For a bond issued at a premium or discount, interest exPEnse and coupon interest
payments are not equal. Interest exPEnse includes amortization of any discount or
premium. Using the effective interest rate method, interest exPEnse is equal to the
book value of the bond liability at the beginning of the PEriod, multiplied by the bond's
yield at issuance.
For a premium bond, interest exPEnse is less than the coupon payment (yield <
coupon rate). The difference between interest exPEnse and the coupon
payment is the amortization of the premium. The premium amortization is
subtracted each PEriod from the bond liability on the balance sheet. Thus,
interest exPEnse will decrease over time as the bond liability decreases.
For a discount bond, interest exPEnse is greater than the coupon payment (yield
> coupon rate). The difference between interest exPEnse and the coupon
payment is the amortization of the discount. The amortization of the discount
each PEriod is added to the bond liability on the balance sheet. Therefore,
interest exPEnse will increase over time as the bond liability increases.
Professor's Note: In the case of a discount bond, the coupon is too low relative to the required
rate of return of the market. The purposes of amortizing the discount are to (1) increase the book
value of the bond liability over time, and (2) increase interest exPEnse so that the coupon
payment plus discount amortization is approximately equal to the interest exPEnse that would
have prevailed had the bond been issued at par. Conversely, amortizing a premium decreases the book
value of the bond liability over time and decreases interest exPEnse.
The effective interest rate method of amortizing a discount or premium is required
under IFRS. Under U.S. GAAP, the effective interest rate method is preferred, but the
straight-line method is allowed if the results are not materially different. The straightline method is similar to straight-line depreciation in that the total discount or
premium at issuance is amortized by equal amounts each PEriod over the life of the
bond.
While coupon interest is paid in cash, amortization is a noncash item. When presenting
the cash flow statement using the indirect method, net income must be adjusted to
remove the effects of any amortization of a discount or premium in order to calculate
cash flow from oPErations.
Firms that follow U.S. GAAP must report cash interest paid in the cash flow statement
as an oPErating cash flow. Firms that follow IFRS can report cash interest paid as either
an oPErating or financing cash flow. Therefore, it may be necessary to reclassiFY
interest paid when comparing firms that follow different standards.
Professor's Note: Some analysts believe classiFYing interest exPEnse as an oPErating activity is
inconsistent with treating the bond proceeds as a financing activity. In addition, treating
interest exPEnse as an oPErating activity incorrectly describes the economics of a bond issued
at a premium or discount. For bonds issued at a discount, cash flow from oPErations is
overstated. This is because the coupon payment is reported as an oPErating cash flow, while
the discount, when paid (as part of a bond's maturity payment), is reported as a financing cash
flow. Stated differently, had the firm issued the bond at par, the coupon payment would have
been higher to match the market rate of interest. ReclassiFYing interest as a financing activity in the
cash flow statement corrects this inconsistent treatment.
Example: Book values and cashflows
On December 31, 20X2, a company issued a 3-year, 10% annual coupon bond with a face value of
$100,000. Calculate the book value of the bond at year-end 20X2, 20X3, and 20X4, and the interest
exPEnse for 20X3, 20X4, and 20X5, assuming the bond was issued at a market rate of interest of (a) 10%,
(b) 9%, and (c) 11%.
Answer:
(a) Bond issued at par. If the market rate of interest at issuance is 10%, the book value of the bonds will
always be $100,000, and the interest exPEnse will always be $10,000, which is equal to the coupon
payment of 0.10 x $100,000. There is no discount or premium to amortize.
(b) Premium bond. If the market rate of interest is 9%, the present value of the cash payments (a 3-year
annuity of $10,000 and a payment in three years of $100,000) is $102,531:
N = 3; PMT = 10,000; FV = 100,000; I/Y = 9; CPT - PV = $102,531
Professor's Note: The present value computed in this manner will have a minus sign.
The following table shows the interest exPEnse and book value at the end of each year.
Interest ExPEnse and Book Value for a Premium Bond
The premium amortization for 20X3 is 10,000 - 9,228 = $772. For 20X4, the amortization is 10,000 - 9,158
= $842. Finally, for 20X5, premium amortization is $917. Note that the premium has been fully amortized
upon maturity so that the book value of the bond equals par value.
(c) Discount bond. If the market rate of interest is 11%, the present value of the cash payments (a 3-year
annuity of $10,000 and a payment in three years of $100,000) is $97,556.
N = 3; PMT = 10,000; FV = 100,000; I/Y = 11; CPT - PV = $97,556
The following table shows the interest exPEnse and book value at the end of each year.
Interest ExPEnse and Book Value for a Discount Bond
Again, the pattern of discount amortization is such that the discount is fully amortized upon maturity,
when the book value of the bond equals par value.
Zero-coupon bonds make no PEriodic interest payments. A zero-coupon bond, also
known as a pure-discount bond, is issued at a discount from its par value and its annual
interest exPEnse is implied, but not explicitly paid. The actual interest payment is
included in the face value that is paid at maturity. The effects of zero-coupon bonds on
the financial statements are qualitatively the same as any discount bond, but the
impact is larger because the discount is larger.
Issuance Costs
Issuing a bond involves legal and accounting fees, printing costs, sales commissions,
and other fees. Under IFRS and U.S. GAAP, the initial bond liability on the balance
sheet (the proceeds from issuing the bond) is reduced by the amount of issuance costs,
increasing the bond's effective interest rate. In effect, issuance costs are treated as
unamortized discount.
Before 2016, under U.S. GAAP, issuance costs were capitalized as an asset and
allocated to the income statement over the life of the bond. Although the treatment of
issuance costs has now converged, U.S. GAAP still PErmits the earlier treatment.
Under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS, bond issuance costs (an outflow) are usually netted
against the bond proceeds (an inflow) and reported on the cash flow statement as a
financing cash flow.
Fair Value Reporting Option
Recall that the book value of a bond liability is based on its market yield at issuance.
So, as long as the bond's yield does not change, the bond liability represents fair
(market) value. However, if the yield changes, the balance sheet liability is no longer
equal to fair value.
An increase in the bond's yield will result in a decrease in the fair value of the bond
liability. Conversely, a decrease in the bond's yield increases its fair value. Changes in
yield result in a divergence between the book value of the bond liability and the fair
value of the bond. The fair value of the bond is the economic liability at a point in time.
IFRS and U.S. GAAP give firms the IRRevocable option to report debt at fair value. Under
this option, gains (decreases in bond liability) and losses (increases in bond liability)
that result from changes in bonds' market yields are reported in the income
statement.
For analysis, the market value of a firm's debt may be more appropriate than its book
value. For example, a firm that issued a bond when interest rates were low is relatively
better off when interest rates increase. This is because the firm could repurchase the
bond at its now-lower market value. Decreasing the bond liability on the balance sheet
to market value increases equity and decreases the debt-to-assets and debt-to-equity
ratios. If interest rates have decreased since issuance, adjusting debt to its market
value will have the opposite effects.
Summary of Financial Statement Effects of Issuing a Bond
Figure 1: Cash Flow Impact of Issuing a Bond
Cash Flow from Financing
Cash Flow from
OPErations
Issuance of debt
Increased by cash received
No effect
(Present value of the bond at the
market interest rate)
No effect
Decreased by interest
paid
[(coupon rate) x (face
or par value)]
Decreased by face (par) value
No effect
PEriodic
interest
payments
Payment at
maturity
Figure 2: Income Statement Impact of Issuing a Bond
Figure 3: Balance Sheet Impact of Issuing a Bond
Long-term debt is carried at the present value of the remaining cash payments
discounted at the market rate prevailing when the debt was issued.
Issued at
Par
Carried
at face
value
Issued at a Premium
Issued at a Discount
Carried at face value plus
premium
Carried at face value less
discount
The liability decreases as the
premium is amortized to
interest exPEnse
The liability increases as the
discount is amortized to interest
exPEnse
LOS 31.c: Explain the derecognition of debt.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 615
When bonds mature, no gain or loss is recognized by the issuer. At maturity, any
original discount or premium has been fully amortized; thus, the book value of a bond
liability and its face value are the same. The cash outflow to repay a bond is reported
in the cash flow statement as a financing cash flow.
A firm may choose to redeem bonds before maturity because interest rates have
fallen, because the firm has generated surplus cash through oPErations, or because
funds from the issuance of equity make it possible (and desirable).
When bonds are redeemed before maturity, a gain or loss is recognized by subtracting
the redemption price from the book value of the bond liability at the reacquisition
date. For example, consider a firm that reacquires $1 million face amount of bonds at
102% of par when the carrying value of the bond liability is $995,000. The firm will
recognize a loss of $25,000 ($995,000 carrying value - $1,020,000 redemption price).
Had the carrying value been greater than the redemption price, the firm would have
recognized a gain.
If the redeemed bonds' issuance costs were capitalized, any remaining unamortized
costs must be written off and included in the gain or loss calculation. No separate entry
is necessary if the issuance costs were accounted for in the initial bond liability,
because in that case no separate asset representing unamortized issuance costs would
have been created.
Any gain or loss from redeeming debt is reported in the income statement, usually as a
part of continuing oPErations, and additional information is disclosed separately.
Redeeming debt is usually not a part of the firm's day-to-day oPErations; thus, analysts
often eliminate the gain or loss from the income statement for analysis and
forecasting.
When presenting the cash flow statement using the indirect method, any gain (loss) is
subtracted from (added to) net income in calculating cash flow from oPErations. The
redemption price is reported as an outflow from financing activities.
LOS 31.d: Describe the role of debt covenants in protecting creditors.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 617
Debt covenants are restrictions imposed by the lender on the borrower to protect the
lender's position. Debt covenants can reduce default risk and thus reduce borrowing
costs. The restrictions can be in the form of affirmative covenants or negative
covenants.
With affirmative covenants, the borrower promises to do certain things, such as:
Make timely payments of principal and interest.
Maintain certain ratios (such as the current, debt-to-equity, and interest
coverage ratios) in accordance with sPEcified levels.
Maintain collateral, if any, in working order.
With negative covenants, the borrower promises to refrain from certain activities that
might adversely affect its ability to repay the outstanding debt, such as:
Increasing dividends or repurchasing shares.
Issuing more debt.
Engaging in mergers and acquisitions.
The bondholders can demand immediate repayment of principal if the firm violates a
covenant (referred to as technical default). Analyzing the covenants is a necessary
component of the credit analysis of a bond. Bond covenants are typically discussed in
the financial statement footnotes.
Covenants protect bondholders from actions the firm may take that would harm the
value of the bondholders' claims to the firm's assets and earnings (i.e., decrease credit
quality). To the extent that covenants restrict, for example, the firm's ability to invest,
take on additional debt, or pay dividends, analysis of covenants can be important when
valuing the firm's equity (esPEcially involving its growth prosPEcts) as well as when
analyzing and valuing its debt SECurities.
Professor's Note: Debt covenants are described further in the Study Session on fixed income
investments.
LOS 31.e: Describe the financial statement presentation of and disclosures relating to
debt.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 619
Firms will often report all of their outstanding long-term debt on a single line on the
balance sheet. The portion that is due within the next year is reported as a current
liability. The firm separately discloses more detail about its long-term debt in the
footnotes. These disclosures are useful in determining the timing and amounts of
future cash outflows. The footnote disclosure usually includes a discussion of:
The nature of the liabilities.
Maturity dates.
Stated and effective interest rates.
Call provisions and conversion privileges.
Restrictions imposed by creditors.
Assets pledged as SECurity.
The amount of debt maturing in each of the next five years.
A discussion of the firm's long-term debt is also found in the Management Discussion
and Analysis SECtion. This discussion is both quantitative, such as identiFYing
obligations and commitments that are due in the future, and qualitative, such as
discussing capital resource trends and material changes in the mix and cost of debt.
LOS 31.f: Explain motivations for leasing assets instead of purchasing them.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 622
A lease is a contractual arrangement whereby the lessor, the owner of the asset,
allows the lessee to use the asset for a sPEcified PEriod of time in return for PEriodic
payments.
Leases are classified as either finance leases or oPErating leases. In the United States, a
finance lease is known as a capital lease.
A finance lease is, in substance, a purchase of an asset that is financed with debt.
Accordingly, at the inception of the lease, the lessee will add equal amounts to both
assets and liabilities on the balance sheet. Over the term of the lease, the lessee will
recognize depreciation exPEnse on the asset and interest exPEnse on the liability.
An oPErating lease is essentially a rental arrangement. No asset or liability is reported
by the lessee and the PEriodic lease payments are simply recognized as rental exPEnse
in the income statement.
Professor's Note: Accounting standards scheduled to take effect in 2019 will require oPErating
leases to apPEar on the balance sheets of lessees.
Leasing can have certain benefits:
Less costly financing. Typically, a lease requires no initial down payment. Thus,
the lessee conserves cash.
Reduced risk of obsolescence. At the end of the lease, the asset can be returned
to the lessor.
Less restrictive provisions. Leases can provide more flexibility than other forms
of financing because the lease agreement can be negotiated to better suit the
needs of each party.
Off-balance-sheet financing. Entering into an oPErating lease does not result in
a balance sheet liability, so reported leverage ratios are lower compared to
borrowing the funds to purchase assets.
Tax reporting advantages. In the United States, firms can create a synthetic
lease whereby the lease is treated as an ownership position for tax reporting.
This allows the lessee to deduct depreciation exPEnse and interest exPEnse for
tax purposes. For financial reporting, the lease is treated as a rental agreement
and the lessee does not report the lease liability on the balance sheet.
LOS 31.g: Distinguish between a finance lease and an oPErating lease from the
PErsPEctives of the lessor and the lessee.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 623
Lessee's PErsPEctive
Under IFRS, the classification of a lease is determined by the economic substance of
the transaction. If substantially all the rights and risks of ownership are transferred to
the lessee, the lease is treated as a finance lease. Circumstances that require a lease to
be treated as a finance lease include:
Title to the leased asset is transferred to the lessee at the end of the lease.
The lessee can purchase the leased asset for a price that is significantly lower
than the fair value of the asset at some future date.
The lease term covers a major portion of the asset's economic life.
The present value of the lease payments is substantially equal to the fair value
of the leased asset.
The leased asset is so sPEcialized that only the lessee can use the asset without
significant modifications.
Under U.S. GAAP, the criteria are conceptually similar, but are more sPEcific than
under IFRS. A lessee must treat a lease as a capital (finance) lease if any of the
following criteria are met:
Title to the leased asset is transferred to the lessee at the end of the lease
PEriod.
A bargain purchase option PErmits the lessee to purchase the leased asset for a
price that is significantly lower than the fair market value of the asset at some
future date.
The lease PEriod is 75% or more of the asset's economic life.
The present value of the lease payments is 90% or more of the fair value of the
leased asset.
A lease not meeting any of these criteria is classified as an oPErating lease. Lessees
often prefer oPErating leases because no liability is reported. Recall that with a finance
lease, the lessee reports both an asset and a liability on the balance sheet.
Lessor's PErsPEctive
From the lessor's PErsPEctive, the lease is also classified as either an oPErating lease or
a finance (capital) lease.
Under IFRS, classification by the lessor is the same as the lessee's; that is, if
substantially all the rights and risks of ownership are transferred to the lessee, the
lease is treated as a finance lease. Otherwise, the lease is treated as an oPErating
lease.
Under U.S. GAAP, if any one of the capital (finance) lease criteria for lessees is met, and
the collectability of lease payments is reasonably certain, and the lessor has
substantially completed PErformance, the lessor must treat the lease as a capital
(finance) lease. Otherwise, the lessor will treat the lease as an oPErating lease.
With an oPErating lease, the lessor recognizes rental income and continues to report
and depreciate the leased asset on its balance sheet. With a capital (finance) lease, the
lessor removes the leased asset from the balance sheet and replaces it with a lease
investment account (lease receivable).
LOS 31.h: Determine the initial recognition, initial measurement, and subsequent
measurement of finance leases.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 624
Reporting by the Lessee
The treatment of a lease as either an oPErating lease or finance lease determines
whether the lease is reported on the balance sheet, how the lease exPEnse is
recognized in the income statement, and the classification of the lease payments on
the cash flow statement.
OPErating lease. At the inception of the lease, the balance sheet is unaffected. No
asset or liability is reported by the lessee. During the term of the lease, rent exPEnse
equal to the lease payment is recognized in the lessee's income statement. In the cash
flow statement, the lease payment is reported as an outflow from oPErating activities.
Finance lease. At the inception of the lease, the lower of the present value of future
minimum lease payments or the fair value of the leased asset is recognized as both an
asset and as a liability on the lessee's balance sheet. Over the term of the lease, the
asset is depreciated in the income statement and interest exPEnse is recognized.
Interest exPEnse is equal to the lease liability at the beginning of the PEriod multiplied
by the lease interest rate.
Professor's Note: In a finance lease, the interest rate used by the lessee is the lower of the lessee's
incremental borrowing rate and the lessor's implicit rate.
In the cash flow statement, the lease payment is separated into its interest and
principal components. Just as with any amortizing loan, the principal portion of the
lease payment is equal to the total payment minus the interest portion. Under U.S.
GAAP, interest paid is reported in the cash flow statement as an outflow from
oPErating activities and the principal payment is reported as an outflow from financing
activities.
Professor's Note: Under IFRS, firms can choose to report interest paid in the cash flow statement as
an oPErating or financing cash flow.
Example: Accounting for a finance lease
Affordable Company leases a machine for its own use for four years with annual payments of $10,000. At
the end of the lease, the machine is returned to the lessor, who will sell it for its scrap value. The
appropriate interest rate is 6%.
Calculate the impact of the lease on Affordable's balance sheet and income statement for each of the four
years, including the immediate impact. Affordable depreciates all assets on a straight-line basis. Assume
the lease payments are made at the end of the year.
Answer:
The lease is classified as a finance lease because the asset is being leased for 75% or more of its useful life
(we know this because at the end of the lease term, the asset will be sold for scrap). The present value of
the lease payments at 6% is $34,651.
N = 4; I/Y = 6; PMT = -10,000; FV = 0; CPT - PV = $34,651
This amount is immediately recorded as both an asset and a liability on the lessee's balance sheet.
Professor's Note: Here we are assuming the payments are made at the end of the year.
Watch out on the exam. If the lease had called for beginning of the year payments, it would
have been necessary to change the payment mode on your calculator in order to compute
the present value.
Over the next four years, depreciation will be $34,651 / 4 = $8,663 PEr year. The book value of the asset
will decline each year by the depreciation exPEnse.
The interest exPEnse and liability values are shown in the following table. Note that the principal
repayment amount each PEriod is equal to the lease payment minus the interest exPEnse for the PEriod
(6% times the liability at the beginning of the PEriod).
Affordable Company Example: Finance Lease Calculations
Column 5 shows the ending book value of the leased asset each year. Note that, initially, depreciation is
greater than the amortization (principal repayment) of the loan, so the asset's book value declines more
rapidly than the lease liability. In the later years of the lease term, annual interest exPEnse is less and the
amortization of the lease liability is greater. The book value of the leased asset and the lease liability are
again equal (both are zero) at the end of the lease term.
Financial Statement and Ratio Effects of OPErating and Finance Leases
Balance sheet. A finance lease results in a reported asset and a liability. Consequently,
turnover ratios that use total or fixed assets in their denominators will be lower when
a lease is treated as a finance lease as compared to an oPErating lease. For the same
reason, return on assets will also be lower for finance leases. Most importantly,
leverage ratios, such as the debt-to-assets ratio and the debt-to-equity ratio, will be
higher with finance leases than with oPErating leases because of the reported liability.
The principal payment due within the next year is reported as a current liability on the
lessee's balance sheet. This reduces the lessee's current ratio and working capital
(current assets minus current liabilities).
Because the liability for an oPErating lease does not apPEar on the lessee's balance
sheet, oPErating leases are sometimes referred to as off-balance-sheet financing
activities.
Income statement. OPErating income (EBIT) will be higher for companies that use
finance leases relative to companies that use oPErating leases. With an oPErating
lease, the entire lease payment is an oPErating exPEnse, while for a finance lease, only
the depreciation of the leased asset (not the interest portion of the lease payment) is
treated as an oPErating exPEnse.
In the previous example, assume Affordable Company can treat the lease as either an
oPErating lease or a finance lease. Figure 4 compares the income statement effects.
Figure 4: Affordable Company: Impact of Lease Accounting Method on the Income
Statement
OPErating Lease
Finance Lease
Year
Rent ExPEnse
Depreciation
Interest
Finance Lease ExPEnse
1
2
3
4
$10,000
$8,663
$2,079
$10,742
10,000
8,663
1,604
10,267
10,000
8,663
1,100
10,000
8,663
566
$40,000
9,763
9,229
$40,000
Total exPEnse over the life of a lease will be the same whether it is accounted for as an
oPErating lease or a finance (capital) lease because the sum of depreciation exPEnse
and interest exPEnse will equal the total of the lease payments. In the early years of a
finance lease, however, the interest exPEnse is higher, so the sum of depreciation and
interest exPEnse is greater than the lease payment. Consequently, net income will be
lower for a finance lease in its early years and higher in its later years, compared to an
oPErating lease.
Cash flow statement. Total cash flow is unaffected by the accounting treatment of a
lease. In our example, the total cash outflow is $10,000 PEr year. If the lease is treated
as an oPErating lease (rent exPEnse = $10,000), then the total cash payment reduces
cash flow from oPErations. If the lease is treated as a finance lease, then only the
portion of the lease payment that is considered interest exPEnse reduces cash flow
from oPErations. The part of the lease payment considered repayment of principal
reduces cash flow from financing activities. Figure 5 illustrates that for a finance lease,
cash flow from oPErations (CFO) is higher, and cash flow from financing (CFF) is lower,
compared to an oPErating lease.
Figure 5: Affordable Company: Impact on Cash Flow
Finance Lease
OPErating Lease
Year
CF OPErations
CF Financing
CF OPErations
1
-$2,079
-$7,921
-$10,000
2
3
4
-1,604
-8,396
-10,000
-1,100
-8,900
-10,000
-566
-9,434
-10,000
If Affordable treats the lease as a finance lease, oPErating cash outflow is $2,079 in
Year 1, and if it treats the lease as an oPErating lease, oPErating cash outflow is
$10,000. Companies with finance leases will show higher CFO relative to firms that use
oPErating leases (all else the same).
Figure 6 and Figure 7 summarize the differences between the effects of finance leases
and oPErating leases on the financial statements and ratios of the lessee.
Figure 6: Financial Statement Impact of Lease Accounting
Finance Lease OPErating Lease
Assets
Higher
Lower
Liabilities (current and long-term)
Higher
Lower
Net income (in the early years)
Lower
Higher
Net income (later years)
Higher
Lower
Total net income
Same
Same
EBIT (oPErating income)
Higher
Lower
Cash flow from oPErations
Higher
Lower
Cash flow from financing
Lower
Higher
Total cash flow
Same
Same
Figure 7: Ratio Impact of Lease Accounting
Finance Lease OPErating Lease
Current ratio (CA / CL)
Lower
Higher
Working capital (CA - CL)
Lower
Higher
Asset turnover (Revenue / TA)
Lower
Higher
Return on assets* (NI / TA)
Lower
Higher
Return on equity* (NI / SE)
Lower
Higher
Debt / Assets
Higher
Lower
Debt / Equity
Higher
Lower
* In the early years of the lease.
In sum, all the ratios in Figure 7 are worse when the lease is capitalized. The only
improvements from a finance lease are higher EBIT (because interest is not subtracted
in calculating EBIT), higher CFO (because principal repayment is CFF), and higher net
income in the later years of the lease (because interest plus depreciation is less than
the lease payment in the later years).
Professor's Note: There are two points that candidates often find confusing. FIRSt, interest
payments are an oPErating cash flow but are not considered an oPErating exPEnditure. That is,
they are not subtracted in calculating oPErating income (EBIT). SECond, adding equal amounts
to assets and liabilities will typically increase the debt-to-assets ratio. Because assets are
typically larger than debt (liabilities), the numerator of the debt-to-assets ratio increases by a
greater proportion than the denominator when equal amounts are added to each, so the ratio
increases. With resPEct to the current ratio and working capital, the current year principal
amortization for a finance lease is added to current liabilities, but there is no increase in current
assets because the asset is long-lived.
Reporting by the Lessor
From the lessor's PErsPEctive, a capital lease under U.S. GAAP is treated as either a
sales-tyPE lease or a direct financing lease. If the present value of the lease payments
exceeds the carrying value of the asset, the lease is treated as a sales-tyPE lease. If the
present value of the lease payments is equal to the carrying value, the lease is treated
as a direct financing lease.
IFRS does not distinguish between a sales-tyPE lease and a direct financing lease.
However, similar treatment to a sales-tyPE lease is allowed under IFRS for finance
leases originated by manufacturers or dealers. In this case, the present value of the
lease payments likely exceeds the carrying value of the asset.
Sales-TyPE Lease
A sales-tyPE lease is treated as if the lessor sold the asset for the present value of the
lease payments and provided a loan to the buyer in the same amount. Sales-tyPE
leases are typical when the lessor is a manufacturer or dealer because the cost
(balance sheet value) of the leased asset is usually less than its fair value.
At the inception of the lease, the lessor recognizes a sale equal to the present value of
the lease payments, and cost of goods sold equal to the carrying value of the asset.
Just as with a normal sales transaction, the difference between the sales price and cost
of goods sold is gross profit. The asset is removed from the balance sheet and a lease
receivable is created, equal to the present value of the lease payments. As the lease
payments are received, the principal portion of the payment reduces the lease
receivable and the interest portion of the lease payment is recognized as interest
income. The interest portion of each lease payment is equal to the lease receivable at
the beginning of the PEriod multiplied by the lease interest rate.
In the cash flow statement, the interest portion of the lease payment is reported as an
inflow from oPErating activities, and the principal reduction is reported as an inflow
from investing activities, just as with an amortizing loan.
Direct Financing Lease
In a direct financing lease, no gross profit is recognized by the lessor at the inception
of the lease. Because the present value of the lease payments is equal to the carrying
value of the leased asset, the lessor is simply providing a financing function to the
lessee. In this case, the lessor is not usually a manufacturer or dealer, but has
purchased the asset from a third party.
At the inception of the lease, the lessor removes the asset from its balance sheet and
creates a lease receivable in the same amount. As the lease payments are received, the
principal portion of each payment reduces the lease receivable.
In the income statement, the lessor recognizes interest income over the term of the
lease. The interest portion of each lease payment is equal to the lease receivable at the
beginning of the PEriod multiplied by the interest rate.
In the cash flow statement, the interest portion of the lease payment is reported as an
inflow from oPErating activities and the principal reduction is reported as an inflow
from investing activities.
Example: Direct financing lease
Assume Johnson Company purchases an asset for $69,302 to lease to Carver, Inc. for four years with an
annual lease payment of $20,000 at the end of each year. At the end of the lease, Carver will own the
asset for no additional payment. The implied interest rate in the lease is 6% (N = 4, PV = -69,302, PMT =
20,000, FV = 0, CPT I/Y - 6). Determine how Johnson should account for the lease payments from Carver.
Answer:
Since the present value of lease payments of $69,302 is equal to the carrying value of the asset, Johnson
treats the lease as a direct financing lease. Johnson removes the leased asset from the balance sheet and
records a lease receivable of $69,302. The lease payments are recorded as follows:
Interest income received each year will increase earnings. In the cash flow statement, the interest income
is reported as an inflow from oPErating activities. The principal reduction (column 3 - column 2) reduces
the lease receivable and is treated in the cash flow statement as an inflow from investing activities.
If Johnson had manufactured the equipment with a cost of goods of $60,000, it would have recorded a
gross profit of $69,302 - $60,000 = $9,302 at lease inception, put a lease receivable of $69,302 on its
balance sheet, and then accounted for the interest income portion of the lease payments just as in the
table above.
OPErating Lease
If the lease is treated as an oPErating lease, the lessor simply recognizes the lease
payment as rental income. In addition, the lessor will keep the leased asset on its
balance sheet and depreciate it over its useful life.
Returning to our example, if Johnson treats the lease as an oPErating lease, $20,000 of
rental income is recognized each year. In addition, depreciation exPEnse of $17,325.50
($69,302 / 4 years) is also recognized. Figure 8 compares the income from a direct
financing lease and an oPErating lease.
Figure 8: Income Comparison of a Direct Financing Lease and OPErating Lease
Total income over the life of the lease is the same for an oPErating lease and a direct
financing lease. However, in the early years of the lease, the income reported from the
direct financing lease is higher than the income reported from the oPErating lease. Just
as with an amortizing loan, the interest is higher in the early years. This situation
reverses in the later years of the lease.
In the cash flow statement, the lease classifications result in significant differences in
cash flow from oPErations, as shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9: Cash Flow Comparison to the Lessor of a Direct Financing Lease and an
OPErating Lease
Direct Financing Lease
OPErating Lease
Year CF OPErations CF Investing
CF OPErations
1
2
3
4
$4,158
$15,842
$20,000
3,208
16,792
20,000
2,200
17,800
20,000
1,132
18,868
20,000
Total cash flow is the same for an oPErating lease and a direct financing lease.
However, cash flow from oPErations is higher with the oPErating lease. With a direct
financing lease, the lease payment is separated into the interest portion (CFO) and
principal portion (CFI).
Professor's Note: From the lessee's PErsPEctive, principal is a financing outflow. From the lessor's
PErsPEctive, principal is a return of capital invested in the lease. Thus, the principal is reported as
an investing inflow.
LOS 31.i: Compare the disclosures relating to finance and oPErating leases.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 628
Both lessees and lessors are required to disclose useful information about finance
leases and oPErating leases in the financial statements or in the footnotes, including:
General description of the leasing arrangement.
The nature, timing, and amount of payments to be paid or received in each of
the next five years. Lease payments after five years can be aggregated.
Amount of lease revenue and exPEnse reported in the income statement for
each PEriod presented.
Amounts receivable and unearned revenues from lease arrangements.
Restrictions imposed by lease agreements.
For lessees, analysts often use the disclosures to estimate the off-balance-sheet
liabilities of oPErating leases.
Professor's Note: Unfortunately, the interest rate used in the lease calculations is not always
disclosed. Thus, it may be necessary for an analyst to derive the interest rate in order to make
adjustments for analytical purposes. Deriving the interest rate and carrying out the lease
adjustments are covered beyond the scoPE of the Level I exam.
LOS 31.j: Compare the presentation and disclosure of defined contribution and
defined benefit PEnsion plans.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 640
A PEnsion is a form of deferred comPEnsation earned over time through employee
service. The most common PEnsion arrangements are defined contribution plans and
defined benefit plans.
A defined contribution plan is a retirement plan in which the firm contributes a sum
each PEriod to the employee's retirement account. The firm's contribution can be
based on any number of factors, including years of service, the employee's age,
comPEnsation, profitability, or even a PErcentage of the employee's contribution. In
any event, the firm makes no promise to the employee regarding the future value of
the plan assets. The investment decisions are left to the employee, who assumes all of
the investment risk.
The financial reporting requirements for defined contribution plans are
straightforward. PEnsion exPEnse is simply equal to the employer's contribution. There
is no future obligation to report on the balance sheet as a liability.
In a defined benefit plan, the firm promises to make PEriodic payments to employees
after retirement. The benefit is usually based on the employee's years of service and
the employee's comPEnsation at, or near, retirement. For example, an employee might
earn a retirement benefit of 2% of her final salary for each year of service.
Consequently, an employee with 20 years of service and a final salary of $100,000,
would receive $40,000 ($100,000 final salary x 2% x 20 years of service) each year
upon retirement until death. Because the employee's future benefit is defined, the
employer assumes the investment risk.
A company that offers defined PEnsion benefits typically funds the plan by contributing
assets to a separate legal entity, usually a trust. The plan assets are managed to
generate the income and principal growth necessary to pay the PEnsion benefits as
they come due.
Financial reporting for a defined benefit plan is much more complicated than for a
defined contribution plan because the employer must estimate the value of the future
obligation to its employees. The obligation involves forecasting a number of variables,
such as future comPEnsation levels, employee turnover, average retirement age,
mortality rates, and an appropriate discount rate.
For a defined benefit plan, the net PEnsion asset or net PEnsion liability is a key
element for analysis. If the fair value of the plan's assets is greater than the estimated
PEnsion obligation, the plan is said to be overfunded and the sponsoring firm records a
net PEnsion asset on its balance sheet. If the fair value of the plan's assets is less than
the estimated PEnsion obligation, the plan is underfunded and the firm records a net
PEnsion liability.
The change in the net PEnsion asset or liability is recognized on the firm's financial
statements each year. Some components are included in net income while others are
recorded as other comprehensive income. Figure 10 illustrates the treatments under
IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
Figure 10: Components of the Change in a Net PEnsion Asset or Liability
Treatment under IFRS
Under IFRS, three components make up the change in net PEnsion asset or liability:
service costs, net interest exPEnse or income, and remeasurements. PEnsion exPEnse
on the income statement is the sum of service costs and the net interest exPEnse or
income. Remeasurements are recognized as other comprehensive income.
Service cost is the present value of additional benefits earned by an employee over the
year. Net interest exPEnse (income) is the beginning value of net PEnsion liability
(asset) multiplied by the discount rate assumed when determining the present value of
the PEnsion obligation. This discount rate is chosen by management but should reflect
the yield of a highly rated corporate bond.
Remeasurements are the third component. These include actuarial gains or losses and
the difference between the actual return on plan assets and the return included in net
interest exPEnse or income. Under IFRS, remeasurements are not amortized to the
income statement over time.
Treatment under U.S. GAAP
Five components make up the change in net PEnsion asset or liability under U.S. GAAP.
PEnsion exPEnse in the current PEriod has three components: service costs, net
interest exPEnse, and the exPEcted return on plan assets (a positive exPEcted return
decreases PEnsion exPEnse).
Two components are recognized in other comprehensive income: past service costs
(retROActive benefits awarded to employees when a plan is initiated or amended) and
actuarial gains or losses. These are amortized to PEnsion exPEnse, which allows
companies to smooth their effects on PEnsion exPEnses over time. Under U.S. GAAP,
the difference between the actual and exPEcted return on plan assets is included in
actuarial gains and losses.
For manufacturing companies, under either IFRS or U.S. GAAP, PEnsion exPEnse is
allocated to inventory and cost of goods sold for employees who provide direct labor
to production and to salary or administrative exPEnse for other employees. As a result,
PEnsion exPEnse does not apPEar separately on the income statement for
manufacturing companies. An analyst must examine the financial statement notes to
find the details of these companies' PEnsion exPEnse.
LOS 31.k: Calculate and interpret leverage and coverage ratios.
Analysts use solvency ratios to measure a firm's ability to satisFY its long-term
obligations. In evaluating solvency, analysts look at leverage ratios and coverage ratios.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 643
Leverage Ratios
Leverage ratios focus on the balance sheet by measuring the amount of debt in a firm's
capital structure. For calculating these ratios, "debt" refers to interest-bearing
obligations. Non-interest bearing liabilities, such as accounts payable, accrued
liabilities, and deferred taxes, are not considered debt.
Debt-to-assets ratio = total debt / total assets.
Measures the PErcentage of total assets financed with debt.
Debt-to-capital ratio = total debt / (total debt + total equity).
Measures the PErcentage of total capital financed with debt. Debt-to-capital is
similar to the debt-to-assets ratio, except that total capital excludes noninterest bearing liabilities. Recall the balance sheet equation A = L + E. Thus,
total assets and total capital differ by the firm's non-interest bearing liabilities.
Debt-to-equity ratio = total debt / total equity.
Measures the amount of debt financing relative to the firm's equity base. A firm
whose debt-to-equity ratio is 1.0 has equal amounts of debt and equity. Stated
differently, its debt-to-capital ratio is 50%.
Financial leverage ratio = average total assets / average total equity.
Measure of leverage used in the DuPont formula.
All of these leverage ratios are interpreted similarly; that is, the higher the ratio, the
higher the leverage. When comparing firms, analysts must remember that in some
countries, debt financing is more popular than equity financing. Firms in these
countries will have higher leverage.
Coverage Ratios
Coverage ratios focus on the income statement by measuring the sufficiency of
earnings to repay interest and other fixed charges when due. Two popular coverage
ratios are the interest coverage ratio and the fixed charge coverage ratio.
Interest coverage = EBIT / interest payments.
A firm with lower interest coverage will have more difficulty meeting its interest
payments.
Fixed charge coverage = (EBIT + lease payments) / (interest payments + lease
payments).
Similar to interest coverage ratio but more inclusive because oPErating lease
payments are added to the numerator and denominator. Significant oPErating
lease payments will reduce this ratio as compared to interest coverage. Fixed
charge coverage is more meaningful for firms that engage in significant
oPErating leases.
Example: Leverage and coverage ratios
Westcliff Corporation is a hardware wholesaler. The following table shows selected information from
Westcliff's most recent financial statements.
Discuss Westcliff's solvency using the appropriate leverage and coverage ratios.
Answer:
When evaluating solvency, accounts payable and accrued liabilities are not considered debt. Debt only
includes interest bearing obligations:
Westcliff's leverage and coverage ratios are calculated as follows:
Debt-to-assets 2009: 1,185,200 debt / 2,363,600 assets = 50.1%
Debt-to-assets 2008: 1,181,100 debt / 2,197,400 assets = 53.7%
Debt-to-equity 2009: 1,185,200 debt / 727,600 equity = 1.6
Debt-to-equity 2008: 1,181,100 debt / 588,700 equity = 2.0
Debt-to-total capital 2009: 1,185,200 debt / 1,912,800 total capital = 62.0%
Debt-to-total capital 2008: 1,181,100 debt / 1,769,800 total capital = 66.7%
(Note: Total capital = total debt + shareholders' equity.)
Interest coverage 2009: 399,500 EBIT / 168,000 interest exPEnse = 2.4
Interest coverage 2008: 380,800 EBIT / 116,100 interest exPEnse = 3.3
Fixed charge coverage 2009:
(399,500 EBIT + 24,000 lease payments) / (168,000 interest exPEnse + 24,000 lease payments) = 2.2
Fixed charge coverage 2008:
(380,800 EBIT + 22,800 lease payments) / (116,100 interest exPEnse + 22,800 lease payments) = 2.9
Leverage declined in 20X9 using all three measures, mainly as a result of an increase in shareholders'
equity. On the other hand, both coverage ratios declined in 20X9 as a result of higher interest exPEnse.
One possible explanation for the increase in interest exPEnse, given lower leverage, is that interest rates
are increasing.
KEY CONCEPTS
LOS 31.a
When a bond is issued, assets and liabilities both initially increase by the bond
proceeds. At any point in time, the book value of the bond liability is equal to the
present value of the remaining future cash flows (coupon payments and maturity
value) discounted at the market rate of interest at issuance. The proceeds are reported
in the cash flow statement as an inflow from financing activities.
A premium bond (coupon rate > market yield at issuance) is reported on the balance
sheet at a value greater than its face value. As the premium is amortized (reduced), the
book value of the bond liability will decrease until it reaches its face value at maturity.
A discount bond (market yield at issuance > coupon rate) is reported on the balance
sheet at less than its face value. As the discount is amortized, the book value of the
bond liability will increase until it reaches its face value at maturity.
LOS 31.b
Interest exPEnse includes amortization of any discount or premium at issuance. Using
the effective interest rate method, interest exPEnse is equal to the book value of the
bond liability at the beginning of the PEriod multiplied by the bond's yield at issuance.
For a premium bond, interest exPEnse is less than the coupon payment (yield < coupon
rate). The difference between interest exPEnse and the coupon payment is subtracted
from the bond liability on the balance sheet.
For a discount bond, interest exPEnse is greater than the coupon payment (yield >
coupon rate). The difference between interest exPEnse and the coupon payment is
added to the bond liability on the balance sheet.
LOS 31.c
When bonds are redeemed before maturity, a gain or loss is recognized equal to the
difference between the redemption price and the carrying (book) value of the bond
liability at the reacquisition date.
LOS 31.d
Debt covenants are restrictions on the borrower that protect the bondholders'
interests, thereby reducing both default risk and borrowing costs. Covenants can
include restrictions on dividend payments and share repurchases; mergers and
acquisitions; sale, leaseback, and disposal of certain assets; and issuance of new debt
in the future. Other covenants require the firm to maintain ratios or financial
statement items at sPEcific levels.
LOS 31.e
The firm separately discloses details about its long-term debt in the footnotes. These
disclosures are useful for determining the timing and amount of future cash outflows.
The disclosures usually include a discussion of the nature of the liabilities, maturity
dates, stated and effective interest rates, call provisions and conversion privileges,
restrictions imposed by creditors, assets pledged as SECurity, and the amount of debt
maturing in each of the next five years.
LOS 31.f
Compared to purchasing an asset, leasing may provide the lessee with less costly
financing, reduce the risk of obsolescence, and include less restrictive provisions than a
typical loan. Synthetic leases provide tax advantages and keep the lease liability off the
balance sheet.
LOS 31.g
Under IFRS, if substantially all the rights and risks of ownership are transferred to the
lessee, the lease is treated as a finance lease by both the lessee and lessor. Otherwise,
the lease is an oPErating lease.
Under U.S. GAAP, the lessee must treat a lease as a capital (finance) lease if any one of
the following criteria is met:
Title to the leased asset is transferred to the lessee at the end of the lease
PEriod.
A bargain purchase option exists.
The lease PEriod is 75% or more of the asset's economic life.
The present value of the lease payments is 90% or more of the fair value of the
leased asset.
Under U.S. GAAP, the lessor capitalizes the lease if any one of the finance lease criteria
for lessees is met, collectability of lease payments is reasonably certain, and the lessor
has substantially completed PErformance.
LOS 31.h
A finance lease is, in substance, a purchase of an asset that is financed with debt. At
any point in time, the lease liability is equal to the present value of the remaining lease
payments.
From the lessee's PErsPEctive, finance lease exPEnse consists of depreciation of the
asset and interest on the loan. The finance lease payment consists of an oPErating
outflow of cash (interest exPEnse) and a financing outflow of cash (principal
reduction).
An oPErating lease is simply a rental arrangement; no asset or liability is reported by
the lessee. The rental payment is reported as an exPEnse and as an oPErating outflow
of cash.
From the lessor's PErsPEctive, a finance lease is either a sales-tyPE lease or a direct
financing lease. In either case, a lease receivable is created at the inception of the
lease, equal to the present value of the lease payments. The lease payments are
treated as part interest income (CFO) and part principal reduction (CFI).
With a sales-tyPE lease, the lessor recognizes gross profit at the inception of the lease
and interest income over the life of the lease. With a direct financing lease, the lessor
recognizes interest income only.
LOS 31.i
Both lessees and lessors are required to disclose useful information about finance
leases and oPErating leases in the financial statements or in the footnotes, including:
General description of the leasing arrangement.
The nature, timing, and amount of payments to be paid or received in each of
the next five years. Lease payments after five years can be aggregated.
Amount of lease revenue and exPEnse reported in the income statement for
each PEriod presented.
Amounts receivable and unearned revenues from lease arrangements.
Restrictions imposed by lease agreements.
LOS 31.j
A firm reports a net PEnsion liability on its balance sheet if the fair value of a defined
benefit plan's assets is less than the estimated PEnsion obligation, or a net PEnsion
asset if the fair value of the plan's assets is greater than the estimated PEnsion
obligation. The change in the net PEnsion asset or liability is reflected in a firm's
comprehensive income each year.
Under IFRS, service costs (including past service costs) and interest income or exPEnse
on the beginning plan balance are included in PEnsion exPEnse on the income
statement. Remeasurements are recorded in other comprehensive income. These
include actuarial gains or losses and the difference between the actual return and the
exPEcted return on plan assets.
Under U.S. GAAP, service costs, interest income or exPEnse, and the exPEcted return
on plan assets are included in PEnsion exPEnse. Past service costs and actuarial gains
or losses are recorded in other comprehensive income and amortized over time to the
income statement.
PEnsion exPEnse for a defined contribution PEnsion plan is equal to the employer's
contributions.
LOS 31.k
Analysts use solvency ratios to measure a firm's ability to satisFY its long-term
obligations. In evaluating solvency, analysts look at leverage ratios and coverage ratios.
Leverage ratios, such as debt-to-assets, debt-to-capital, debt-to-equity, and the
financial leverage ratio, focus on the balance sheet.
Debt-to-assets ratio = total debt / total assets
Debt-to-capital ratio = total debt / (total debt + total equity)
Debt-to-equity ratio = total debt / total equity
Financial leverage ratio = average total assets / average total equity
Coverage ratios, such as interest coverage and fixed charge coverage, focus on the
income statement.
Interest coverage = EBIT / interest payments
Fixed charge coverage = (EBIT + lease payments) / (interest payments + lease
payments)
CONCEPT CHECKERS
Use the following data to answer Questions 1 through 8.
A firm issues a $10 million bond with a 6% coupon rate, 4-year maturity, and annual
interest payments when market interest rates are 7%.
1. The bond can be classified as a:
A. discount bond.
B. par bond.
C. premium bond.
2. The annual coupon payments will each be:
A. $600,000.
B. $676,290.
C. $700,000.
3. Total of all cash payments to the bondholders is:
A. $12,400,000.
B. $12,738,721.
C. $12,800,000.
4. The initial book value of the bonds is:
A. $9,400,000.
B. $9,661,279.
C. $10,000,000.
5. For the fIRSt PEriod the interest exPEnse is:
A. $600,000.
B. $676,290.
C. $700,000.
6. If the market rate changes to 8% and the bonds are carried at amortized cost,
the book value of the bonds at the end of the fIRSt year will be:
A. $9,484,581.
B. $9,661,279.
C. $9,737,568.
7. The total interest exPEnse reported by the issuer over the life of the bond will
be:
A. $2,400,000.
B. $2,738,721.
C. $2,800,000.
8. For analytical purposes, what is the impact on the debt-to-equity ratio if the
market rate of interest increases after the bond is issued?
A. An increase.
B. A decrease.
C. No change.
9. Using the effective interest rate method, the reported interest exPEnse of a
bond issued at a premium will:
A. decrease over the term of the bond.
B. increase over the term of the bond.
C. remain unchanged over the term of the bond.
10. According to U.S. GAAP, the coupon payment on a bond is:
A. reported as an oPErating cash outflow.
B. reported as a financing cash outflow.
C. reported as part oPErating cash outflow and part financing cash outflow.
11. At the beginning of 20X6, Cougar Corporation enters a finance lease requiring
five annual payments of $10,000 each beginning on the fIRSt day of the lease.
Assuming the lease interest rate is 8%, the amount of interest exPEnse
recognized by Cougar in 20X6 is closest to:
A. $2,650.
B. $3,194.
C. $3,450.
12. Which of the following is least likely to be disclosed in the financial statements
of a bond issuer?
A. The amount of debt that matures in each of the next five years.
B. Collateral pledged as SECurity in the event of default.
C. The market rate of interest on the balance sheet date.
13. As compared to purchasing an asset, which of the following is least likely an
incentive to structure a transaction as a finance lease?
A. At the end of the lease, the asset is returned to the lessor.
B. The terms of the lease terms can be negotiated to better meet each
party's needs.
C. The lease enhances the balance sheet by the lease liability.
14. At the end of last year, Maui Corporation's assets and liabilities were as
follows:
Total assets
$98,500
Accrued liabilites
$5,000
Short-term debt
$12,000
Bonds payable
$39,000
Maui's debt-to-equity ratio is closest to:
A. 1.2.
B. 1.3.
C. 1.4.
For more questions related to this topic review, log in to your Schweser online account
and launch SchweserPro(tm) QBank; and for video instruction covering each LOS in this
topic review, log in to your Schweser online account and launch the OnDemand video
lectures, if you have purchased these products.
ANSWERS - CONCEPT CHECKERS
Use the following data to answer Questions 1 through 8.
A firm issues a $10 million bond with a 6% coupon rate, 4-year maturity, and annual
interest payments when market interest rates are 7%.
1. The bond can be classified as a:
A. discount bond.
B. par bond.
C. premium bond.
This bond is issued at a discount since the coupon rate < market rate.
2. The annual coupon payments will each be:
A. $600,000.
B. $676,290.
C. $700,000.
Coupon payment = (coupon rate x face value of bond) = 6% x $10,000,000 =
$600,000.
3. Total of all cash payments to the bondholders is:
A. $12,400,000.
B. $12,738,721.
C. $12,800,000.
Four coupon payments and the face value = ($600,000 x 4) + $10,000,000 =
$12,400,000.
4. The initial book value of the bonds is:
A. $9,400,000.
B. $9,661,279.
C. $10,000,000.
The present value of a 4-year annuity of $600,000 plus a 4-year lump sum of
$10 million, all valued at a discount rate of 7%, equals $9,661,279. Choice C can
be eliminated because the bond was issued at a discount.
5. For the fIRSt PEriod the interest exPEnse is:
A. $600,000.
B. $676,290.
C. $700,000.
Market interest rate x book value = 7% x $9,661,279 = $676,290.
6. If the market rate changes to 8% and the bonds are carried at amortized cost,
the book value of the bonds at the end of the fIRSt year will be:
A. $9,484,581.
B. $9,661,279.
C. $9,737,568.
The new book value = beginning book value + interest exPEnse - coupon
payment = $9,661,279 + $676,290 - $600,000 = $9,737,569. The interest
exPEnse was calculated in question 5. Alternatively, changing N from 4 to 3 and
calculating the PV will yield the same result. The change in market rates will not
affect amortized costs.
7. The total interest exPEnse reported by the issuer over the life of the bond will
be:
A. $2,400,000.
B. $2,738,721.
C. $2,800,000.
Coupon payments + discount interest = coupon payments + (face value - issue
value) = $2,400,000 + ($10,000,000 - $9,661,279) = $2,738,721.
8. For analytical purposes, what is the impact on the debt-to-equity ratio if the
market rate of interest increases after the bond is issued?
A. An increase.
B. A decrease.
C. No change.
An increase in the market rate will decrease the price of a bond. For analytical
purposes, adjusting the bond liability to its economic value will result in a lower
debt-to-equity ratio (lower numerator and higher denominator).
9. Using the effective interest rate method, the reported interest exPEnse of a
bond issued at a premium will:
A. decrease over the term of the bond.
B. increase over the term of the bond.
C. remain unchanged over the term of the bond.
Interest exPEnse is based on the book value of the bond. As the premium is
amortized, the book value of the bond decreases until it reaches face value.
10. According to U.S. GAAP, the coupon payment on a bond is:
A. reported as an oPErating cash outflow.
B. reported as a financing cash outflow.
C. reported as part oPErating cash outflow and part financing cash outflow.
The actual coupon payment on a bond is reported as oPErating cash outflow
under U.S. GAAP.
11. At the beginning of 20X6, Cougar Corporation enters a finance lease requiring
five annual payments of $10,000 each beginning on the fIRSt day of the lease.
Assuming the lease interest rate is 8%, the amount of interest exPEnse
recognized by Cougar in 20X6 is closest to:
A. $2,650.
B. $3,194.
C. $3,450.
At the inception of the lease, the present value of the lease payments is
$43,121 (BGN mode: N = 5, I = 8, PMT = 10,000, FV = 0, solve for PV). After the
fIRSt payment is made, the balance of the lease liability is $43,121 - 10,000
principal payment = $33,121. Interest exPEnse for the fIRSt year is $33,121 x 8%
= $2,650.
12. Which of the following is least likely to be disclosed in the financial statements
of a bond issuer?
A. The amount of debt that matures in each of the next five years.
B. Collateral pledged as SECurity in the event of default.
C. The market rate of interest on the balance sheet date.
The market rate on the balance sheet date is not typically disclosed. The
amount of debt principal scheduled to be repaid over the next five years and
collateral pledged (if any) are generally included in the footnotes to the
financial statements.
13. As compared to purchasing an asset, which of the following is least likely an
incentive to structure a transaction as a finance lease?
A. At the end of the lease, the asset is returned to the lessor.
B. The terms of the lease terms can be negotiated to better meet each
party's needs.
C. The lease enhances the balance sheet by the lease liability.
OPErating leases enhance the balance sheet by excluding any lease liability.
With a finance lease, an asset and a liability are reported on the balance sheet
as with purchase made with debt.
14. At the end of last year, Maui Corporation's assets and liabilities were as
follows:
Total assets
$98,500
Accrued liabilites
$5,000
Short-term debt
$12,000
Bonds payable
$39,000
Maui's debt-to-equity ratio is closest to:
A. 1.2.
B. 1.3.
C. 1.4.
Because A - L = E, shareholders' equity is 98,500 assets - 5,000 accrued
liabilities - 12,000 short-term debt - 39,000 bonds payable = $42,500. Thus,
debt-to-equity is (12,000 short-term debt + 39,000 bonds payable) / 42,500
equity = 1.2. Only interest-bearing liabilities are considered debt. Accrued
liabilities are not interest bearing.