CREDIT RATINGS AND THE SUBPRIME CRISIS
While the focus of this chapter is on the credit analysis and distress prediction of corporate debt, there are also important lessons to be learned from examining the role that
credit analysis and ratings of SECuritized financial instruments (primarily asset-backed
SECurities) played in the 2008 financial crisis. We touch on these briefly here.
Credit Analysis and Distress Prediction 10-17
Much of the research into the causes of the financial crisis has focused on the application of SECuritization to the U.S. subprime mortgage market.11 The SECuritization of
mortgage debt, which involved the pooling of individual mortgages and the slicing of
that pool into layers ("tranches") with progressive levels of seniority, enabled the development of SECurities which could be widely sold in the financial markets--something not
possible at the individual mortgage level. In addition, the SECuritization process was
exPEcted to mitigate the individual risk of default of the underlying SECurities by filling
the pool with SECurities whose default risk was not highly correlated, allowing the
creation of SECurities with different levels of default risk--some (or many, dePEnding
on the sPEcifics) with a lower risk of default than the average of the underlying mortgages in the pool.
As banks refined and expanded these offerings to capitalize on the burgeoning subprime mortgage market, they pushed the ratings agencies, which up until that time had
focused on the rating of corporate debt, to rate the SECurities so as to make them more
widely acceptable both to institutional investors who were restricted in their ability to
invest in non-rated SECurities and to the bROAder market, which looked more favorably
on SECurities given the stamp of approval of an investment-grade rating. The agencies
complied and saw their revenues jump dramatically until this part of their revenue
stream in many cases constituted the majority of their revenues.
When the housing market exPErienced a significant downturn beginning in late 2005,
it became clear that the credit agencies and the market had underestimated the riskiness
of these SECurities and their potential exposure to the bROAd market downturn that
occurred. Also, the crisis raised questions about the quality of the ratings in general,
esPEcially as it related to the agency/banking relationship dynamic.
While much of the discussion into the role of the credit rating agencies in the crisis
has been around the conflict of interest inherent in the agencies' relationship to their
banking clients and its potential compromising impact on the quality of its rating of
the client's products, researchers have also examined factors inherent in the agencies'
own rating methodologies that contributed to a systemic underestimation of the risk
of the SECuritized subprime mortgage product.12 In general, the ratings agencies were
more familiar with corporate debt ratings--they had only recently moved into rating
financial instruments--and their models did not seem adequate to handle the complexity of the structured products they were being asked to rate. Also, the embedded nature
of many of these products meant that small errors in estimates had big impacts on
default risk calculations. For instance, one product known as a CDO2 (collateralized
debt obligation squared) was made up of the most junior tranches of other CDOs,
pooled and tranched again, which magnified this tyPE of instrument's exposure to estimate error risk. Also, structured products in general replace the of individual default
with the risk of systematic default (i.e., failure of the whole system), which made the
mortgage-based product highly exposed to losses in bROAd downturns such as occurred
beginning in 2005. Despite this critical risk, ratings agency models did not even
account for the potential of a significant housing downturn since there had not been
one in recent memory. Finally, in general the ratings agencies did not have good historical data on subprime defaults since subprime lending was a relatively new phenomenon. In total, it is clear that while conflict of interest issues were an important factor in
the crisis, another PErhaps equally important factor was that the analysis PErformed by
the agencies in assigning ratings to these SECurities was not adequate to assess their true
creditworthiness.
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, which was
passed in the wake of the financial crisis, was an attempt to address through regulation
10-18 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
some of the key causes of the financial crisis, and included increased oversight of the
ratings agencies. Among its key provisions related to credit agencies:13
Creation of an Office of Credit Ratings at the SEC--with its own compliance staff
and the authority to fine agencies, and the mandate to examine the ratings agencies at least once a year.
Increased disclosure requirements for the ratings agencies--of their methodologies,
their use of third parties for due diligence efforts, and their ratings track record.
Required use of indePEndent information by the ratings agencies--from sources
other than organizations being rated, if credible.
Increased limitations on activities involving potential conflict of interest--prohibits
compliance officers from working on ratings, and other reporting requirements.
Increased potential
allowing investors to bring private rights of action against agencies.
liability--removes liability exemptions for ratings agencies,
Gives SEC right to deregister a ratings agency--for providing bad ratings over time.
Increased education requirements--requires ratings analysts to pass qualiFYing
exams and to participate in continuing education.
Elimination of statutory and regulatory requirements for use of ratings--in an
attempt to reduce over-reliance on ratings.
Increased indePEndence of agency boards--requires at least 50 PErcent of agency
boards to hold no financial stake in credit ratings.
New SEC mechanism to prevent "shoPPIng for ratings"--to prevent issuers of SECurities from picking the agency most likely to give their product a favorable rating.
SUMMARY
Debt financing is attractive to firms with high marginal tax rates and few non-interest
tax shields, making interest tax shields from debt valuable. Debt can also help create
value by deterring management of firms with high, stable income/cash flows and few
new investment opportunities from over-investing in unprofitable new ventures.
However, debt financing also creates the risk of financial distress, which is likely to be
particularly severe for firms with volatile earnings and cash flows, and intangible assets
that are easily destroyed by financial distress.
ProsPEctive providers of debt use credit analysis to evaluate the risks of financial distress for a firm. Credit analysis is important to a wide variety of economic agents--not
only bankers and other financial intermediaries but also public debt analysts, industrial
companies, service companies, and others.
At the heart of credit analysis lie the same techniques described in Chapters 2 through 8:
business strategy analysis, accounting analysis, financial analysis, and portions of prosPEctive analysis. The purpose of credit analysis in private debt markets goes beyond the
assessment of the likelihood that a potential borrower will fail to repay the loan. It also
serves to identiFY the nature of the main risks involved and to guide how the loan might
be structured to mitigate or control those risks. A well-structured loan provides the lender
with a viable "exit strategy," even in the case of default. ProPErly designed accounting-based
covenants are essential to this structure.
Fundamentally, the issues involved in analysis of public debt are no different from
those involved in evaluating bank loans or other private debt. Institutionally, however,
the contexts are different. Investors in public debt are usually not close to the borrower
and must rely on other agents, including debt raters and other analysts, to assess creditworthiness. Debt ratings, which dePEnd heavily on firm size and financial measures of
Credit Analysis and Distress Prediction 10-19
PErformance, have an important influence on the market yields that must be offered to
issue debt.
The primary task in credit analysis is assessment of the probability of default. The
task is complex, difficult, and to some extent, subjective. A few financial ratios can help
predict financial distress with some accuracy. The most important indicators for this
purpose are profitability, volatility of profits, and leverage. While there are a number of
models that predict distress based on financial indicators, they cannot replace the indepth forms of analysis discussed in this book.
The financial crisis of 2008 is an example of a major miscalculation of the probability
of default for asset-backed SECurities due to the complex, not well understood nature of
the financial instruments. Government legislation put in place after the financial crisis
attempts to impose additional controls on ratings agencies who had significant conflict
of interest and whose models did not fully understand the complex SECurities that they
were being asked to rate given their historic background in rating corporate debt.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Financial analysts typically measure financial leverage as the ratio of debt to equity.
However, there is less agreement on how to measure debt, or even equity. How
would you treat the following items in computing this ratio? JustiFY your answers.
Revolving credit agreement with bank
Cash and marketable SECurities
OPErating leases
Unrecorded PEnsion commitments
Deferred tax liabilities
Preferred stock
Convertible debt
2. U.S. public companies with "low" leverage have an interest-bearing net debtto-equity ratio of 0 PErcent or less, firms with "medium" leverage have a ratio
between 1 and 62 PErcent, and "high" leverage firms have a ratio of 63 PErcent or
more. Given these data, how would you classiFY the following firms in terms of
their optimal debt-to-equity ratio (high, medium, or low)?
a successful pharmaceutical company
an electric utility
a manufacturer of consumer durables
a commercial bank
a start-up software company
3. What are the critical PErformance dimensions for (a) a retailer and (b) a financial
services company that should be considered in credit analysis? What ratios would
you suggest looking at for each of these dimensions?
4. Why would a company pay to have its public debt rated by a major rating agency
(such as Moody's or Standard and Poor's)? Why might a firm decide not to have its
debt rated?
5. Some have argued that the market for original-issue junk bonds develoPEd in the
late 1970s as a result of a failure in the rating process. Proponents of this argument
suggest that rating agencies rated companies too harshly at the low end of the rating
scale, denying investment grade status to some deserving companies. What are proponents of this argument effectively assuming were the incentives of rating agencies?
What economic forces could give rise to this incentive?
10-20 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
6. Many debt agreements require borrowers to obtain the PErmission of the lender
before undertaking a major acquisition or asset sale. Why would the lender want to
include this tyPE of restriction?
7. Betty Li, the CFO of a company applying for a new loan, states, "I will never agree
to a debt covenant that restricts my ability to pay dividends to my shareholders
because it reduces shareholder wealth." Do you agree with this argument?
8. Cambridge Construction Company follows the PErcentage-of-completion method
for reporting long-term contract revenues. The PErcentage-of-completion is based
on the cost of materials shipPEd to the project site as a PErcentage of total exPEcted
material costs. Cambridge's major debt agreement
includes restrictions on net
worth, interest coverage, and minimum working capital requirements. A leading
analyst claims that "the company is buying its way out of these covenants by sPEnding cash and buying materials, even when they are not needed." Explain how this
might be possible.
9. Can Cambridge improve its Z score by behaving as the analyst claims in Question 8?
Is this change consistent with economic reality?
10. A banker asserts, "I avoid lending to companies with negative cash from oPErations
because they are too risky." Is this a sensible lending policy?
11. A leading retailer finds itself in a financial bind. It does not have sufficient cash flow
from oPErations to finance its growth, and it is close to violating the maximum debtto-assets ratio allowed by its covenants. The Vice-President for Marketing suggests,
"We can raise cash for our growth by selling the existing stores and leasing them
back. This source of financing is cheap since it avoids violating either the debtto-assets or interest-coverage ratios in our covenants." Do you agree with his analysis? Why or why not? As the firm's banker, how would you view this arrangement?
MERGERS AND
ACQUISITIONS
M ergers and acquisitions have long been a popular form of corporate
investment, particularly in countries with Anglo-American forms of capital
markets. There is no question that these transactions provide a healthy
their value to acquiring shareholders is
return to target stockholders. However,
less understood. Many skeptics point out
that given the hefty premiums paid to
target stockholders, acquisitions tend to be negative-valued investments for acquiring
stockholders.1
A number of questions can be examined using financial analysis for mergers and
acquisitions:
SECurities analysts can ask: Does a proposed acquisition create value for the acquiring firm's stockholders?
Risk arbitrageurs can ask: What is the likelihood that a hostile takeover offer will
ultimately succeed, and are there other potential acquirers likely to enter the
bidding?
Acquiring management can ask: Does this target fit our business strategy? If so,
what is it worth to us, and how can we make an offer that can be successful?
Target management can ask: Is the acquirer's offer a reasonable one for our stockholders? Are there other potential acquirers that would value our company more
than the current bidder?
Investment bankers can ask: How can we identiFY potential targets that are likely to
be a good match for our clients? And how should we value target firms when we
are asked to issue fairness opinions?
In this chapter we focus primarily on the use of financial statement data and analysis
the acquiring firm's
directed at evaluating whether a merger creates value for
stockholders. However, our discussion can also be applied to these other merger
analysis contexts. The topic of whether acquisitions create value for acquirers focuses
on evaluating the (1) motivations for acquisitions, (2) pricing of offers, (3) forms of
payment, and (4) likelihood that an offer will be successful. Throughout the chapter we
use Pfizer Inc.'s acquisition of Wyeth in 2009 to illustrate how financial analysis can be
used in a merger context.
11-1
11-2 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
MOTIVATION FOR MERGER OR ACQUISITION
There are a variety of reasons that firms merge or acquire other firms. Some acquiring
managers may want to increase their own power and prestige. Others, however, realize
that business combinations provide an opportunity to create new economic value for
their stockholders. New value can be created in the following ways:
1. Taking advantage of economies of scale. Mergers are often justified as a means of
providing the two participating firms with increased economies of scale. Economies of scale arise when one large firm can PErform a function more efficiently
than two smaller firms. While Pfizer did not consider this the primary reason for
the acquisition of Wyeth, management did forecast potential oPErational savings of
$4 billion that would result from combining the oPErations of the two firms.2
2. Improving target management. Another common motivation for acquisition is to
improve target management. A firm is likely to be a target if it has systematically
underPErformed its industry. Historically poor PErformance could be due to bad
luck, but it could also be due to the firm's managers making poor investment and
oPErating decisions or deliberately pursuing goals that increase their PErsonal
power but cost stockholders.
3. Combining complementary resources. Firms may decide that a merger will create
value by combining complementary resources of the two partners. For example,
Pfizer viewed Wyeth's strong presence in biotech drugs, vaccines, and consumer
health products as complementary to its own primarily prescription medicine
focus, with the combination resulting in a bROAdly diversified health care
company.
4. Capturing tax benefits. In the United States, the 1986 Tax Reform Act eliminated
many of the tax benefits from mergers and acquisitions. However, several merger
tax benefits remain. The major benefit is the acquisition of oPErating tax losses. If a
firm does not exPEct to earn sufficient profits to fully utilize oPErating tax loss carryforward benefits, it may decide to buy another firm that is earning profits. The
oPErating losses and loss carryforwards of the acquirer can then be offset against
the target's taxable income.3 A SECond tax benefit often attributed to mergers is
the tax shield that comes from increasing leverage for the target firm. This was
particularly relevant for leveraged buyouts in the 1980s.4
5. Providing low-cost financing to a financially constrained target. If capital markets
are imPErfect, PErhaps because of
information asymmetries between management and outside investors, firms can face capital constraints. Information problems are likely to be esPEcially severe for newly formed, high-growth firms.
These firms can be difficult for outside investors to value since they have short
track records, and their financial statements provide little insight into the value of
their growth opportunities. Further, since they typically have to rely on external
funds to finance their growth, capital market constraints for high-growth firms
are likely to affect their ability to undertake profitable new projects. Public capital
markets are therefore likely to be costly sources of funds for these tyPEs of firms.
An acquirer that understands the business and is willing to provide a steady source
of finance may therefore be able to add value.5
6. Creating value through restructuring and break-ups. Acquisitions are often pursued
by financial investors such as leveraged buy-out firms that exPEct to create value by
significantly restructuring or even breaking up the firm. The break-up value is
exPEcted to be larger than the aggregate worth of the entire firm. Often, a financial
investor will acquire a firm with a view of unlocking value from various
Mergers and Acquisitions 11-3
components of the firm's asset base. For example, in 2011 investor Carl Icahn
made a series of unsolicited bids for Clorox Co., the U.S.-based consumer products
maker. Analysts and news media at the time sPEculated that his goal was to break
up the company and sell off the company's many popular brands such as Clorox
bleach products, Kingsford charcoal, Brita water filters, Glad trash bags, and
Hidden Valley Ranch salad dressings.6
7. PEnetrating new geographies. Cross-border acquisitions are pursued by firms to
expand product markets, to capitalize on new technologies, and to capture labor
cost advantages that presumably could not have been achieved through joint
ventures or supplier contracts. In the 25-year PEriod between 1986 and 2010, over
12 PErcent of all acquisitions in the United States were led by foreign buyers, with
nearly 1,500 such deals announced in 2010 alone.7
8. Increasing product-market rents. Firms can also have incentives to merge in order
to increase product-market rents. By merging and becoming a dominant firm
in the industry, two smaller firms can collude to restrict their output and raise
prices, thereby increasing their profits. This circumvents problems that arise in
cartels of indePEndent firms, where firms have incentives to cheat on the cartel
and increase their output.
While product-market rents make sense for firms as a motive for merging, the two
partners are unlikely to announce their intentions when they explain the merger to
their investors, since most countries have antitrust laws that regulate mergers between
two firms in the same industry. For example, in the United States there are three
major antitrust statutes--The Sherman Act of 1890, The Clayton Act of 1914, and
The Hart Scott Rodino Act of 1976.
Anti-comPEtitive concerns were potentially significant for Pfizer's acquisition of
Wyeth, since at the time of the merger announcement, Pfizer and Wyeth were the
largest and twelfth-largest pharmaceutical companies in the world, resPEctively.8
Merger approval was required by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC), the
EuroPEan Commission, and regulatory bodies in China, Australia, and Canada.
All did eventually approve the merger but required the combined firm to sell assets
in certain businesses and regions to preserve comPEtition.
While many of the motivations for acquisitions are likely to create new economic
value for shareholders, some are not. Firms that are flush with cash but have few new
profitable investment opportunities are particularly prone to using their surplus cash to
make acquisitions. Stockholders of these firms would probably prefer that managers pay
out any surplus cash flows as dividends or use the funds to repurchase the firm's stock.
However, these options reduce the size of the firm and the assets under management's
control. Management may therefore prefer to invest the free cash flows to buy new companies, even if they do not create value for stockholders. Of course, managers will never
announce that they are buying a firm because they are reluctant to pay out funds to
stockholders. They may explain the merger using one of the motivations discussed
above, or they may argue that they are buying the target at a bargain price.
Another motivation for mergers that is valued by managers but not stockholders is
diversification, which was a popular motivation for acquisitions in the 1960s and early
1970s. Acquirers sought to damPEn their earnings volatility by buying firms in unrelated
businesses. Diversification as a motive for acquisitions has since been widely discredited.
Modern finance theorists point out that in a well-functioning capital market, investors
can diversiFY for themselves and do not need managers to do so for them. In addition,
diversification has been criticized when leading firms lose sight of their major comPEtitive strengths and expand into businesses where they do not have exPErtise.9 These firms
11-4 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
eventually recognize that diversification-motivated acquisitions do not create value, leading to divestitures of business units. Divestitures have been the source of almost a third
of all acquisitions over the past 25 years, and in 2010 alone, close to 3,100 deals were a
result of corporate divestitures.10
Key Analysis Questions
In evaluating a proposed merger, analysts are interested in determining whether the
merger creates new wealth for acquiring and target stockholders, or whether it is
motivated by managers' desires to increase their own power and prestige. Key questions for financial analysis are likely to include:
What is the motivation(s) for an acquisition and the anticipated benefits disclosed by acquirers or targets?
What are the industries of the target and acquirer? Are the firms related horizontally or vertically? How close are the business relations between them? If
the businesses are unrelated, is the acquirer cash-rich and reluctant to return
free cash flows to stockholders?
What are the key oPErational strengths of the target and the acquirer? Are
these strengths complementary? For example, does one firm have a renowned
research group and the other a strong distribution network?
Is the acquisition a friendly one, supported by target management, or hostile? In the
case of a hostile takeover, which is more likely to occur for targets with poorPErforming management, will the transaction go through despite the opposition
of management who will want to preserve its jobs? Will the hostile acquirer have
sufficient access to information to mitigate the risk of overpayment?
What is the premerger PErformance of the two firms? PErformance metrics are
likely to include ROE, gross margins, general and administrative exPEnses to
sales, and working capital management ratios. On the basis of these measures,
is the target a poor PErformer in its industry, implying that there are opportunities for improved management? Is the acquirer in a declining industry and
searching for new directions?
What is the tax position of both firms? What are the average and marginal
current tax rates for the target and the acquirer? Does the acquirer have oPErating loss carryforwards and the target taxable profits?
This analysis should help the analyst understand what sPEcific benefits, if any,
the merger is likely to generate.
Motivation for Pfizer's Acquisition of Wyeth
There were important industry-wide and company-sPEcific factors in 2009 that motivated Pfizer to acquire Wyeth.11 Across the pharmaceutical industry in the late 2000s,
comPEtition from generic drugs was increasingly making the traditional strategy of reliance on a few blockbuster drugs obsolete, as difficult economic conditions and the
increased PErvasiveness of managed care increased demand for the lower-priced generics.
Also, the profitability of blockbusters was being further reduced as sPEcialty manufacturers found increasing success in gaining approval for drugs that closely replicated the
blockbuster drug without infringing on its patent. In addition, a tougher regulatory
approval climate made the in-house development of new ground-breaking drugs more
Mergers and Acquisitions 11-5
exPEnsive, time-consuming, and risky, leading large firms such as Pfizer to acquire proven
products rather than to develop them in-house. Also, global demand was increasing--with
much of the higher growth opportunities in developing countries such as Latin America,
the Middle East, and China necessitating an increasingly global footprint in order to take
advantage of the growth in those markets.12 Finally, the rapidly growing biotech segment
represented an attractive diversification option for the large pharmaceutical companies,
who again viewed acquisition or partnering as a more attractive option than developing
capabilities in-house. As a result of these market dynamics, large pharmaceutical firms
increasingly moved to bROAden their product offerings, keep their piPElines full, and to
expand their geographic coverage--often by acquisition.
For Pfizer, the most pressing motivation in early 2009 was the imPEnding loss of patent protection for the blockbuster drug Lipitor (the world's top selling drug, which
accounted for 29 PErcent of Pfizer's pharmaceutical revenues in 2008)13 which, combined
with the inability of Pfizer to create a successful follow-up drug, threatened to create a
huge revenue hole for the company in the next few years (torcetrapib, a promising
potential replacement, had recently failed in late-stage testing). This looming issue, combined with a lack of other high-quality prosPEcts in its development piPEline, a languishing company stock (which in early 2009 was trading at about a third of its July 2000
PEak), and $23 billion in cash holdings, had analysts and shareholders pressuring management to make a big move. Historically, as well, Pfizer had grown by acquisition rather
than by developing its own blockbuster drugs, with major acquisitions of WarnerLambert in 2000 for $89 billion and Pharmacia in 2003 for $60 billion keeping its product line full and giving it status as the world's largest pharmaceutical company.
OPErationally, Pfizer's acquisition of Wyeth would provide significant diversification
for the combined company, complementing Pfizer's strength in human health pharmaceuticals with Wyeth's strong presence in vaccines, injectable biologic drugs, veterinary
medicine, Alzheimer's disease drugs, and consumer products such as Chapstick,
in the combined company no drug
Centrum, Anacin, and Preparation H. In fact,
would represent more than 10 PErcent of total revenue,14 buffering it from sudden
future revenue loss of a blockbuster such as Lipitor. In addition, management stressed
the enhanced global coverage of the combined company in both develoPEd and emerging markets.15
Potential cost savings due to streamlining were also a potential positive in a time of
reduced profit margins and increased comPEtition. At the time of the merger, Pfizer projected potential savings at $4 billion from increased economies of scale and consolidation
of redundant oPErations, and announced plans to cut the combined work force by
15 PErcent (which represented 20,000 jobs).16
Analysts and the financial media were mixed on the economic benefits that potentially would be derived from the acquisition. While the pressing need for Pfizer to
replace the imPEnding loss of revenue from the Lipitor patent expiration was recognized,
some nevertheless expressed concern as to whether Wyeth, with the patent expiration of
its two top drugs coming in the next two years, was the best target.17
ACQUISITION PRICING
A well considered economic motivation for a merger or acquisition is a necessary but
not sufficient condition for it to create value for acquiring stockholders. The acquirer
must be careful to avoid overpaying for the target. Overpayment makes the transaction
highly desirable and profitable for target stockholders, but it diminishes the value of the
deal to acquiring stockholders. A financial analyst can use the following methods to
assess whether the acquiring firm is overpaying for the target.
11-6 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
Analyzing Premium Offered to Target Stockholders
One popular way to assess whether the acquirer is overpaying for a target is to compare
the premium offered to target stockholders to premiums offered in similar transactions.
If the acquirer offers a relatively high premium, the analyst is typically led to conclude
that the transaction is less likely to create value for acquiring stockholders.
Premiums differ significantly for friendly and hostile acquisitions. Premiums tend to be
about 30 PErcent higher for hostile deals than for friendly offers, implying that hostile
acquirers are more likely to overpay for a target.18 There are several reasons for this. FIRSt,
a friendly acquirer has access to the internal records of the target, improving the accuracy
in valuing the target and making it less likely that it will be surprised by hidden liabilities or
problems once it has completed the deal. In contrast, a hostile acquirer does not have this
advantage in valuing the target during negotiations and is more likely to overpay. SECond,
the delays that typically accompany a hostile acquisition often provide opportunities for
comPEting bidders to make an offer for the target, leading to a bidding war.
Comparing a target's premium to values for similar tyPEs of transactions is straightforward but has several practical problems. FIRSt, it is not obvious how to define a comparable transaction. Figure 11-1 shows the mean and median premiums paid for U.S.
targets over a 25-year PEriod between 1986 and 2010. Average premiums rose from
around 40 PErcent through the mid-1990s to between 50 and 60 PErcent in 1999-2001.
Median premiums also increased during this PEriod, from around 30 PErcent to 40 PErcent. Despite the increase in M&A activity in 2004 and 2005, both average and median
premiums dropPEd significantly from the highs of 1999-2001 to only 31 to 35 and 23 to
24 PErcent, resPEctively. Recently, premiums have rebounded--in 2008-2010 average
premiums ranged again between 50 and 60 PErcent, with median premiums in the
35 to 40 PErcent range.19 However, mean and median premiums have to be interpreted
FIGU RE 11- 1
Merger Activity and Premium Paid: 1981-2010
i
m
u
m
e
r
P
70.0%
60.0%
50.0%
40.0%
30.0%
20.0%
10.0%
0.0%
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
-
s
l
a
e
D
f
o
#
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
# of Announcements
Mean premium
Median premium
Source: Mergerstat Review 2011 (FactSet Mergerstat, LLC).
Mergers and Acquisitions 11-7
with caution since there is considerable variation across transactions, making it difficult
to use these estimates as a benchmark.
A SECond problem in using premiums offered to target stockholders to assess whether
an acquirer overpaid is that measured premiums can be misleading if an offer is anticipated by investors. The stock price run-up for the target will then tend to make estimates
of the premium apPEar relatively low. This limitation can be partially offset by using target stock prices one month prior to the acquisition offer as the basis for calculating premiums. However, in some cases offers may have been anticipated for even longer than
one month.
Finally, using target premiums to assess whether an acquirer overpaid ignores the
value of the target to the acquirer after the acquisition. The acquirer exPEcts to benefit
from the merger by improving the target firm's oPErating PErformance through a combination of economies of scale, improved management, tax benefits, and spillover effects
derived from the acquisition. Clearly, acquirers will be willing to pay higher premiums
for targets that are exPEcted to generate higher merger benefits. Thus, examining the premium alone cannot determine whether the acquisition creates value for acquiring
stockholders.
Analyzing Value of the Target to the Acquirer
A SECond and more reliable way of assessing whether the acquirer has overpaid for the
target is to compare the offer price to the estimated value of the target to the acquirer.
This latter value can be computed using the valuation techniques discussed in Chapters 7
and 8. The most popular methods of valuation used for mergers and acquisitions are
earnings multiples and discounted cash flows. Since a comprehensive discussion of
these techniques is provided earlier in the book, we focus here on implementation issues
that arise for valuing targets in mergers and acquisitions.
We recommend fIRSt computing the value of the target as an indePEndent firm. This
provides a way of checking whether the valuation assumptions are reasonable, since
for publicly listed targets we can compare our estimate with premerger market prices. It
also provides a useful benchmark for thinking about how the target's PErformance, and
hence its value, is likely to change once it is acquired.
Earnings Multiples
To estimate the value of a target to an acquirer using earnings multiples, we have to
forecast earnings for the target and decide on an appropriate earnings multiple, as
follows:
Step 1: Forecasting earnings Earnings forecasts are usually made by fIRSt forecasting
next year's net income for the target, assuming no acquisition. Historical sales growth
rates, gross margins, and average tax rates are useful in building a pro forma income
model. Once we have forecasted the income for the target as an indePEndent firm, we
can incorporate into the pro forma model any improvements in earnings PErformance
that we exPEct to result from the acquisition. PErformance improvements can be modeled on numerous dimensions including:
Higher oPErating margins through economies of scale in purchasing, or increased
market power;
Reductions in exPEnses as a result of consolidating research and development
staffs, sales forces, and/or administration; or
Lower average tax rates from taking advantage of oPErating tax loss carryforwards.
11-8 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
Step 2: Determining the price-earnings multiple How do we determine the earnings
multiple to be applied to our earnings forecasts? If the target firm is listed, it may be
tempting to use the preacquisition price-earnings multiple to value postmerger earnings.
However, there are several limitations to this appROAch. FIRSt, for many targets, earnings
growth exPEctations are likely to change after a merger, implying that there will be a difference between the pre- and postmerger price-earnings multiples. Postmerger earnings
should then be valued using a multiple for firms with comparable growth and risk characteristics. A SECond problem is that premerger price-earnings multiples are unavailable
for unlisted targets. Once again it becomes necessary to decide which tyPEs of listed
firms are likely to be good comparables. In addition, since the earnings being valued
are the projected earnings for the next 12 months or the next full fiscal year, the appropriate benchmark ratio should be a forward price-earnings ratio. Finally, if a premerger
price-earnings multiple is appropriate for valuing postmerger earnings, care is required
to ensure that the multiple is calculated prior to any acquisition announcement, since
the price will increase in anticipation of the premium to be paid to target stockholders.
The following table summarizes how price-earnings multiples are used to value a target firm before an acquisition (assuming it will remain an indePEndent entity) and to
estimate the value of a target to a potential acquirer:
Summary of Price-Earnings Valuation for Targets
..................................................................................................................................................
Value of target as an
indePEndent firm
Value of target to
potential acquirer
Target earnings forecast for the next year, assuming no
change in ownership, multiplied by its premerger forward PE
multiple.
Target revised earnings forecast for the next year,
incorporating the effect of any oPErational changes made
by the acquirer, multiplied by its postmerger forward PE
multiple.
...................................................................................................................................................
Limitations of Price-Earnings Valuation As explained in Chapter 7, there are serious
limitations to using earnings multiples for valuation. In addition to these limitations, the
method has two more that are sPEcific to merger valuations:
1. PE multiples assume that merger PErformance improvements come either from an
immediate increase in earnings or from an increase in earnings growth (and hence
an increase in the postmerger PE ratio). In reality, improvements and savings can
come in many forms--gradual increases in earnings from implementing new oPErating policies, eliminating overinvestment, managing working capital better, or
paying out excess cash to stockholders. These tyPEs of improvements are not naturally reflected in PE multiples.
2. PE models do not easily incorporate any spillover benefits from an acquisition for
the acquirer since they focus on valuing the earnings of the target.
Discounted Abnormal Earnings or Cash Flows
As discussed in Chapters 7 and 8, we can also value a company using the discounted
abnormal earnings and discounted free cash flow methods. These require us to fIRSt forecast the abnormal earnings or free cash flows for the firm and then discount them at the
cost of capital, as follows.
Step 1: Forecasting abnormal earnings / free cash flows A pro forma model of exPEcted
future income and cash flows for the firm provides the basis for forecasting abnormal
Mergers and Acquisitions 11-9
earnings / free cash flows. As a starting point, the model should be constructed under the
assumption that the target remains an indePEndent firm. The model should reflect the
best estimates of future sales growth, cost structures, working capital needs, investment
and research and development needs, and cash requirements for known debt retirements, develoPEd from a financial analysis of the target. The abnormal earnings method
requires that we forecast abnormal earnings or net oPErating profit after tax (NOPAT)
for as long as the firm exPEcts new investment projects to earn more than their cost of
capital. Under the free cash flow appROAch, the pro forma model will forecast free cash
flows to either the firm or to equity, typically for a PEriod of five to ten years. Once we
have a model of the abnormal earnings or free cash flows, we can incorporate any
improvements in earnings / free cash flows that we exPEct to result from the acquisition.
These will include the cost savings, cash received from asset sales, benefits from eliminating overinvestment, improved working capital management, and excess cash paid out to
stockholders.
Step 2: Compute the discount rate If we are valuing the target's postacquisition abnormal NOPAT or cash flows to the firm, the appropriate discount rate is the weighted
average cost of capital (WACC) for the target, using its exPEcted postacquisition capital
structure. Alternatively, if the target's equity cash flows are being valued directly or if we
are valuing abnormal earnings, the appropriate discount rate is the target's postacquisition cost of equity rather than its WACC. Two common mistakes are to use the
acquirer's cost of capital or the target's preacquisition cost of capital to value the postmerger abnormal earnings / cash flows from the target.
The computation of the target's postacquisition cost of capital can be complicated if
the acquirer plans to make a change to the target's capital structure after the acquisition,
since the target's costs of debt and equity will change. As discussed in Chapter 8, this
involves estimating the asset beta for the target, calculating the new equity and debt
betas under the modified capital structure, and finally computing the revised cost of
equity capital or WACC. As a practical matter, the effect of these changes on the
WACC is likely to be quite small unless the revision in leverage has a significant effect
on the target's interest tax shields or its likelihood of financial distress.
The following table summarizes how the discounted abnormal earnings / cash flow
methods can be used to value a target before an acquisition (assuming it will remain an
indePEndent entity) and to estimate the value of a target firm to a potential acquirer.
Summary of Discounted Abnormal Earnings / Cash Flow Valuation for Targets
...................................................................................................................................................
Value of target as an
indePEndent firm
Value of target to
potential acquirer
(a) Present value of abnormal earnings / free cash flows to
target equity assuming no acquisition, discounted at
premerger cost of equity, or
(b) Present value of abnormal NOPAT / free cash flows to
target debt and equity assuming no acquisition, discounted
at premerger WACC, less value of debt.
(a) Present value of abnormal earnings / free cash flows to
target equity, including benefits from merger, discounted at
postmerger cost of equity, or
(b) Present value of abnormal NOPAT / free cash flows to
target debt and equity, including benefits from merger, discounted at postmerger WACC, less value of debt.
....................................................................................................................................................
Step 3: Analyze sensitivity Once we have estimated the exPEcted value of a target, we
will want to examine the sensitivity of our estimate to changes in the model assumptions.
11-10 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
For example, answering the following questions can help the analyst assess the risks
associated with an acquisition:
What hapPEns to the value of the target if it takes longer than exPEcted for the
benefits of the acquisition to materialize?
What hapPEns to the value of the target if the acquisition prompts its primary
comPEtitors to respond by also making an acquisition? Will potential changes in
industry dynamics affect the firm's plans and estimates?
Key Analysis Questions
To analyze the pricing of an acquisition, the analyst is interested in assessing the
value of the acquisition benefits to be generated by the acquirer relative to the
price paid to target stockholders. Analysts are therefore likely to be interested in
answers to the following questions:
What is the premium that the acquirer paid for the target's stock? What does
this premium imply for the acquirer in terms of future PErformance improvements to justiFY the premium?
What are the likely PErformance improvements that management exPEcts to
generate from the acquisition? For example, are there likely to be increases in
the revenues for the merged firm from new products, increased prices, or better distribution of existing products? Alternatively, are there cost savings as a
result of taking advantage of economies of scale, improved efficiency, or a
lower cost of capital for the target?
What is the value of any PErformance improvements? Values can be estimated
using multiples or discounted abnormal earnings / cash flow methods.
Pfizer's Pricing of Wyeth
Pfizer's $68 billion price for Wyeth represented a 29 PErcent premium to target stockholders over the market value on January 22, 2009, the day before the Wall Street Journal reported on the possible deal. This was below the mean and median premiums
reported for all acquisitions during that year (shown in Figure 11-1 as 58.7 PErcent and
39.8 PErcent, resPEctively), PErhaps in some part reflecting its timing as the fIRSt major
deal announcement since the beginning of the global financial crisis.
In terms of traditional multiples-based forms of valuation, Pfizer's pricing of Wyeth
apPEars to be reasonable. For example, at the time of the announcement of Pfizer's
offer, the PE multiple for other firms in the pharmaceutical and biotech industries that
were comparable to Wyeth ranged from 13.7 to 18.6. Pfizer's offer valued Wyeth at
15.4 times current earnings.20
The market reaction to the acquisition announcement suggests that analysts believed
that the deal was not necessarily a positive one for Pfizer's stockholders--Pfizer's stock
price dropPEd by a little over 10 PErcent on January 26, 2009, the day the deal was
announced (the S&P 500 registered a .6 PErcent gain on that day), and throughout
2009, Pfizer stock continued to underPErform the market index. By October 15, the
date the deal closed, Pfizer stock had regained ground,
increasing 13 PErcent since
the deal announcement, but it still lagged the 31 PErcent rebound of the S&P 500 index
during the same PEriod. Pfizer stock ended 2009 with a loss of .5 PErcent for the year,
compared to a gain for the S&P 500 market index of 20 PErcent.21 All else being equal,
it seems that investors were not convinced that the deal made sense for Pfizer.
Mergers and Acquisitions 11-11
Subsequent short-term results for Pfizer suggested that at least on the cost-cutting front
the merger was resulting in exPEcted synergies. In late 2010, Pfizer reported that it had
achieved approximately one half of the forecast $4-5 billion in cost savings announced
at the time of the merger.22 However, the longer term issue of revenue loss due to expiring
patents (with Lipitor and eight other high revenue drugs coming off patent protection
by 2015) continued to weigh on the company stock; as of the end of third quarter 2011,
Pfizer stock had increased a total of 13 PErcent since the merger announcement, well
underPErforming the S&P 500, which increased 35 PErcent over the same PEriod.23
ACQUISITION FINANCING AND FORM OF PAYMENT
Even if an acquisition is undertaken to create new economic value and is priced judiciously, it may still destroy shareholder value if it is inappropriately financed. Several
financing options are available to acquirers, including issuing stock or warrants to target
stockholders, or acquiring target stock using surplus cash or proceeds from new debt.
The trade-offs between these alternatives from the standpoint of target stockholders usually hinge on their tax and transaction cost implications. For acquirers, they can affect
the firm's capital structure and provide new information to investors.
As we will discuss, the financing preferences of acquiring and target stockholders can
diverge. Financing arrangements can therefore increase or reduce the attractiveness of an
acquisition from the standpoint of acquiring stockholders. As a result, a complete analysis of an acquisition will include an examination of the implications of the financing
arrangements for the acquirer.
Effect of Form of Payment on Acquiring Stockholders
From the PErsPEctive of the acquirer, the form of payment is essentially a financing decision. As discussed in Chapter 10, in the long term firms choose whether to use debt or
equity financing to balance the tax and incentive benefits of debt against the risks of
financial distress. For acquiring stockholders, the costs and benefits of different financing
alternatives therefore usually dePEnd on three factors described below: how the offer
affects their firm's capital structure, any information effects associated with different
forms of financing, and control issues arising from the form of payment.
Capital Structure Effects of Form of Financing
In acquisitions where debt financing or surplus cash are the primary form of consideration for target shares, the acquisition increases the net financial leverage of the acquirer.
This increase in leverage may be part of the acquisition strategy, since one way an
acquirer can add value to an inefficient firm is to lower its taxes by increasing interest
tax shields. However, in many acquisitions an increase in postacquisition leverage is a
side effect of the method of financing and not part of a deliberate tax-minimizing strategy. Demands by target shareholders for consideration in cash could lead the acquirer to
have a postacquisition capital structure that can potentially reduce shareholder value for
the acquirer by increasing the risk of financial distress.
To assess whether an acquisition leads an acquirer to have too much leverage, financial analysts can assess the acquirer's financial risk following the proposed acquisition by
these methods:
Analyze the business risks and the volatility of the combined, postacquisition cash
flows against the level of debt in the new capital structure, and the implications for
possible financial distress.
11-12 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
Assess the pro forma financial risks for the acquirer under the proposed financing
plan. Popular measures of
financial risk include debt-to-equity and interestcoverage ratios, as well as projections of cash flows available to meet debt repayments. The ratios can be compared to similar PErformance metrics for the acquiring
and target firms' industries to determine whether postmerger ratios indicate that the
firm's probability of financial distress has increased significantly.
Examine whether there are important off-balance-sheet liabilities for the target
and/or acquirer that are not included in the pro forma ratio and cash flow analysis
of postacquisition financial risk.
Determine whether the pro forma assets for the acquirer are largely intangible and
therefore sensitive to financial distress. Measures of intangible assets include such
ratios as market to book equity and tangible assets to the market value of equity.
Information Problems and the Form of Financing
In the short term, information asymmetries between managers and external investors
can make managers reluctant to raise equity to finance new projects. Managers' reluctance arises from their fear that investors will interpret the decision as an indication
that the firm's stock is overvalued. In the short term, this effect can lead managers to
deviate from the firm's long-term optimal mix of debt and equity. As a result, acquirers
are likely to prefer to use internal funds or debt to finance an acquisition since these
forms of consideration are less likely to be interpreted negatively by investors.24
The information effects imply that firms forced to use stock financing are likely to
face a stock price decline when investors learn of the method of financing.25 From the
viewpoint of financial analysts, the financing announcement may, therefore, provide
valuable news about the acquiring managers' views of their own company's value prior
to the acquisition. On the other hand, it should have no implications for analysis of
whether the acquisition creates value for acquiring shareholders since the news reflected
in the financing announcement is about the preacquisition value of the acquirer and not
about the postacquisition value of the target to the acquirer.
A SECond information problem arises if the acquiring management does not have
good information about the target. Stock financing then provides a way for acquiring
stockholders to share the information risks with target shareholders. If the acquirer
finds out after the acquisition that the value of the target is less than previously anticipated, the accompanying decline in the acquirer's equity price will be partially borne by
target stockholders who continue to hold the acquirer's stock. In contrast, if the target's
shares were acquired in a cash offer, any postacquisition loss would be fully borne by the
acquirer's original stockholders. The risk-sharing benefits from using stock financing
apPEar to be widely recognized for acquisitions of private companies, where public information on the target is largely unavailable.26 In practice it apPEars to be considered less
important for acquisitions of large public corporations.
Control and the Form of Payment
There is a significant difference between the use of cash and stock in terms of its impact
on the voting control of the combined firm postacquisition. Financing an acquisition
with cash allows the acquirer to retain the structure and composition of its equity ownership. On the other hand, dePEnding on the size of the target firm relative to the
acquirer, an acquisition financed with stock could have a significant impact on the ownership and control of the firm postacquisition. This could be particularly relevant to a
Mergers and Acquisitions 11-13
family-controlled acquirer. Therefore, the effects of control need to be balanced against
the other costs and benefits when determining the form of payment.
Over the last 25 years, offers that are 100 PErcent cash have comprised 49 PErcent of
all acquisitions, exceeding all-stock offers (26 PErcent) and mixed stock and cash offers
(25 PErcent). The popularity of all-cash offers has increased since 2000, rising to 60 PErcent
of all deals in 2010 whereas the use of all-stock offers has declined to only 21 PErcent.27
Effect of Form of Payment on Target Stockholders
The key payment considerations for target stockholders are the tax and transaction cost
implications of the acquirer's offer.
Tax Effects of Different Forms of Consideration
Target stockholders care about the after-tax value of any offer they receive for their
shares. In the United States, whenever target stockholders receive cash for their shares,
they are required to pay capital gains tax on the difference between the takeover offer
price and their original purchase price. Alternatively,
if they receive shares in the
acquirer as consideration and the acquisition is undertaken as a tax-free reorganization,
they can defer any taxes on the capital gain until they sell the new shares.
As a result, U.S. tax laws apPEar to cause target stockholders to prefer a stock offer to
a cash one. This is certainly likely to be the case for a target founder who still has a significant stake in the company. If the company's stock price has appreciated over its life,
the founder will face a substantial capital gains tax on a cash offer and will therefore
probably prefer to receive stock in the acquiring firm. However, cash and stock offers
can be tax-neutral for some groups of stockholders. For example, consider the tax implications for risk arbitrageurs, who take a short-term position in a company that is a takeover candidate in the hoPE that other bidders will emerge and increase the takeover
price. They have no intention of holding stock in the acquirer once the takeover is completed and will pay ordinary income tax on any short-term trading gain. Cash and stock
offers therefore have identical after-tax values for risk arbitrageurs. Similarly, tax-exempt
institutions are likely to be indifferent to whether an offer is in cash or stock.
Transaction Costs and the Form of Payment
Transaction costs are another factor related to the form of payment that can be relevant
to target stockholders. Transaction costs are incurred when target stockholders sell any
stock received as consideration for their shares in the target. These costs will not be faced
by target stockholders if the bidder offers them cash. Transaction costs are unlikely to be
significant for investors who intend to hold the acquirer's stock following a stock acquisition. However, they may be relevant for investors who intend to sell, such as risk
arbitrageurs.
Key Analysis Questions
For an analyst focused on the acquiring firm, it is important to assess how the
method of financing affects the acquirer's capital structure and its risks of financial
distress by asking the following questions:
What is the leverage for the newly created firm? How does this compare to
leverage for comparable firms in the industry?
11-14 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
What are the projected future cash flows for the merged firm? Are these sufficient to meet the firm's debt commitments? How much of a cushion does the
firm have if future cash flows are lower than exPEcted? Is the firm's debt level
likely to impair its ability to finance profitable future investments if future
cash flows are below exPEctations?
Pfizer's Financing of Wyeth
Pfizer offered Wyeth shareholders $33 in cash and 0.985 shares of Pfizer stock for each
Wyeth share. With the stock component valued at $17.19 PEr share, the combined cash
and equity implied a total offer of roughly $68 billion. While the premerger equity value
of Wyeth represented 31 PErcent of the combined market value, the large cash component of the deal caused the postmerger proportion of ownership to drop to about 16 PErcent for Wyeth shareholders and to rise to 84 PErcent for Pfizer shareholders.
The merger was structured as a taxable transaction for federal income tax purposes.
This implied that Wyeth shareholders would recognize capital gain or loss for federal
income tax purposes as a result of the transaction. By using debt in addition to stock
and cash to finance the acquisition, Pfizer increased its financial leverage significantly--
increasing total debt as a PErcentage of equity from 30 PErcent prior to the acquisition to
54 PErcent at the end of 2009. Also, in order to help finance the large cash outlay
required for the acquisition, Pfizer cut its dividend by 50 PErcent upon announcing the
deal (which likely also contributed to the significant drop in share price when the deal
was announced). Reacting to this material change in Pfizer's financial structure, Standard
and Poor's downgraded Pfizer's credit rating from AAA to AA on October 16, 2009--the
day after the Wyeth acquisition closed, with the other agencies following suit.28
ACQUISITION OUTCOME
The final question of interest to the analyst evaluating a potential acquisition is whether
it will indeed be completed. If an acquisition has a clear value-based motive, the target is
priced appropriately, and its proposed financing does not create unnecessary financial
risks for the acquirer, it may still fail because the target receives a higher comPEting
bid, there is opposition from entrenched target management, or the transaction fails to
receive necessary regulatory approval. Therefore, to evaluate the likelihood that an offer
will be accepted, the financial analyst has to understand whether there are potential comPEting bidders who could pay an even higher premium to target stockholders than is
currently offered. They also have to consider whether target managers are entrenched
and likely to oppose an offer to protect their jobs, as well as the political and regulatory
environment in which the target and the acquirer oPErate.
Other Potential Acquirers
If there are other potential bidders for a target, esPEcially ones who place a higher value
on the target, there is a strong possibility that the bidder in question will be unsuccessful.
Target management and stockholders have an incentive to delay accepting the initial
offer to give potential comPEtitors time to also submit a bid. From the PErsPEctive of
the initial bidder, this means that the offer could potentially reduce stockholder value
by the cost of making the offer (including substantial investment banking and legal
fees). In practice, a losing bidder can usually recoup these losses and sometimes even
Mergers and Acquisitions 11-15
make healthy profits from selling to the successful acquirer any shares it has accumulated in the target.
On some occasions, the original bidder includes a break-up fee in the acquisition contract that is payable should the target company choose to be acquired by a different
partner. For example, in late 2005 Johnson & Johnson signed an agreement to acquire
Guidant Corporation for about $21 billion. A takeover battle for Guidant resulted when
Boston Scientific made a higher offer. Over the ensuing seven weeks (from December
2005 to January 2006), both Johnson & Johnson and Boston Scientific increased their
bids on multiple occasions. Eventually, Boston Scientific won with a $27 billion offer.
However, in addition to the purchase price, Boston Scientific had to reimburse Guidant
the termination fee of $705 million payable to Johnson & Johnson.
Key Analysis Questions
The financial analyst can determine whether there are other potential acquirers for a
target and how they value the target by asking the following questions:
Who are the acquirer's major comPEtitors? Could any of these firms provide
an even better fit for the target?
Are there other firms that could also implement the initial bidder's acquisition
strategy? For example, if this strategy relies on developing benefits from complementary assets, look for potential bidders who also have assets complementary to the target. If the goal of the acquisition is to replace inefficient
management, what other firms in the target's industry could provide management exPErtise?
Target Management Entrenchment
If target managers are entrenched and fearful for their jobs, it is likely that they will
oppose a bidder's offer. Some firms have implemented "golden parachutes" for top managers to allay their concerns about job SECurity at the time of an offer. Golden parachutes
provide top managers of a target firm with attractive comPEnsation rewards should the
firm get taken over.29 However, many firms do not have such schemes, and opposition
to an offer from entrenched management is a very real possibility.
More generally, there are a variety of structural imPEdiments known as takeover
defense mechanisms that provide a disincentive to acquiring firms. Many such defenses
were used during the turbulent 1980s, when hostile acquisitions were at their PEak.
the most widely adopted include poison pills, staggered boards, suPErSome of
majority rules, dual-class recapitalizations,
fair-price provisions, ESOP plans, and
changes in states of incorporation to states with more restrictive anti-takeover laws.
While the existence of takeover defenses for a target indicates that its management is
likely to fight a bidding firm's offer, defenses have typically not prevented an acquisition
from taking place. Instead, they tend to cause delays, which increase the likelihood that
there will be comPEting offers made for the target, including offers by friendly parties
solicited by target management, called "white knights." Takeover defenses, therefore,
increase the likelihood that the bidder in question will be outbid for the target, or that
it will have to increase its offer significantly to win a bidding contest. Given these risks,
some have argued that acquirers are now less likely to embark on a potentially hostile
acquisition.
11-16 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
Key Analysis Questions
To assess whether the target firm's management is entrenched and therefore likely
to oppose an acquisition, analysts can ask the following questions:
Does the target firm have takeover defenses designed to protect management?
Has the target been a poor PErformer relative to other firms in its industry? If
so, management's job SECurity is likely to be threatened by a takeover, leading
it to oppose any offers.
Is there a golden parachute plan in place for target management? Golden parachutes provide attractive comPEnsation for management in order to deter
opposition to a takeover for job SECurity reasons.
Antitrust and SECurity Issues
Regulators such as the Federal Trade Commission in the U.S. and the EuroPEan ComPEtition Commission assess the effects of an acquisition on the comPEtitive dynamics of the
industry in which the firms oPErate. The objective is to ensure that no one firm, through
mergers and acquisitions, creates a dominant position that can imPEde effective comPEtition in sPEcific geographies or product markets. For instance, in August 2011 the U.S.
Justice Department sued to block AT&T's proposed $39 billion purchase of rival
T-Mobile USA on the grounds that the merger would substantially reduce comPEtition
for mobile phone services in the United States.30
In addition, political concerns around firms that have an impact on the national and
economic SECurity of a country come under the scrutiny of local lawmakers, whose opposition can often derail cross-border acquisition efforts. The United States, for instance,
has a sPEcific inter-agency committee that vets foreign takeovers of U.S. assets on
national SECurity grounds. Two recent high profile cases--China's CNOOC oil company's proposed acquisition of California-based Unocal in mid-2005 and Dubai Ports
World's acquisition of U.S. port terminals in March 2006--underscore the importance
of assessing this risk. Chevron, another interested bidder for Unocal, used CNOOC's
links to the Chinese government to generate political opposition to the CNOOC bid,
which eventually led CNOOC to drop its offer. Similarly, political opposition based on
the United Arab Emirates government's control of Dubai Ports World and the national
SECurity concerns over port infrastructure forced the company to sell the U.S. oPErations
as part of its acquisition of British port oPErator P&O.
Key Analysis Questions
To assess whether the regulators and/or government is likely to oppose an acquisition, analysts can ask the following questions:
What proportion of industry sales do the two firms control? Is this likely to be
of concern to regulators in countries in which the firms oPErate? Are the combined firms likely to be able to reduce regulatory opposition by selling certain
business units?
Is the target firm or the industry in which it oPErates of strategic importance or
in the national interest of the country in which it is located? Is the ownership
structure of the acquirer likely to create political opposition to the deal?
Mergers and Acquisitions 11-17
Analysis of Outcome of Pfizer's Offer for Wyeth
Analysts covering Wyeth had little reason to question whether Wyeth would be sold to
Pfizer. The offer was a friendly one that had received the approval of Wyeth's management and board of directors. There was some risk of another major pharmaceutical company entering the bidding for Wyeth--in fact, in the S-4 filed by Pfizer in March of
2009, there is mention of a "Company X" that appROAched Wyeth in December of 2008
to explore making a comPEtitive bid (rumored at the time to be Abbott LABS).31, 32 After
discussions with both companies, Wyeth management accepted Pfizer's bid, determining
that difficult current market conditions and potential anti-comPEtitive issues would likely
make a more attractive bid unlikely, and in the end no comPEting bid was made.
The complementary nature of the two companies' product lines on the human health
side meant that the deal raised few antitrust concerns on that front. However, Pfizer and
Wyeth's similar strength in animal health products was seen as a potential antitrust
issue. Consequently, regulators in the United States and in the EuroPEan Union, Canada,
China, and Australia required the combined company to divest certain animal health
assets in those countries as a condition of approval. Pfizer agreed to the conditions, and
the acquisition was completed on October 15, 2009, nine months after announcement of
the initial agreement.
SUMMARY
This chapter summarizes how financial statement data and analysis can be used by
financial analysts interested in evaluating whether an acquisition creates value for an
acquiring firm's stockholders. Obviously, much of this discussion is also likely to be relevant to other merger participants, including target and acquiring management and their
investment banks.
For the external analyst, the fIRSt task is to identiFY the acquirer's acquisition strategy.
We discuss a number of strategies. Some of these are consistent with maximizing
acquirer value, including acquisitions to take advantage of economies of scale, improve
target management, combine complementary resources, capture tax benefits, provide
low-cost financing to financially constrained targets, and increase product-market rents.
Other strategies apPEar to benefit managers more than stockholders. For example,
some unprofitable acquisitions are made because managers are reluctant to return free
cash flows to shareholders, or because managers want to lower the firm's earnings volatility by diversiFYing into unrelated businesses.
The financial analyst's SECond task is to assess whether the acquirer is offering a reasonable price for the target. Even if the acquirer's strategy is based on increasing shareholder value, it can overpay for the target. Target stockholders will then be well rewarded
but at the exPEnse of acquiring stockholders. We show how the ratio analysis, forecasting, and valuation techniques discussed earlier in the book can all be used to assess the
worth of the target to the acquirer.
The method of financing an offer is also relevant to a financial analyst's review of an
acquisition proposal. If a proposed acquisition is financed with surplus cash or new debt,
it increases the acquirer's financial risk. Financial analysts can use ratio analysis of the
acquirer's postacquisition balance sheet and pro forma estimates of cash flow volatility
and interest coverage to assess whether demands by target stockholders for consideration
in cash lead the acquirer to increase its risk of financial distress.
Finally, the financial analyst is interested in assessing whether a merger is likely to be
completed once the initial offer is made, and at what price. This requires the analyst to
11-18 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
determine whether there are other potential bidders, whether target management is
entrenched and likely to oppose a bidder's offer, or whether the deal could fail due to
antitrust or SECurity concerns.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Since the year 2000, there has been a noticeable increase in mergers and acquisitions
among firms in different countries (termed cross-border acquisitions). What factors
could explain this increase? What sPEcial issues can arise in executing a cross-border
acquisition and in ultimately meeting one's objectives for a successful combination?
2. Private equity firms have become an important player in the acquisition market.
These private investment groups offer to buy a target firm, often with the cooPEration of management, and then take the firm private. Private equity buyouts rose
from just 2 PErcent of U.S. merger and acquisition activity in 2000 to 15 PErcent as
of December 2005. Private equity buyers tend to finance a significant portion of the
acquisition with debt.
a. What tyPEs of firms would make ideal candidates for a private equity buyout?
Why?
b. How might the buyout firm add sufficient value to the target to justiFY a high
buyout premium?
3. Kim Silverman, CFO of the FIRSt Public Bank Company, notes, "We are fortunate to
have a cost of capital of only 7 PErcent. We want to leverage this advantage by
acquiring other banks that have a higher cost of funds. I believe that we can add
significant value to these banks by using our lower cost financing." Do you agree
with Silverman's analysis? Why or why not?
4. The Boston Tea Company plans to acquire Hi Flavor Soda Co. for $60 PEr share, a
50 PErcent premium over current market price. John E. Grey, the CFO of Boston
Tea, argues that this valuation can easily be justified using a price-earnings analysis:
"Boston Tea has a price-earnings ratio of 15, and we exPEct that we will be able to
generate long-term earnings for Hi Flavor Soda of $5 PEr share. This implies that Hi
Flavor is worth $75 to us, well below our $60 offer price." Do you agree with this
analysis? What are Grey's key assumptions?
5. You have been hired by GT Investment Bank to work in the merger department.
The analysis required for all potential acquisitions includes an examination of the
target for any off-balance-sheet assets or liabilities that have to be factored into the
valuation. Prepare a checklist for your examination.
6. A target company is currently valued at $50 in the market. A potential acquirer
believes that it can add value in two ways: $15 of value can be added through better
working capital management, and an additional $10 of value can be generated by
making available a unique technology to expand the target's new product offerings.
In a comPEtitive bidding contest, how much of this additional value will the acquirer
have to pay out to the target's shareholders to emerge as the winner?
7. In 2011 Comcast acquired a majority stake in NBC Universal in a deal that valued
the company at more than $30 billion. Analysts at the time tended to define the
rationale for the acquisition as being one of "conduit" acquiring "content". Evaluate
the potential strategic merits of this rationale.
8. A leading oil exploration company decides to acquire an Internet company at a
50 PErcent premium. The acquirer argues that this move creates value for its own
stockholders because it can use its excess cash flows from the oil business to help
Mergers and Acquisitions 11-19
finance growth in the new Internet segment. Evaluate the economic merits of this
claim.
9. Under current U.S. accounting standards, acquirers are required to capitalize goodwill and report any subsequent declines in value as an impairment charge. What
PErformance metrics would you use to judge whether goodwill is impaired?
10. As an external adviser to the U.S. Government's interagency committee that vets
foreign takeovers, you have been asked to provide exPErt testimony on the proposed
takeover of a major U.S. airport by a Dutch airport management services company.
Would you recommend that the acquisition be granted regulatory approval? What
are the different issues you will examine and present to the committee?
COMMUNICATION AND
GOVERNANCE
C orporate governance has become an increasingly important issue in capital
markets throughout the world during the turbulent fIRSt decade of the new
century, with the financial market meltdowns in Asia and the United States
in the early 2000s, the global financial crisis that began in 2008, and the EuroPEan Debt
crisis of 2010-11. These market collapses exposed problems of accounting misstatements
and lack of corporate transparency, as well as governance problems and conflicts of
interest among the intermediaries charged with monitoring management and corporate
disclosures.
The breakdowns have increased the challenge for managers in communicating
credibly with skeptical outside investors, making it more difficult for new (and in some
cases even established) firms to raise capital. Financial reports, the traditional platform
for management to communicate with investors, have increasingly come to be viewed
with skepticism following a number of widely publicized audit failures; the demise of
Enron, Worldcom, and Arthur Andersen in the United States; and lack of transparency
of financial firms in their exposures to subprime mortgage instruments in the 2008
financial crisis.
The market crashes have also raised questions about
improving the quality of
governance by information and financial
intermediaries, and have resulted in the
passage of legislation attempting to address such deficits. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act in
the United States (discussed in Chapter 1) attempts to increase accountability and
financial comPEtence for audit committees and external auditors, who are charged with
reviewing the financial reporting and disclosure process, and accountability for the CEO
and CFO, who are required to certiFY the validity of both financial statements and
internal controls. The Dodd-Frank Act (also discussed in Chapter 1) attempts to
protect investors by increasing the transparency and accountability of credit rating
agencies and to improve the financial SECurity of large financial institutions.
Throughout this book we have focused primarily on showing how financial statement
data can be helpful for analysts and outside investors in making a variety of decisions.
In this chapter we change our emphasis and focus primarily on management
communication and the role of governance agents. Of course an understanding of the
management communication process and corporate governance is also important for
SECurity analysts and investors. The appROAch taken here, however, is more germane to
insiders since most of the tyPEs of analyses we discuss are not available to outsiders.
12-1
12-2 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
In the SECtions that follow we discuss how many of the financial analysis tools
develoPEd in Chapters 2 through 8 can be used by managers to develop a coherent
disclosure strategy, and by corporate board members and external auditors to improve
the quality of their work. The following tyPEs of questions are dealt with:
Managers ask: Is our current communication policy effective in helping investors
understand the firm's business strategy and exPEcted future PErformance, thereby
ensuring that our stock price is not seriously over- or undervalued?
Audit committee members ask: What are the firm's key business risks? Are they
reflected appropriately in the financial statements? How is management communicating on important risks that cannot be reflected in the financial statements? Is
information on the firm's PErformance as presented to the board consistent with
that provided to investors in the financial report and firm disclosures?
External auditors ask: What are the firm's key business risks, and how are they
reflected in the financial statements? Where should we focus our audit tests? Is
our assessment of the firm's PErformance consistent with that of external investors
and analysts? If not, are we overlooking something, or is management misrepresenting the firm's true PErformance in disclosures?
GOVERNANCE OVERVIEW
As we discuss throughout this book, outside investors require access to reliable information on firm PErformance, both to value their debt and equity claims and to monitor the
PErformance of management. When investors agree to provide capital to the firm,
they require that managers provide information on their company's PErformance and
future plans.
However, left to their own devices, managers are likely to paint a rosy picture of the
firm's PErformance in their disclosures. There are three reasons for manager optimism in
reporting. FIRSt, most managers are genuinely positive about their firms' prosPEcts, leading them to unwittingly emphasize the positive and downplay the negative.
SECond, management optimism in reporting arises because firm disclosures play an
important role in mitigating "agency" problems between managers and investors.1 Investors use firm disclosures to judge whether managers have either run the firm in the
investors' best interests or abused their authority and control over firm resources.
Reporting consistently poor earnings increases the likelihood that top management will
be replaced, either by the board of directors or by an acquirer who takes over the firm to
improve its management.2 Of course, managers are aware of this and have incentives to
show positive PErformance.
Third, managers are also likely to make optimistic disclosures prior to issuing new
equity. Recent evidence indicates that entrepreneurs tend to take their firms public
after disclosure of strong reported, but frequently unsustainable, earnings PErformance.
Also, seasoned equity offers (additional offers of equity made by an already public firm)
typically follow strong, but again unsustainable, stock and earnings PErformance. The
strong earnings PErformance prior to IPOs and seasoned offers apPEars to be at least
partially due to earnings management.3 Rational outside investors recognize management's incentives to manage earnings and inflate exPEctations prior to a new issue.
They respond by discounting the stock, demanding a hefty new issue discount, and
(in extreme cases) refusing to purchase the new stock. This raises the cost of capital
and potentially leaves some of the best new ventures and projects unfunded.4
As discussed in Chapter 1, financial and information intermediaries help reduce
agency and information problems faced by outside investors. These intermediaries
Communication and Governance 12-3
FIG UR E 12- 1
The Intermediation Chain Between Managers and Investors
Information Demand Side
Retail
Investors
$$
Professional
Investors
(mutual funds,
banks, VCs)
Investment
advice
Information
Analyzers
(financial analysts,
rating agencies)
Business & financial
information
Managers
Internal
Governance
Agents
(board,
audit committee,
internal auditors)
Information Supply Side
Credible
financial
statements
Assurance
Professionals
(external
auditors)
Standard Setters and Capital Market Regulators
(e.g., SEC, PCAOB, FASB, Stock Exchanges)
Source: (c) Cengage Learning
evaluate the quality of management representation in the firm's disclosures, provide
their own analysis of firms' (and managers') PErformance, and make investment recommendations and decisions on behalf of investors. As presented in Figure 12-1, these intermediaries include internal governance agents, assurance professionals, information analyzers, and
professional investors. The importance of these intermediaries is underscored by the magnitude of the fees that they collectively receive from investors and entrepreneurs.
Internal governance agents, such as corporate boards, audit committees and internal
auditors, are responsible for monitoring a firm's management. Their functions include
reviewing business strategy, evaluating and rewarding top management, and assuring
the flow of credible information to external parties. Assurance professionals, such as
external auditors, enhance the credibility of financial information prepared by managers.
Information analyzers, such as financial analysts and ratings agencies, are responsible for
gathering and analyzing information to provide PErformance forecasts and investment
recommendations to both professional and retail individual investors. Finally, professional investors (such as banks, investment advisors, private equity firms, hedge funds,
mutual funds, insurance companies, and venture capital firms) make investment decisions on behalf of disPErsed investors. They are therefore responsible for valuing and
selecting investment opportunities in the economy.
In this framework, management, internal governance agents, and assurance professionals are charged with supplying information. The demand for information comes
from individual and professional investors and information analyzers. Both the supply
12-4 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
and demand sides are governed by a variety of regulatory institutions. In the United
States, these include public regulators such as the SECurities and Exchange Commission
(SEC), the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), and bank regulators,
as well as private SECtor bodies such as the Financial Accounting Standards Board
(FASB), the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), and stock
exchanges. Other countries have similar tyPEs of institutions.
The level and quality of information and residual information and agency problems in
capital markets are determined by the organizational design of these intermediaries and
regulatory institutions. Key organizational design questions include: What are the
optimal incentive schemes for rewarding top managers? What should be the composition
and charter of corporate boards? Should auditors assure that financial reports comply
with accounting standards or represent a firm's underlying economics? Should there
be detailed accounting standards or a few bROAd accounting principles? What should
be the organizational
form and business scoPE of auditors and analysts? What
incentive schemes should be used for professional investors to align their interests with
individual investors?
A variety of economic and institutional factors are likely to influence the answers
to these design questions. Examples include the ability to write and enforce optimal
contracts, proprietary costs that might make disclosure costly for investors, and regulatory imPErfections. The sPEctacular collapses of companies like Enron and Lehman
Brothers, and their impact on equity and credit markets, suggest that these limitations
can have a fIRSt-order effect on the functioning of capital markets.
While it is interesting to sPEculate on how to improve the functioning of capital
markets through changes in organizational design, that issue goes beyond the scoPE of
this chapter. Instead, we discuss how the financial analysis tools develoPEd in Chapters 2
through 8 can be used to improve the PErformance of some of
the information
intermediaries who were widely criticized following revelations of financial reporting
improprieties at companies such as Enron, WorldCom, Tyco, and Lehman Brothers.5
We have already discussed the application of financial analysis tools to equity and
credit analysts and to professional investors in Chapters 9 through 11. In the remainder
of this chapter, we discuss how these tools can be used by managers to develop a strategy
for effective communication with investors, by members of boards of directors and audit
committees in overseeing management and the audit process, and by audit professionals.
MANAGEMENT COMMUNICATION WITH INVESTORS
Some managers argue that communication problems are not worth worrying about.
They maintain that as long as managers make investment and oPErating decisions
that enhance shareholder value, investors will value their PErformance and the firm's
stock accordingly. While this is true in the long run, since all information is eventually
public, it may not hold in the short or even medium term. If investors do not have
access to the same information as management, they will probably find it difficult to
value new and innovative investments, or to assess intelligently the degree of risk inherent in a company's oPErations or positions. In an efficient capital market, they will not
consistently over- or undervalue these new investments or risks, but their valuations can
be noisy. This can make stock prices and a company's overall cost of capital relatively
noisy, leading management at various times to consider their firms to be either seriously
over- or undervalued.
Does it matter if a firm is over- or undervalued for a PEriod? Most managers would
prefer to not have their stock undervalued or lenders over-estimate their firms' risk, since
it makes it more costly to raise new financing. They may also worry that undervaluation
Communication and Governance 12-5
is likely to increase the chance of a takeover by a hostile acquirer, with an accompanying
reduction in their job SECurity. Also, the financial crisis of 2008 demonstrated the importance of investor confidence for the effective oPEration of financial markets and the risk
of financial distress for firms that lose that confidence. Managers of firms that are overvalued may also be concerned about the market's assessment, since they are legally liable
for failing to disclose information relevant to investors.6 Therefore, they may not wish to
see their stock seriously overvalued, even though overvaluation provides opportunities to
issue new equity at favorable rates.
A Word of Caution
As noted above, it is natural that many managers believe that firms are undervalued by
the capital market. This frequently occurs because it is difficult for managers to be objective about their company's future PErformance. After all, it is part of their job to sell the
company to new employees, customers, suppliers, and investors. In addition, forecasting
the firm's future PErformance objectively requires them to judge their own capabilities as
managers. Thus, it is not surprising that many managers argue that investors are uninformed and that their firm is undervalued. Only some managers can back that up with
solid evidence.
If management decides that the firm does face a genuine information problem, it can
begin to consider whether and how this could be redressed. Is the problem potentially
serious enough that it is worth doing something to alter investors' PErceptions? Or is
the problem likely to resolve itself within a short PEriod? Does the firm have plans to
raise new equity or to use equity to acquire another company? Is management's job
SECurity or the company's viability threatened? As we discuss below, management has a
wide range of options in this situation.
Key Analysis Questions
We recommend that before jumping to the conclusion that their firms are undervalued, managers should analyze their firms' PErformance and compare their own
forecasts of
future PErformance with those of analysts, using the following
appROAch:
Is there a significant difference between internal management forecasts of
future earnings and cash flows and those of outside analysts?
Do any differences between managers' and analysts' forecasts arise because of
different exPEctations about economy-wide PErformance? Managers may understand their own businesses better than analysts, but they may not be any better at forecasting macROEconomic conditions.
Can managers identiFY any factors that might explain a difference between analysts' and managers' forecasts of future PErformance? For example, are analysts
unaware of positive new R&D results, do they have different information
about customer responses to new products and marketing campaigns, etc.?
These tyPEs of differences could indicate that the firm faces an information
problem.
Example: Communication Issues for Jefferies Group, Inc.
In 2011, Jefferies Group, Inc. was a mid-sized global SECurities and investment banking
firm that had been in business for almost 50 years. The firm's strong balance sheet had
enabled it to successfully weather the 2008 financial crisis without government support,
12-6 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
and provided it with the financial flexibility to expand its global oPErations aggressively
following the crisis. At its fiscal 2010 year end on November 30, 2010, Jefferies had a
book value PEr share of $16.37, a price-to-book value of 1.7, a price to earnings multiple
of 20.3, and an equity beta of 1.7.
However, during 2011, the Jefferies stock price declined precipitously from $26.63
to a low of $11.60 in early October, recovering somewhat to $14.72 as of October 28.
This drop was attributed to concerns about the firm's exposure to the growing EuroPEan debt crisis, a concern that was magnified by the firm's aggressive expansion
the stock's recovery was abruptly halted
in EuroPE since 2008. On October 31,
when MF Global, a commodities broker-dealer that dealt with Jefferies, filed for
bankruptcy protection, citing losses resulting from EuroPEan sovereign debt exposure.
few days Jefferies stock fell almost 20 PErcent as investors tried
Over the next
to assess potential
indirect and direct exposure to MF Global and the sovereign
debt crisis.
The firm's management issued a press release on October 31 explaining that it had
only minimal exposure to MF Global and to EuroPEan sovereign debt. But this failed to
stem the market's concerns. As one blogger at the Wall Street Journal explained, "Yes,
Jefferies says it has no 'meaningful exposure' to the government debt of the PIIGS. Trouble is, since the financial crisis, investors shoot fIRSt and ask questions later."
On November 3, ratings agency Egan-Jones downgraded Jefferies debt, citing concern
over the company's potential exposure to EuroPEan sovereign debt. Jefferies was quick to
respond, issuing two increasingly detailed press releases on the same day disclosing its
limited exposure. The stock remained stable for the next few days, but then continued
its downward trajectory, trading as low as $9.50 on November 17.
The sharp decline in its price raises questions about the valuation of Jefferies stock.
At the November 17, 2011, close, the price-to-book ratio was well below 1, and the
price-to-earnings multiple was 6.9. The market, therefore, exPEcted that the company
would generate a return on equity somewhat lower than its cost of capital--a dramatic
turnaround from the market's PErception at the beginning of 2011. Jefferies management
expressed surprise and frustration at the sharp drop in price and argued that the market
was unjustly punishing the firm for exposure that it did not have. However, before
reaching this conclusion, a number of questions need to be answered:
Was the firm previously overvalued? If so, what forces were behind the market's
high valuation of the company? Had management been painting too rosy a picture
for the company's future in its meetings with analysts?
What were the financial implications of the events that precipitated the company's
drop in stock value? As noted above, the primary question for analysts was the
extent of the firm's exposure--either directly or indirectly, to the EuroPEan debt
crisis. Management needed to make sure it had a deep understanding of both the
macro- and micro-economic asPEcts of the issue to assess the implications for the
company's future PErformance.
If management believed that the firm was actually being undervalued, what options
were available to correct the market's view of the company?
COMMUNICATION THROUGH FINANCIAL REPORTING
Financial reports are the most popular format for management communication. Below
we discuss the role of financial reporting as a means of investor communication, the
institutions that make accounting information credible, and the situations in which the
reporting is likely to be ineffective.
Communication and Governance 12-7
Accounting as a Means of Management Communication
As we discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, financial reports are an important medium for
management communication with external investors. Reports provide investors with an
explanation of how their money has been invested, a summary of the PErformance of
those investments, and a discussion of how current PErformance fits within the firm's
overall philosophy and strategy.
Accounting reports not only provide a record of past transactions but also reflect
management estimates and forecasts of the future. For example, they include estimates
of bad debts, forecasts of the lives of tangible assets, and implicit forecasts that outlays
will generate future cash flow benefits that exceed their cost. Since management is likely
to be in a position to make forecasts of these future events that are more accurate than
those of external investors, financial reports are a potentially useful way of communicating with investors. However, as discussed, investors are also likely to be skeptical of
reports prepared by management. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act requires the CEO and CFO
to certiFY that the financials fairly represent the financial PErformance of the company
and that internal controls are adequate to support those financial statements. This
requirement increases the accountability of senior management and mitigates some of
the investors' skepticism.
Factors That Increase the Credibility of Accounting Communication
A number of mechanisms mitigate conflicts of
interest in financial reporting and
increase the credibility of accounting information that is communicated to investors.
These include accounting standards, auditing, monitoring of management by financial
analysts and ratings agencies, and management reputation.
Accounting Standards and Auditing
Accounting standards, such as those promulgated by the FASB and the SEC in the
United States and the IASB and country-sPEcific standard setters and regulators globally,
provide guidelines for managers on how to make accounting decisions and furnish outside investors with a way of interpreting these decisions. Uniform accounting standards
attempt to reduce managers' ability to record similar economic transactions in different
ways, either over time or across firms. Compliance with these standards is enforced by
external auditors who attempt to ensure that managers' estimates are reasonable. Auditors, therefore, reduce the likelihood of earnings management.
Monitoring by Financial Analysts and Ratings Agencies
Information intermediaries such as financial analysts and ratings agencies also limit management's ability to manage earnings and understate risk. Financial analysts and ratings agencies sPEcialize in developing firm- and industry-sPEcific knowledge, enabling them to assess
the quality of a firm's reported numbers and to make any necessary adjustments. These
information analyzers evaluate the appropriateness of management's forecasts implicit in
accounting method choices and reported accruals. This requires a thorough understanding
of the firm's business and the relevant accounting rules used in the preparation of its financial reports. SuPErior analysts adjust reported accrual numbers, if necessary, to reflect
economic reality, PErhaps by using the cash flow statement and the footnote disclosures.
Analysts' business and technical exPErtise as well as their legal liability and incentives differ
from those of auditors. Consequently, analyst reports can provide information to investors on
whether the firm's accounting decisions are appropriate or whether managers are overstating
the firm's economic PErformance (or understating its risk) to protect their jobs.7
12-8 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
Management Reputation
A third factor that can counteract external investors' natural skepticism about financial
reporting is management reputation. Managers that exPEct to have an ongoing relation
with external investors and financial intermediaries may be able to build a track record
for unbiased financial reporting. By making accounting estimates and judgments that are
supported by subsequent PErformance, managers can demonstrate their comPEtence and
reliability to investors and analysts. As a result, managers' future judgments and accounting estimates are more likely to be viewed as credible.
Limitations of Financial Reporting for Investor Communication
While accounting standards, auditing, monitoring of management by financial analysts,
and management concerns about its reputation increase the credibility and informativeness of financial reports, these mechanisms are far from PErfect. Consequently, there are
times when financial reporting breaks down as a means for management to communicate with external investors. These breakdowns can arise when (1) there are no accounting rules to guide practice or the existing rules do not distinguish between poor and
successful PErformers, (2) auditors and analysts do not have the exPErtise to judge new
products or business opportunities, or (3) management faces credibility problems.
Accounting Rule Limitations
Despite the rapid increase in new accounting standards, accounting rules frequently do
not distinguish between good and poor PErformers. For example, current accounting
rules do not PErmit managers to show on their balance sheets in a timely fashion the
benefits of investments in quality improvements, human resource development programs, research and development (with the exception of software development costs),
and customer service.
Some of the problems with accounting standards arise because it takes time for standard setters to develop appropriate standards for many new tyPEs of economic transactions. Other difficulties arise because standards are the result of compromises between
different interest groups (e.g., auditors, investors, corporate managers, and regulators).
Auditor, Analyst, and other Intermediary Limitations
While auditors and analysts may have a good understanding of a firm's business, they do
not have the same depth of information as managers. The discrepancy between managers' and auditors'or analysts' business assessments is likely to be most severe for firms
with distinctive business strategies, or firms that oPErate in emerging industries or in
industries with constantly evolving, very complex products (such as financial services).
In addition, auditors' decisions in these circumstances are likely to be dominated by concerns about legal liability, hamPEring management's ability to use financial reports to
communicate effectively with investors.
Finally, conflicts of interest faced by auditors, analysts, and other intermediaries make
their analysis imPErfect. Conflicts can potentially induce auditors to side with management to retain the firm as an audit client. They can also arise for analysts who provide
favorable ratings and research on companies to increase their firm's investment banking
business and trading volume among less-informed investors, and for credit ratings agencies who earn their revenue from the firms they are rating. Regulations that increase
oversight of audit firms by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board and limit
the impact of investment banking on financial analysts' incentives, were put in place as
part of Sarbanes-Oxley and the Global Settlement to reduce auditor and analyst conflicts
Communication and Governance 12-9
of interest, while the Dodd-Frank Act sought, among other things, to increase the transparency and accountability of ratings agencies.
Management Credibility Problems
There is limited evidence on when management is likely to face credibility problems with
investors. However, managers of new firms, firms with volatile earnings, firms in financial distress, and firms with poor track records in communicating with investors should
exPEct to find it difficult to be seen as credible reporters.
If management has a credibility problem, financial reports are likely to be viewed with
considerable skepticism. Investors will view financial reporting estimates that increase
income as evidence that management is padding earnings. This makes it very difficult
for management to use financial reports to communicate positive news about current
or future PErformance.
Example: Accounting Communication for Jefferies
Jefferies exposure to EuroPEan sovereign debt is reported in the company's August 31,
2011, balance sheet. The asset, "Government, Federal Agency, and Other Sovereign
Obligations," which amounts to $5.5 billion, aggregates EuroPEan sovereign debt with U.S.
and other debt. Footnote disclosure reveals that "Sovereign obligations" were $2.7 billion
and were offset by a $2.5 billion liability "Financial instruments sold, not yet purchased,"
suggesting that the firm was effectively hedged in the event of EuroPEan sovereign debt
defaults. In addition, management explained that increases in sovereign debt inventory
during 2010 and 2011 arose from the firm being designated as a Primary Dealer in several
EuroPEan jurisdictions. These exposures "are substantially comprised of the most liquid
SECurities in the asset class with a significant portion in holdings of SECurities of G-7 countries. Our market risk exposure to Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece, and Spain was modest at
August 31, 2011." However, management may have raised questions about the firm's exposure when in another part of the same report it warned that: "EuroPE's debt crisis could
have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and liquidity."
Although the third quarter financial statements were unaudited, there is reason to
exPEct that Jefferies management would have some credibility with analysts. The company's CEO, Richard Handler, who had led the company since 2000, had successfully
helPEd navigate the firm through the 2008 financial crisis, and had a reputation among
analysts for a deep understanding of the firm's businesses, and for eschewing the opulent
banking lifestyle common among leading investment banks.
Yet the ratings agency, Egan-Jones, raised questions about the credibility of the firm's
hedge and financial reporting. In explaining the debt downgrade, Egan-Jones principal
Shaun Egan commented: "They claim it's beautifully hedged. Our view is that we're
skeptical until we see complete proof of that. In the past, the hedges haven't been as PErfect as originally presented. We don't know how those shorts are set up and whether
they completely offset their $2.7 billion [exposure]."
Key Analysis Questions
For management interested in understanding how effectively the firm's financial
reports help it communicate with outside investors, the following questions are
likely to provide a useful starting point:
What are the primary business risks that have to be managed effectively? What
processes and controls are in place to manage the business risks? How are these
12-10 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
risks reflected in the financial statements? For example, credit risks are
reflected in the bad debt allowance, and product quality risks are reflected in
allowances for product returns and the method of revenue recognition. For
these tyPEs of risks, what message is the firm sending on the management of
these risks through its estimates or choices of accounting methods? Has the
firm been unable to deliver on the forecasts underlying these choices? Alternatively, does the market seem to be ignoring the message underlying the
firm's financial reporting choices, indicating a lack of credibility?
How does the firm communicate about important risks that cannot be reflected
in accounting estimates or methods? For example, a company such as Jefferies
has direct and indirect exposure to major external market shocks such as
the EuroPEan debt crisis which is difficult to fully reflect in its financial
statements; hence, investors and information intermediaries may still have
questions about this business issue.
COMMUNICATION THROUGH FINANCIAL POLICIES
Managers can also use financing policies to communicate effectively with external investors. One important difference between this tyPE of communication and additional disclosure is that
the firm does not provide potentially proprietary information to
comPEtitors. Financial policies that are useful in this resPEct include dividend payouts,
stock repurchases, financing choices, and hedging strategies.
Dividend Payout Policies
A firm's dividend payout decisions can provide information to investors on managers'
assessments of the firm's future prosPEcts. Dividend payout, defined as cash dividends
as a PErcentage of income available to common shareholders, reflects the extent to
which a company pays out profits or retains them for reinvestment. Because paying dividends reduces financial slack and is thus costly, a firm's dividend policy can help management communicate effectively with external
Investors recognize that
managers will only increase their firm's dividend rate if they anticipate that the payout
will not have a serious effect on the firm's future financing options. Thus, the decision
to increase dividends can help investors appreciate management's optimism about the
firm's future PErformance and ability to finance growth. This arises because dividend
payouts tend to be sticky, as managers are reluctant to cut dividend payouts. Managers
will only increase dividends when they are confident that they will be able to sustain the
increased payout rate in future years. Consequently, investors interpret dividend increases
as signals of managers' confidence in the quality of current and future earnings.8
investors.
As a result, managers in high-growth firms tend to set low dividend payout policies
and retain their internally generated funds for reinvestment to minimize any costs from
capital market constraints on financing growth options. On the other hand, firms with
high and stable oPErating cash flows and few investment opportunities have high dividend payouts to reduce managers' incentives to reinvest free cash flows in unprofitable
ventures.
Stock Repurchases
In some countries, such as the United States and the United Kingdom, managers can use
stock repurchases to communicate with external investors. Under a stock repurchase, the
Communication and Governance 12-11
firm buys back its own stock, either through a purchase on the oPEn market, through a
tender offer, or through a negotiated purchase with a large stockholder. Of course a stock
repurchase, particularly a tender offer repurchase, is an exPEnsive way for management
to communicate with outside investors that they believe the firm is undervalued. Firms
typically pay a hefty premium to acquire their shares in tender offer repurchases, potentially diluting the value of the shares that are not tendered or not accepted for tender. In
addition, the fees to investment banks and lawyers, and for share solicitation, are not
trivial. Given these costs, it is not surprising that research findings indicate that stock
repurchases are effective signals to investors about the level and risk of future earnings
PErformance.9 Research findings also suggest that firms that use stock repurchases to
communicate with investors have accounting assets that are less reflective of firm value
and have high general information asymmetry.10
Financing Choices
Firms that have problems communicating with external investors may be able to use
financing choices to reduce them. For example, a firm that is unwilling to provide proprietary information to help disPErsed public investors value it appropriately may be
willing to provide such information to a knowledgeable private investor, which can
become a large stockholder/creditor, or to a bank that agrees to provide the company
with a significant new loan. A firm with credibility problems in financial reporting
can also sell stock or issue debt to an informed private investor such as a large customer who has suPErior information about the quality of its product or service. For
example, Warren Buffett's investment of $5 billion in Bank of America in August of
2011 was widely viewed as enhancing the bank's credibility. Investors responded
accordingly, increasing the stock by 20 PErcent in the three trading days following the
announcement.
Such changes in financing and ownership can mitigate communication problems in
two ways. FIRSt, the terms of the new financing arrangement and the credibility of the
new lender or stockholder can provide investors with information to reassess the value
of the firm. SECond, the accompanying increased concentration of ownership and the
role of large block holders in corporate governance can have a positive effect on valuation. If investors are concerned about management's incentives to increase shareholder
value, the presence of a new block shareholder or significant creditor on the board can
be reassuring. This tyPE of monitoring arises in leveraged buyouts, startups backed by
venture capital firms, and firms with equity partnership investments. In Japanese and
German corporations, it may also arise because large banks own both debt and equity
and have close working relationships with firms' managers.
Of course, in the extreme, management can decide that the best option for a firm is to
no longer oPErate as a public company. This can be accomplished by a management
buyout, where a buyout group (including management) leverages its own investment
(using bank or public debt finance), buys the firm, and takes it private. The buyout
group hoPEs to run the firm for several years and then take the company public again,
hoPEfully with a track record of improved PErformance that enables investors to value
the firm more effectively.
Hedging
An important source of mispricing arises if investors are unable to distinguish between
unexPEcted changes in reported earnings due to management PErformance and transitory shocks that are beyond managers' control (e.g., foreign currency translation gains
12-12 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
and losses). Managers can counteract these effects by hedging such "accounting" risks.
Even though hedging may be costly, it is valuable if it reduces information problems
that potentially lead to misvaluation.
Example: Financial Policies at Jefferies
Jefferies took several financial policy actions in 2011 in efforts to communicate its financial strength to the market. On September 20, 2011, the firm announced that its Board of
Directors had approved a share repurchase program authorizing the repurchase of up to
20 million shares--or a little over 10 PErcent--of its common stock, and followed
through with purchases of about 5 million shares of stock under the program in the following two months. In November the firm reported that it had also repurchased
$50 million of its 2012 bonds on the oPEn market. On November 3-4--coinciding with
the company's debt downgrade by Egan-Jones--the company's largest shareholder,
Leucadia National (which held more than 25 PErcent of the company stock at the time),
bought an additional 1.5 million shares of common stock. Finally, company insiders
purchased significant shares in 2011, signaling to investors their faith in the company.
Board members Ian Cumming and Joseph Steinberg, co-founders of Leucadia National,
purchased a total of 1.5 million shares on November 3 and 4. On November 15, the
Chairman and CEO Richard Handler (who owned more than 6 PErcent of company
shares), purchased more than 80,000 of the bank's shares. Overall in 2011, insider buys
outweighed sales by a ratio of 57 to 3.
These combined actions, however, did not arrest the stock's slide, as worries about the
firm's exposure to the EuroPEan debt crisis continued to build. On the day before the
share buyback announcement (which was announced in conjunction with the company
reporting a 53 PErcent increase in third quarter profits over the previous year), the shares
closed at $14.12. By November 1, the day after the MF Global bankruptcy was announced,
the shares had fallen to $12.01. The slide continued through the month of November,
reaching a low of $10.20 on November 21, a drop of over 60 PErcent year to date.
Key Analysis Questions
For management considering whether to use financing policies to communicate
more effectively with investors, the following questions are likely to provide a useful
starting point for analysis:
Have other, potentially less costly actions, such as expanded disclosure or
accounting communication, been considered? If not, would these alternatives
provide a lower-cost means of communication? Alternatively, if management
is concerned about providing proprietary information to comPEtitors, or has
low credibility, these options may not be effective.
Does the firm have sufficient free cash flow to be able to implement a share
repurchase program or to increase dividends? If the firm has excess cash available today but exPEcts to be constrained in the future, a stock repurchase may
be more effective. Alternatively, if management exPEcts to have some excess
cash available each year, a dividend increase may be in order.
Is the firm cash constrained and unable to increase disclosure for proprietary
reasons? If so, management may want to consider changing the mix of owners
as a way of indicating to investors that another informed outsider is bullish on
the company. Of course, another possibility is for management itself to
increase its stake in the company.
ALTERNATE FORMS OF INVESTOR COMMUNICATION
Communication and Governance 12-13
Given the limitations of accounting standards, auditing, and monitoring by financial
analysts, as well as the reporting credibility problems faced by management, firms that
wish to communicate effectively with external investors are often forced to use alternative methods. We discuss two additional ways that managers can communicate with
external investors and analysts below.
Analyst Meetings
One popular way for managers to help mitigate communication problems is to meet regularly with financial analysts that follow the firm. At these meetings, management will
field questions about the firm's current financial PErformance and discuss its future business plans. In addition to holding analyst meetings, many firms appoint a director of
public relations, who provides further regular contact with analysts seeking more information on the firm.
In the last twenty years, conference calls have become a popular forum for management to communicate with financial analysts. Research finds that firms are more likely
to host calls if they are in industries where financial statement data fail to capture key
business fundamentals on a timely basis.11 In addition, conference calls themselves
apPEar to provide new information to analysts about a firm's PErformance and future
prosPEcts.12 Smaller and less heavily traded firms in particular benefit from initiating
investor conference calls.13
In the 1990s, firms typically had closed conference calls with key analysts and institutional investors. However, under Regulation Fair Disclosure (or Reg FD), implemented
in October 2000, the SEC encouraged firms to oPEn these meetings to the public. Reg
FD required firms that provided material nonpublic information to SECurity analysts or
professional investors to simultaneously (or promptly thereafter) disclose the information to the public. While Reg FD has reduced the information that managers disclose
in private meetings, research also shows that the regulation has enhanced the conference
call's ability to improve analyst forecast accuracy and consensus by eliminating selective
disclosure.14
Voluntary Disclosure
Another way for managers to improve the credibility of their financial reporting is
through voluntary disclosure. Accounting rules usually prescribe minimum disclosure
requirements, but they do not restrict managers from voluntarily providing additional
information. These could include an articulation of the company's long-term strategy,
sPEcification of nonfinancial leading indicators that are useful in judging the effectiveness
of the strategy implementation, explanation of the relation between the leading indicators and future profits, forecasts of future PErformance, additional financial or nonfinancial information to rebut an incorrect view in the market, or information on corporate
sustainability initiatives designed to create long-term, sustainable value, but which is
not necessarily reflected in the current stock price. Voluntary disclosures can be reported
in the firm's annual report, in brochures created to describe the firm to investors, in
management meetings with analysts, or in investor relations' responses to information
requests.15
One constraint on expanded disclosure is the comPEtitive dynamics in product
markets. Disclosure of proprietary information on strategies and their exPEcted economic
consequences may hurt the firm's comPEtitive position. Managers then face a trade-off
to investors in assessing the firm's
is useful
between providing information that
12-14 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
economic PErformance and withholding information to maximize the firm's product
market advantage.
A SECond constraint in providing voluntary disclosure is management's legal liability.
Forecasts and voluntary disclosures can potentially be used by dissatisfied shareholders
to bring civil action against management for providing misleading information. This
seems ironic, since voluntary disclosures should provide investors with additional information. Unfortunately, it can be difficult for courts to decide whether managers' disclosures were good faith estimates of uncertain future events that later did not materialize,
or whether management manipulated the market. Consequently many corporate legal
departments recommend against management providing much voluntary disclosure.
One asPEct of voluntary disclosure, earnings guidance, has been particularly controversial. There is growing evidence that the guidance provided by management plays an
important role in leading analysts' exPEctations toward achievable earnings targets, and
that management guidance is more likely when analysts'
initial forecasts are overly
optimistic.16
Finally, management credibility can limit a firm's incentives to provide voluntary
disclosures. If management faces a credibility problem in financial reporting, any voluntary disclosure it provides is also likely to be viewed skeptically. In particular, investors
may be concerned about what management is not telling them, particularly since such
disclosures are not audited.
Example: Other Forms of Communication at Jefferies
Beginning on the day of the MF Global bankruptcy, and continuing with its debt rating
downgrade, the decline in its share price, and ongoing questions about the firm's viability, the board and management of Jefferies provided extensive voluntary disclosures in an
effort to regain investor confidence.
On October 31, 2011, within hours of the MF Global bankruptcy news breaking,
Jefferies sought to quell rumors that it had significant exposure to MF Global, issuing a
press release that "its exposure to MF Global Holdings Ltd. Debt SECurities ... is less than
$9 million in marked-to-market positions." The next day, the firm issued another press
release, this time to disPEl rumors about its exposure to EuroPEan debt. The release
reaffirmed statements in its SEC filings that it "currently has no meaningful exposure
to the sovereign debt of the nations of Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece, and Spain" and
sought
related offbalance-sheet derivative activity" that could generate losses, such as those incurred by
several leading financial institutions during the 2008 financial crisis.
it had no "repo-to-maturity or
to reassure investors
that
In response to the November 3 ratings downgrade, which cited concerns over its
potential exposure to EuroPEan sovereign debt, Jefferies management issued a series of
additional press releases providing material new information intended to disprove the
assumptions behind the downgrade. The fIRSt such report disclosed the firm's net exposure to EuroPEan sovereign debt by country. It was followed by a SECond release later the
same day, informing investors that it held, "no credit-default swaps hedging its sovereign
debt positions." These actions apPEared to slow the stock price drop--the shares closed
down only about 2 PErcent for the trading day after being down as much as 20 PErcent
earlier in the session. One day later, in response to further inquiries, the company disclosed details of all short and long positions by country. In explaining the firm's actions,
Chairman and CEO Richard Handler noted that "these are fragile times in the financial
market and we decided the only way to conclusively disPEl rumors, misinformation and
misplaced concerns is with unprecedented transparency about internal information that
is rarely, if ever, publicly disclosed."
Communication and Governance 12-15
The firm's efforts to reassure the markets continued on November 7 with a press release
announcing that it had reduced its gross holding of EuroPEan sovereign debt by 50 PErcent,
with "no meaningful profit or loss on today's trading activity or our remaining positions."
This news prompted the head of one research firm to observe that the company "has
certainly sent a message to the market that they are aggressively attending to this criticism,
whether it's founded or not."
These efforts were of limited help in restoring confidence in the company. The stock
continued to fall, closing at $10.20 on November 21, 2011. On that day, Handler took
the offensive, posting a six-page letter on the Jefferies website to rebut what he saw as
continued false impressions about the company. Handler argued that:
Throughout the month of November, Jefferies has been barraged by a group of PEople
maliciously spreading rumors, half-truths and outright lies through every means possible, including calling analysts and SECurity holders, as well as using the mass media in
an effort to ampliFY and legitimize their efforts. Last week, a representative of a hedge
fund, who we understand has been spreading false rumors about Jefferies, sent us a
letter with a series of questions that for the most part show what we must presume is
an intentional misreading of our public filings to try to support these rumors. All these
folks seem to be trying to take advantage of the MF Global bankruptcy and the volatile
market environment with a view to harming Jefferies and all of us, presumably for
PErsonal gain. With the facts and truth on our side, we have responded to all this
directly and completely. Fortunately, those who take the time to understand and truly
analyze the facts are reaching the right conclusion. While it may be necessary for us to
continue to respond to these ill-conceived attacks, we fortunately can do so on a firm
foundation and with confidence in our funding and business model.
Handler pointed out that the firm's net exposure was an insignificant $134 million, or
3.8 PErcent of equity.
Handler's strong response and the coverage it received proved to be a turning point
for the stock, which rose from $10.20 on the date of the letter to more than $13.00 in
early December. In late December, Jefferies announced strong fourth quarter earnings,
providing further support for management's position, and the stock jumPEd 23 PErcent
to close at $14.50 on December 20.
The Role of the Auditor
In the United States the auditor is responsible for providing investors with assurance that
the financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles, or U.S. GAAP, and that the company maintains effective internal
control over its financial reporting. This requires the auditor to evaluate whether transactions are recorded in a way that is consistent with the rules produced by regulators
(including the FASB, PCAOB, and SEC), whether management estimates reflected in
the financial statements are reasonable, and whether the company maintained effective
internal financial control systems. The results of the audit are disclosed in the audit
report, which is part of the financial statements. The auditor issues an unqualified report
if (a) the firm's financial statements conform to U.S. GAAP, (b) the accounting methods
are applied consistently throughout the prior three years, (c) the internal financial
reporting controls are adequate as of the end of the audit PEriod, and (d) there is no
substantial doubt about the firm's ability to survive. If the financials do not conform to
U.S. GAAP, the auditor is required to issue a qualified or an adverse report that provides
information to investors on the discrepancies. If the auditor is uncertain about whether
the firm can survive during the coming year, a going concern report that discusses the
firm's survival risks is issued.
12-16 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
In contrast, in the United Kingdom and countries that have adopted the U.K. system,
such as Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, Hong Kong, and India, auditors undertake
a bROAder review than their U.S. counterparts. Their audits are required to not only
assess whether the financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting
standards, but also to judge whether they present a "true and fair view" of the client's
underlying economic PErformance. This additional assurance requires more judgment
on the part of the auditor and increases the value of the audit to outside investors.
The essential procedures involved in a typical audit include (1) understanding the
client's business and industry to identiFY key risks for the audit, (2) evaluating the firm's
internal control system to assess whether it is likely to produce reliable information,
(3) PErforming preliminary analytic procedures to identiFY unusual events and possible
errors, and (4) collecting sPEcific evidence on controls, transactions, and account balance
details to form the basis for the auditor's opinion. In most cases client management is willing to respond to issues raised by the audit to ensure that the company receives an unqualified audit opinion. Once the audit is completed, the auditor presents a summary of audit
scoPE and findings to the Audit Committee of the firm's board of directors.
It is worth noting that in both the U.S. and U.K. systems (and for that matter elsewhere), the audit is not intended to detect fraud. Of course in some cases it may do so,
but that is not its purpose. The detection of fraud is the domain of the internal audit
department of the firm itself.
Role of Financial Analysis Tools in Auditing
How can the financial analysis tools discussed in this book be used by audit professionals? The relevance to the audit of the four stEPS in financial analysis--strategy
analysis, accounting analysis, financial analysis, and prosPEctive analysis--is discussed
briefly next.
Strategy Analysis Strategy analysis is critical to the fIRSt stage of the audit, understanding the client's business and industry. It is important that the auditor develop the exPErtise to be able to identiFY the chief risks facing its client. Given the sheer volume of
activity, it is impossible to review all the transactions of the firm during the audit. Time
and attention should be focused on the areas that investors need in order to evaluate the
firm's value proposition and how well it is managing key success factors. These are also
likely to be the areas worth further testing and analysis by the auditor, to assess their
impact on the financial statements.
Accounting Analysis For the auditor, accounting analysis involves two stEPS. FIRSt, the
auditor must understand how the key success factors and risks are reflected in the financial statements. The SECond step in accounting analysis is for the auditor to evaluate
management judgment reflected in the critical financial statements items.
Financial Analysis Financial ratios help auditors judge whether there are any unusual
PErformance changes for their client, either relative to past PErformance or relative to
their comPEtitors. Any such changes merit further investigation to ensure that the
reasons for the change can be fully explained and to determine what additional tests
are required to satisFY the auditor that the reported changes in PErformance are justified.
Careful ratio analysis can also reveal whether clients are facing business problems that
might induce management to conceal
losses or keep significant obligations off the
balance sheet. Such information should alert auditors that extra care and additional
detailed tests are likely to be required to reach a conclusion on the client's financial
statements.
Communication and Governance 12-17
ProsPEctive Analysis Auditors use prosPEctive analysis to assess whether estimates and
forecasts made by management are consistent with the firm's economic position. In
addition, the market's PErception of a client's future PErformance provides a useful
benchmark for affirming or questioning the auditor's assessment of the client's prosPEcts.
If the auditor concludes that the market is either overly optimistic or PEssimistic about a
client, he or she can determine whether additional disclosure will help investors develop
a more realistic view of the company's prosPEcts.
Key Analysis Questions
The following questions are likely to provide a useful starting point for auditors in
their analysis of a client's financial statements:
What are the chief business risks facing the firm? How well are these risks
managed?
What are the accounting policies and estimates that reflect the firm's principal
risks? What tests and evidence are required to evaluate management judgment
that is reflected in these accounting decisions?
Do the critical ratios indicate any unusual changes in client PErformance?
What tests and evidence are required to understand the causes of such
changes?
Has firm PErformance deteriorated, creating pressure on management
to
manage earnings or record off-balance-sheet transactions? If so, what additional tests and evidence are required to provide assurance that the financial
statements are consistent with GAAP?
How is the market assessing the client's prosPEcts? If different from the auditor,
what is the reason for the difference? If the market is overly optimistic or
for client disclosure or accounting
PEssimistic, are there implications
estimates?
Example: Auditing Jefferies
The EuroPEan crisis raises several questions for the firm's auditors. The company's management of its net market exposure to increasingly risky debt instruments and its continued ability to access funds are critical success factors. The stock price volatility apPEars to
be largely driven by changing PErceptions of this risk, potentially affecting the fair values
of assets and liabilities reported on the balance sheet, and write-downs in the income
statement. These should be a principal focus of the audit.
Questions for the auditor include the following:
Has the company proPErly recorded and provided sufficient explanation of positions held?
Has the company appropriately disclosed the use of off-balance sheet instruments,
including disclosure of recourse provisions and other critical details?
Why has the market reacted so negatively to Jefferies over the past year? Is there
something that the market recognizes that Jefferies management does not? What
information is available about the sPEcific hedging strategies that Jefferies claims
is minimizing its market exposure?
Is the firm's classification of assets into Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 appropriate?
What information is there about the models used to value Level 3 assets?
12-18 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
If the firm's positions apPEar to be reasonable and well established, what additional
information can the firm provide to investors to address their concerns? Will this
information need to be audited?
THE ROLE OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE IN THE UNITED STATES
Audit committees are responsible for overseeing the work of the auditor, for ensuring
that the financial statements are proPErly prepared, and for reviewing the internal
controls at
the company. Audit committees, which are mandated by many stock
exchanges and by the SEC, typically comprise three to four outside directors who meet
regularly before or after the full board meetings.
In the last 15 years, requirements for audit committees have been expanded and
formalized. In December 1999, the SEC, the national stock exchange(s), and the Auditing
Standards Board issued new audit committee rules based largely on recommendations of
the Blue Ribbon Committee (BRC) on Improving the Effectiveness of Corporate Audit
Committees. The new rules defined best practices for judging audit committee members'
indePEndence and qualifications.
Following the collapse of Enron, additional audit committee requirements were
created under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. The Act requires that audit committees take
formal responsibility for appointing, overseeing, and negotiating fees with external
auditors. Audit committee members are required to be indePEndent directors with no
consulting or other potentially compromising relation to management. It is recommended that at least one member of the committee have financial exPErtise, such as
being a CFO, CEO, or retired audit partner.
The audit committee is exPEcted to be indePEndent of management and to take an active
role in reviewing the propriety of the firm's financial statements. Committee members are
exPEcted to question management and the auditors about the quality of the firm's financial
reporting, the scoPE and findings of the external audit, and the quality of internal controls.
In reality, however, the audit committee has to rely extensively on information from management as well as internal and external auditors. Given the ground that it has to cover, its
limited available time, and the technical nature of accounting standards, audit committees
are not in a position to catch management fraud or auditors' failures on a timely basis.
How then can the audit committee add value?17 We believe that many of the financial
analysis tools discussed in this book can provide a useful way for audit committees to
appROAch their tasks. Many of the applications of the financial analysis stEPS discussed
for auditors also apply for audit committees.
In its scrutiny of financial statements, the committee should use the 80-20 rule,
devoting most of its time to assessing the effectiveness of those few policies and decisions
that have the most impact on investors' PErceptions of the company's critical PErformance indicators. This should not require any additional work for committee members,
since they should already have a good understanding of the firm's key success factors
and risks from discussions of the full board.
Audit committee members should also have sufficient financial background to identiFY where in the financial statements the important risks are reflected. Their discussions
with management and external auditors should focus on these risks. How well are they
being managed? How are the auditors planning their work to focus on these areas? What
evidence have they gathered to judge the adequacy of the financial statement estimates?
The audit committee also receives regular reviews of company PErformance from management as part of their board duties. Committee members should be esPEcially pROActive
in requesting information that helps them evaluate how the firm is managing its key risks,
since this information can also help them judge the quality of the financial statements.
Communication and Governance 12-19
Audit committee members need to ask: Is information on company PErformance we are
receiving in our regular board meetings consistent with the picture portrayed in the financial statements? If not, what is missing? Are additional disclosures required to ensure that
investors are well informed about the firm's oPErations and PErformance?
Finally, audit committees need to focus on capital market exPEctations, not just statutory financial reports. In today's capital markets, the game begins when companies set
exPEctations via analyst meetings, press releases, and other forms of investor communications. Indeed, the pressure to manage earnings is often a direct consequence of Wall
Street's unrealistic exPEctations, either deliberately created by management or sustained
by their inaction. Thus, it is also important for audit committees to oversee the firm's
investor relations strategy and ensure that management sets realistic exPEctations for
both the short and long term.
Key Analysis Questions
The following questions are likely to provide a useful starting point for audit committees in their discussions with management and auditors about the firm's financial statements:
How are the critical business risks facing the firm being managed?
How are these risks reflected by accounting policies and estimates in the financial statements? What was the basis for the external auditor's assessment of
these items?
Is information on the critical value drivers and firm PErformance presented to
the full board consistent with the picture of the firm reflected in the financial
statements and MD&A?
What exPEctations is management creating in the capital market? Are these
likely to cause undue pressure to manage earnings?
SUMMARY
This chapter discussed how many of the financial analysis tools develoPEd in Chapters 2
through 8 can be used by managers to develop a coherent disclosure strategy, and by
corporate board members and external auditors to improve the quality of their work.
By communicating effectively with investors, management can potentially reduce
information problems for outside investors, lowering the likelihood that the stock will
be mispriced or unnecessarily volatile, or that the market will lose confidence in the
company and limit its access to capital entirely. This can be important for firms that
wish to raise new capital or avoid takeovers, or whose management is concerned that
its true job PErformance is not reflected in the firm's stock price. Finally, as we saw in
the 2008 financial crisis and in the Jefferies example more recently, financial markets are
fragile and can easily lose confidence in a company and its management. As a result, the
quality and effectiveness of management communication can sometimes have a significant impact on a company's financial viability.
The typical way for firms to communicate with investors is through financial reporting. Accounting standards and auditing make the reporting process a way for managers
to not only provide information about the firm's current PErformance but also indicate,
through accounting estimates, where they believe the firm is headed in the future.
12-20 PART 3 Business Analysis and Valuation Applications
However, financial reports are not always able to convey the tyPE of forward-looking
information that investors need. Accounting standards often do not PErmit firms to capitalize outlays, such as R&D, that provide significant future benefits to the firm.
A SECond way that management can communicate with investors is through nonaccounting means. We discussed several such mechanisms, including using financial policies (such as stock repurchases, dividend increases, and hedging) to help signal
management's optimism about the firm's future PErformance; meeting with financial
analysts to explain the firm's strategy, current PErformance, and outlook; and disclosing
additional information, both quantitative and qualitative, to provide investors with information similar to that of management.
In this chapter we have stressed the importance of communicating effectively with
investors. But firms also have to communicate with other stakeholders, including employees, customers, suppliers, and regulatory bodies. Many of the same principles discussed
here can also be applied to management communication with these other stakeholders.
Finally, we examined the capital market role of governance agents, such as external
auditors and audit committees. Both have faced considerable public scrutiny following a
series of financial reporting meltdowns in the United States. Much has been done to
improve the governance and indePEndence of these intermediaries. We focus on how
the financial analysis tools develoPEd in the book can be used to improve the quality of
audit and audit committee work. The tools of strategy analysis, accounting analysis,
financial analysis, and prosPEctive analysis can help auditors and audit committee
members to identiFY the key issues in the financial statements to focus on and provide
common sense ways of assessing whether there are potential reporting problems that
merit additional testing and analysis.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Amazon's inventory increased from $3.2 billion on December 31, 2010, to $5.0 billion one year later. In addition, sales for the fourth quarter of those years increased
from $12.9 billion in 2010 to $17.4 billion in 2011. What is the implied annualized
inventory turnover for Amazon for these years? What different interpretations about
future PErformance could a financial analyst infer from this change? What information could Amazon's management provide to investors to clariFY the change in
inventory turnover? What are the costs and benefits to Amazon from disclosing
this information? What issues does this change raise for the auditor? What additional tests would you want to conduct as Amazon's auditor?
2. a. What are likely to be the long-term critical success factors for the following tyPEs
of firms?
a high technology company such as Microsoft
a large low-cost retailer such as Wal-Mart
b. How useful is financial accounting data for evaluating how well these two companies are managing their critical success factors? What other tyPEs of information would be useful in your evaluation? What are the costs and benefits to
these companies from disclosing this tyPE of information to investors?
3. Management frequently objects to disclosing additional information on the grounds
that it is proprietary. For instance, when the FASB proposed to expand disclosures
on (a) accounting for stock-based employee comPEnsation (issued in December
2002) and (b) business segment PErformance (issued in June 1997), many corporate
managers expressed strong opposition to both proposals. What are the potential
proprietary costs from expanded disclosures in each of these areas? If you conclude
Communication and Governance 12-21
that proprietary costs are relatively low for either, what alternative explanations do
you have for management's opposition?
4. In contrast to U.S. GAAP, IFRS PErmits management to reverse impairment on
fixed assets that have increased in value since the time of their impairment. Revaluations are typically based on estimates of realizable value made by management
or indePEndent valuers. Do you exPEct that these accounting standards will make
earnings and book values more or less useful to investors? Explain why or why
not. How can management make these tyPEs of disclosures more credible?
5. Under a management buyout, the top management of a firm offers to buy the company from its stockholders, usually at a premium over its current stock price. The
management team puts up its own capital to finance the acquisition, with additional
financing typically coming from a private buyout firm and private debt. If management is interested in making such an offer for its firm in the near future, what are
its financial reporting incentives? How do these differ from the incentives of management that are not interested in a buyout? How would you respond to a proposed
management buyout if you were the firm's auditor? What about if you were a member of the audit committee?
6. You are appROAched by the management of a small start-up company that is planning to go public. The founders are unsure about how aggressive they should be in
their accounting decisions as they come to the market. John Smith, the CEO, asserts,
"We might as well take full advantage of any discretion offered by accounting rules,
since the market will be exPEcting us to do so." What are the pros and cons of this
strategy? As the partner of a major audit firm, what tyPE of analysis would you PErform before deciding to take on a startup that is planning to go public?
7. Two years after a successful public offering, the CEO of a biotechnology company is
concerned about stock market uncertainty surrounding the potential of new drugs in
the development piPEline. In his discussion with you, the CEO notes that even though
they have recently made significant progress in their internal R&D efforts, the stock
has PErformed poorly. What options does he have to help convince investors of the
value of the new products? Which of these alternatives are likely to be feasible?
8. Why might the CEO of the biotechnology firm discussed in Question 7 be concerned about the firm being undervalued? Would the CEO be equally concerned if
the stock were overvalued? Do you believe that the CEO would attempt to correct
the market's PErception in this overvaluation case? How would you react to company concern about market under- or overvaluation if you were the firm's auditor?
Or if you were a member of the audit committee?
9. When companies decide to shift from private to public financing by making an
initial public offering for their stock, they are likely to face increased costs of investor communications. Given this additional cost, why would firms opt to go public?
10. German firms are traditionally financed by banks, which have representatives on the
companies' boards. How would communication challenges differ for these firms relative to U.S. firms, which rely more on public financing?