UNDERSTANDING INCOME STATEMENTS
Study Session 7
EXAM FOCUS
Now we're getting to the heart of the matter. Since forecasts of future earnings, and
therefore estimates of firm value, dePEnd crucially on understanding a firm's income
statement, everything in this topic review is important. Some of the items requiring
calculation include depreciation, COGS, and inventory under different cost flow
assumptions, as well as basic and diluted EPS. The separation of items into oPErating
and non-oPErating categories is important when estimating recurring income as a fIRSt
step in forecasting future firm earnings. Note that questions regarding the effect on
financial ratios of the choice of accounting method and of accounting estimates are
one common way to test your understanding of the material on those topics presented
here.
INCOME STATEMENT COMPONENTS AND FORMAT
The income statement reports the revenues and exPEnses of the firm over a PEriod of
time. The income statement is sometimes referred to as the "statement of
oPErations," the "statement of earnings," or the "profit and loss statement." The
income statement equation is:
revenues - exPEnses = net income
Under IFRS, the income statement can be combined with "other comprehensive
income" and presented as a single statement of comprehensive income. Alternatively,
the income statement and the statement of comprehensive income can be presented
separately. Presentation is similar under U.S. GAAP.
Investors examine a firm's income statement for valuation purposes while lenders
examine the income statement for information about the firm's ability to make the
promised interest and principal payments on its debt.
LOS 24.a: Describe the components of the income statement and alternative
presentation formats of that statement.
Revenues are the amounts reported from the sale of goods and services in the normal
course of business. Revenue less adjustments for estimated returns and allowances is
known as net revenue.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 151
Professor's Note: The terms "revenue" and "sales" are sometimes used synonymously. However,
sales is just one component of revenue in many firms. In some countries, revenues are referred to
as "turnover."
ExPEnses are the amounts incurred to generate revenue and include cost of goods
sold, oPErating exPEnses, interest, and taxes. ExPEnses are grouPEd together by their
nature or function. Presenting all depreciation exPEnse from manufacturing and
administration together in one line of the income statement is an example of grouping
by nature of the exPEnse. Combining all costs associated with manufacturing (e.g., raw
materials, depreciation, labor, etc.) as cost of goods sold is an example of grouping by
function. Grouping exPEnses by function is sometimes referred to as the cost of sales
method.
Professor's Note: Firms can present columnar data in chronological order from left-to-right or
vice versa. Also, some firms present exPEnses as negative numbers while other firms use
parentheses to signiFY exPEnses. Still other firms present exPEnses as positive numbers with the
assumption that users know that exPEnses are subtracted in the income statement. Watch for
these different treatments on the exam.
The income statement also includes gains and losses, which result in an increase
(gains) or decrease (losses) of economic benefits. Gains and losses may or may not
result from ordinary business activities. For example, a firm might sell surplus
equipment used in its manufacturing oPEration that is no longer needed. The
difference between the sales price and book value is reported as a gain or loss on the
income statement. Summarizing, net income is equal to income (revenues + gains)
minus exPEnses (including losses). Thus, the components can be rearranged as follows:
net income = revenues - ordinary exPEnses + other income - other exPEnse +
gains - losses
If a firm has a controlling interest in a subsidiary, the pro rata share of the subsidiary's
income not owned by the parent is reported in parent's income statement as the
noncontrolling interest (also known as minority interest or minority owners'
interest). The noncontrolling interest is subtracted in arriving at net income because
the parent is reporting all of the subsidiary's revenue and exPEnse.
Presentation Formats
A firm can present its income statement using a single-step or multi-step format. In a
single-step statement, all revenues are grouPEd together and all exPEnses are grouPEd
together. A multi-step format includes gross profit, revenues minus cost of goods sold.
Figure 1 is an example of a multi-step income statement format for the BHG Company.
Figure 1: Multi-Step Income Statement
BHG Company Income Statement
For the year ended December 31, 20X7
Revenue
Cost of goods sold
Gross profit
Selling, general, and administrative exPEnse
Depreciation exPEnse
OPErating profit
Interest exPEnse
Income before tax
Provision for income taxes
Income from continuing oPErations
Earnings (losses) from discontinued oPErations, net of tax
Net income
$579,312
(362,520)
216,792
(109,560)
(69,008)
38,224
(2,462)
35,762
(14,305)
21,457
1,106
$22,563
Gross profit is the amount that remains after the direct costs of producing a product or
service are subtracted from revenue. Subtracting oPErating exPEnses, such as selling,
general, and administrative exPEnses, from gross profit results in another subtotal
known as oPErating profit or oPErating income. For nonfinancial firms, oPErating profit
is profit before financing costs, income taxes, and non-oPErating items are considered.
Subtracting interest exPEnse and income taxes from oPErating profit results in the
firm's net income, sometimes referred to as "earnings" or the "bottom line."
Professor's Note: Interest exPEnse is usually considered an oPErating exPEnse for financial firms.
LOS 24.b: Describe general principles of revenue recognition and accrual accounting,
sPEcific revenue recognition applications (including accounting for long-term
contracts, installment sales, barter transactions, gross and net reporting of revenue),
and implications of revenue recognition principles for financial analysis.
LOS 24.c: Calculate revenue given information that might influence the choice of
revenue recognition method.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 155
Under the accrual method of accounting, revenue is recognized when earned and
exPEnses are recognized when incurred. The important point to remember is that
accrual accounting does not necessarily coincide with the receipt or payment of cash.
Consequently, firms can manipulate net income by recognizing revenue earlier or later
or by delaying or accelerating the recognition of exPEnses.
According to the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), revenue is
recognized from the sale of goods when:1
1. The risk and reward of ownership is transferred.
2. There is no continuing control or management over the goods sold.
3. Revenue can be reliably measured.
4. There is a probable flow of economic benefits.
5. The cost can be reliably measured.
For services rendered, revenue is recognized when:2
1. The amount of revenue can be reliably measured.
2. There is a probable flow of economic benefits.
3. The stage of completion can be measured.
4. The cost incurred and cost of completion can be reliably measured.
According to the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), revenue is recognized in
the income statement when (a) realized or realizable and (b) earned.3 The SECurities
and Exchange Commission (SEC) provides additional guidance by listing four criteria to
determine whether revenue should be recognized:4
1. There is evidence of an arrangement between the buyer and seller.
2. The product has been delivered or the service has been rendered.
3. The price is determined or determinable.
4. The seller is reasonably sure of collecting money.
If a firm receives cash before revenue recognition is complete, the firm reports it as
unearned revenue. Unearned revenue is reported on the balance sheet as a liability.
The liability is reduced in the future as the revenue is earned. For example, a magazine
publisher typically receives subscription payments in advance of delivery. When
payments are received, both assets (cash) and liabilities (unearned revenue) increase.
As the magazines are delivered, the publisher recognizes revenue on the income
statement and the liability is reduced.
SPEcific Revenue Recognition Applications
Revenue is usually recognized at delivery using the revenue recognition criteria
previously discussed. However, in some cases, revenue may be recognized before
delivery occurs or even after delivery takes place.
Long-Term Contracts
The PErcentage-of-completion method and the completed-contract method are used
for contracts that extend beyond one accounting PEriod, often contracts related to
construction projects.
In certain cases involving service contracts or licensing agreements, the firm may
simply recognize revenue equally over the term of the contract or agreement.
When the outcome of a long-term contract can be reliably estimated, the PErcentageof-completion method is used under both IFRS and U.S. GAAP. Accordingly, revenue,
exPEnse, and therefore profit, are recognized as the work is PErformed. The
PErcentage of completion is measured by the total cost incurred to date divided by the
total exPEcted cost of the project.
Under International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), if the firm cannot reliably
measure the outcome of the project, revenue is recognized to the extent of contract
costs, costs are exPEnsed when incurred, and profit is recognized only at completion.
Under U.S. GAAP, the completed-contract method is used when the outcome of the
project cannot be reliably estimated. Accordingly, revenue, exPEnse, and profit are
recognized only when the contract is complete.
If a loss is exPEcted, the loss must be recognized immediately under IFRS and
U.S. GAAP.
The effect of using these different revenue recognition methods for long-term
contracts on the income statement is illustrated in the following examples.
Example: Revenue recognition for long-term contracts
Assume that AAA Construction Corp. has a contract to build a ship for $1,000 and a reliable estimate of
the contract's total cost is $800. Project costs incurred by AAA are as follows:
AAA Project Costs
Determine AAA's net income from this project for each year using the PErcentage-of-completion and
completed contract methods in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Answer:
Since one-half of the total contract cost [$400 / $800] was incurred during 20X5, the project was 50%
complete at year-end. Under the PErcentage-of-completion method, 20X5 revenue is $500 [$1,000 x 50%].
ExPEnses (cost incurred) were $400; thus, net income for 20X5 was $100 [$500 revenue - $400 exPEnse].
At the end of 20X6, the project is 87.5% complete [($400 + $300) / $800]. Revenue to date should total
$875 [$1,000 x 87.5%]. Since AAA already recognized $500 of revenue in 20X5, 20X6 revenue is $375
[$875 - $500]. 20X6 exPEnses were $300 so 20X6 net income was $75 [$375 revenue - $300 exPEnse].
At the end of 20X7, the project is 100% complete [($400 + $300 +$100) / $800]. Revenue to date should
total $1,000 [$1,000 x 100%]. Since AAA already recognized $875 of revenue in 20X5 and 20X6, 20X7
revenue is $125 [$1,000 - $875]. 20X7 exPEnses were $100 so 20X7 net income was $25 [$125 revenue -
$100 exPEnse].
The table below summarizes the AAA's revenue, exPEnse, and net income over the term of project under
the PErcentage-of-completion method.
AAA Income Statements
Under the completed contract method, revenue, exPEnses, and profit are not recognized until the contract
is complete. Therefore, at the end of 20X7, AAA reports revenue of $1,000, exPEnse of $800, and net
income of $200.
Example: Long-term contracts under IFRS
Using the data from the previous example, determine AAA's net income from this project each year in
accordance with IFRS.
Answer:
If the outcome of the project can be reliably estimated, the results under the PErcentage-of-completion
method would be identical to U.S. GAAP. If the outcome cannot be reliably estimated, revenues would be
recognized only to the extent of costs incurred in 20X5 and 20X6. The remainder of the revenue, and all of
the profit, is recognized in 20X7 as follows:
AAA Income Statements
As compared to the completed contract method, the PErcentage-of-completion
method is more aggressive since revenue is reported sooner. Also, the PErcentage-ofcompletion method is more subjective because it involves cost estimates. However,
the PErcentage-of-completion method provides smoother earnings and results in
better matching of revenues and exPEnses over time. Cash flows are the same under
both methods.
Installment Sales
An installment sale occurs when a firm finances a sale and payments are exPEcted to
be received over an extended PEriod. Under U.S. GAAP, if collectibility is certain,
revenue is recognized at the time of sale using the normal revenue recognition criteria.
If collectibility cannot be reasonably estimated, the installment method is used. If
collectibility is highly uncertain, the cost recovery method is used.
Under the installment method, profit is recognized as cash is collected. Profit is equal
to the cash collected during the PEriod multiplied by the total exPEcted profit as a
PErcentage of sales. Under the cost recovery method, profit is recognized only when
cash collected exceeds costs incurred. Both the installment and cost recovery methods
are typically used only for sales of real estate.
The effects of using the installment and the cost recovery methods are illustrated in
the following example.
Example: Revenue recognition under the installment method
Assume that BBB ProPErty Corp. sells a piece of land for $1,000. The original cost of the land was $800.
Collections received by BBB for the sale are as follows:
BBB Installment Collections
Determine BBB's profit under the installment and cost recovery methods.
Answer:
Total exPEcted profit as a PErcentage of sales is 20% [($1,000 - $800) / $1,000]. Under the installment
method, BBB will report profit in 20X5 and 20X6 of $80 [$400 x 20%] each year. In 20X7, BBB will report
profit of $40 [$200 x 20%].
Under the cost recovery method, the collections received during 20X5 and 20X6 are applied to the
recovery of costs. In 20X7, BBB will report $200 of profit.
Under IFRS, the discounted present value of the installment payments is recognized at
the time of sale. The difference between the installment payments and the discounted
present value is recognized as interest over time. If the outcome of the project cannot
be reliably estimated, revenue recognition under IFRS is similar to the cost recovery
method.
Barter Transactions
In a barter transaction (or non-monetary exchange), two parties exchange goods or
services without cash payment. A round-trip transaction involves the sale of goods to
one party with the simultaneous purchase of almost identical goods from the same
party. The underlying issue with these transactions is whether revenue should be
recognized. In the late 1990s, several internet companies increased their revenue
significantly by "buying" equal values of advertising space on each others' websites.
According to U.S. GAAP, revenue from a barter transaction can be recognized at fair
value only if the firm has historically received cash payments for such goods and
services and can use this historical exPErience to determine fair value. Otherwise, the
revenue is recorded at the carrying value of the asset surrendered.5
Under IFRS, revenue from barter transactions must be based on the fair value of
revenue from similar nonbarter transactions with unrelated parties.6
Gross and Net Reporting of Revenue
Under gross revenue reporting, the selling firm reports sales revenue and cost of
goods sold separately. Under net revenue reporting, only the difference in sales and
cost is reported. While profit is the same, sales are higher using gross revenue
reporting.
For example, consider a travel agent who arranges a fIRSt-class ticket for a customer
flying to Singapore. The ticket price is $10,000, and the travel agent receives a $1,000
commission. Using gross reporting, the travel agent would report $10,000 of revenue,
$9,000 of exPEnse, and $1,000 of profit. Using net reporting, the travel agent would
simply report $1,000 of revenue and no exPEnse.
The following criteria must be met in order to use gross revenue reporting under
U.S. GAAP.7 The firm must:
Be the primary obligor under the contract.
Bear the inventory risk and credit risk.
Be able to choose its supplier.
Have reasonable latitude to establish the price.
Implications for Financial Analysis
As noted previously, firms can recognize revenue before delivery, at the time of
delivery, or after delivery takes place, as appropriate. Different revenue recognition
methods can be used within the firm. Firms disclose their revenue recognition policies
in the financial statement footnotes.
Users of financial information must consider two points when analyzing a firm's
revenue: (1) how conservative are the firm's revenue recognition policies (recognizing
revenue sooner rather than later is more aggressive), and (2) the extent to which the
firm's policies rely on judgment and estimates.
LOS 24.d: Describe key asPEcts of the converged accounting standards for revenue
recognition issued by the International Accounting Standards Board and Financial
Accounting Standards Board in May 2014.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 168
In May 2014, IASB and FASB issued converged standards for revenue recognition that
are currently scheduled go into effect for PEriods beginning after December 15, 2017,
for U.S. GAAP reporting firms and after January 1, 2018, for IFRS reporting firms. IFRS
firms may adopt these new standards early. U.S. GAAP firms may adopt them for
PEriods beginning after December 15, 2016.
The new standards take a principles-based appROAch to revenue recognition issues.
The central principle is that a firm should recognize revenue when it has transferred a
good or service to a customer. This is consistent with the familiar accrual accounting
principle that revenue should be recognized when earned.
The converged standards identiFY a five-step process8 for recognizing revenue:
1. IdentiFY the contract(s) with a customer.
2. IdentiFY the PErformance obligations in the contract.
3. Determine the transaction price.
4. Allocate the transaction price to the PErformance obligations in the contract.
5. Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a PErformance obligation.
The standard defines a contract as an agreement between two or more parties that
sPEcifies their obligations and rights. Collectability must be probable for a contract to
exist, but "probable" is defined differently under IFRS and U.S. GAAP so an identical
activity could still be accounted for differently by IFRS and U.S. GAAP reporting firms.
A PErformance obligation is a promise to deliver a distinct good or service. A "distinct"
good or service is one that meets the following criteria:
The customer can benefit from the good or service on its own or combined with
other resources that are readily available.
The promise to transfer the good or service can be identified separately from
any other promises.
A transaction price is the amount a firm exPEcts to receive from a customer in
exchange for transferring a good or service to the customer. A transaction price is
usually a fixed amount but can also be variable, for example, if it includes a bonus for
early delivery. A firm can only include a variable part in a transaction price if the firm is
almost certain they will not have to reverse it.
For long-term contracts, revenue is recognized based on a firm's progress toward
completing a PErformance obligation. This treatment is consistent with the
PErcentage-of-completion method currently in use, although the new standards do not
call it that.
Required disclosures under the converged standards include:
Contracts with customers by category.
Assets and liabilities related to contracts, including balances and changes.
Outstanding PErformance obligations and the transaction prices allocated to
them.
Management judgments used to determine the amount and timing of revenue
recognition, including any changes to those judgments.
For many transactions, revenue recognition under the converged standards will be
little changed. Industries that are exPEcted to be affected most are those that often
sell bundles of goods and services, such as the software and telecommunications
industries.
LOS 24.e: Describe general principles of exPEnse recognition, sPEcific exPEnse
recognition applications, and implications of exPEnse recognition choices for
financial analysis.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 172
ExPEnses are subtracted from revenue to calculate net income. According to the IASB,
exPEnses are decreases in economic benefits during the accounting PEriod in the form
of outflows or depletions of assets or incurrence of liabilities that result in decreases in
equity other than those relating to distributions to equity participants.9
If the financial statements were prepared on a cash basis, neither revenue recognition
nor exPEnse recognition would be an issue. The firm would simply recognize cash
received as revenue and cash payments as exPEnse.
Under the accrual method of accounting, exPEnse recognition is based on the
matching principle whereby exPEnses to generate revenue are recognized in the same
PEriod as the revenue. Inventory provides a good example. Assume inventory is
purchased during the fourth quarter of one year and sold during the fIRSt quarter of the
following year. Using the matching principle, both the revenue and the exPEnse (cost
of goods sold) are recognized in the fIRSt quarter, when the inventory is sold, not the
PEriod in which the inventory was purchased.
Not all exPEnses can be directly tied to revenue generation. These costs are known as
PEriod costs. PEriod costs, such as administrative costs, are exPEnsed in the PEriod
incurred.
Inventory ExPEnse Recognition
If a firm can identiFY exactly which items were sold and which items remain in
inventory, it can use the sPEcific identification method. For example, an auto dealer
records each vehicle sold or in inventory by its identification number.
Under the fIRSt-in, fIRSt-out (FIFO) method, the fIRSt item purchased is assumed to be
the fIRSt item sold. The cost of inventory acquired fIRSt (beginning inventory and early
purchases) is used to calculate the cost of goods sold for the PEriod. The cost of the
most recent purchases is used to calculate ending inventory. FIFO is appropriate for
inventory that has a limited shelf life. For example, a food products company will sell
its oldest inventory fIRSt to keep the inventory on hand fresh.
Under the last-in, fIRSt-out (LIFO) method, the last item purchased is assumed to be
the fIRSt item sold. The cost of inventory most recently purchased is assigned to the
cost of goods sold for the PEriod. The costs of beginning inventory and earlier
purchases are assigned to ending inventory. LIFO is appropriate for inventory that does
not deteriorate with age. For example, a coal distributor will sell coal off the top of the
pile.
In the United States, LIFO is popular because of its income tax benefits. In an
inflationary environment, LIFO results in higher cost of goods sold. Higher cost of
goods sold results in lower taxable income and, therefore, lower income taxes.
The weighted average cost method makes no assumption about the physical flow of
the inventory. It is popular because of its ease of use. The cost PEr unit is calculated by
dividing cost of available goods by total units available, and this average cost is used to
determine both cost of goods sold and ending inventory. Average cost results in cost of
goods sold and ending inventory values between those of LIFO and FIFO.
FIFO and average cost are PErmitted under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS. LIFO is allowed
under U.S. GAAP but is prohibited under IFRS.
Figure 2 summarizes the effects of the inventory methods.
Figure 2: Inventory Method Comparison
Method
Assumption
Cost of Goods
Sold Consists
of...
Ending
Inventory
Consists of...
FIFO
(U.S. and
IFRS)
LIFO
The items fIRSt purchased
are the fIRSt to be sold.
fIRSt purchased
most recent
purchases
The items last purchased
last purchased
earliest
The items last purchased
are the fIRSt to be sold.
last purchased
earliest
purchases
Items sold are a mix of
purchases.
average cost of
all items
average cost
of all items
LIFO
(U.S.
only)
Weighted
average
cost
(U.S. and
IFRS)
Example: Inventory costing
Use the inventory data in the table below to calculate the cost of goods sold and ending inventory under
each of the three methods.
Inventory Data
Answer:
FIFO cost of goods sold: Value the seven units sold using the unit cost of fIRSt units purchased. Start with
the beginning inventory and the earliest units purchased and work down, as illustrated in the following
table.
LIFO cost of goods sold: Value the seven units sold at unit cost of last units purchased. Start with the most
recently purchased units and work up, as illustrated in the following table.
Average cost of goods sold:
Value the seven units sold at the average unit cost of goods available.
The following table summarizes the calculations of COGS and ending inventory for each method.
Summary:
Depreciation ExPEnse Recognition
The cost of long-lived assets must also be matched with revenues. Long-lived assets
are exPEcted to provide economic benefits beyond one accounting PEriod. The
allocation of cost over an asset's life is known as depreciation (tangible assets),
depletion (natural resources), or amortization (intangible assets). Most firms use the
straight-line depreciation method for financial reporting purposes. The straight-line
method recognizes an equal amount of depreciation exPEnse each PEriod. However,
most assets generate more benefits in the early years of their economic life and fewer
benefits in the later years. In this case, an accelerated depreciation method is more
appropriate for matching the exPEnses to revenues.
In the early years of an asset's life, the straight-line method will result in lower
depreciation exPEnse as compared to an accelerated method. Lower exPEnse results in
higher net income. In the later years of the asset's life, the effect is reversed, and
straight-line depreciation results in higher exPEnse and lower net income compared to
accelerated methods.
Straight-line depreciation (SL) allocates an equal amount of depreciation each year
over the asset's useful life as follows:
Example: Calculating straight-line depreciation exPEnse
Littlefield Company recently purchased a machine at a cost of $12,000. The machine is exPEcted to have a
residual value of $2,000 at the end of its useful life in five years. Calculate depreciation exPEnse using the
straight-line method.
Answer:
The annual depreciation exPEnse each year will be:
Accelerated depreciation sPEeds up the recognition of depreciation exPEnse in a
systematic way to recognize more depreciation exPEnse in the early years of the
asset's life and less depreciation exPEnse in the later years of its life. Total depreciation
exPEnse over the life of the asset will be the same as it would be if straight-line
depreciation were used.
The declining balance method (DB) applies a constant rate of depreciation to an
asset's (declining) book value each year.
Professor's Note: The declining balance method is also known as the diminishing balance
method.
The most common declining balance method is double-declining balance (DDB), which
applies two times the straight-line rate to the declining balance. If an asset's life is ten
years, the straight-line rate is 1/10 or 10%, and the DDB rate would be 2/10 or 20%.
DB does not explicitly use the asset's residual value in the calculations, but
depreciation ends once the estimated residual value has been reached. If the asset is
exPEcted to have no residual value, the DB method will never fully depreciate it, so the
DB method is typically changed to straight-line at some point in the asset's life.
Example: Calculating double-declining balance depreciation exPEnse
Littlefield Company recently purchased a machine at a cost of $12,000. The machine is exPEcted to have a
residual value of $2,000 at the end of its useful life in five years. Calculate depreciation exPEnse for all five
years using the double-declining balance method.
Answer:
The depreciation exPEnse using the double declining balance method is:
Year 1: (2 / 5)($12,000) = $4,800
Year 2: (2 / 5)($12,000 - $4,800) = $2,880
Year 3: (2 / 5)($12,000 - $7,680) = $1,728
In years 1 through 3, the company has recognized cumulative depreciation exPEnse of $9,408. Since the
total depreciation exPEnse is limited to $10,000 ($12,000 - $2,000 salvage value), the depreciation in year
4 is limited to $592, rather than the (2 / 5)($12,000 - $9,408) = $1,036.80 using the DDB formula.
Year 5: Depreciation exPEnse is $0, since the asset is fully depreciated.
Note that the rate of depreciation is doubled (2 / 5) from straight-line, and the only thing that changes
from year to year is the base amount (book value) used to calculate annual depreciation.
Professor's Note: We've been discussing the "double" declining balance method, which
uses a factor of two times the straight-line rate. Firms can compute declining balance
depreciation based on any factor (e.g., 1.5, double, triple).