UNDERSTANDING CASH FLOW STATEMENTS
Study Session 7
EXAM FOCUS
This topic review covers the third important required financial statement: the
statement of cash flows. Since the income statement is based on the accrual method,
net income may not represent cash generated from oPErations. A company may be
generating positive and growing net income but may be headed for insolvency because
insufficient cash is being generated from oPErating activities. Constructing a statement
of cash flows, by either the direct or indirect method, is therefore very important in an
analysis of a firm's activities and prosPEcts. Make sure you understand the preparation
of a statement of cash flows by either method, the classification of various cash flows
as oPErating, financing, or investing cash flows, and the key differences in these
classifications between U.S. GAAP and international accounting standards.
THE CASH FLOW STATEMENT
The cash flow statement provides information beyond that available from the income
statement, which is based on accrual, rather than cash, accounting. The cash flow
statement provides the following:
Information about a company's cash receipts and cash payments during an
accounting PEriod.
Information about a company's oPErating, investing, and financing activities.
An understanding of the impact of accrual accounting events on cash flows.
The cash flow statement provides information to assess the firm's liquidity, solvency,
and financial flexibility. An analyst can use the statement of cash flows to determine
whether:
Regular oPErations generate enough cash to sustain the business.
Enough cash is generated to pay off existing debts as they mature.
The firm is likely to need additional financing.
UnexPEcted obligations can be met.
The firm can take advantage of new business opportunities as they arise.
classiFY cash flow items as relating to one of those three categories given a
description of the items.
Items on the cash flow statement come from two sources: (1) income statement items
and (2) changes in balance sheet accounts. A firm's cash receipts and payments are
classified on the cash flow statement as either oPErating, investing, or financing
activities.
Cash flow from oPErating activities (CFO), sometimes referred to as "cash flow from
oPErations" or "oPErating cash flow," consists of the inflows and outflows of cash
resulting from transactions that affect a firm's net income.
Cash flow from investing activities (CFI) consists of the inflows and outflows of cash
resulting from the acquisition or disposal of long-term assets and certain investments.
Cash flow from financing activities (CFF) consists of the inflows and outflows of cash
resulting from transactions affecting a firm's capital structure.
Examples of each cash flow classification, in accordance with U.S. GAAP, are presented
in Figure 1 .
Figure 1: U.S. GAAP Cash Flow Classifications
OPErating Activities
Inflows
Outflows
Cash collected from customers
Cash paid to employees and
suppliers
Interest and dividends received
Cash paid for other exPEnses
Sale proceeds from trading SECurities
Acquisition of trading SECurities
Interest paid
Taxes paid
Investing Activities
Inflows
Outflows
Sale proceeds from fixed assets
Acquisition of fixed assets
Sale proceeds from debt and equity
investments
Acquisition of debt and equity
investments
Principal received from loans made to
others
Loans made to others
Financing Activities
Inflows
Outflows
Principal amounts of debt issued
Principal paid on debt
Proceeds from issuing stock
Payments to reacquire stock
Dividends paid to shareholders
Note that the acquisition of debt and equity investments (other than trading SECurities)
and loans made to others are reported as investing activities; however, the income
from these investments (interest and dividends received) is reported as an oPErating
activity. Also, note that principal amounts borrowed from others are reported as
financing activities; however, the interest paid is reported as an oPErating activity.
Finally, note that dividends paid to the firm's shareholders are financing activities.
Professor's Note: Don't confuse dividends received and dividends paid. Under U.S. GAAP,
dividends received are oPErating cash flows and dividends paid are financing cash flows.
Noncash investing and financing activities are not reported in the cash flow statement
since they do not result in inflows or outflows of cash.
For example, if a firm acquires real estate with financing provided by the seller, the
firm has made an investing and financing decision. This transaction is the equivalent of
borrowing the purchase price. However, since no cash is involved in the transaction, it
is not reported as an investing and financing activity in the cash flow statement.
Another example of a noncash transaction is an exchange of debt for equity. Such an
exchange results in a reduction of debt and an increase in equity. However, since no
cash is involved in the transaction, it is not reported as a financing activity in the cash
flow statement.
Noncash transactions must be disclosed in either a footnote or supplemental schedule
to the cash flow statement. Analysts should be aware of the firm's noncash
transactions, incorporate them into analysis of past and current PErformance, and
include their effects in estimating future cash flows.
Reporting Standards (IFRS) and US generally accepted accounting principles (US
GAAP).
Recall from Figure 1 that under U.S. GAAP, dividends paid to the firm's shareholders
are reported as financing activities while interest paid is reported in oPErating
activities. Interest received and dividends received from investments are also reported
as oPErating activities.
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) allow more flexibility in the
classification of cash flows. Under IFRS, interest and dividends received may be
classified as either oPErating or investing activities. Dividends paid to the company's
shareholders and interest paid on the company's debt may be classified as either
oPErating or financing activities.
Another important difference relates to income taxes paid. Under U.S. GAAP, all taxes
paid are reported as oPErating activities, even taxes related to investing and financing
transactions. Under IFRS, income taxes are also reported as oPErating activities unless
the exPEnse is associated with an investing or financing transaction.
For example, consider a company that sells land that was held for investment for $1
million. Income taxes on the sale total $160,000. Under U.S. GAAP, the firm reports an
inflow of cash from investing activities of $1 million and an outflow of cash from
oPErating activities of $160,000. Under IFRS, the firm can report a net inflow of
$840,000 from investing activities.
There are two methods of presenting the cash flow statement: the direct method and
the indirect method. Both methods are PErmitted under U.S. GAAP and IFRS. The use
of the direct method, however, is encouraged by both standard setters. Regrettably,
most firms use the indirect method. The difference between the two methods relates
to the presentation of cash flow from oPErating activities. The presentation of cash
flows from investing activities and financing activities is exactly the same under both
methods.
Under the direct method, each line item of the accrual-based income statement is
converted into cash receipts or cash payments. Recall that under the accrual method
of accounting, the timing of revenue and exPEnse recognition may differ from the
timing of the related cash flows. Under cash-basis accounting, revenue and exPEnse
recognition occur when cash is received or paid. Simply stated, the direct method
converts an accrual-basis income statement into a cash-basis income statement.
Figure 2 contains an example of a presentation of oPErating cash flow for Seagraves
Supply Company using the direct method.
Figure 2 Direct Method of Presenting OPErating Cash Flow
Seagraves Supply Company
OPErating Cash Flow - Direct Method
For the year ended December 31, 20X7
Cash collections from customers
$429,980
Cash paid to suppliers
(265,866)
Cash paid for oPErating exPEnses
(124,784)
Cash paid for interest
Cash paid for taxes
OPErating cash flow
(4,326)
(14,956)
$20,048
Notice the similarities of the direct method cash flow presentation and an income
statement. The direct method begins with cash inflows from customers and then
deducts cash outflows for purchases, oPErating exPEnses, interest, and taxes.
Indirect Method
Under the indirect method, net income is converted to oPErating cash flow by making
adjustments for transactions that affect net income but are not cash transactions.
These adjustments include eliminating noncash exPEnses (e.g., depreciation and
amortization), nonoPErating items (e.g., gains and losses), and changes in balance
sheet accounts resulting from accrual accounting events.
Figure 3 contains an example of a presentation of oPErating cash flow for Seagraves
Supply Company under the indirect method.
Figure 3: Indirect Method of Presenting OPErating Cash Flow
Seagraves Supply Company
OPErating Cash Flow - Indirect Method
For the year ended December 31, 20X7
Net income
Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash flow provided by
oPErating activities:
Depreciation and amortization
Deferred income taxes
Increase in accounts receivable
Increase in inventory
Decrease in prepaid exPEnses
Increase in accounts payable
Increase in accrued liabilities
$18,788
7,996
416
(1,220)
(20,544)
494
13,406
712
OPErating cash flow
$20,048
Notice that under the indirect method, the starting point is net income, the "bottom
line" of the income statement. Under the direct method, the starting point is the top
of the income statement, revenues, adjusted to show cash received from customers.
Total cash flow from oPErating activities is exactly the same under both methods, only
the presentation methods differ.
Arguments in Favor of Each Method
The primary advantage of the direct method is that it presents the firm's oPErating
cash receipts and payments, while the indirect method only presents the net result of
these receipts and payments. Therefore, the direct method provides more information
than the indirect method. This knowledge of past receipts and payments is useful in
estimating future oPErating cash flows.
The main advantage of the indirect method is that it focuses on the difference
between net income and oPErating cash flow. This provides a useful link to the income
statement when forecasting future oPErating cash flow. Analysts forecast net income
and then derive oPErating cash flow by adjusting net income for the differences
between accrual accounting and the cash basis of accounting.
Disclosure Requirements
Under U.S. GAAP, a direct method presentation must also disclose the adjustments
necessary to reconcile net income to cash flow from oPErating activities. This
disclosure is the same information that is presented in an indirect method cash flow
statement. This reconciliation is not required under IFRS.
Under IFRS, payments for interest and taxes must be disclosed separately in the cash
flow statement under either method (direct or indirect). Under U.S. GAAP, payments
for interest and taxes can be reported in the cash flow statement or disclosed in the
footnotes.
The cash flow statement reconciles the beginning and ending balances of cash over an
accounting PEriod. The change in cash is a result of the firm's oPErating, investing, and
financing activities as follows:
OPErating cash flow
+
+
Investing cash flow
Financing cash flow
=
+
=
Change in cash balance
Beginning cash balance
Ending cash balance
With a few exceptions, oPErating activities relate to the firm's current assets and
current liabilities. Investing activities typically relate to the firm's noncurrent assets,
and financing activities typically relate to the firm's noncurrent liabilities and equity.
Transactions for which the timing of revenue or exPEnse recognition differs from the
receipt or payment of cash are reflected in changes in balance sheet accounts. For
example, when revenues (sales) exceed cash collections, the firm has sold items on
credit and accounts receivable (an asset) increase. The opposite occurs when
customers repay more on their outstanding accounts than the firm extends in new
credit: cash collections exceed revenues and accounts receivable decrease. When
purchases from suppliers exceed cash payments, accounts payable (a liability) increase.
When cash payments exceed purchases, payables decrease.
It is helpful to understand how transactions affect each balance sheet account. For
example, accounts receivable are increased by sales and decreased by cash collections.
We can summarize this relationship as follows:
Beginning accounts receivable
+
-
=
Sales
Cash collections
Ending accounts receivable
Knowing three of the four variables, we can solve for the fourth. For example, if
beginning accounts receivable are EUR10,000, ending accounts receivable are EUR15,000,
and sales are EUR68,000, then cash collections must equal EUR63,000.
Understanding these interrelationships is not only useful in preparing the cash flow
statement, but is also helpful in uncovering accounting shenanigans.
LOS 26.f: Describe the stEPS in the preparation of direct and indirect cash flow
statements, including how cash flows can be computed using income statement and
balance sheet data.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 289
Professor's Note: Throughout the discussion of the direct and
indirect methods, remember the following points:
CFO is calculated differently, but the result is the same under
both methods.
The calculation of CFI and CFF is identical under both
methods.
There is an inverse relationship between changes in assets
and changes in cash flows. In other words, an increase in an
asset account is a use of cash, and a decrease in an asset
account is a source of cash.
There is a direct relationship between changes in liabilities
and changes in cash flow. In other words, an increase in a
liability account is a source of cash, and a decrease in a
liability is a use of cash.
Sources of cash are positive numbers (cash inflows) and uses
of cash are negative numbers (cash outflows).
Direct Method
The direct method of presenting a firm's statement of cash flows shows only cash
payments and cash receipts over the PEriod. The sum of these inflows and outflows is
the company's CFO. The direct method gives the analyst more information than the
indirect method. The analyst can see the actual amounts that went to each use of cash
and that were received from each source of cash. This information can help the analyst
to better understand the firm's PErformance over time and to forecast future cash
flows.
The following are common components of cash flow that apPEar on a statement of
cash flow presented under the direct method:
Cash collected from customers, typically the main component of CFO.
Cash used in the production of goods and services (cash inputs).
Cash oPErating exPEnses.
Cash paid for interest.
Cash paid for taxes.
Professor's Note: A common "trick" in direct method questions is to provide information on
depreciation exPEnse along with other oPErating cash flow components. When using the direct
method, ignore depreciation exPEnse--it's a noncash charge. We'll see later that we do consider
depreciation exPEnse
indirect method computations, but we do this solely because
depreciation exPEnse and other noncash exPEnses have been subtracted in calculating net
income (our starting point) and need to be added back to get cash flow.
in
Investing cash flows (CFI) are calculated by examining the change in the gross asset
accounts that result from investing activities, such as proPErty, plant, and equipment,
intangible assets, and investment SECurities. Related accumulated depreciation or
amortization accounts are ignored since they do not represent cash exPEnses.
Professor's Note: In this context, "gross" simply means an amount that is presented on the balance
sheet before deducting any accumulated depreciation or amortization.
When calculating cash paid for a new asset, it is necessary to determine whether old
assets were sold. If assets were sold during the PEriod, you must use the following
formula:
cash paid for new asset = ending gross assets + gross cost of old assets sold -
beginning gross assets
Professor's Note: It may be easier to think in terms of the account reconciliation format discussed
earlier. That is, beginning gross assets + cash paid for new assets - gross cost of assets sold =
ending gross assets. Given three of the variables, simply solve for the fourth.
When calculating the cash flow from an asset that has been sold, it is necessary to
consider any gain or loss from the sale using the following formula:
cash from asset sold = book value of the asset + gain (or - loss) on sale
Financing cash flows ( CFF) are determined by measuring the cash flows occurring
between the firm and its suppliers of capital. Cash flows between the firm and its
creditors result from new borrowings (positive CFF) and debt principal repayments
(negative CFF). Note that interest paid is technically a cash flow to creditors, but it is
included in CFO under U.S. GAAP. Cash flows between the firm and its shareholders
occur when equity is issued, shares are repurchased, or dividends are paid. CFF is the
sum of these two measures:
net cash flows from creditors = new borrowings - principal amounts repaid
net cash flows from shareholders = new equity issued - share repurchases -
cash dividends paid
Cash dividends paid can be calculated from dividends declared and any changes in
dividends payable.
Finally, total cash flow is equal to the sum of CFO, CFI, and CFF. If calculated correctly,
the total cash flow will equal the change in cash from one balance sheet to the next.
Indirect Method
Cash flow from oPErations is presented differently under the indirect method, but the
amount of CFO is the same under either method. Cash flow from financing and cash
flow from investing are presented in the same way on cash flow statements prepared
under both the direct and indirect methods of presenting the statement of cash flows.
Under the indirect method of presenting CFO, we begin with net income and adjust it
for differences between accounting items and actual cash receipts and cash
disbursements. Depreciation, for example, is deducted in calculating net income, but
requires no cash outlay in the current PEriod. Therefore, we must add depreciation
(and amortization) to net income for the PEriod in calculating CFO.
Another adjustment to net income on an indirect statement of cash flows is to subtract
gains on the disposal of assets. Proceeds from the sale of fixed assets are an investing
cash flow. Since gains are a portion of such proceeds, we need to subtract them from
net income in calculating CFO under the indirect method. Conversely, a loss would be
added back to net income in calculating CFO under the indirect method.
Under the indirect method, we also need to adjust net income for change in balance
sheet accounts. If, for example, accounts receivable went up during the PEriod, we
know that sales during the PEriod were greater than the cash collected from
customers. Since sales were used to calculate net income under the accrual method,
we need to reduce net income to reflect the fact that credit sales, rather than cash
collected were used in calculating net income.
A change in accounts payable indicates a difference between purchases and the
amount paid to suppliers. An increase in accounts payable, for example, results when
purchases are greater than cash paid to suppliers. Since purchases were subtracted in
calculating net income, we need to add any increase in accounts payable to net income
so that CFO reflects the actual cash disbursements for purchases (rather than total
purchases).
The stEPS in calculating CFO under the indirect method can be summarized as follows:
Step 1: Begin with net income.
Step 2: Subtract gains or add losses that resulted from financing or investing
cash flows (such as gains from sale of land).
Step 3: Add back all noncash charges to income (such as depreciation and
amortization) and subtract all noncash components of revenue.
Step 4: Add or subtract changes to balance sheet oPErating accounts as follows:
Increases in the oPErating asset accounts (uses of cash) are
subtracted, while decreases (sources of cash) are added.
Increases in the oPErating liability accounts (sources of cash) are
added, while decreases (uses of cash) are subtracted.
Example: Statement of cash flows using the indirect method
Use the following balance sheet and income statement to prepare a statement of cash flows under the
indirect method.
Income Statement for 20X7
Sales
ExPEnse
Cost of goods sold
Wages
Depreciation
Interest
Total exPEnses
Income from continuing oPErations
Gain from sale of land
Pretax income
Provision for taxes
Net income
Common dividends declared
Balance Sheets for 20X7 and 20X6
$100,000
40,000
5,000
7,000
500
$52,500
$47,500
10,000
57,500
20,000
$37,500
$8,500
Assets
Current assets
Cash
20X7
20X6
$33,000
$9,000
Accounts receivable
10,000
9,000
Inventory
5,000
7,000
Noncurrent assets
Land
$35,000
$40,000
Gross plant and equipment
85,000
60,000
less: Accumulated depreciation
(16,000)
(9,000)
Net plant and equipment
$69,000
$51,000
Goodwill
10,000
10,000
$162,000
$126,000
Total assets
Liabilities
Current liabilities
Accounts payable
$9,000
$5,000
Wages payable
4,500
8,000
Interest payable
3,500
3,000
Taxes payable
5,000
4,000
Dividends payable
6,000
1,000
Total current liabilities
28,000
21,000
Noncurrent liabilities
Bonds
$15,000
$10,000
Deferred tax liability
20,000
15,000
Total liabilities
$63,000
$46,000
Stockholders' equity
Common stock
$40,000
$50,000
Retained earnings
59,000
30,000
Total equity
$99,000
$80,000
Total liabilities and stockholders' equity
$162,000
$126,000
Any discrepancies between the changes in accounts reported on the balance sheet and those reported in
the statement of cash flows are typically due to business combinations and changes in exchange rates.
Answer:
OPErating Cash Flow:
Step 1: Start with net income of $37,500.
Step 2: Subtract gain from sale of land of $10,000.
Step 3: Add back noncash charges of depreciation of $7,000.
Step 4: Subtract increases in receivables and inventories and add increases of payables and deferred taxes.
Net income
$37,500
Gain from sale of land
(10,000)
Depreciation
Subtotal
7,000
$34,500
Changes in oPErating accounts
Increase in receivables
($1,000)
Decrease in inventories
Increase in accounts payable
2,000
4,000
Decrease in wages payable
(3,500)
Increase in interest payable
Increase in taxes payable
Increase in deferred taxes
500
1,000
5,000
Cash flow from oPErations
$42,500
Investing cash flow:
In this example, we have two components of investing cash flow: the sale of land and the change in gross
plant and equipment (P&E).
cash from sale of land = decrease in asset + gain on sale = $5,000 + $10,000 = $15,000 (source)
beginning land + land purchased - gross cost of land sold = ending land = $40,000 + $0 - $5,000 = $35,000
Note: If the land had been sold at a loss, we would have subtracted the loss amount from the decrease in
land.
P&E purchased = ending gross P&E + gross cost of P&E sold - beginning gross P&E
= $85,000 + $0 - $60,000 = $25,000 (use)
beginning gross P&E + P&E purchased - gross cost of P&E sold = ending P&E = $60,000 + $25,000 - $0 =
$85,000
Cash from sale of land
$15,000
Purchase of plant and equipment
(25,000)
Cash flow from investments
($10,000)
Financing cash flow:
cash from bond issue = ending bonds payable + bonds repaid - beginning bonds payable = $15,000 + $0 -
$10,000 = $5,000 (source)
beginning bonds payable + bonds issued - bonds repaid = ending bonds payable = $10,000 +
$5,000 - $0 = $15,000
cash to reacquire stock = beginning common stock + stock issued - ending common stock = $50,000 + $0
- $40,000 = $10,000 (use, or a net share repurchase of $10,000)
beginning common stock + stock issued - stock reacquired = ending common stock = $50,000 +
$0 - $10,000 = $40,000
cash dividends = - dividend declared + increase in dividends payable = -$8,500* + $5,000 = -$3,500 (use)
beginning dividends payable + dividends declared - dividends paid = ending dividends payable =
$1,000 + $8,500 - $3,500 = $6,000
*Note: If the dividend declared amount is not provided, you can calculate the amount as follows:
dividends declared = beginning retained earnings + net income - ending retained earnings. Here, $30,000
+ $37,500 - $59,000 = $8,500.
Sale of bonds
$5,000
Repurchase of stock
(10,000)
Cash dividends
(3,500)
Cash flow from financing
($8,500)
Total cash flow:
Cash flow from oPErations
$42,500
Cash flow from investments
(10,000)
Cash flow from financing
(8,500)
Total cash flow
$24,000
The total cash flow of $24,000 is equal to the increase in the cash account. The difference between
beginning cash and ending cash should be used as a check figure to ensure that the total cash flow
calculation is correct.
Both IFRS and U.S. GAAP encourage the use of a statement of cash flows in the direct
format. Under U.S. GAAP, a statement of cash flows under the direct method must
include footnote disclosure of the indirect method. Most companies however, report
cash flows using the indirect method, which requires no additional disclosure. The next
LOS illustrates the method an analyst will use to create a statement of cash flows in
the direct method format when the company reports using the indirect method.
LOS 26.g: Convert cash flows from the indirect to direct method.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 301
The only difference between the indirect and direct methods of presentation is in the
cash flow from oPErations (CFO) SECtion. CFO under the direct method can be
computed using a combination of the income statement and a statement of cash flows
prepared under the indirect method.
There are two major SECtions in CFO under the direct method: cash inflows (receipts)
and cash outflows (payments). We will illustrate the conversion process using some
frequently used accounts. Please note that the list below is for illustrative purposes
only and is far from all-inclusive of what may be encountered in practice. The general
principle here is to adjust each income statement item for its corresponding balance
sheet accounts and to eliminate noncash and nonoPErating transactions.
Cash collections from customers:
1. Begin with net sales from the income statement.
2. Subtract (add) any increase (decrease) in the accounts receivable balance as
reported in the indirect method. If the company has sold more on credit than
has been collected from customers, accounts receivable will increase and cash
collections will be less than net sales.
3. Add (subtract) an increase (decrease) in unearned revenue. Unearned revenue
includes cash advances from customers. Cash received from customers when
the goods or services have yet to be delivered is not included in net sales, so
the advances must be added to net sales in order to calculate cash collections.
Cash payments to suppliers:
1. Begin with cost of goods sold (COGS) as reported in the income statement.
2. If depreciation and/or amortization have been included in COGS (they increase
COGS), these noncash exPEnses must be added back when computing the cash
paid to suppliers.
3. Reduce (increase) COGS by any increase (decrease) in the accounts payable
balance as reported in the indirect method. If payables have increased, then
more was sPEnt on credit purchases during the PEriod than was paid on
existing payables, so cash payments are reduced by the amount of the increase
in payables.
4. Add (subtract) any increase (decrease) in the inventory balance as disclosed in
the indirect method. Increases in inventory are not included in COGS for the
PEriod but still represent the purchase of inputs, so they increase cash paid to
suppliers.
5. Subtract an inventory write-off that occurred during the PEriod. An inventory
write-off, as a result of applying the lower of cost or market rule, will reduce
ending inventory and increase COGS for the PEriod. However, no cash flow is
associated with the write-off.
Other items in a direct method cash flow statement follow the same principles. Cash
taxes paid, for example, can be derived by starting with income tax exPEnse on the
income statement. Adjustment must be made for changes in related balance sheet
accounts (deferred tax assets and liabilities, and income taxes payable).
Cash oPErating exPEnse is equal to selling, general, and administrative exPEnse (SG&A)
from the income statement, increased (decreased) for any increase (decrease) in
prepaid exPEnses. Any increase in prepaid exPEnses is a cash outflow that is not
included in SG&A for the current PEriod.
Example: Direct method for computing CFO
Prepare a cash flow statement using the direct method, based on the indirect statement of cash flows,
balance sheet, and income statement from the previous example.
Answer:
There are many ways to think about these calculations and lots of
sources and uses and pluses and minuses to keep track of. It's easier if you use a "+" sign
for net sales and a "-" sign for cost of goods sold and other cash exPEnses used as the
starting points. Doing so will allow you to consistently follow the rule that an increase in
assets or decrease in liabilities is a use of cash and a decrease in assets or an increase in
liabilities is a source. We'll use this appROAch in the answer to the example. Remember,
sources are always + and uses are always -.
The calculations that follow include a reconciliation of each account, analyzing the transactions that
increase and decrease the account for the PEriod. As previously discussed, this reconciliation is useful in
understanding the interrelationships between the balance sheet, income statement, and cash flow
statement.
Cash from oPErations:
Keep track of the balance sheet items used to calculate CFO by marking them off the balance sheet. They
will not be needed again when determining CFI and CFF.
cash collections = sales - increase in accounts receivable = $100,000 - $1,000 = $99,000
beginning receivables + sales - cash collections = ending receivables = $9,000 + $100,000 -
$99,000 = $10,000
cash paid to suppliers = -COGS + decrease in inventory + increase in accounts payable = -$40,000 +
$2,000 + $4,000 = -$34,000
beginning inventory + purchases - COGS = ending inventory = $7,000 + $38,000 (not provided) -
$40,000 = $5,000
beginning accounts payable + purchases - cash paid to suppliers = ending accounts payable =
$5,000 + $38,000 (not provided) - $34,000 = $9,000
cash wages = -wages - decrease in wages payable = -$5,000 - $3,500 = -$8,500
beginning wages payable + wages exPEnse - wages paid = ending wages payable = $8,000 +
$5,000 - $8,500 = $4,500
cash interest = -interest exPEnse + increase in interest payable = -$500 + $500 = 0
beginning interest payable + interest exPEnse - interest paid = ending interest payable = $3,000
+ $500 - $0 = $3,500
cash taxes = -tax exPEnse + increase in taxes payable + increase in deferred tax liability
= -$20,000 + $1,000 + $5,000 = -$14,000
beginning taxes payable + beginning deferred tax liability + tax exPEnse - taxes paid = ending
taxes payable + ending deferred tax liability = $4,000 + $15,000 + $20,000 - $14,000 = $5,000 +
$20,000
Cash collections
$99,000
Cash to suppliers
(34,000)
Cash wages
Cash interest
Cash taxes
(8,500)
0
(14,000)
Cash flow from oPErations
$42,500
LOS 26.h: Analyze and interpret both reported and common-size cash flow
statements.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 302
Major Sources and Uses of Cash
Cash flow analysis begins with an evaluation of the firm's sources and uses of cash
from oPErating, investing, and financing activities. Sources and uses of cash change as
the firm moves through its life cycle. For example, when a firm is in the early stages of
growth, it may exPErience negative oPErating cash flow as it uses cash to finance
increases in inventory and receivables. This negative oPErating cash flow is usually
financed externally by issuing debt or equity SECurities. These sources of financing are
not sustainable. Eventually, the firm must begin generating positive oPErating cash
flow or the sources of external capital may no longer be available. Over the long term,
successful firms must be able to generate oPErating cash flows that exceed capital
exPEnditures and provide a return to debt and equity holders.
OPErating Cash Flow
An analyst should identiFY the major determinants of oPErating cash flow. Positive
oPErating cash flow can be generated by the firm's earnings-related activities.
However, positive oPErating cash flow can also be generated by decreasing noncash
working capital, such as liquidating inventory and receivables or increasing payables.
Decreasing noncash working capital is not sustainable, since inventories and
receivables cannot fall below zero and creditors will not extend credit indefinitely
unless payments are made when due.
OPErating cash flow also provides a check of the quality of a firm's earnings. A stable
relationship of oPErating cash flow and net income is an indication of quality earnings.
(This relationship can also be affected by the business cycle and the firm's life cycle.)
Earnings that significantly exceed oPErating cash flow may be an indication of
aggressive (or even improPEr) accounting choices such as recognizing revenues too
soon or delaying the recognition of exPEnses. The variability of net income and
oPErating cash flow should also be considered.
Investing Cash Flow
The sources and uses of cash from investing activities should be examined. Increasing
capital exPEnditures, a use of cash, is usually an indication of growth. Conversely, a
firm may reduce capital exPEnditures or even sell capital assets in order to save or
generate cash. This may result in higher cash outflows in the future as older assets are
replaced or growth resumes. As mentioned above, generating oPErating cash flow that
exceeds capital exPEnditures is a desirable trait.
Financing Cash Flow
The financing activities SECtion of the cash flow statement reveals information about
whether the firm is generating cash flow by issuing debt or equity. It also provides
information about whether the firm is using cash to repay debt, reacquire stock, or pay
dividends. For example, an analyst would certainly want to know if a firm issued debt
and used the proceeds to reacquire stock or pay dividends to shareholders.
Common-Size Cash Flow Statement
Like the income statement and balance sheet, common-size analysis can be used to
analyze the cash flow statement.
The cash flow statement can be converted to common-size format by expressing each
line item as a PErcentage of revenue. Alternatively, each inflow of cash can be
expressed as a PErcentage of total cash inflows, and each outflow of cash can be
expressed as a PErcentage of total cash outflows.
A revenue based common-size cash flow statement is useful in identiFYing trends and
forecasting future cash flow. Since each line item of the cash flow statement is stated
in terms of revenue, once future revenue is forecast, cash flows can be estimated for
those items that are tied to revenue.
Example: Common-size cash flow statement analysis
Triple Y Corporation's common-size cash flow statement is shown in the table below. Explain the decrease
in Triple Y's total cash flow as a PErcentage of revenues.
Triple Y Corporation
Answer:
OPErating cash flow has decreased as a PErcentage of revenues. This apPEars to be due largely to
accumulating inventories. Investing activities, sPEcifically purchases of plant and equipment, have also
required an increasing PErcentage of the firm's cash flow.
Free cash flow is a measure of cash that is available for discretionary purposes. This is
the cash flow that is available once the firm has covered its capital exPEnditures. This is
a fundamental cash flow measure and is often used for valuation. There are several
measures of free cash flow. Two of the more common measures are free cash flow to
the firm and free cash flow to equity.
Free Cash Flow to the Firm
Free cash flow to the firm (FCFF) is the cash available to all investors, both equity
owners and debt holders. FCFF can be calculated by starting with either net income or
oPErating cash flow.
FCFF is calculated from net income as:
FCFF = NI + NCC + [Int x (1 - tax rate)] - FCInv - WCInv
where:
NI
NCC
= net income
= noncash charges (depreciation and amortization)
Int
= interest exPEnse
FCInv
= fixed capital investment (net capital exPEnditures)
WCInv
= working capital investment
Professor's Note: Fixed capital investment is cash sPEnt on fixed assets minus cash received from
selling fixed assets. It is not the same as CFI, which includes cash flows from fixed investments,
investments in SECurities, and repaid principal from loans made.
Note that interest exPEnse, net of tax, is added back to net income. This is because
FCFF is the cash flow available to stockholders and debt holders. Since interest is paid
to (and therefore "available to") the debt holders, it must be included in FCFF.
FCFF can also be calculated from oPErating cash flow as:
FCFF = CFO + [Int x (1 - tax rate)] - FCInv
where:
CFO
Int
= cash flow from oPErations
= interest exPEnse
FCInv
= fixed capital investment (net capital exPEnditures)
It is not necessary to adjust for noncash charges and changes in working capital when
starting with CFO, since they are already reflected in the calculation of CFO. For firms
that follow IFRS, it is not necessary to adjust for interest exPEnse that is included as a
part of financing activities. Additionally, firms that follow IFRS can report dividends
paid as oPErating activities. In this case, the dividends paid would be added back to
CFO. Again, the goal is to calculate the cash flow that is available to the shareholders
and debt holders. It is not necessary to adjust dividends for taxes since dividends paid
are not tax deductible.
Free Cash Flow to Equity
Free cash flow to equity (FCFE) is the cash flow that would be available for distribution
to common shareholders. FCFE can be calculated as follows:
FCFE = CFO - FCInv + net borrowing
where:
CFO
FCInv
= cash flow from oPErations
= fixed capital investment (net capital exPEnditures)
net borrowing
= debt issued - debt repaid
Professor's Note: If net borrowing is negative (debt repaid exceeds debt issued), we would
subtract net borrowing in calculating FCFE.
If firms that follow IFRS have subtracted dividends paid in calculating CFO, dividends
must be added back when calculating FCFE.
Other Cash Flow Ratios
Just as with the income statement and balance sheet, the cash flow statement can be
analyzed by comparing the cash flows either over time or to those of other firms. Cash
flow ratios can be categorized as PErformance ratios and coverage ratios.
PErformance Ratios
The cash flow-to-revenue ratio measures the amount of oPErating cash flow
generated for each dollar of revenue.
The cash return-on-assets ratio measures the return of oPErating cash flow attributed
to all providers of capital.
The cash return-on-equity ratio measures the return of oPErating cash flow attributed
to shareholders.
The cash-to-income ratio measures the ability to generate cash from firm oPErations.
Cash flow PEr share is a variation of basic earnings PEr share measured by using CFO
instead of net income.
Note: If common dividends were classified as oPErating activities under IFRS,
they should be added back to CFO for purposes of calculating cash flow PEr
share.
Coverage Ratios
The debt coverage ratio measures financial risk and leverage.
The interest coverage ratio measures the firm's ability to meet its interest obligations.
Note: If interest paid was classified as a financing activity under IFRS, no
interest adjustment is necessary.
The reinvestment ratio measures the firm's ability to acquire long-term assets with
oPErating cash flow.
The debt payment ratio measures the firm's ability to satisFY long-term debt with
oPErating cash flow.
The dividend payment ratio measures the firm's ability to make dividend payments
from oPErating cash flow.
The investing and financing ratio measures the firm's ability to purchase assets, satisFY
debts, and pay dividends.
KEY CONCEPTS
Cash flow from oPErating activities (CFO) consists of the inflows and outflows of cash
resulting from transactions that affect a firm's net income.
Cash flow from investing activities (CFI) consists of the inflows and outflows of cash
resulting from the acquisition or disposal of long-term assets and certain investments.
Cash flow from financing activities (CFF) consists of the inflows and outflows of cash
resulting from transactions affecting a firm's capital structure, such as issuing or
repaying debt and issuing or repurchasing stock.
Noncash investing and financing activities, such as taking on debt to the seller of a
purchased asset, are not reported in the cash flow statement but must be disclosed in
the footnotes or a supplemental schedule.
Under U.S. GAAP, dividends paid are financing cash flows. Interest paid, interest
received, and dividends received are oPErating cash flows. All taxes paid are oPErating
cash flows.
Under IFRS, dividends paid and interest paid can be reported as either oPErating or
financing cash flows. Interest received and dividends received can be reported as
either oPErating or investing cash flows. Taxes paid are oPErating cash flows unless
they arise from an investing or financing transaction.
Under the direct method of presenting CFO, each line item of the accrual-based
income statement is adjusted to get cash receipts or cash payments. The main
advantage of the direct method is that it presents clearly the firm's oPErating cash
receipts and payments.
Under the indirect method of presenting CFO, net income is adjusted for transactions
that affect net income but do not affect oPErating cash flow, such as depreciation and
gains or losses on asset sales, and for changes in balance sheet items. The main
advantage of the indirect method is that it focuses on the differences between net
income and oPErating cash flow. This provides a useful link to the income statement
when forecasting future oPErating cash flow.
OPErating activities typically relate to the firm's current assets and current liabilities.
Investing activities typically relate to noncurrent assets. Financing activities typically
relate to noncurrent liabilities and equity.
Timing of revenue or exPEnse recognition that differs from the receipt or payment of
cash is reflected in changes in balance sheet accounts.
The direct method of calculating CFO is to sum cash inflows and cash outflows for
oPErating activities.
Cash collections from customers--sales adjusted for changes in receivables and
unearned revenue.
Cash paid for inputs--COGS adjusted for changes in inventory and accounts
payable.
Cash oPErating exPEnses--SG&A adjusted for changes in related accrued
liabilities or prepaid exPEnses.
Cash interest paid--interest exPEnse adjusted for the change in interest
payable.
Cash taxes paid--income tax exPEnse adjusted for changes in taxes payable and
changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities.
The indirect method of calculating CFO begins with net income and adjusts it for gains
or losses related to investing or financing cash flows, noncash charges to income, and
changes in balance sheet oPErating items.
CFI is calculated by determining the changes in asset accounts that result from
investing activities. The cash flow from selling an asset is its book value plus any gain
on the sale (or minus any loss on the sale).
CFF is the sum of net cash flows from creditors (new borrowings minus principal
repaid) and net cash flows from shareholders (new equity issued minus share
repurchases minus cash dividends paid).
An indirect cash flow statement can be converted to a direct cash flow statement by
adjusting each income statement account for changes in associated balance sheet
accounts and by eliminating noncash and non-oPErating items.
An analyst should determine whether a company is generating positive oPErating cash
flow over time that is greater than its capital sPEnding needs and whether the
company's accounting policies are causing reported earnings to diverge from oPErating
cash flow.
A common-size cash flow statement shows each item as a PErcentage of revenue or
shows each cash inflow as a PErcentage of total inflows and each outflow as a
PErcentage of total outflows.
Free cash flow to the firm (FCFF) is the cash available to all investors, both equity
owners and debt holders.
FCFF = net income + noncash charges + [interest exPEnse x (1 - tax rate)] - fixed
capital investment - working capital investment.
FCFF = CFO + [interest exPEnse x (1 - tax rate)] - fixed capital investment.
Free cash flow to equity (FCFE) is the cash flow that is available for distribution to the
common shareholders after all obligations have been paid.
FCFE = CFO - fixed capital investment + net borrowing
Cash flow PErformance ratios, such as cash return on equity or on assets, and cash
coverage ratios, such as debt coverage or cash interest coverage, provide information
about the firm's oPErating PErformance and financial strength.
<|endoftext|>
