LONG-LIVED ASSETS
Study Session 8
EXAM FOCUS
Long-lived assets include tangible assets, intangible assets, and financial assets. Firms
make many estimates and choices in accounting for long-lived assets that affect the
firms' profits, ratios, and cash flow classifications. You must understand the effects of
and issues concerning capitalization versus immediate exPEnsing of various costs,
including construction interest, research and development, and software costs. For
capitalized costs, you must be familiar with the effects of the different depreciation
and amortization methods and be able to determine if an asset is impaired. Finally, you
must be familiar with the revaluation (fair value) model under IFRS and the disclosure
requirements for financial reporting.
LOS 29.a: Distinguish between costs that are capitalised and costs that are exPEnsed
in the PEriod in which they are incurred.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 475
When a firm makes an exPEnditure, it can either capitalize the cost as an asset on the
balance sheet or exPEnse the cost in the income statement in the PEriod incurred. As a
general rule, an exPEnditure that is exPEcted to provide a future economic benefit
over multiple accounting PEriods is capitalized; however, if the future economic
benefit is unlikely or highly uncertain, the exPEnditure is exPEnsed in the PEriod
incurred.
An exPEnditure that is capitalized is initially recorded as an asset on the balance sheet
at cost, typically its fair value at acquisition plus any costs necessary to prepare the
asset for use. Except for land and intangible assets with indefinite lives (such as
acquisition goodwill), the cost is then allocated to the income statement over the life
of the asset as depreciation exPEnse (for tangible assets) or amortization exPEnse (for
intangible assets with finite lives).
Alternatively, if an exPEnditure is immediately exPEnsed, current PEriod pretax income
is reduced by the amount of the exPEnditure.
Once an asset is capitalized, subsequent related exPEnditures that provide more future
economic benefits (e.g., rebuilding the asset) are also capitalized. Subsequent
exPEnditures that merely sustain the usefulness of the asset (e.g., regular
maintenance) are exPEnsed when incurred.
Example: Capitalizing versus exPEnsing
Northwood Corp. purchased new equipment to be used in its manufacturing plant. The cost of the
equipment was $250,000 including $5,000 freight and $12,000 of taxes. In addition to the equipment cost,
Northwood paid $10,000 to install the equipment and $7,500 to train its employees to use the equipment.
Over the asset's life, Northwood paid $35,000 for repair and maintenance. At the end of five years,
Northwood extended the life of the asset by rebuilding the equipment's motors at a cost of $85,000.
What amounts should be capitalized on Northwood's balance sheet and what amounts should be
exPEnsed in the PEriod incurred?
Answer:
Northwood should capitalize all costs that provide future economic benefits, including the costs that are
necessary to get the asset ready for use. Rebuilding the equipment's motors extended its life and thus
increased its future benefits.
Capitalized Costs
Purchase price
$250,000
(including freight & taxes)
Installation costs
10,000
Rebuilt motors
85,000
$345,000
Costs that do not provide future economic benefits are exPEnsed in the PEriod incurred. The initial
training costs are not necessary to get the asset ready for use. Rather, the training costs are necessary to
get the employees ready to use the asset. Thus, the training costs are immediately exPEnsed. Repair and
maintenance costs are oPErating exPEnditures that do not extend the life of the equipment.
Costs ExPEnsed When Incurred
Initial training costs
Repair and maintenance
$7,500
35,000
$42,500
Capitalized Interest
When a firm constructs an asset for its own use or, in limited circumstances, for resale,
the interest that accrues during the construction PEriod is capitalized as a part of the
asset's cost. The reasons for capitalizing interest are to accurately measure the cost of
the asset and to better match the cost with the revenues generated by the constructed
asset. The treatment of construction interest is similar under U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
Capitalized interest is not reported in the income statement as interest exPEnse. Once
construction interest is capitalized, the interest cost is allocated to the income
statement through depreciation exPEnse (if the asset is held for use), or COGS (if the
asset is held for sale).
Generally, capitalized interest is reported in the cash flow statement as an outflow
from investing activities, while interest exPEnse is reported as an outflow from
oPErating activities.
Professor's Note: Interest exPEnse can be reported on the cash flow statement as either an
oPErating activity or financing activity under IFRS.
LOS 29.b: Compare the financial reporting of the following tyPEs of intangible assets:
purchased, internally develoPEd, acquired in a business combination.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 478
Intangible assets are long-term assets that lack physical substance, such as patents,
brand names, copyrights, and franchises. Some intangible assets have finite lives while
others have indefinite lives.
The cost of a finite-lived intangible asset is amortized over its useful life. Indefinitelived intangible assets are not amortized, but are tested for impairment at least
annually. If impaired, the reduction in value is recognized in the income statement as a
loss in the PEriod in which the impairment is recognized.
Intangible assets are also considered either identifiable or unidentifiable. Under IFRS,
an identifiable intangible asset must be:
Capable of being separated from the firm or arise from a contractual or legal
right.
Controlled by the firm
ExPEcted to provide future economic benefits.
In addition, the future economic benefits must be probable and the asset's cost must
be reliably measurable.
An unidentifiable intangible asset is one that cannot be purchased separately and may
have an indefinite life. The most common example of an unidentifiable intangible asset
is goodwill. Goodwill is the excess of purchase price over the fair value of the
identifiable assets (net of liabilities) acquired in a business combination.
Not all intangible assets are reported on the balance sheet. Accounting for an
intangible asset dePEnds on whether the asset was created internally, purchased
externally, or obtained as part of a business combination.
Intangible Assets Created Internally
With some exceptions, costs to create intangible assets are exPEnsed as incurred.
Important exceptions are research and development costs (under IFRS) and software
development costs.
Research and development costs. Under IFRS, research costs, which are costs aimed
at the discovery of new scientific or technical knowledge and understanding, are
exPEnsed as incurred. However, development costs may be capitalized. Development
costs are incurred to translate research findings into a plan or design of a new product
or process. To recognize an intangible asset in development, a firm must show that it
can complete the asset and intends to use or sell the completed asset, among other
criteria.
Under U.S. GAAP, both research and development costs are generally exPEnsed as
incurred. However, the costs of creating software for sale to others are treated in a
manner similar to the treatment of research and development costs under IFRS. Costs
incurred to develop software for sale to others are exPEnsed as incurred until the
product's technological feasibility has been established, after which the costs of
developing a salable product are capitalized.
Purchased Intangible Assets
Like tangible assets, an intangible asset purchased from another party is initially
recorded on the balance sheet at cost, typically its fair value at acquisition.
If the intangible asset is purchased as part of a group, the total purchase price is
allocated to each asset on the basis of its fair value. For analytical purposes, an analyst
is usually more interested in the tyPE of asset acquired rather than the value assigned
on the balance sheet. For example, recently acquired franchise rights may provide
insight into the firm's future oPErating PErformance. In this case, the allocation of cost
is not as important.
The financial statement effects of capitalizing intangible assets are the same as the
effects of capitalizing other exPEnditures. Capitalizing results in higher net income in
the fIRSt year and lower net income in the subsequent years. Similarly, assets, equity,
and oPErating cash flow are all higher when exPEnditures are capitalized.
Intangible Assets Obtained in a Business Combination
The acquisition method is used to account for business combinations. Under the
acquisition method, the purchase price is allocated to the identifiable assets and
liabilities of the acquired firm on the basis of fair value. Any remaining amount of the
purchase price is recorded as goodwill. Goodwill is said to be an unidentifiable asset
that cannot be separated from the business itself.
Only goodwill created in a business combination is capitalized on the balance sheet.
The costs of any internally generated "goodwill" are exPEnsed in the PEriod incurred.
LOS 29.c: Explain and evaluate how capitalising versus exPEnsing costs in the PEriod
in which they are incurred affects financial statements and ratios.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 481
Although it may make no oPErational difference, the choice between capitalizing costs
and exPEnsing them will affect net income, shareholders' equity, total assets, cash flow
from oPErations, cash flow from investing, and numerous financial ratios.
Net Income
Capitalizing an exPEnditure delays the recognition of an exPEnse in the income
statement. Thus, in the PEriod that an exPEnditure is capitalized, the firm will report
higher net income compared to immediately exPEnsing. In subsequent PEriods, the
firm will report lower net income compared to exPEnsing, as the capitalized
exPEnditure is allocated to the income statement through depreciation exPEnse. This
allocation process reduces the variability of net income by spreading the exPEnse over
multiple PEriods.
Professor's Note: For growing firms, capitalizing exPEnditures may result in earnings that are
higher over many PEriods compared to an otherwise identical exPEnsing firm. This is because the
amount of depreciation from previously capitalized exPEnditures is less than the amount of
additional costs that are being newly capitalized each PEriod.
Conversely, if a firm exPEnses an exPEnditure in the current PEriod, net income is
reduced by the after-tax amount of the exPEnditure. In subsequent PEriods, no
allocation of cost is necessary. Thus, net income in future PEriods is higher than if the
exPEnditure had been capitalized.
Over the life of an asset, total net income is identical whether the asset's cost is
capitalized or exPEnsed. Timing of the exPEnse recognition in the income statement is
the only difference.
Shareholders' Equity
Because capitalization results in higher net income in the PEriod of the exPEnditure
compared to exPEnsing, it also results in higher shareholders' equity because retained
earnings are greater. Total assets are greater with capitalization and liabilities are
unaffected, so the accounting equation (A = L + E) remains balanced. As the cost is
allocated to the income statement in subsequent PEriods, net income, retained
earnings, and shareholders' equity will be reduced.
If the exPEnditure is immediately exPEnsed, retained earnings and shareholders'
equity will reflect the entire reduction in net income in the PEriod of the exPEnditure.
Cash Flow From OPErations
A capitalized exPEnditure is usually reported in the cash flow statement as an outflow
from investing activities. If immediately exPEnsed, the exPEnditure is reported as an
outflow from oPErating activities. Thus, capitalizing an exPEnditure will result in higher
oPErating cash flow and lower investing cash flow compared to exPEnsing. Assuming
no differences in tax treatment, total cash flow will be the same. The classification of
the cash flow is the only difference.
Recall that when an exPEnditure is capitalized, depreciation exPEnse is recognized in
subsequent PEriods. Depreciation is a noncash exPEnse and, aside from any tax effects,
does not affect oPErating cash flow.
Professor's Note: If the tax treatment is changed to match the financial reporting treatment of the
exPEnditure, exPEnsing will result in higher oPErating cash flow in the fIRSt year because of the tax
savings. However, if the tax treatment is indePEndent of the financial reporting treatment, taxes,
and therefore cash flows, are unaffected by the choice.
Financial Ratios
Capitalizing an exPEnditure initially results in higher assets and higher equity compared
to exPEnsing. Thus, both the debt-to-assets ratio and the debt-to-equity ratio are
lower (they have larger denominators) with capitalization.
Capitalizing an exPEnditure will initially result in higher return on assets (ROA) and
higher return on equity (ROE). This is the result of higher net income in the fIRSt year. In
subsequent years, ROA and ROE will be lower for a capitalizing firm because net
income is reduced by the depreciation exPEnse.
Because an exPEnsing firm recognizes the entire exPEnse in the fIRSt year, ROA and
ROE will be lower in the fIRSt year and higher in the subsequent years. After the fIRSt
year, net income (numerator) is higher, and assets and equity (denominators) are
lower, than they would be if the firm had capitalized the exPEnditure. Analysts must be
careful when comparing firms because immediately exPEnsing an exPEnditure gives
the apPEarance of growth after the fIRSt year.
The interest coverage ratio (EBIT / interest exPEnse) measures a firm's ability to make
required interest payments on its debt. In the year of the exPEnditure, capitalizing
interest results in lower interest exPEnse compared to exPEnsing. The result is a higher
interest coverage ratio (smaller denominator) when interest is capitalized.
Many analysts calculate the interest coverage ratio based on total interest exPEnse,
including capitalized interest. Because the interest is a required payment, this may be a
better measure of the firm's solvency. Treating the capitalized interest as interest
exPEnse for analytical purposes reduces the interest coverage ratio. Bond rating
agencies often make this adjustment.
The financial effects of capitalizing versus exPEnsing are summarized in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Financial Statement Effects of Capitalizing vs. ExPEnsing
Capitalizing
ExPEnsing
Total assets
Higher
Lower
Shareholders' equity
Higher
Lower
Income variability
Lower
Higher
Net income (fIRSt year)
Higher
Lower
Net income (subsequent years)
Lower
Higher
Cash flow from oPErations
Higher
Lower
Cash flow from investing
Lower
Higher
Debt ratio & Debt-to-equity
Lower
Higher
Interest coverage (fIRSt year)
Higher
Lower
Interest coverage (subsequent years)
Lower
Higher
LOS 29.d: Describe the different depreciation methods for proPErty, plant, and
equipment and calculate depreciation exPEnse.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 493
Depreciation is the systematic allocation of an asset's cost over time. Two important
terms are:
Carrying (book) value. The net value of an asset or liability on the balance
sheet. For proPErty, plant, and equipment, carrying value equals historical cost
minus accumulated depreciation.
Historical cost. The original purchase price of the asset including installation
and transportation costs. Historical cost is also known as gross investment in the
asset.
Depreciation is a real and significant oPErating exPEnse. Even though depreciation
doesn't require current cash exPEnditures (the cash outflow was made in the past
when the asset was purchased), it is an exPEnse nonetheless and cannot be ignored.
The analyst must decide whether the reported depreciation exPEnse is more or less
than economic depreciation, which is the actual decline in the value of the asset over
the PEriod. One chain of video rental stores was found to be overstating income by
depreciating its stock of movies by equal amounts each year. In fact, a greater portion
of the decrease in the value of newly released movies occurs in the fIRSt year.
Depreciating the rental assets by a greater amount during the fIRSt year would have
better approximated economic depreciation and reduced reported income.
Depreciation Methods
Depreciation of a capitalized cost (asset) may be reported using straight-line,
accelerated, or units-of-production methods.
Straight-line depreciation is the predominant method of computing depreciation for
financial reporting. Depreciation is the same amount each year over the asset's
estimated life:
With an accelerated depreciation method, more depreciation exPEnse is recognized in
the early years of an asset's life and less depreciation exPEnse in the later years. Thus,
accelerated depreciation results in lower net income in the early years of an asset's life
and higher net income in the later years, compared to straight-line depreciation. One
often-used accelerated depreciation method is the double-declining balance (DDB)
method:
Note that salvage value is not in the formula for double-declining balance depreciation.
However, once the carrying (book) value of the asset reaches the salvage value, no
additional depreciation exPEnse is recognized.
Depreciation under the units-of-production method is based on usage rather than
time. Depreciation exPEnse is higher in PEriods of high usage.
Professor's Note: The units-of-production method applied to natural resources is referred to as
depletion.
Component Depreciation
IFRS requires firms to depreciate the components of an asset separately, thereby
requiring useful life estimates for each component. For example, a building is made up
of a roof, walls, flooring, electrical systems, plumbing, and many other components.
Under component depreciation, the useful life of each component is estimated and
depreciation exPEnse is computed separately for each.
Component depreciation is allowed under U.S. GAAP but is seldom used.
Example: Component depreciation
Global Airlines purchased a new airplane with an all-inclusive cost of $50 million. The estimated life of the
airplane is 30 years and the estimated salvage value is $5 million. Global exPEcts to replace the interior of
the aircraft after 15 years. The component cost of the interior is estimated at $3 million.
Calculate depreciation exPEnse in Year 1 using the straight-line method, both assuming the interior is a
separate component and assuming the component method is not used.
Answer:
Depreciation exPEnse is lower by $100,000 each year ($1,600,000 - $1,500,000) for the fIRSt 15 years
without the component method. However, at the end of Year 15, Global will sPEnd $3,000,000 to replace
the interior. Thus, additional depreciation exPEnse of $3,000,000 / 15 years = $200,000 each year is
required for the last 15 years of the asset's life.
Under both scenarios, Global will have exPEnded a total of $53,000,000 and recognized $48,000,000 of
depreciation exPEnse over the airplane's life:
LOS 29.e: Describe how the choice of depreciation method and assumptions
concerning useful life and residual value affect depreciation exPEnse, financial
statements, and ratios.
The following example illustrates the differences in depreciation, net income, and
reported net profit margin for the three methods.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 493
Example: Effect of depreciation methods on net income
Sackett Laboratories purchases chemical processing machinery for $550,000. The equipment has an
estimated useful life of five years and an estimated salvage value of $50,000. The company exPEcts to
produce 20,000 units of output using this machinery, with 6,000 units in each of the fIRSt two years, 3,000
units in the next two years, and 2,000 units in the fifth year. The company's effective tax rate is 30%.
Revenues are $600,000 PEr year, and exPEnses other than depreciation are $300,000 in each year.
Calculate Sackett's net income and net profit margin if the company depreciates the machinery using (a)
the straight-line method, (b) the double declining balance method, and (c) the units of production
method.
Answer:
Using the straight-line method, depreciation exPEnse in each year is ($550,000 - $50,000) / 5 = $100,000.
Using the double declining balance method, each year's depreciation is 2 / 5 of net book value.
In year 5, double declining balance depreciation of $71,280 x 2/5 = $28,512 would depreciate the
machinery below its estimated salvage value, so we only recognize enough depreciation exPEnse to
reduce net book value to the salvage value.
Using the units of production method, depreciation exPEnse in the fIRSt two years is
(6,000 / 20,000) x ($550,000 - $50,000) = $150,000, in the next two years is
(3,000 / 20,000) x ($550,000 - $50,000) = $75,000, and in the fifth year is
(2,000 / 20,000) x ($550,000 - $50,000) = $50,000.
Straight-line depreciation:
Double-declining balance:
Units of production:
The accelerated depreciation methods result in pretax income, tax exPEnse, net income, and net profit
margins that are lower in the early years and higher in the later years, compared to straight-line
depreciation. Over the entire PEriod, however, depreciation exPEnse, tax exPEnse, pretax income, net
income, and net profit margin are unaffected by the depreciation method chosen.
Useful Lives and Salvage Values
Calculating depreciation exPEnse requires estimating an asset's useful life and its
salvage (residual) value. Firms can manipulate depreciation exPEnse, and therefore net
income, by increasing or decreasing either of these estimates.
A longer estimated useful life decreases annual depreciation and increases reported
net income, while a shorter estimated useful life will have the opposite effect. A higher
estimate of the salvage value will also decrease depreciation and increase net income,
while a lower estimate of the salvage value will increase depreciation and decrease net
income.
A change in an accounting estimate, such as useful life or salvage value, is put into
effect in the current PEriod and prosPEctively. That is, the change in estimate is applied
to the asset's carrying (book) value and depreciation is calculated going forward using
the new estimate. The previous PEriods are not affected by the change.
Example: Change in depreciation estimate
Alpine Company purchased machinery for $20,000 with an estimated useful life of five years and a salvage
value of $4,000. Alpine uses the straight-line depreciation method. At the beginning of the third year,
Alpine reduces its salvage value estimate to $1,600. Determine the depreciation exPEnse for each year.
Answer:
For the fIRSt two years, straight-line depreciation exPEnse is [($20,000 original cost - $4,000 salvage value)
/ 5-year life] = $3,200 each year. At the beginning of the third year, the asset's carrying value on the
balance sheet is $20,000 original cost - $6,400 accumulated depreciation = $13,600.
To calculate straight-line depreciation exPEnse for the remaining years, simply begin with the carrying
value and depreciate over the remaining useful life using the new salvage value estimate. Depreciation
exPEnse for the last three years is [($13,600 carrying value - $1,600 revised salvage value) / 3 years
remaining life] = $4,000 each year.
Estimates are also involved when a manufacturing firm allocates depreciation exPEnse
between COGS and SG&A. While the allocation does not affect a firm's oPErating
margin, it affects the firm's gross margin (which is computed before SG&A exPEnse)
and oPErating exPEnses.
LOS 29.f: Describe the different amortisation methods for intangible assets with
finite lives and calculate amortisation exPEnse.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 501
Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their useful lives. Amortization is
identical to the depreciation of tangible assets. The same methods, straight-line,
accelerated, and units-of-production, are PErmitted. The calculation of amortization
exPEnse also requires estimates of useful lives and salvage values. However,
estimating useful lives is complicated by many legal, regulatory, contractual,
comPEtitive, and economic factors that may limit the use of the intangible assets.
As with depreciation, the total amount of amortization is the same under all of the
methods. Timing of the amortization exPEnse in the income statement is the only
difference.
Another example of an intangible asset with an indefinite life is a trademark that may
have a sPEcific expiration date, but can be renewed at minimal cost. In this case, the
trademark is considered to have an indefinite life and no amortization is required.
Example: Calculating amortization exPEnse
At the beginning of this year, Brandon Corporation entered into business acquisition. As a result of the
acquisition, Brandon reported the following intangible assets:
The patent expires in 12 years. The franchise agreement expires in 7 years but can be renewed indefinitely
at a minimal cost. The copyright is exPEcted to be sold at the end of 20 years for $30,000. Use the straightline amortization method to calculate the total carrying value of Brandon's intangible assets at the end of
the year.
Answer:
Goodwill is an indefinite-lived asset and is not amortized. Because the franchise agreement can be
renewed indefinitely at minimal cost, it is also considered an indefinite-lived asset and is not amortized.
Using the straight-line method, amortization exPEnse is $46,000 as follows:
Thus, the carrying value at the end of the fIRSt year is $1,484,000 as follows:
LOS 29.g: Describe how the choice of amortisation method and assumptions
concerning useful life and residual value affect amortisation exPEnse, financial
statements, and ratios.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 501
The choice of amortization method will affect exPEnses, assets, equity, and financial
ratios in exactly the same way that the choice of depreciation method will. Just as with
the depreciation of tangible assets, increasing either the estimate of an asset's useful
life or the estimate of its residual value will reduce annual amortization exPEnse, which
will increase net income, assets, ROE, and ROA for the typical firm.
LOS 29.h: Describe the revaluation model.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 502
Under U.S. GAAP, most long-lived assets are reported on the balance sheet at
depreciated cost (original cost less accumulated depreciation and any impairment
charges).
There is no fair value alternative for asset reporting under U.S. GAAP. Under IFRS, most
long-lived assets are also reported at depreciated cost (the cost model ). IFRS provides
an alternative, the revaluation model, that PErmits a long-lived asset to be reported at
its fair value, as long as an active market exists for the asset so its fair value can be
reliably (and somewhat objectively) estimated. Firms must choose the same treatment
for similar assets (e.g., land and buildings) so they cannot revalue only sPEcific assets
that are more likely to increase than decrease in value. The revaluation model is rarely
used in practice by IFRS reporting firms.
Under the revaluation model, an asset is carried at its depreciated cost, but at each
revaluation date, the balance sheet value is adjusted to fair value. Between revaluation
dates, depreciation is recorded for the asset. Revaluation to fair value must be done
sufficiently often that the reported value is not significantly different from fair value.
Whether a revaluation affects the income statement, rather than only affecting equity,
dePEnds on previous revaluations. Consider the following situations.
FIRSt revaluation date
When there have been no prior revaluations and fair value is less than the carrying
value (cost minus accumulated depreciation as of the fIRSt revaluation date), a loss is
recorded on the income statement, much like an impairment charge. If fair value at the
fIRSt revaluation date is greater than the carrying value of the asset, the difference is
recorded as revaluation surplus, a component of equity, so net income is not affected.
Subsequent revaluation dates
On a revaluation date after the fIRSt revaluation, if fair value is greater than the
carrying value, a gain is fIRSt reported on the income statement to the extent it
reverses any previously recorded loss from revaluation. If the revaluation gain is
greater than prior losses reported in the income statement that have not been
reversed, the excess is reported in the revaluation surplus account.
If fair value on a revaluation date after the fIRSt revaluation date is less than the
carrying value, the difference fIRSt goes to reduce any existing balance in the
revaluation surplus account. Any remaining difference in excess of the balance in the
revaluation surplus account is reported on the income statement as a loss.
Example: Revaluation model
On December 31, 20X1, Parsons Corp. reports a carrying value for an asset class as $30 million and a fair
value of $29 million and reports a revaluation loss on the income statement of $1 million.
On December 31, 20X2, Parsons determines that the fair market value of the asset class is $1.5 million
above its carrying value. This upward revaluation will be reported as a $1 million gain on the income
statement (to reverse the previously recorded loss on the income statement) and a $0.5 million increase
in the revaluation surplus account that does not affect income, but increases equity directly.
On December 31, 20X3, Parsons determines that the fair market value of the asset class is $1 million
below its carrying value. This loss fIRSt goes to reduce the existing revaluation surplus of $0.5 million, and
the other $0.5 million of the downward revaluation is reported as a loss on the income statement.
LOS 29.i: Explain the impairment of proPErty, plant, and equipment and intangible
assets.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 506
Both IFRS and U.S. GAAP require firms to write down impaired assets by recognizing a
loss in the income statement. However, there are differences in applying the
standards.
Professor's Note: The following discussion applies to both tangible and intangible long-lived
assets with finite lives that are held for use.
Impairments under IFRS
Under IFRS, the firm must annually assess whether events or circumstances indicate an
impairment of an asset's value has occurred. For example, there may have been a
significant decline in the market value of the asset or a significant change in the asset's
physical condition. If so, the asset's value must be tested for impairment.
An asset is impaired when its carrying value (original cost less accumulated
depreciation) exceeds the recoverable amount. The recoverable amount is the greater
of its fair value less any selling costs and its value in use. The value in use is the present
value of its future cash flow stream from continued use.
If impaired, the asset's value must be written down on the balance sheet to the
recoverable amount. An impairment loss, equal to the excess of carrying value over
the recoverable amount, is recognized in the income statement.
Under IFRS, an impairment loss on an identifiable long-lived asset can be reversed if
the asset's value recovers in the future. However, the loss reversal is limited to the
original impairment loss. Thus, the carrying value of the asset after reversal cannot
exceed the carrying value before the impairment loss was recognized.
Impairments under U.S. GAAP
Under U.S. GAAP, an asset is tested for impairment only when events and
circumstances indicate the firm may not be able to recover the carrying value through
future use.
Determining an impairment and calculating the loss potentially involves two stEPS. In
the fIRSt step, the asset is tested for impairment by applying a recoverability test. If the
asset is impaired, the SECond step involves measuring the loss.
Recoverability. An asset is considered impaired if the carrying value (original cost less
accumulated depreciation) is greater than the asset's future undiscounted cash flow
stream. Because the recoverability test is based on estimates of future undiscounted
cash flows, tests for impairment involve considerable management discretion.
Loss measurement. If impaired, the asset's value is written down to fair value on the
balance sheet and a loss, equal to the excess of carrying value over the fair value of the
asset (or the discounted value of its future cash flows if the fair value is not known), is
recognized in the income statement.
Under U.S. GAAP, loss recoveries are typically not PErmitted.
Professor's Note: The difference between testing for impairment and measuring the impairment
loss can be confusing. In testing for impairment, undiscounted cash flows are used. Once
impairment has been detected, the loss is based on fair value or the discounted exPEcted future
cash flows. Using undiscounted cash flows to test for impairment keEPS PP&E assets from
becoming "impaired" by increases in the discount rate when interest rates increase.
Example: Asset impairment
Information related to equipment owned by Brownfield Company follows:
Assuming Brownfield will continue to use the equipment, test the asset for impairment under both IFRS
and U.S. GAAP and discuss the results.
Answer:
The carrying value of the equipment is $900,000 original cost - $100,000 accumulated depreciation =
$800,000, and the recoverable amount under IFRS is $785,000 (greater of $785,000 value in use and
$760,000 fair value less selling costs). Under IFRS, the asset is written down on the balance sheet to the
$785,000 recoverable amount, and a $15,000 loss ($800,000 carrying value - $785,000 recoverable
amount) is recognized in the income statement.
Under U.S. GAAP, the asset is not impaired because the $825,000 exPEcted future cash flows exceed the
$800,000 carrying value.
Intangible Assets with Indefinite Lives
Intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized; rather, they are tested for
impairment at least annually. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying
amount exceeds fair value.
Professor's Note: The details of impairment for indefinite-lived intangibles, such as goodwill, are
covered at Level II.
Long-Lived Assets Held for Sale
If a firm reclassifies a long-lived asset from held for use to held for sale because
management intends to sell it, the asset is tested for impairment. At this point, the
asset is no longer depreciated or amortized. The held-for-sale asset is impaired if its
carrying value exceeds its net realizable value (fair value less selling costs). If impaired,
the asset is written down to net realizable value and the loss is recognized in the
income statement.
For long-lived assets held for sale, the loss can be reversed under IFRS and U.S. GAAP if
the value of the asset recovers in the future. However, the loss reversal is limited to
the original impairment loss. Thus, the carrying value of the asset after reversal cannot
exceed the carrying value before the impairment was recognized.
LOS 29.j: Explain the derecognition of proPErty, plant, and equipment and intangible
assets.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 509
Eventually, long-lived assets are removed from the balance sheet. Derecognition
occurs when assets are sold, exchanged, or abandoned.
When a long-lived asset is sold, the asset is removed from the balance sheet and the
difference between the sale proceeds and the carrying value of the asset is reported as
a gain or loss in the income statement. The carrying value is equal to original cost
minus accumulated depreciation and any impairment charges.
The gain or loss is usually reported in the income statement as a part of other gains
and losses, or reported separately if material. Also, if the firm presents its cash flow
statement using the indirect method, the gain or loss is removed from net income to
compute cash flow from oPErations because the proceeds from selling a long-lived
asset are an investing cash inflow.
If a long-lived asset is abandoned, the treatment is similar to a sale, except there are
no proceeds. In this case, the carrying value of the asset is removed from the balance
sheet and a loss of that amount is recognized in the income statement.
If a long-lived asset is exchanged for another asset, a gain or loss is computed by
comparing the carrying value of the old asset with fair value of the old asset (or the fair
value of the new asset if that value is clearly more evident). The carrying value of the
old asset is removed from the balance sheet and the new asset is recorded at its fair
value.
LOS 29.k: Explain and evaluate how impairment, revaluation, and derecognition of
proPErty, plant, and equipment and intangible assets affect financial statements and
ratios.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 502
Impairment reduces an asset's carrying value on the balance sheet. An impairment
charge is recognized as a loss in the income statement, reducing assets and equity
(retained earnings). In the year of impairment, ROA and ROE will decrease because the
impairment charge reduces net income.
In subsequent PEriods, net income will be higher than it would have been without the
impairment charge because depreciation will be lower (the asset has a lower
depreciable value). Both ROA and ROE will increase in PEriods after the impairment
charge because both equity and assets will fall as a result of the impairment charge.
Asset turnover will increase in the PEriod in which the impairment charge is taken, and
in subsequent PEriods as well.
Asset impairment has no impact on cash flow because the impairment does not reduce
taxable income; it is an unrealized loss until the asset is disposed of.
Analysis of Impairments
An impairment loss is an indication that the firm has not recognized sufficient
depreciation or amortization exPEnse, and has overstated earnings as a result.
The judgment required in determining asset impairments gives management
considerable discretion about the timing and amounts of impairment charges.
Consequently, impairment decisions present an opportunity for management to
manipulate earnings. Waiting to recognize an impairment loss until a PEriod of
relatively high earnings would tend to smooth earnings.
Alternatively, existing managements may take more impairment charges in PEriods
when earnings will be poor due to external (macROEconomic or industry) factors. New
managements may also choose to take more or greater impairment charges when they
take over. In either case, the resulting low earnings might not be PErceived as the
"fault" of management, and lower values for assets and equity give a boost to ROA and
ROE going forward.
Revaluation
Under U.S. GAAP, most long-lived assets are reported on the balance sheet at
depreciated cost using the cost model (original cost less accumulated depreciation and
impairment charges). Revaluing long-lived assets upward is generally prohibited. One
exception relates to long-lived assets held for sale, for which prior impairment losses
can be reversed.
Under IFRS, firms can choose to use the revaluation model and report long-lived
assets at their fair values. Firms can choose depreciated cost for some asset classes
and fair value for others.
Professor's Note: Do not confuse the revaluation model with fair-value reporting of trading
SECurities or some tyPEs of inventory, under which all gains and losses flow through the income
statement.
Revaluing an asset's value upward will result in:
Higher total assets and higher shareholders' equity.
Lower leverage ratios as measured by the debt ratio (total debt / total assets)
and the debt-to-equity ratio (higher denominators).
Higher depreciation exPEnse and thus lower profitability in PEriods after
revaluation.
Lower ROA and ROE in PEriods after revaluation (lower numerators and higher
denominators). However, if the increase in the asset value is the result of higher
oPErating capacity, such higher capacity should result in higher revenues and
thus higher earnings.
An analyst should check the source of the appraisal that supports the revaluation.
Appraisals from indePEndent sources are usually more reliable than appraisals by
management.
Derecognition of Assets
Derecognition of an asset refers to its disposal by sale, exchange for another asset, or
abandonment. Under the cost model, the carrying (book) value of a long-lived asset is
its historical cost minus accumulated depreciation or amortization, adjusted for any
impairment charges taken. Under the revaluation model, the carrying value of an asset
is its value as of the last revaluation date, less any subsequent depreciation or
amortization.
The difference between the sale price and the carrying value is reported as a gain or
loss on the income statement. Such gains and losses may be reported in other income
or losses or as a separate line item if the amount is material. When an asset is
abandoned, the treatment is the same, but the sale price is zero and the loss is equal
to the carrying value.
If an asset is exchanged for another asset, the sale price is taken to be the fair value of
the asset exchanged, or the value of the asset acquired if that value is more readily
available. There are no cash flows with an exchange of assets, but gains or losses,
based on the difference between the carrying value and the "price" received for the
exchanged asset, are reported on the income statement (as they are with a sale). If the
fair values of the assets cannot be reliably estimated, the price of the acquired asset is
taken to be the carrying value of the exchanged asset and no gains or losses are
recorded.
LOS 29.l: Describe the financial statement presentation of and disclosures relating to
proPErty, plant, and equipment and intangible assets.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 511
IFRS Disclosures
Under IFRS, the firm must disclose the following for each class of proPErty, plant, and
equipment (PP&E):
Basis for measurement (usually historical cost).
Useful lives or depreciation rate.
Gross carrying value and accumulated depreciation.
Reconciliation of carrying amounts from the beginning of the PEriod to the end
of the PEriod.
The firm must also disclose:
Title restrictions and assets pledged as collateral.
Agreements to acquire PP&E in the future.
If the revaluation (fair value) model is used, the firm must disclose:
The revaluation date.
How fair value was determined.
Carrying value using the historical cost model.
Under IFRS, the disclosure requirements for intangible assets are similar to those for
PP&E, except that the firm must disclose whether the useful lives are finite or
indefinite.
For impaired assets, the firm must disclose:
Amounts of impairment losses and reversals by asset class.
Where the losses and loss reversals are recognized in the income statement.
Circumstances that caused the impairment loss or reversal.
U.S. GAAP Disclosures
Under U.S. GAAP, the PP&E disclosures include:
Depreciation exPEnse by PEriod.
Balances of major classes of assets by nature and function, such as land,
improvements, buildings, machinery, and furniture.
Accumulated depreciation by major classes or in total.
General description of depreciation methods used.
Under U.S. GAAP, the disclosure requirements for intangible assets are similar to those
for PP&E. In addition, the firm must provide an estimate of amortization exPEnse for
the next five years.
For impaired assets, the firm must disclose:
A description of the impaired asset.
Circumstances that caused the impairment.
How fair value was determined.
The amount of loss.
Where the loss is recognized in the income statement.
LOS 29.m: Analyze and interpret financial statement disclosures regarding proPErty,
plant, and equipment and intangible assets.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 511
Financial statement disclosures provide an analyst considerable information about a
company's fixed assets and depreciation (amortization) methods. An analyst can use
these data to estimate the average age of the firm's assets. The average age is useful
for two reasons:
1. Older, less-efficient assets may make a firm less comPEtitive.
2. The average age of assets helps an analyst to estimate the timing of major
capital exPEnditures and a firm's future financing requirements.
The level of detail provided in footnote disclosures regarding fixed assets and
depreciation varies across firms. Because assets are often grouPEd by their useful lives,
the following methods of estimating the average age, economic life, and remaining
useful life of a firm's assets do not produce precise values, but they can highlight issues
for further investigation.
Three useful calculations (in years) for an analyst are:
Average Age
average age =
This calculation is more accurate for a firm that uses straight-line depreciation. The
calculation can be significantly affected by the mix of assets.
Total Useful Life
total useful life =
Historical cost is gross PP&E before deducting accumulated depreciation.
Remaining Useful Life
remaining useful life =
Net PP&E is equal to original cost (gross PP&E) minus accumulated depreciation.
Professor's Note: The remaining useful life can also be approximated by subtracting the average
age from the average depreciable life.
Example: Calculating average age and total useful life
At the end of 20X8, a company has gross PP&E of $3 million and accumulated depreciation of $1 million.
During the year, depreciation exPEnse was $500,000.
What is the average age, total useful life, and remaining useful life of the company's PP&E?
Answer:
Another popular metric is the ratio of annual capital exPEnditures to depreciation
exPEnse. This ratio provides information about whether the firm is replacing its PP&E
at the same rate as its assets are being depreciated.
LOS 29.n: Compare the financial reporting of investment proPErty with that of
proPErty, plant, and equipment.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 522
Under IFRS, proPErty that a firm owns for the purpose of collecting rental income,
earning capital appreciation, or both, is classified as investment proPErty. U.S. GAAP
does not distinguish investment proPErty from other kinds of long-lived assets.
IFRS gives firms the choice of using a cost model or a fair value model when valuing
investment proPErty, if a fair value for the proPErty can be established reliably. A firm
generally must use the same valuation model (cost or fair value) for all of its
investment proPErties.
The cost model for investment proPErty is the same as the cost model for valuing
proPErty, plant, and equipment, but the fair value model is different from the
revaluation model we described earlier. Recall that under the revaluation model, any
revaluation above historical cost is recognized as revaluation surplus in owners' equity.
For investment proPErty, however, revaluation above historical cost is recognized as a
gain on the income statement.
Firms are required to disclose which valuation model they use for investment proPErty.
Firms that use the fair value model must state how they determine the fair value of
investment proPErty and reconcile its beginning and ending values. Firms that use the
cost model must disclose the fair value of their investment proPErty, along with the
disclosures that are required for other tyPEs of long-lived assets (e.g., useful lives,
depreciation methods used).
In some cases, a firm may change its use of a proPErty such that it becomes investment
proPErty or is no longer classified as investment proPErty. For example, a firm may
move its offices out of a building it owns and begin renting the space to others. If the
firm uses the fair value model, the financial statement treatment of the asset's value
dePEnds on the nature of the change, as summarized in Figure 2. If the firm uses the
cost model, the proPErty's carrying amount does not change when it is transferred into
or out of investment proPErty.
Figure 2: Transfers To or From Investment ProPErty (Fair Value Model)
Transfer
From
Transfer To
Financial Statement Treatment
Owneroccupied
Investment
proPErty
Treat as revaluation: recognize gain only if it
reverses previously recognized loss
Inventory
Investment
proPErty
Recognize gain or loss if fair value is different
from carrying amount
Investment
proPErty
Owneroccupied or
inventory
Fair value of asset at date of transfer will be
its cost under new classification
LOS 29.o: Explain and evaluate how leasing rather than purchasing assets affects
financial statements and ratios.
LOS 29.p: Explain and evaluate how finance leases and oPErating leases affect
financial statements and ratios from the PErsPEctive of both the lessor and the
lessee.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 525
A lease is a contractual arrangement whereby the lessor, the owner of an asset, allows
a lessee to use the asset for a sPEcified PEriod of time in return for PEriodic payments.
Leases are classified as either finance leases or oPErating leases. In the United States, a
finance lease is known as a capital lease.
A finance lease is, in substance, a purchase of an asset that is financed with debt.
Accordingly, at the inception of the lease, the lessee will add equal amounts to both
assets and liabilities on the balance sheet. Over the term of the lease, the lessee will
recognize depreciation exPEnse on the asset and interest exPEnse on the liability. This
is the same treatment as if the asset were purchased with borrowed funds at the same
asset value and terms as the finance lease.
An oPErating lease is essentially a rental arrangement. No asset or liability is reported
by the lessee and the PEriodic lease payments are simply recognized as rental exPEnse
in the income statement.
Professor's Note: Accounting standards scheduled to take effect in 2019 will require oPErating
leases to apPEar on the balance sheets of lessees.
Reporting by the Lessee
The treatment of a lease as either an oPErating lease or finance lease determines
whether or not the lease is reported on the balance sheet, how the lease exPEnse is
recognized in the income statement, and the classification of the lease payments on
the cash flow statement.
OPErating lease. At the inception of the lease, no entry is made (though any related
future obligations must be disclosed in the footnotes). During the term of the lease,
rent exPEnse, equal to the lease payment, is recognized in the lessee's income
statement. In the cash flow statement, the lease payment is reported as an outflow
from oPErating activities.
Finance lease. At the inception of the lease, the lower of the present value of future
minimum lease payments or the fair value is recognized as an asset and as a liability on
the lessee's balance sheet. Over the term of the lease, the asset is depreciated and
depreciation exPEnse as well as interest exPEnse is reported in the income statement.
Interest exPEnse is equal to the lease liability at the beginning of the PEriod multiplied
by the interest rate implicit in the lease.
In the cash flow statement, the lease payment is allocated to interest exPEnse and
principal repayment, just as with an amortizing loan. The principal portion of the lease
payment is equal to the total payment minus the interest exPEnse for the PEriod.
Under U.S. GAAP, interest exPEnse is reported in the cash flow statement as an
outflow from oPErating activities and the principal payment is reported as an outflow
from financing activities.
Professor's Note: Under IFRS, firms can choose to report interest paid in the cash flow statement
either as an oPErating or a financing activity.
Figure 3 and Figure 4 compare the impacts on a lessee of accounting for a lease as
oPErating or financing.
Figure 3: Financial Statement Impact of Finance vs. OPErating Leases
Finance Lease OPErating Lease
Assets
Higher
Lower
Liabilities (current and long-term)
Higher
Lower
Net income (in the early years)
Lower
Higher
Net income (later years)
Higher
Lower
Total net income
Same
Same
EBIT (oPErating income)
Higher
Lower
Cash flow from oPErations
Higher
Lower
Cash flow from financing
Lower
Higher
Total cash flow
Same
Same
Figure 4: Ratio Impact of Finance vs. OPErating Leases
Finance Lease OPErating Lease
Current ratio (CA / CL)
Lower
Higher
Working capital (CA - CL)
Lower
Higher
Asset turnover (Revenue / TA)
Lower
Higher
Return on assets* (NI / TA)
Lower
Higher
Return on equity* (NI / SE)
Lower
Higher
Debt / Assets
Higher
Lower
Debt / Equity
Higher
Lower
* In the early years of the lease.
In sum, all the ratios in Figure 4 are worse when a lease is capitalized (i.e., treated as a
finance lease). The only improvements from a finance lease are higher EBIT (because
interest is not subtracted in calculating EBIT), higher CFO (because principal repayment
is CFF), and higher net income in the later years of the lease (because interest plus
depreciation is less than the lease payment in the later years).
Reporting by the Lessor
From the lessor's PErsPEctive, a lease is also classified as either an oPErating lease or a
finance (capital) lease.
At the inception of a finance lease, the lessor will recognize a sale equal to the present
value of the lease payments, and cost of goods sold equal to the carrying value of the
asset. Just as with a normal sales transaction, the difference between the sales price
and cost of goods sold is gross profit. If the lessor is not a manufacturer or dealer for
the asset, but strictly offering financing in the form or a lease, the gross profit at the
inception of the lease is zero (PV of the lease payments equals the carrying value of the
leased asset).
The asset is removed from the balance sheet and a lease receivable, equal to the
present value of the lease payments, is created. As the lease payments are received,
the principal portion of the payment reduces the lease receivable. It is as if the lessor
sold the asset for its fair market value, and loaned the lessee the purchase price.
The lessor also recognizes interest income over the term of the lease. The interest
revenue is equal to the lease receivable at the beginning of each PEriod multiplied by
the interest rate.
In the cash flow statement, the interest revenue portion of the lease payment is
reported as an inflow from oPErating activities and the principal reduction is reported
as an inflow from investing activities, just as with any amortizing loan the lessor may
make.
Example: Lessor accounting for a finance lease
Suppose Johnson Company purchases an asset for $69,302 to lease to Carver, Inc. for four years with an
annual lease payment of $20,000 at the end of each year. At the end of the lease, Carver will own the
asset for no additional payment. The implied interest rate in the lease is 6% (N = 4, PV = -69,302, PMT =
20,000, FV = 0, CPT I/Y - 6). Determine how Johnson should account for the lease payments from Carver.
Answer:
Because the present value of lease payments of $69,302 is equal to the carrying value of the asset,
Johnson records no gross profit at the inception of the lease. Johnson removes the leased asset from the
balance sheet and records a lease receivable of $69,302. The lease payments are recorded as follows:
Interest income received each year will increase earnings. In the cash flow statement, the interest income
is reported as an inflow from oPErating activities. The principal reduction (column 3 - column 2) reduces
the lease receivable and is treated in the cash flow statement as an inflow from investing activities.
If a lease is treated as an oPErating lease, the lessor simply recognizes the lease
payment as rental income. The lessor will keep the leased asset on its balance sheet
and recognize depreciation exPEnse over the asset's useful life.
Returning to our example, if Johnson treats the lease as an oPErating lease, $20,000 of
rental income is recognized each year. In addition, depreciation exPEnse of $17,325.50
($69,302 / 4 years) is recognized. Figure 5 compares the income from a finance lease
and an oPErating lease.
Figure 5: Income Comparison of a Finance Lease and OPErating Lease
Total income over the life of the lease is the same for an oPErating lease and a finance
lease. However, in the early years of the lease, the income reported from the finance
lease is higher than the income reported from the oPErating lease. Just like an
amortizing loan, the interest is higher in the early years. This situation reverses in the
later years of the lease.
In the cash flow statement, the classifications result in significant differences in cash
flow from oPErations, as seen in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Cash Flow Comparison to the Lessor of a Finance Lease and an OPErating
Lease
Finance Lease
OPErating Lease
Year CF OPErations CF Investing
CF OPErations
1
2
3
4
$4,158
$15,842
$20,000
3,208
16,792
20,000
2,200
17,800
20,000
1,132
18,868
20,000
Total cash flow is the same for an oPErating lease and a finance lease. However, cash
flow from oPErations is higher with the oPErating lease. With a finance lease, the lease
payment is separated into the interest portion (CFO) and principal portion (CFI).
Professor's Note: From the lessee's PErsPEctive, principal is a financing outflow. From the lessor's
PErsPEctive, principal is a return of capital invested in the lease. Thus, the principal is reported as
an investing inflow.
KEY CONCEPTS
LOS 29.a
When an asset is exPEcted to provide benefits for only the current PEriod, its cost is
exPEnsed on the income statement for the PEriod. If an asset is exPEcted to provide
benefits over multiple PEriods, it is capitalized rather than exPEnsed.
LOS 29.b
The cost of a purchased finite-lived intangible asset is amortized over its useful life.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized, but are tested for impairment at
least annually. The cost of internally develoPEd intangible assets is exPEnsed.
Under IFRS, research costs are exPEnsed but development costs may be capitalized.
Under U.S. GAAP, both research and development costs are exPEnsed as incurred,
except in the case of software created for sale to others.
The acquisition method is used to account for assets acquired in a business
combination. The purchase price is allocated to the fair value of identifiable assets of
the acquired firm less its liabilities. Any excess of the purchase price above the fair
value of the acquired firm's net assets is recorded as goodwill, an unidentifiable
intangible asset that cannot be separated from the business itself.
LOS 29.c
With capitalization, the asset value is put on the balance sheet and the cost is
exPEnsed through the income statement over the asset's useful life through either
depreciation or amortization. Compared to exPEnsing the asset cost, capitalization
results in:
Lower exPEnse and higher net income in PEriod of acquisition, higher exPEnse
(depreciation or amortization) and lower net income in each of the remaining
years of the asset's life.
Higher assets and equity.
Lower CFI and higher CFO because the cost of a capitalized asset is classified as
an investing cash outflow.
Higher ROE and ROA in the initial PEriod, and lower ROE and ROA in subsequent
PEriods because net income is lower and both assets and equity are higher.
Lower debt-to-assets and debt-to-equity ratios because assets and equity are
higher.
LOS 29.d
Depreciation methods:
Straight-line: Equal amount of exPEnse each PEriod.
Accelerated (declining balance): Higher depreciation exPEnse in the early years
and lower depreciation exPEnse in the later years of an asset's life.
Units-of-production: ExPEnse based on PErcentage usage rather than time.
Straight-line method:
Double-declining balance (DDB), an accelerated depreciation method:
Units of production method:
IFRS requires component depreciation, in which significant parts of an asset are
identified and depreciated separately.
LOS 29.e
In the early years of an asset's life, accelerated depreciation results in higher
depreciation exPEnse, lower net income, and lower ROA and ROE compared to
straight-line depreciation. Cash flow is the same assuming tax depreciation is
unaffected by the choice of method for financial reporting.
Firms can reduce depreciation exPEnse and increase net income by using longer useful
lives and higher salvage values.
LOS 29.f
Amortization methods for intangible assets with finite lives are the same as those for
depreciation: straight line, accelerated, or units of production. Calculation of
amortization exPEnse for such assets is the same as with depreciation exPEnse.
LOS 29.g
The choice of amortization method will affect exPEnses, assets, equity, and financial
ratios in exactly the same way that the choice of depreciation method will. Just as with
the depreciation of tangible assets, increasing either the estimate of an asset's useful
life or the estimate of its residual value will reduce annual amortization exPEnse, which
will increase net income, assets, ROE, and ROA for a typical firm.
LOS 29.h
Under IFRS, firms have the option to revalue assets based on fair value under the
revaluation model. U.S. GAAP does not PErmit revaluation.
The impact of revaluation on the income statement dePEnds on whether the initial
revaluation resulted in a gain or loss. If the initial revaluation resulted in a loss
(decrease in carrying value), the initial loss would be recognized in the income
statement and any subsequent gain would be recognized in the income statement only
to the extent of the previously reported loss. Revaluation gains beyond the initial loss
bypass the income statement and are recognized in shareholders' equity as a
revaluation surplus.
If the initial revaluation resulted in a gain (increase in carrying value), the initial gain
would bypass the income statement and be reported as a revaluation surplus. Later
revaluation losses would fIRSt reduce the revaluation surplus.
LOS 29.i
Under IFRS, an asset is impaired when its carrying value exceeds the recoverable
amount. The recoverable amount is the greater of fair value less selling costs and the
value in use (present value of exPEcted cash flows). If impaired, the asset is written
down to the recoverable amount. Loss recoveries are PErmitted, but not above
historical cost.
Under U.S. GAAP, an asset is impaired if its carrying value is greater than the asset's
undiscounted future cash flows. If impaired, the asset is written down to fair value.
Subsequent recoveries are not allowed for assets held for use.
Asset impairments result in losses in the income statement. Impairments have no
impact on cash flow as they have no tax or other cash flow effects until disposal of the
asset.
LOS 29.j
When a long-lived asset is sold, the difference between the sale proceeds and the
carrying (book) value of the asset is reported as a gain or loss in the income statement.
When a long-lived asset is abandoned, the carrying value is removed from the balance
sheet and a loss is recognized in that amount.
If a long-lived asset is exchanged for another asset, a gain or loss is computed by
comparing the carrying value of the old asset with fair value of the old asset (or fair
value of the new asset if more clearly evident).
LOS 29.k
Impairment charges decrease net income, assets, and equity, which results in lower
ROA and ROE and higher debt-to-equity and debt-to-assets ratios for a typical firm.
Upward revaluation increases assets and equity, and thereby decreases debt-to-assets
and debt-to-equity ratios. A downward revaluation has opposite effects. The effect on
net income and related ratios dePEnds on whether the revaluation is to a value above
or below cost.
Derecognition of assets can result in either a gain or loss on the income statement. A
loss will reduce net income and assets, while a gain will increase net income and
assets.
LOS 29.l
There are many differences in the disclosure requirements for tangible and intangible
assets under IFRS and U.S. GAAP. However, firms are generally required to disclose:
Carrying values for each class of asset.
Accumulated depreciation and amortization.
Title restrictions and assets pledged as collateral.
For impaired assets, the loss amount and the circumstances that caused the
loss.
For revalued assets (IFRS only), the revaluation date, how fair value was
determined, and the carrying value using the historical cost model.
LOS 29.m
Analysts can use disclosures of the historical cost, accumulated depreciation
(amortization), and annual depreciation (amortization) exPEnse to estimate average
age of assets, total useful life of assets, and remaining useful life of assets. These
estimates are more accurate for firms that use straight-line depreciation.
Average age =
Total useful life =
Remaining useful life =
LOS 29.n
Under IFRS (but not U.S. GAAP), investment proPErty is defined as proPErty owned for
the purpose of earning rent, capital appreciation, or both. Firms can account for
investment proPErty using the cost model or the fair value model. Unlike the
revaluation model for proPErty, plant, and equipment, increases in the fair value of
investment proPErty above its historical cost are recognized as gains on the income
statement if the firm uses the fair value model.
LOS 29.o
For a lessee, the accounting treatment of a finance (capital) lease is like that of
purchasing the asset with debt. The leased asset is recorded on the lessee's balance
sheet and depreciated over its life. The present value of the lease payment is a liability
that is amortized over the term of the lease. The interest portion of the lease payment
and the depreciation of the asset are recorded as exPEnses on the income statement.
On the cash flow statement, the interest portion of the lease payment is an oPErating
cash outflow and the principal portion is a financing cash outflow.
With an oPErating lease, the full lease payment is reported as rental exPEnse on the
lessee's income statement and as an oPErating cash outflow. No asset or liability is
reported on the balance sheet.
LOS 29.p
With an oPErating lease, the asset remains on the balance sheet of the lessor and is
depreciated. The lease payments are rental income. For a finance lease, the lessor
removes the asset from the balance sheet and replaces it with a lease receivable. The
interest portion of the lease payment is interest income to the lessor and the
remainder of the payment is a principal repayment that decreases the lease receivable
on the lessor's balance sheet.
Compared to an oPErating lease, a finance lease adds the asset and the related lease
liability to the lessee's balance sheet so that equity is initially unchanged. The leased
asset is depreciated over the lease term. Depreciation and interest exPEnse comprise
the lease exPEnses recorded on the income statement and will exceed the lease
payment in the early years of the lease and be less than the lease payment in the later
years of the lease. This results in less profit for the lessee in the early years of a lease
and greater profit in the later years.
CONCEPT CHECKERS
1. Red Company immediately exPEnses its development costs while Black
Company capitalizes its development costs. All else equal, Red Company will:
A. show smoother reported earnings than Black Company.
B. report higher oPErating cash flow than Black Company.
C. report higher asset turnover than Black Company.
2. Which of the following statements about indefinite-lived intangible assets is
most accurate?
A. They are amortized on a straight-line basis over a PEriod not to exceed
40 years.
B. They are reported on the balance sheet indefinitely.
C. They never apPEar on the balance sheet unless they are internally
develoPEd.
3. In the early years of an asset's life, a firm using the double-declining balance
method, as compared to a firm using straight-line depreciation, will report
lower:
A. depreciation exPEnse.
B. oPErating cash flow.
C. retained earnings.
4. East Company purchased a new truck at the beginning of this year for $30,000.
The truck has a useful life of eight years or 150,000 miles, and an estimated
salvage value of $3,000. If the truck is driven 16,500 miles this year, how much
depreciation will East report under the double-declining balance (DDB) method
and the units-of-production (UOP) method?
DDB
A. $7,500
B. $7,500
C. $6,750
UOP
$2,970
$3,300
$2,970
5. Which of the following is least likely considered in determining the useful life
an intangible asset?
A. Initial cost.
B. Legal, regulatory, or contractual provisions.
C. Provisions for renewal or extension.
6. At the beginning of this year, Fairweather Corp. incurred $200,000 of research
costs and $100,000 of development costs to create a new patent. The patent is
exPEcted to have a useful life of 40 years with no salvage value. Calculate the
carrying value of the patent at the end of this year, assuming Fairweather
follows U.S. GAAP.
A. $0.
B. $97,500.
C. $292,500.
7. Two years ago, Metcalf Corp. purchased machinery for $800,000. At the end of
last year, the machinery had a fair value of $720,000. Assuming Metcalf uses
the revaluation model, what amount, if any, is recognized in Metcalf's net
income this year if the machinery's fair value is $810,000?
A. $0.
B. $80,000.
C. $90,000.
8. According to U.S. GAAP, an asset is impaired when:
A. the firm cannot fully recover the carrying amount of the asset through
oPErations.
B. accumulated depreciation plus salvage value exceeds acquisition cost.
C. the present value of future cash flows from an asset exceeds its carrying
value.
9. A firm recently recognized a $15,000 loss on the sale of machinery used in its
manufacturing oPEration. The original cost of the machinery was $100,000 and
the accumulated depreciation at the date of sale was $60,000. What amount
did the firm receive from the sale?
A. $25,000.
B. $45,000.
C. $85,000.
10. Which of the following disclosures would least likely be found in the financial
statement footnotes of a firm?
A. Accumulated depreciation.
B. Carrying values by asset class.
C. Average age of assets.
11. In the year after an impairment charge on a finite-lived identifiable intangible
asset, compared to not taking the charge, net income is most likely to be:
A. lower.
B. higher.
C. unaffected.
12. Metallurgy, Inc., reported depreciation exPEnse of $15 million for the most
recent year. Beginning-of-year gross PP&E and accumulated depreciation were
$287 million and $77 million, resPEctively. If end-of year gross PP&E and
accumulated depreciation were $300 million and $80 million, the estimated
remaining useful life of PP&E is closest to:
A. 10 years.
B. 15 years.
C. 20 years.
For more questions related to this topic review, log in to your Schweser online account
and launch SchweserPro(tm) QBank; and for video instruction covering each LOS in this
topic review, log in to your Schweser online account and launch the OnDemand video
lectures, if you have purchased these products.
ANSWERS - CONCEPT CHECKERS
1. Red Company immediately exPEnses its development costs while Black
Company capitalizes its development costs. All else equal, Red Company will:
A. show smoother reported earnings than Black Company.
B. report higher oPErating cash flow than Black Company.
C. report higher asset turnover than Black Company.
As compared to a firm that capitalizes its exPEnditures, a firm that immediately
exPEnses exPEnditures will report lower assets. Thus, asset turnover (revenue /
average assets) will be higher for the exPEnsing firm (lower denominator).
2. Which of the following statements about indefinite-lived intangible assets is
most accurate?
A. They are amortized on a straight-line basis over a PEriod not to exceed
40 years.
B. They are reported on the balance sheet indefinitely.
C. They never apPEar on the balance sheet unless they are internally
develoPEd.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized; rather, they are reported
on the balance sheet indefinitely unless they are impaired.
3. In the early years of an asset's life, a firm using the double-declining balance
method, as compared to a firm using straight-line depreciation, will report
lower:
A. depreciation exPEnse.
B. oPErating cash flow.
C. retained earnings.
In the early years, accelerated depreciation will result in higher depreciation
exPEnse; thus, lower net income. Lower net income will result in lower
retained earnings.
4. East Company purchased a new truck at the beginning of this year for $30,000.
The truck has a useful life of eight years or 150,000 miles, and an estimated
salvage value of $3,000. If the truck is driven 16,500 miles this year, how much
depreciation will East report under the double-declining balance (DDB) method
and the units-of-production (UOP) method?
DDB
A. $7,500
UOP
$2,970
B. $7,500
C. $6,750
$3,300
$2,970
Double-declining balance = $30,000 book value x (2/8) = $7,500.
Units-of-production = ($30,000 cost - $3,000 salvage value) / 150,000 miles =
$0.18 PEr mile.
16,500 miles driven x $0.18 PEr mile = $2,970.
5. Which of the following is least likely considered in determining the useful life
an intangible asset?
A. Initial cost.
B. Legal, regulatory, or contractual provisions.
C. Provisions for renewal or extension.
Initial cost has nothing to do with the useful life of an intangible asset.
6. At the beginning of this year, Fairweather Corp. incurred $200,000 of research
costs and $100,000 of development costs to create a new patent. The patent is
exPEcted to have a useful life of 40 years with no salvage value. Calculate the
carrying value of the patent at the end of this year, assuming Fairweather
follows U.S. GAAP.
A. $0.
B. $97,500.
C. $292,500.
Under U.S. GAAP, research and development costs are exPEnsed as incurred.
Thus, the entire $300,000 of R&D is exPEnsed this year. The result is a zero
carrying value.
7. Two years ago, Metcalf Corp. purchased machinery for $800,000. At the end of
last year, the machinery had a fair value of $720,000. Assuming Metcalf uses
the revaluation model, what amount, if any, is recognized in Metcalf's net
income this year if the machinery's fair value is $810,000?
A. $0.
B. $80,000.
C. $90,000.
Under the revaluation method, Metcalf reports the equipment on the balance
sheet at fair value. At the end of last year, an $80,000 loss was recognized
(from $800,000 to $720,000) in the income statement. Any recovery is
recognized in the income statement to the extent of the loss. Any remainder is
recognized in shareholders' equity as revaluation surplus. Thus, at the end of
this year, an $80,000 gain is recognized in the income statement, and a
$10,000 revaluation surplus is recognized in shareholders' equity.
8. According to U.S. GAAP, an asset is impaired when:
A. the firm cannot fully recover the carrying amount of the asset through
oPErations.
B. accumulated depreciation plus salvage value exceeds acquisition cost.
C. the present value of future cash flows from an asset exceeds its carrying
value.
An asset is impaired when the firm cannot recover the carrying value. Under
U.S. GAAP, recoverability is tested based on undiscounted future cash flows.
9. A firm recently recognized a $15,000 loss on the sale of machinery used in its
manufacturing oPEration. The original cost of the machinery was $100,000 and
the accumulated depreciation at the date of sale was $60,000. What amount
did the firm receive from the sale?
A. $25,000.
B. $45,000.
C. $85,000.
Gain or loss is equal to the sale proceeds minus the carrying value (cost minus
accumulated depreciation) at the time of sale. Given the loss of $15,000 and
carrying value of $40,000 ($100,000 - $60,000), we can solve for the proceeds
of $25,000 (-15,000 + 40,000).
10. Which of the following disclosures would least likely be found in the financial
statement footnotes of a firm?
A. Accumulated depreciation.
B. Carrying values by asset class.
C. Average age of assets.
The average age is not a required disclosure. However, it can be calculated
given other disclosures.
11. In the year after an impairment charge on a finite-lived identifiable intangible
asset, compared to not taking the charge, net income is most likely to be:
A. lower.
B. higher.
C. unaffected.
Because a finite-lived identifiable intangible asset would be amortized,
amortization exPEnse in the year after the reduction from the impairment
charge would be lower (the carrying value of the asset would most likely be
lower), increasing net income.
12. Metallurgy, Inc., reported depreciation exPEnse of $15 million for the most
recent year. Beginning-of-year gross PP&E and accumulated depreciation were
$287 million and $77 million, resPEctively. If end-of year gross PP&E and
accumulated depreciation were $300 million and $80 million, the estimated
remaining useful life of PP&E is closest to:
A. 10 years.
B. 15 years.
C. 20 years.
The remaining useful life can be estimated as ending net PP&E value divided by
annual deprecation.
(300 - 80)/15 = 14.66 years