Chapter 6
PROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS:
FORECASTING
M ost financial statement analysis tasks are undertaken with a forward-looking
decision in mind--and much of the time it is useful to summarize the view
develoPEd in the analysis with an explicit forecast. Managers need forecasts to
formulate business plans and provide PErformance targets; analysts need forecasts to help
communicate their views of the firm's prosPEcts to investors; and bankers and debt
market participants need forecasts
loan repayment.
to assess
Moreover, there are a variety of contexts (including but not limited to SECurity analysis)
where the forecast is usefully summarized in the form of an estimate of the firm's value.
This estimate can be viewed as an attempt to best reflect in a single summary statistic the
manager's or analyst's view of the firm's prosPEcts.
the likelihood of
ProsPEctive analysis includes two tasks--forecasting and valuation--that together
represent appROAches to explicitly summarizing the analyst's forward-looking views. In
this chapter we focus on forecasting; valuation is the topic of the next two chapters.
Forecasting is not so much a separate analysis as it is a way of summarizing what has
been learned through business strategy analysis, accounting analysis, and financial
analysis. However, there are certain techniques and knowledge that can help a manager
or analyst to structure the best possible forecast based on what has been learned in the
previous stEPS. Below we summarize an appROAch to structuring the forecast, offer
information useful
in getting started, explore the relationship between the other
analytical stEPS and forecasting, and give detailed stEPS to forecast earnings, balance
sheet data, and cash flows. The key concepts discussed in this chapter are illustrated
using a forecast for TJX, the off-price retailer examined in Chapter 5.
THE OVERALL STRUCTURE OF THE FORECAST
The best way to forecast future PErformance is to do it comprehensively--producing not
only an earnings forecast, but also a forecast of cash flows and the balance sheet. A comprehensive appROAch is useful, even in cases where one might be interested primarily in a
single facet of PErformance, because it guards against unrealistic implicit assumptions.
For example, if an analyst forecasts growth in sales and earnings for several years without explicitly considering the required increases in working capital and plant assets and
the associated financing, the forecast might possibly imbed unreasonable assumptions
about asset turnover, leverage, or equity capital infusions.
6-1
6-2 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
A comprehensive appROAch involves many forecasts, but in most cases they are all
linked to the behavior of a few key "drivers." The drivers vary according to the tyPE of
business, but for businesses outside the financial services SECtor, the sales forecast is nearly
always one of the key drivers; profit margin is another. When asset turnover is exPEcted to
remain stable--often a realistic assumption--working capital accounts and investment in
plants should track the growth in sales closely. Most major exPEnses also track sales, subject to exPEcted shifts in profit margins. By linking forecasts of such amounts to the sales
forecast, one can avoid internal inconsistencies and unrealistic implicit assumptions.
In some contexts the manager or analyst is interested ultimately in a forecast of cash
flows, not earnings PEr se. Nevertheless, in practice even forecasts of cash flows tend to
be grounded on forecasts of accounting numbers, including sales, earnings, assets, and liabilities. Of course it would be possible in principle to move directly to forecasts of cash
flows--inflows from customers, outflows to suppliers and laborers, and so forth--and in
some businesses this is a convenient way to proceed. In most cases, however, the growth
prosPEcts, profitability, and investment and financing needs of the firm are more readily
framed in terms of accrual-based sales, oPErating earnings, assets, and liabilities. These
amounts can then be converted to cash flow measures by adjusting for the effects of noncash exPEnses and exPEnditures for working capital and plant, proPErty, and equipment.
A Practical Framework for Forecasting
The most practical appROAch to forecasting a company's financial statements is to focus on
projecting "condensed" financial statements, as used in the ratio analysis in Chapter 5,
rather than attempting to project detailed financial statements at the level that the company reports. There are several reasons for this recommendation. Forecasting condensed
financial statements involves a relatively small set of assumptions about the future of the
firm, so the analyst will have more ability to think about each of the assumptions carefully.
A detailed line-item forecast is likely to be very tedious, and an analyst may not have a
good basis to make all the assumptions necessary for such forecasts. Further, for most purposes, condensed financial statements are all that are needed for analysis and decision
making. We therefore appROAch the task of financial forecasting with this framework.
Recall that the condensed income statement that we used in Chapter 5 consists of the
following elements: sales, net oPErating profits after tax (NOPAT), net interest exPEnse
after tax, taxes, and net income. The condensed balance sheet consists of net oPErating
working capital, net long-term assets, net debt, and equity. Also recall that we start with
a balance sheet at the beginning of the forecasting PEriod. Assumptions about how we
use the beginning balance sheet and run the firm's oPErations will lead to the income
statement for the forecasting PEriod; assumptions about investment in working capital
and long-term assets, and how we finance these assets, results in a balance sheet at the
end of the forecasting PEriod.
To forecast the condensed income statement, one needs to begin with an assumption
about next PEriod's sales. Beyond that, assumptions about NOPAT margin, interest rate
on beginning debt, and tax rate are all that are needed to prepare the condensed income
statement for the PEriod.
To forecast the condensed balance sheet for the end of the PEriod (or the equivalent,
the beginning of the next PEriod), we need to make the following additional assumptions:
(1) the ratio of net oPErating working capital to sales, to estimate the level of working
capital needed to support those sales; (2) the ratio of net oPErating long-term assets to
the following year's sales, to calculate the exPEcted level of net oPErating long-term
assets; and (3) the ratio of net debt to capital to estimate the levels of debt and equity
needed to finance the estimated amount of assets on the balance sheet.
ProsPEctive Analysis: Forecasting 6-3
Once we have the condensed income statement and balance sheet, it is relatively
straightforward to compute the condensed cash flow statement,
including cash flow
from oPErations before working capital investments, cash flow from oPErations after
working capital investments, free cash flow available to debt and equity, and free cash
flow available to equity.
We discuss how best to make the necessary assumptions to forecast the condensed
income statement, balance sheet, and cash flow statements below.
PERFORMANCE BEHAVIOR: A STARTING POINT
Every forecast has, at least implicitly, an initial benchmark--some notion of how a
particular amount, such as sales or earnings, would be exPEcted to behave in the ABSence
of detailed information. For example, in beginning to contemplate fiscal 2011 profitability for TJX, 2010 PErformance might be a starting point. Another potential place to begin
might be 2010 PErformance adjusted for recent trends. A third possibility that might
seem reasonable--but one that generally turns out not to be very useful--is the average
PErformance over several prior years.
By the time one has completed a business strategy analysis, an accounting analysis,
and a detailed financial analysis, the resulting forecast might differ significantly from
the original point of departure. Nevertheless, for purposes of having a starting point
that can help anchor the detailed analysis, it is also useful to know how certain financial
statistics behave "on average" for all firms.
In the case of some key statistics, such as earnings, a point of departure based only on
prior behavior of the number is more powerful than one might exPEct. Research demonstrates that some such benchmarks for earnings are almost as accurate as the forecasts of
professional SECurity analysts, who have access to a rich information set (we return to
this point in more detail later). Thus, the benchmark is often not only a good starting
point but also close to the amount forecast after detailed analysis. Large departures
from the benchmark could be justified only in cases where the firm's situation is demonstrably unusual.
Reasonable points of departure for forecasts of key accounting numbers can be based
on the evidence summarized next. Such evidence may also be useful for checking the
reasonableness of a completed forecast.
Sales Growth Behavior
Sales growth rates tend to be "mean-reverting": firms with above-average or belowaverage rates of sales growth tend to revert over time to a "normal" level (historically in
the range of 7 to 9 PErcent for U.S. firms) within three to ten years. Figure 6-1 documents this mean-reverting effect for the PEriod 1993 through 2010 for all the publicly
traded U.S. firms covered by the Compustat database. All firms are ranked in terms of
their sales growth in 1993 (year 1) and formed into five portfolios based on the relative
ranking of their sales growth in that year. Firms in portfolio 1 are in the top 20 PErcent
of rankings in terms of their sales growth in 1993, those in portfolio 2 fall into the next
20 PErcent, while those in portfolio 5 are in the bottom 20 PErcent when ranked by sales
growth. The sales growth rates of firms in each of these five portfolios are traced from
1993 through the subsequent nine years (years 2 to 10). The same exPEriment is rePEated
with 1997 and then 2001 as the base year (year 1). The results are averaged over the
three exPEriments, and the resulting sales growth rates of each of the five portfolios for
years 1 through 10 are plotted in Figure 6-1.
The figure shows that the group of firms with the highest growth initially--sales
growth rates of a little over 70 PErcent--exPErience a decline to about an 8 PErcent
6-4 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
FIG UR E 6-1
Behavior of Sales Growth for U.S. Firms, 1993-2010
80.0%
70.0%
60.0%
50.0%
40.0%
30.0%
20.0%
10.0%
0.0%
-10.0%
-20.0%
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Top Fifth
Fourth Fifth
SECond Fifth
Third Fifth
Bottom Fifth
Source: (c) Cengage Learning 2013
growth rate within three years and are never much above 20 PErcent in the next seven
years. Those with the lowest initial sales growth rates, negative 10 PErcent, improve
immediately to a marginally positive sales growth in year 2 and show positive growth
through year 10. One explanation for the pattern of sales growth seen in Figure 6-1 is
that as industries and companies mature, their growth rate slows down due to demand
saturation and intra-industry comPEtition. Therefore, even when a firm is growing rapidly at present, it is generally unrealistic to assume that the current high growth will PErsist indefinitely. Of course, how quickly a firm's growth rate reverts to the average
dePEnds on the characteristics of its industry and its own comPEtitive position within
an industry.
Earnings Behavior
Earnings have been shown on average to follow a process that can be approximated by
a "random walk" or "random walk with drift." This implies that the prior year's earnings is a good starting point in considering future earnings potential. Even a simple
random walk forecast--one that predicts next year's earnings will be equal to last
year's earnings--is surprisingly useful. One study documents that professional analysts'
year-ahead forecasts are only 22 PErcent more accurate, on average, than a simple random walk forecast.1 Thus a final earnings forecast will usually not differ dramatically
from a random walk benchmark. In addition, it is reasonable to adjust this simple
benchmark for the earnings changes of the most recent quarter, i.e., changes relative
to the comparable quarter of the prior year after controlling for the long-run trend in
the series.
Although the average level of earnings over several prior years is not useful, long-term
trends in earnings tend to be sustained on average, and so they are also worthy of
consideration. If quarterly data are also included, then some consideration should usually
be given to any departures from the long-run trend that occurred in the most recent
quarter. For most firms, these most recent changes tend to be partially rePEated in subsequent quarters.2
ProsPEctive Analysis: Forecasting 6-5
Return on Equity Behavior
Given that prior earnings serve as a useful benchmark for future earnings, one might
exPEct the same to be true of measures of return on investment such as ROE. That, however, is not the case for two reasons. FIRSt, even though the average firm tends to sustain
the current earnings level, this is not true of firms with unusual levels of ROE. Firms
with abnormally high (low) ROE tend to exPErience earnings declines (increases).3
SECond, firms with higher ROEs tend to expand their investment bases more quickly
than others, which causes the denominator of the ROE to increase. Of course, if firms
could earn returns on the new investments that match the returns on the old ones,
then the level of ROE would be maintained. However, firms have difficulty continuing
to generate those impressive ROEs. Firms with higher ROEs tend to find that, as time
goes by, their earnings growth does not keep pace with growth in their investment
base, and ROE ultimately falls.
The resulting behavior of ROE and other measures of return on investment is characterized as mean-reverting, a pattern similar to that observed for sales growth rates earlier.
Firms with above-average or below-average rates of return tend to revert over time to a
"normal" level (historically in the range of 10 to 15 PErcent for U.S. firms) within no
more than ten years.4 Figure 6-2 documents this mean-reverting effect for U.S. firms
from 1993 through 2010. All firms are ranked in terms of their ROE in 1993 (year 1)
and formed into five portfolios in a similar fashion to the sales growth analysis above.
Firms in portfolio 1 have the top 20 PErcent ROE rankings in 1993, those in portfolio 2
fall into the next 20 PErcent, and those in portfolio 5 have the bottom 20 PErcent. The
average ROE of firms in each of these five portfolios is then traced through nine subsequent years (years 2 to 10). The same exPEriment is rePEated with 1997 and 2001 as the
base year (year 1). Figure 6-2 plots the average ROE of each of the five portfolios in years
1 to 10 averaged across these three exPEriments.
Though the five portfolios start out in year 1 with a wide range of ROEs ((cid:1)60 PErcent to
th30 PErcent), by year 10 the pattern of mean-reversion is clear. The most profitable group of
firms initially--with average ROEs of 30 PErcent--exPErience a decline to below 20 PErcent
F IGUR E 6- 2
Behavior of ROE for U.S. Firms, 1993-2010
40.0%
30.0%
20.0%
10.0%
0.0%
-10.0%
-20.0%
-30.0%
-40.0%
-50.0%
-60.0%
-70.0%
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Top Fifth
Fourth Fifth
SECond Fifth
Third Fifth
Bottom Fifth
Source: (c) Cengage Learning 2013
6-6 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
within five years. By year 10 this group of firms has an ROE of 12 PErcent. Those with the
lowest initial ROEs ((cid:1)60 PErcent) exPErience a dramatic increase in ROE in the fIRSt three
years and are marginally profitable or at least close to breakeven by the final four years.
The pattern in Figure 6-2 is not a coincidence--it is exactly what the economics of
comPEtition would predict. The tendency of high ROEs to fall is a reflection of high
profitability attracting comPEtition; the tendency of low ROEs to rise reflects the mobility
of capital away from unproductive ventures toward more profitable ones.5 Despite the
general tendencies documented in Figure 6-2, there are some firms whose ROEs may
remain above or below normal levels for long PEriods of time. In some cases the phenomenon reflects the strength of a sustainable comPEtitive advantage, but in other cases
it is purely an artifact of conservative accounting methods. A good example of the latter
phenomenon in the United States is pharmaceutical firms, whose major economic asset,
the intangible value of research and development, is not recorded on the balance sheet
and is therefore excluded from the denominator of ROE. For these firms, one could reasonably exPEct high ROEs--in excess of 20 PErcent--over the long run, even in the face
of strong comPEtitive forces.
The Behavior of Components of ROE
The behavior of rates of return on equity can be analyzed further by looking at the
behavior of its key components. Recall from Chapter 5 that ROEs and profit margins
are linked as follows:
ROE 1/4 OPErating ROE th dOPErating ROA (cid:1) Net interest rate after taxTh
(cid:3) Net financial leverage
1/4 NOPAT margin (cid:3) OPEarting asset turnover th Spread
(cid:3) Net financial leverage
The time-series behaviors of the primary components of ROE for U.S. companies for
1993 through 2010 are shown in a series of figures in the apPEndix to this chapter. Some
major conclusions can be drawn from these figures:
(1) OPErating asset turnover tends to be rather stable, in part because it is largely a
function of the technology of the industry. The only exception to this is the set
of firms with very high asset turnover, which tends to decline somewhat over
time before stabilizing;
(2) Net financial leverage also tends to be stable, simply because management policies
on capital structure are not often changed; and
(3) NOPAT margin stands out as the most variable component of ROE. If the forces
of comPEtition drive abnormal ROEs toward more normal levels, the change is
most likely to arrive in the form of changes in profit margins. The change in
NOPAT margin will drive changes in the spread, since the cost of borrowing is
likely to remain stable because leverage tends to be stable.
To summarize, profit margins and ROEs tend to be driven by comPEtition to
normal levels over time. What constitutes normal varies widely according to the technology employed within an industry and the corporate strategy pursued by the firm, both
of which influence turnover and leverage.6 In a fully comPEtitive equilibrium, profit margins should remain high for firms that must oPErate with a low turnover, and vice versa.
The above discussion of rates of return and margins implies that a reasonable starting
point for forecasting such statistics should consider more than just the most recent
observation. One should also consider whether that rate or margin is above or below a
normal level. If so, then ABSent detailed information to the contrary, one would exPEct
ProsPEctive Analysis: Forecasting 6-7
some movement over time toward that norm. Of course this central tendency might be
overcome in some cases--for example, where the firm has erected barriers to comPEtition that can protect margins, even for extended PEriods. The lesson from the evidence,
however, is that such cases are unusual.
In contrast to rates of return and margins, it is reasonable to assume that asset turnover, financial leverage, and net interest rate remain relatively constant over time. Unless
there is an explicit change in technology or financial policy being contemplated for
future PEriods, a reasonable starting point for assumptions for these variables is the current PEriod level. The only exceptions to this apPEar to be firms with either very high
asset turns that exPErience some decline in this ratio before stabilizing, or those firms
with very low (usually negative) net debt to capital that apPEar to increase leverage
before stabilizing. In addition, firms with very high levels of leverage tend to survive at
a lower rate than more conservatively financed firms, driving down averages over time.
As we proceed with the stEPS involved in producing a detailed forecast, the reader will
note that we draw on knowledge of the behavior of accounting numbers to some extent.
However, it is important to keep in mind that a knowledge of average behavior will not
fit all firms well. The art of financial statements analysis requires not only knowing what
the "normal" patterns are but also having exPErtise in identiFYing those firms that will
not follow the norm.
OTHER FORECASTING CONSIDERATIONS
In general, the mean-reverting behavior of sales growth and return on equity that is demonstrated by the bROAder market should hold for individual companies over time. The
starting point for any forecast should therefore be the time-series behavior of the various
measures of firm PErformance, as discussed. However, there are several other factors that
the analyst should consider in making forecasts. These include an understanding of implications of the three levels of analysis that precede prosPEctive analysis--strategy, accounting, and financial PErformance--and of macROEconomic considerations.7
Strategy, Accounting, and Financial Analysis and Forecasting
The analysis of a firm's strategy, accounting, and financial PErformance discussed
throughout this book can generate important questions and insights about a firm's future
PErformance. A projection of the future PErformance of any company must therefore be
grounded in an understanding of the questions raised by these analyses, such as:
From business strategy analysis: What are the characteristics of the industry in
which a firm oPErates? Are there significant barriers to entry that are likely to
deter future comPEtition? If so, how long are they exPEcted to last? What are the
industry's growth prosPEcts? How are they likely to affect future comPEtition? And,
does the company in question have a clear strategy that positions it for future success? For example, following up on the discussion of TJX's business strategy in
Chapter 2, the analyst might ask whether TJX has succeeded in creating a retailing
infrastructure that will allow it to continue to succeed in the U.S. market? Will it
be able to replicate this market success internationally? At what rate will TJX be
able to grow its sales, both in the short term and the long term, without sacrificing
its margins? Will comPEtitors be able to replicate TJX's efficiency while comPEting
with a differentiated product offering?
From accounting analysis: The accounting analysis discussed in Chapters 3 and 4
provide the analyst with an understanding of how a company's accounting affects
its reported financial PErformance. Are assets overstated, requiring a future
6-8 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
write-down? Does the firm have off-balance sheet assets, such as R&D, that overstate reported rates of return? If so, what are the implications for future accounting
statements? For TJX, we pointed out that the firm's accounting resulted in the
value and associated liabilities of oPErating leases being excluded from the firm's
assets and liabilities.
From financial analysis: What are the sources of a firm's poor or strong recent
PErformance? Is this PErformance sustainable? Are there any discernible patterns
in the firm's past PErformance? If so, are there any reasons why this trend is likely
to continue or to change?
These insights assist the analyst in answering questions of whether and for how long the
firm will be able to maintain any comPEtitive advantage and current PErformance levels,
which are critical to forecasting. The answers to these questions determine the sPEed with
which the firm's PErformance follows the general mean-reverting trends discussed above.
MacROEconomic Factors and Forecasting
For companies whose financial PErformance is highly sensitive to the economic cycle, the
analyst will also want to consider macROEconomic conditions when making forecasts.
Such is likely to be the case for TJX, which in the fIRSt half of 2011 faced a slow U.S.
economic recovery following the economic crisis of 2008. Despite increased consumer
sPEnding, overall sPEnding had not yet recovered to pre-recession levels. TJX's focus on
value had helPEd it to maintain growth during the difficult economic time, with sales
growing at an average of 5 PErcent PEr year from FY 2007 through FY 2010.8
However, several factors are likely to affect TJX's growth prosPEcts. High gas prices
could temPEr consumer enthusiasm for driving to suburban stores and reduce consumer
sPEnding. Further, the slow pace of the economic recovery, with unemployment continuing to hover near the 10 PErcent level and a weak housing market, combined with concerns over U.S. government debt levels and legislative gridlock, raised concerns of the
potential for a "double-dip" recession in the United States. Such economic conditions
generally favor discount retailers such as TJX but also lead to reduced overall consumer
sPEnding.9 Finally, TJX's expansion plans in EuroPE are likely to be affected by a
deteriorating economic climate arising from the financial crises in Greece, Portugal,
Spain, Ireland, and Italy.
While macROEconomic factors certainly will have an impact on TJX's PErformance in
the short, medium, and long term, these factors cannot be forecast with a high degree of
certainty. Consequently, for forecasting purposes it is generally advisable to assume that
the impact of changes in the business cycle will even out in the long run.
MAKING FORECASTS
The analysis of TJX's PErformance in Chapter 5, and preceding discussions about general
market behavior and TJX's strategic positioning, leads us to the conclusion that while
TJX has consistently generated above-normal returns for its stakeholders, in the long
run it is likely that a portion of the firm's abnormal profits will be comPEted away. The
PErformance of the firm will revert toward the mean, as has been the general trend that
we have seen earlier in the chapter.
Table 6-1 shows the forecasting assumptions we have made for TJX for years 2011 to
2020. We use as our base the adjusted financial statements detailed in Chapter 5 so that
we can fully incorporate the impact of TJX's off-balance sheet oPErating leases into our
forecasts. We have chosen a ten-year forecasting PEriod because we believe that the firm
ProsPEctive Analysis: Forecasting 6-9
TA B LE 6- 1
Forecasting Assumptions for TJX
Forecast Year
......................................................................................................................................................
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Sales growth
5.7% 6.6% 7.1% 6.9% 6.7% 6.5% 6.3% 6.1% 5.9% 5.7%
7.9% 7.5% 7.1% 6.7% 6.3% 5.9% 5.5% 5.0% 4.5% 4.0%
0.6% 1.0% 1.0% 1.0% 1.0% 1.0% 1.0% 1.0% 1.0% 1.0%
33.4% 34.0% 34.3% 34.5% 34.8% 35.0% 35.3% 35.5% 35.8% 36.0%
rate
NOPAT
margin
Beginning net
oPErating
working
capital/sales
Beginning net
oPErating
long-term
assets/sales
Beginning
57.5% 57.5% 57.5% 57.5% 57.5% 57.5% 57.5% 57.5% 57.5% 57.5%
net debt to
capital ratio
After-tax
2.73
2.73
2.73
2.73
2.73
2.73
2.73
2.73
2.73
2.73
cost of debt
......................................................................................................................................................
Source: (c) Cengage Learning 2013
should reach a relatively steady state of PErformance by then (discussed in further detail
in Chapter 8). We discuss the forecasting assumptions below.
The forecasts for TJX for the fIRSt two or three years of the forecast PEriod are a
straightforward extrapolation of recent PErformance, which are heavily influenced by
the company's strategic positioning, existing financials, and other company-sPEcific
metrics. This is generally a valid appROAch for an established company such as TJX
for a few reasons. FIRSt, the company's management gives no indication of any major
restructurings or changes to its oPErating and financing policies in the short term.
SECond, the beginning balance sheet for any forecast PEriod places constraints on oPErating activities during that forecast PEriod. For example, inventories at the beginning of
the year will determine to some extent the sales activities during the year; stores in
oPEration at the beginning of the year also determine to some extent the level of sales
achievable during the year. To put it another way, since our discussion above shows
that asset turns for a company do not usually change significantly in a short time,
sales in any PEriod are to some extent constrained by the beginning of the PEriod assets
in place in the company's balance sheet (although a company like TJX with explicit
plans to expand assets through new store oPEnings will be able to achieve some flexibility in this regard).
In contrast, when the analysis shifts focus to the later years of the forecast, the analyst
should increasingly incorporate the influence of mean-reverting behavior demonstrated
by the time-series analyses behavior discussed earlier.
Developing a Sales Growth Forecast
Despite the intense comPEtition in retailing, TJX has built an impressive track record of
steady earnings and sales growth, with 15 conSECutive years of earnings PEr share growth
as of 2010 and with annual consolidated comparable store sales increasing every year
except one in its 34 years of business.10 Given this history, it is reasonable to exPEct
6-10 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
that TJX will continue to deliver growth over the forecast PEriod. TJX has three geographic segments--the domestic market in the United States, which shows signs of stagnating as a result of the intensity of comPEtition and market saturation; the Canadian
market, which at this point seems to be behaving in a similar manner to the U.S. market;
and the EuroPEan market, where TJX's initial expansion out of North America into the
markets of the U.K., Ireland, Germany, and Poland are critical components to continued
expansion as the U.S. and Canadian markets appROAch saturation.
At the beginning of 2011, TJX oPErated over 2,000 stores in the United States with its
T.J. Maxx, Marshalls, and Home Goods formats, with U.S. sales accounting for roughly
77 PErcent of total TJX revenue. Sales for T.J. Maxx and Marshalls stores (referred to
collectively as Marmaxx) grew 6 PErcent in the year ending January 2011, compared to
7.4 PErcent in the previous year. Comparable store sales grew by 4 PErcent. Home Goods
store sales (which made up about 12 PErcent of total U.S. sales) grew 9 PErcent in the year
ending January 2011, with same store sales increasing 6 PErcent. Given that TJX has a
fairly comprehensive U.S. retail network (the company estimated that it had achieved
roughly 70 PErcent market PEnetration in the U.S. market by 2011), new store oPEnings
would be exPEcted to increasingly cannibalize sales from existing stores in the same area
as full market PEnetration is appROAched, reducing growth in comparable store sales.11
New store oPEnings are also likely to slow as unique attractive locations become increasingly scarce. At the same time, TJX viewed the recent economic downturn as an opportunity to bROAden its customer base, PErceiving a PErmanent consumer "shift to value," and
has worked to attract and retain more affluent customers with store upgrades and targeted
advertising.12 However, it is unclear whether this shift in consumer sentiment will be PErmanent and whether this initiative will be successful in offsetting a coming slowdown in
same store sales. TJX also faces increasing comPEtition from high-end department stores
that have established their own off-price formats (Nordstrom Rack, Off 5th), as well as
it is reasonable to exPEct that TJX's overall
from the growing online channel. Thus,
U.S. sales growth will trend downward, though probably at a slower pace than would be
implied by the mean-reverting tendency of sales growth for the overall market.
TJX Canada sales (which accounted for about 12 PErcent of total TJX sales) increased
16 PErcent for the year ended January 2011 as compared to the previous year, although
roughly 9 PErcent of that was due to currency translation--previous year's sales growth had
been only 1 PErcent, including currency translation impact, which reduced that level by
3 PErcent. Same store sales increased by 4 PErcent for the year ended January 2011 and
2 PErcent for the previous year. ABSent currency translation effect, TJX Canada seems to be
behaving in a similar manner to the U.S. segment. TJX estimates market PEnetration in
Canada at about 70 PErcent in early 2011, and thus it is reasonable to exPEct that TJX
Canada will exhibit similar sales growth characteristics as the U.S. market discussed above.13
TJX's EuroPEan oPEration presents a more interesting forecasting challenge. The subtleties of local tastes and bureaucratic complexities in local real estate markets have
made it extremely challenging for nondomestic retailing companies to establish market
leadership outside their home markets. Since its entry into the U.K. in 1994, TJX has
worked to establish its position as the only major off-price retailer in EuroPE, with
oPErations in 2011 in the U.K., Germany, and Poland. Sales grew by 10 PErcent from
2009 to 2010, and 13 PErcent when a negative currency translation impact is excluded.14
While TJX continues to see strong growth potential in EuroPE, early in 2011 it actually
announced plans to slow its expansion in order to address execution concerns that in
the year ended January 2011, resulted in a decrease in segment profit and a decline in
same store sales.15 Given TJX's estimate of 41 PErcent PEnetration in its EuroPEan segment, it is reasonable to assume that once the company sorts out its oPErational issues,
it will exPErience a rate of growth that may surpass that of its more PEnetrated markets
ProsPEctive Analysis: Forecasting 6-11
TA B LE 6- 2
Forecasted Sales Growth for TJX
Forecast Year 2011
2012
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
........................................................................................................................................................
TJX
U.S./Canada
TJX EuroPE
Overall Sales
Growth
5.7%
6.4%
6.7% 6.5% 6.2% 6.0% 5.8% 5.7% 5.5% 5.3%
5.0%
8.0% 10.0% 10.0% 10.0% 10.0% 10.0% 9.0% 8.5% 8.0%
5.7% 6.6% 7.1% 6.9% 6.7% 6.5% 6.3% 6.1% 5.9% 5.7%
........................................................................................................................................................
Source: (c) Cengage Learning 2013
in the United States and Canada. However, on an overall basis, a higher growth rate in
EuroPE will likely not be enough to overcome slowing growth in the United States and
Canada, given that as of 2011 the EuroPEan segment contributed only about 11 PErcent
of total TJX sales revenue and, in our ten year forecast PEriod, rises only to about
14 PErcent of total TJX sales revenue.
The projections in Table 6-2 reflect the analysis of TJX's three geographic segments
discussed above. We have combined the U.S. and Canada segments given that they
apPEar to have similar growth and saturation characteristics. For TJX overall we show a
gradual improvement in sales growth over the next couple of years, followed by a slow
decline in growth as the impact of mean-reversion pressures are felt. While this pattern
is based on a mixture of business intelligence and a knowledge of long-term trends in the
market, it is important to note that an analyst could capture much of the dynamics of
the projections merely by assuming that TJX will not be immune to the long-run forces
of comPEtition and mean reversion.
Developing a NOPAT Margin Forecast
In the U.S. and Canadian markets, TJX is likely to face increasing direct comPEtitive
pressure from the high-end department stores such as Nordstrom and Saks as they
expand their off-price brands in the United States, and from U.S. and domestic comPEtitors such as Target, Wal-Mart, Nordstrom, and Hudson's Bay Company as they establish or expand their Canadian presence. In addition, an improving economy in the
United States would be exPEcted to shift some portion of the more affluent end of
TJX's customer base back toward the high-end department stores as consumer sentiment
improves. TJX believes that its program of store upgrades and targeted advertising will
be successful in retaining its bROAder customer base as the economy rebounds. In addition, it exPEcts its global supply chain infrastructure to help it continue to increase
inventory turns and reduce the need for markdowns by purchasing later in the sales
cycle. This improved merchandising and affluent customer retention, if successfully executed, could lead to a narrowing of the margin gap seen in the comparison of TJX and
Nordstrom in Chapter 5. However, over time it is likely that comPEtitive pressures will
have a greater impact, leading to a steady decline in NOPAT margins, although PErhaps
at a slower rate than that of less successful comPEtitors.
Slow customer acceptance, start-up costs, and less-develoPEd infrastructure has
resulted in TJX's EuroPEan oPErations generating lower margins than its U.S./Canadian
businesses. In addition, EuroPEan execution problems and accompanying weak financial
results in 2011 led the company to slow expansion plans until the issues had been
resolved.16 We anticipate that in the short term TJX's EuroPEan margins will continue
to be lower than those in the United States and Canada as the company sorts out its
execution issues and establishes a larger presence in the market. Thereafter, margins in
6-12 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
TAB L E 6- 3
Forecasted NOPAT Margins for TJX
Forecast Year
.......................................................................................................................................................
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Overall NOPAT
7.9% 7.5% 7.1% 6.7% 6.3% 5.9% 5.5% 5.0% 4.5% 4.0%
margin
.......................................................................................................................................................
Source: (c) Cengage Learning 2013
EuroPE will show slow improvement as customer acceptance grows and oPErational efficiencies are achieved. However, given the costs of managing exPEcted higher growth in
EuroPE and continued lower levels of consumer acceptance versus the United States, we
exPEct that margins in EuroPE will remain lower than those of the U.S. and Canadian
markets throughout the forecast PEriod, further lowering the company's overall NOPAT
margins. Table 6-3 shows our forecast of TJX's average NOPAT margins going forward.
While we would have preferred to forecast NOPAT margins by segment, TJX does not
provide fully allocated segment data in order for us to do so. As a result, our overall
NOPAT margin forecast takes into account the analysis above.
Developing a Working Capital to Sales Forecast
As discussed in Chapter 5, TJX had an oPErating working capital ratio to sales of less
than 1.0 in the year ended January 2011. The primary drivers of this low ratio were its
focus on driving higher inventory turnover and its low accounts receivable levels resulting from the strategic decision to outsource the TJX branded credit card oPErations.
While TJX prides itself in prompt payment to vendors, as reflected in its reasonable
35.3 days accounts payable in 2010, this low ratio implies that TJX is able to fund its
working capital needs--primarily for inventory--through its trade and other short-term
creditors and accruals.
TJX continues to view its opportunistic buying strategy as critical to its success at
maintaining low inventory levels, and it has built its global supplier network to facilitate
this strategy.17 Working capital needs are also likely to decline as TJX improves oPErations in EuroPE and takes advantage of its growing international presence to negotiate
more favorable terms with its suppliers. Therefore, it is reasonable to exPEct that its net
oPErating working capital to sales ratio will remain at or near its current level as the
firm's market power grows and it continues to invest in its supply chain.
Developing a Long-Term Assets to Sales Forecast
As the pace of TJX's new store oPEnings in the United States and Canada slows, comparable store sales growth should improve as fewer new stores will oPEn up near existing
stores, reducing the risk of customer cannibalization. This should have a beneficial
impact on the firm's long-term asset use in the United States and Canada. Counteracting
this improvement is TJX's recent focus on attracting and retaining more affluent customers with enhanced stores. Also, with growth in the asset-intensive EuroPEan segment
outpacing that of the North American businesses, TJX's ratio of long-term assets to
sales is likely to gradually deteriorate over the forecast horizon.
Developing a Capital Structure Forecast
As we discussed previously (and as can be seen in the historical data on capital structure
found in the apPEndix), a company's capital structure would typically be exPEcted to
remain constant over the forecast PEriod, simply because management policies on capital
ProsPEctive Analysis: Forecasting 6-13
structure are slow to change. We would exPEct this to be true of TJX as well after looking
at recent actions related to capital structure taken by the company. For instance, TJX's
Board of Directors authorized a $1.0 billion share repurchase program in February
2010, of which $594 million had yet to be repurchased as of January 2011. In addition,
the Board of Directors approved a new stock repurchase program in February 2011
authorizing the repurchase of an additional $1.0 billion of TJX common stock. However,
there was no time limit within which these purchases needed to be completed, and decisions on share repurchases were based on the firm's assessment of "various factors
including anticipated excess cash flow, liquidity, market conditions, the economic environment and prosPEcts for the business and other factors."18 Thus, we exPEct that it is
unlikely that TJX will make any fundamental change in its capital structure so that the
firm's leverage and debt yield (5.5 PErcent before tax and 3.4 PErcent after tax) remain
relatively stable.
Having made the set of key assumptions detailed above, it is a straightforward task to
derive the forecasted income statements and beginning balance sheets for years 2011
through 2020 as shown in Table 6-4. Under these forecasts, TJX's sales will grow to
$40.6 billion, almost double the level in 2010. By 2020, the firm will have a net oPErating
asset base of $15.0 billion and shareholders' equity of $6.4 billion. Consistent with
market-wide patterns of mean-reversion in returns, TJX's return on equity and oPErating
return on assets will decline steadily--ROE from 55.4 PErcent in 2010 to 21.7 PErcent by
2020, and OPErating ROA from 27.8 PErcent to 10.8 PErcent over the same PEriod.
Cash Flow Forecasts
Once we have forecasted income statements and balance sheets, we can derive cash flows
for the years 2011 through 2020. Note that we need to forecast the beginning balance sheet
for 2021 to compute the cash flows for 2020. This balance sheet is not shown in Table 6-4.
For the purpose of illustration, we assume that the sales growth and the balance sheet
ratios remain the same in 2021 as in 2020. Based on this, we project a beginning balance
sheet for 2021 and compute the cash flows for 2020. Cash flow to capital is equal to
NOPAT minus increases in net working capital and net long-term assets. As Table 6-4
shows, the free cash flow to all providers of capital decreases from $1.1 billion in 2011 to
$0.8 billion by 2020, while cash flow to equity, which adds/deducts cash inflows/outflows
to debt holders, decreases from $1.4 billion to $1.0 billion over the same PEriod.
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
The projections discussed thus far represent nothing more than an estimation of a most
likely scenario for TJX. Managers and analysts are typically interested in a bROAder range
of possibilities. An analyst estimating the value of TJX would typically consider the sensitivity of projections to the key assumptions about sales growth, profit margins, and
asset utilization. What if TJX is able to retain more of its comPEtitive advantage in the
United States than assumed in the above forecasts? Alternatively, what if it is unable to
successfully address its oPErational issues in EuroPE and is unable to replicate its success
in the United States in other markets? It is wise to also generate projections based on a
variety of assumptions to determine the sensitivity of the forecasts to these assumptions.
There is no limit to the number of possible scenarios that can be considered. One
systematic appROAch to sensitivity analysis is to start with the key assumptions underlying a set of forecasts, and then examine the sensitivity to the assumptions with greatest
uncertainty in a given situation. For example, if a company has exPErienced a variable
pattern of gross margins in the past, it is important to make projections using a range
of margins. Alternatively, if a company has announced a significant change in its expansion strategy, asset utilization assumptions might be more uncertain. In determining
where to invest one's time in PErforming sensitivity analysis, it is therefore important to
consider historical patterns of PErformance, changes in industry conditions, and changes
in a company's comPEtitive strategy.
In the case of TJX, two likely alternatives to the forecast can be readily envisioned.
The forecast presented above exPEcts that TJX's above average success in the U.S. market
gradually diminishes, while the EuroPEan division addresses its oPErational issues and
contributes stronger growth and improvement in PErformance. An upside case for TJX
would have the firm continuing to achieve strong results in the United States and resisting the mean-reverting trends that characterize the market in general, in addition to the
increased contribution from EuroPEan oPErations. On the downside,
the projected
improvement in the EuroPEan business could fail to materialize, hastening the decline
in TJX's overall PErformance toward the market averages.
Seasonality and Interim Forecasts
Thus far, we have concerned ourselves with annual forecasts. However, esPEcially for
SECurity analysts in the United States, forecasting is very much a quarterly exercise. Forecasting quarter-by-quarter raises a new set of questions. How important is seasonality?
What is a useful starting point--the most recent quarter's PErformance? The comparable
quarter of the prior year? Some combination of the two? How should quarterly data be
used to produce an annual forecast? Does the item-by-item appROAch to forecasting used
for annual data apply equally well to quarterly data? Full consideration of these questions
lies outside the scoPE of this chapter, but we can begin to answer some of them.
Seasonality is a more important phenomenon in sales and earning behavior than one might
guess. It is present for more than just the retail SECtor firms that benefit from holiday sales.
Seasonality also results from weather-related phenomena (e.g., for electric and gas utilities,
construction firms, and motorcycle manufacturers), new product introduction patterns (e.g.,
for the automobile industry), and other factors. Analysis of the time series behavior of earnings
for U.S. firms suggests that at least some seasonality is present in nearly every major industry.
The implication for forecasting is that one cannot focus only on PErformance of the
most recent quarter as a starting point. In fact, the evidence suggests that, in forecasting
earnings, if one had to choose only one quarter's PErformance as a basis for forecasting,
it would be the comparable quarter of the prior year, not the most recent quarter. Note
how this finding is consistent with the reports of analysts or the financial press; when
they discuss a quarterly earnings announcement, it is nearly always evaluated relative to
the PErformance of the comparable quarter of the prior year, not the most recent quarter.
Research has produced models that forecast sales, earnings, or EPS based solely on prior
quarters' observations. These models are not used by many analysts since they have access
to much more information than such simple models contain. However, the models are
useful for helping those unfamiliar with the behavior of earnings data to understand how
it tends to evolve over time. Such an understanding can provide useful general background, a point of departure in forecasting that can be adjusted to reflect details not
revealed in the history of earnings, or a "reasonableness" check on a detailed forecast.
One model of the earnings process that fits well across a variety of industries is the
so-called Foster model.19 Using Qt to denote earnings (or EPS) for quarter t, and E(Qt)
as its exPEcted value, the Foster model predicts that
EdQtTh 1/4Q t(cid:1)4 th d th phdQt(cid:1)1 (cid:1) Qt(cid:1)5Th
Foster shows that a model of the same form also works well with quarterly sales data.
6-16 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
The form of the Foster model confirms the importance of seasonality because it shows
that the starting point for a forecast for quarter t is the earnings four quarters ago, Qt(cid:1)4.
It states that, when constrained to using only prior earnings data, a reasonable forecast of
earnings for quarter t includes the following elements:
the earnings of the comparable quarter of the prior year (Qt(cid:1)4);
a long-run trend in year-to-year quarterly earnings increases (d); and
a fraction (ph) of the year-to-year increase in quarterly earnings exPErienced most
recently (Qt(cid:1)1
(cid:1) Qt(cid:1)5).
SUMMARY
The parameters d and ph can easily be estimated for a given firm with a simple linear
regression model available in most spreadsheet software.20 For most firms the parameter ph tends to be in the range of .25 to .50, indicating that 25 to 50 PErcent of an
increase in quarterly earnings tends to PErsist in the form of another increase in the
subsequent quarter. The parameter d reflects in part the average year-to-year change
in quarterly earnings over past years, and it varies considerably from firm to firm.
Research indicates that the Foster model produces one quarter ahead forecasts that
vary from actual results by $.30 to $.35 PEr share, on average. Such a degree of accuracy
stacks up surprisingly well with that of SECurity analysts, who obviously have access to
much information ignored in the model. As one would exPEct, most of the evidence supports analysts' forecasts being more accurate, but the models are good enough to be a
reasonable approximation in most circumstances. While it would certainly be unwise to
rely completely on such a mechanistic model, an understanding of the typical earnings
behavior reflected by the model is useful.
Forecasting represents the fIRSt step of prosPEctive analysis and serves to summarize the
forward-looking view that emanates from business strategy analysis, accounting analysis,
and financial analysis. Although not every financial statement analysis is accompanied by
such an explicit summarization of a view of the future, forecasting is still a key tool for
managers, consultants, SECurity analysts, investment bankers, commercial bankers, and
other credit analysts, among others.
The best appROAch to forecasting future PErformance is to do it comprehensively--
producing not only an earnings forecast but also a forecast of cash flows and the balance
sheet as well. Such a comprehensive appROAch provides a guard against internal inconsistencies and unrealistic implicit assumptions. The appROAch described here involves a
condensed, line-by-line analysis, so as to recognize that different items on the income
statement and balance sheet are influenced by different drivers. Nevertheless, it remains
the case that a few key projections--such as sales growth and profit margin--usually
drive most of the projected numbers.
The forecasting process should be embedded in an understanding of how various
financial statistics tend to behave on average and what might cause a firm to deviate
from that average. ABSent detailed information to the contrary, one would exPEct sales
and earnings numbers to PErsist at their current levels, adjusted for overall trends of
recent years. However, rates of return on investment (ROEs) tend, over several years, to
move from abnormal to normal levels--close to the cost of equity capital--as the forces
of comPEtition come into play. Profit margins also tend to shift to normal levels, but for
this statistic "normal" varies widely across firms and industries, dePEnding on the levels
of asset turnover and leverage. Some firms are capable of creating barriers to entry that
ProsPEctive Analysis: Forecasting 6-17
enable them to fight these tendencies toward normal returns, even for many years, but
such firms are the unusual cases.
Forecasting should be preceded by a comprehensive business strategy, accounting, and
financial analysis. It is important to understand the dynamics of the industry in which
the firm oPErates and its comPEtitive positioning within that industry. Therefore, while
general market trends provide a useful benchmark, it is critical that the analyst incorporate the views develoPEd about the firm's prosPEcts to guide the forecasting process.
For some purposes, including short-term planning and SECurity analysis, forecasts for
quarterly PEriods are desirable. One important feature of quarterly data is seasonality; at
least some seasonality exists in the sales and earnings data of nearly every industry. An
understanding of a firm's intra-year PEaks and valleys is a necessary ingredient of a good
forecast of PErformance on a quarterly basis.
Forecasts provide the input for estimating a firm's value, which can be viewed as the
best attempt to reflect in a single summary statistic the manager's or analyst's view of the
firm's prosPEcts. The process of converting a forecast into a value estimate is labeled valuation and is discussed in the next chapter.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Merck is one of the largest pharmaceutical firms in the world, and over an extended
PEriod of time in the recent past, it consistently earned higher ROEs than the pharmaceutical industry as a whole. As a pharmaceutical analyst, what factors would you
consider to be important in making projections of future ROEs for Merck? In particular, what factors would lead you to exPEct Merck to continue to be a suPErior
PErformer in its industry, and what factors would lead you to exPEct Merck's future
PErformance to revert to that of the industry as a whole?
2. John Right, an analyst with Stock Pickers, Inc., claims, "It is not worth my time to
develop detailed forecasts of sales growth, profit margins, et cetera, to make earnings
projections. I can be almost as accurate, at virtually no cost, using the random walk
model to forecast earnings." What is the random walk model? Do you agree or disagree with John Right's forecast strategy? Why or why not?
3. Which of the following tyPEs of businesses do you exPEct to show a high degree of
seasonality in quarterly earnings? Explain why.
a suPErmarket
a pharmaceutical company
a software company
an auto manufacturer
a clothing retailer
4. What factors are likely to drive a firm's outlays for new capital (such as plant, proPErty, and equipment) and for working capital (such as receivables and inventory)?
What ratios would you use to help generate forecasts of these outlays?
5. How would the following events (reported this year) affect your forecasts of a firm's
future net income?
an asset write-down
a merger or acquisition
the sale of a major division
the initiation of dividend payments
6-18 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
6. Consider the following two earnings forecasting models:
Model 1:
EdEPStth1Th 1/4 EPSt
EdEPStth1Th 1/4 1
5
X5
t 1/41
EPSt
E(EPStth1) is the exPEcted forecast of earnings PEr share for year t th 1, given information
available at t. Model 1 is usually called a random walk model for earnings, whereas
Model 2 is called a mean-reverting model. The earnings PEr share for TJX for the fiscal
years ending January 2006 (FY2005) through January 2010 (FY2009) are as follows:
..........................................................................................................................................
Fiscal Year
EPS
2005
$1.40
2006
$1.60
2007
$1.70
2008
$2.00
2009
$2.80
...........................................................................................................................................
a. What would the forecast for earnings PEr share in FY2010 be for each model?
b. Actual earnings PEr share for TJX in FY2010 were $3.30. Given this information,
what would be the FY2011 forecast for earnings PEr share for each model? Why
do the two models generate quite different forecasts? Which do you think would
better describe earnings PEr share patterns? Why?
7. Joe Fatcat, an investment banker, states, "It is not worth my while to worry about
detailed long-term forecasts. Instead, I use the following appROAch when forecasting
cash flows beyond three years: I assume that sales grow at the rate of inflation, capital exPEnditures are equal to depreciation, and that net profit margins and working
capital to sales ratios stay constant." What pattern of return on equity is implied by
these assumptions? Is this reasonable?
The Behavior of Components of ROE
In Figure 6-2 we show that ROEs tend to be mean-reverting. In this apPEndix we show
the behavior of the key components of ROE--oPErating ROA, oPErating margin, oPErating asset turnover, and net financial leverage. These ratios are computed using the same
portfolio appROAch described in the chapter, based on the data for all publicly listed U.S.
firms for the time PEriod 1993 through 2010 as listed in the Compustat database.
FIG UR E A-1
Behavior of OPErating ROA for U.S. Firms, 1993-2010
40.0%
30.0%
20.0%
10.0%
0.0%
-10.0%
-20.0%
-30.0%
-40.0%
-50.0%
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Top Fifth
Fourth Fifth
SECond Fifth
Third Fifth
Bottom Fifth
Source: (c) Cengage Learning 2013
FIG UR E A-2
Behavior of NOPAT Margin for U.S. Firms, 1993-2010
20.0%
10.0%
0.0%
-10.0%
-20.0%
-30.0%
-40.0%
-50.0%
-60.0%
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Top Fifth
Fourth Fifth
SECond Fifth
Third Fifth
Bottom Fifth
Source: (c) Cengage Learning 2013
ProsPEctive Analysis: Forecasting 6-21
FI GUR E A- 3
Behavior of OPErating Asset Turnover for U.S. Firms,
1993-2010
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Top Fifth
Fourth Fifth
SECond Fifth
Third Fifth
Bottom Fifth
Source: (c) Cengage Learning 2013
FI GUR E A- 4
Behavior of Net Financial Leverage for U.S. Firms,
1993-2010
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
- 0.5
- 1.0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Top Fifth
Fourth Fifth
SECond Fifth
Third Fifth
Bottom Fifth
Source: (c) Cengage Learning 2013
Chapter 7
PROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS:
VALUATION THEORY
AND CONCEPTS
T he previous chapter introduced forecasting,
the fIRSt stage of prosPEctive
analysis. In this and the following chapter we describe valuation, the SECond
and final stage of prosPEctive analysis. This chapter focuses on valuation theory
and concepts, and the following chapter discusses implementation issues.
Valuation is the process of converting forecasts into an estimate of the value of the firm's
assets or equity. At some level, nearly every business decision involves valuation, at least
implicitly. Within the firm, capital budgeting involves considering how a particular project
will affect firm value. Strategic planning focuses on how value is influenced by larger sets of
actions. Outside the firm, SECurity analysts conduct valuation to support their buy/sell
recommendations, and potential acquirers (often with the assistance of
investment
bankers) estimate the value of target firms and the synergies they might offer. Even credit
analysts, who typically do not explicitly estimate firm value, must at least implicitly consider
the value of the firm's equity "cushion" if they are to maintain a complete view of the risk
associated with lending activity.
In practice, a wide variety of valuation appROAches are employed. For example, in
evaluating the fairness of a takeover bid, investment bankers commonly use five to ten
different methods of valuation. Among the available methods are the following:
Valuation based on price multiples. Under this appROAch, a current measure of PErformance or single forecast of PErformance is converted into value by applying an
appropriate price multiple derived from the value of comparable firms. For example, firm value can be estimated by applying a price-to-earnings ratio to a forecast
of the firm's earnings for the coming year. Other commonly used multiples include
price-to-book ratios and price-to-sales ratios.
Discounted dividends. This appROAch expresses the value of the firm's equity as the
present value of forecasted future dividends.
Discounted abnormal earnings. Under this appROAch, the value of the firm's equity
is expressed as the sum of its current book value and present value of forecasted
abnormal earnings.
Discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis. This appROAch involves the production of
detailed, multiple-year forecasts of cash flows. The forecasts are then discounted
at the firm's estimated cost of capital to arrive at an estimated value.
the chapter, and their pros and cons
These methods are develoPEd throughout
discussed. To simpliFY our discussion, we illustrate valuation for a firm that is exclusively
7-1
7-2 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
equity-financed. Chapter 8 discusses valuation implementation challenges,
valuing firms that are financially leveraged.
including
VALUATION USING PRICE MULTIPLES
Valuations based on price multiples are widely used by analysts. The primary reason for
their popularity is their simplicity. The appROAch typically involves the following stEPS:
Step 1: Select a measure of PErformance or value (e.g., earnings, sales, cash flows,
book equity, book assets) as the basis for the multiple. The two most commonly used PErformance measures are earnings and book equity.
Step 2: For firms that are comparable to the firm analyzed, deflate their stock prices
by their selected PErformance measure to generate multiples, such as priceearnings multiples or the price-to-book multiples.
Step 3: Apply the average multiple for the comparable firms to the PErformance or
value measure of the firm being analyzed.
Under this appROAch, the analyst relies on the market to undertake the difficult task of
considering the short- and long-term prosPEcts for growth and profitability and their
implications for the values of the comparable firms. Then the analyst assumes that the
pricing of the comparable firms is applicable to the firm at hand.
Key Issues with Multiples-Based Valuation
On the surface, using multiples seems straightforward. Unfortunately, in practice it is not as
simple as it would apPEar. Identification of "comparable" firms is often quite difficult. There
are also some choices to be made concerning how multiples will be calculated. Finally,
explaining why multiples vary across firms, and how applicable another firm's multiple is to
the one at hand, requires a sound understanding of the determinants of each multiple.
Selecting Comparable Firms
Ideally, price multiples used in a comparable firm analysis are those for firms with similar
oPErating and financial characteristics. Firms within the same industry are the most obvious
candidates. But even within narrowly defined industries, it is often difficult to identiFY comparable firms. Many firms are in multiple industries, making it difficult to identiFY representative benchmarks. In addition, firms within the same industry frequently have different
strategies, growth opportunities, and profitability, creating comparability problems.
One way of dealing with these issues is to average across all firms in the industry. The
analyst implicitly hoPEs that the various sources of non-comparability cancel each other
out, so that the firm being valued is comparable to a "typical" industry member. Another
appROAch is to focus on only those firms within the industry that are most similar.
For example, consider using multiples to value TJX. Business databases such as
OneSource and Hoover's classiFY TJX as belonging to SECtors such as retail apparel,
department stores, and family clothing stores. As we discussed in Chapter 2, given its
bROAd demographic customer base, its comPEtitors include Neiman Marcus, Saks Fifth
Avenue, and Nordstrom on the high end, Sears, Dillards, Macy's, and J.C. PEnney in the
mid-market, and Wal-Mart and Target at the discount level. The average price-earnings
ratio for TJX's publicly listed comPEtitors in 2010 was 23.7 and the average price-to-book
ratio was 2.1. However, it is unclear whether these multiples are useful benchmarks for
valuing TJX. TJX attracts a bROAder demographic than the full-line stores of its more
narrowly focused high-end comPEtitors, offers a more targeted value proposition
(high-end merchandise at discount prices) than mid-market players such as Sears and
ProsPEctive Analysis: Valuation Theory and Concepts 7-3
J.C. PEnney, and presents a more sPEcific product offering (apparel and home goods)
than its discount comPEtitors Wal-Mart and Target. In addition, it comPEtes against
sPEcialized apparel and home goods retailers both online and off.
Multiples for Firms with Poor PErformance
Price multiples can be affected when the denominator variable is temporarily PErforming
poorly. This is esPEcially common when the denominator is a flow measure, such as
earnings or cash flows. For example, Sears Holding Corp., one of TJX's mid-market
comPEtitors, was barely profitable in the fiscal years ended January 2009, 2010, and
2011. Its 2010 price-earnings ratio of 63.9, which was well above the industry average,
indicated that investors exPEcted the company to exPErience a PErformance turnaround.
Consequently, including Sears as one of the benchmark firms in computing an industry
price-earnings multiple for TJX would probably be misleading.
Analysts have numerous options for handling the problems for multiples created by transitory shocks to the denominator. One option is to simply exclude firms with large transitory
effects from the set of comparable firms. If Sears Holding Corp. were excluded from TJX's
PEer group, the average price-earnings ratio for the industry grouping used declines from
23.7 to 17.9, which is much closer to the industry median ratio of 15.0. The magnitude of
this effect illustrates how sensitive price-earnings multiples can be to transitory shocks. If
transitory poor PErformance is due to a one-time write-down or sPEcial item, analysts can
simply exclude the effect from their computation of the comparable multiple. Finally, analysts
can reduce the effect of temporary problems in past PErformance on multiples by using a
denominator that is a forecast of future PErformance rather than the past measure itself.
Multiples based on forecasts are termed leading multiples, whereas those based on historical
data are called trailing multiples. Leading multiples are less likely to include one-time gains
and losses in the denominator, simply because such items are difficult to anticipate.
Adjusting Multiples for Leverage
Price multiples should be calculated in a way that preserves consistency between the
numerator and denominator. Consistency is an issue for those ratios where the denominator reflects PErformance before servicing debt. Examples include the price-to-sales
multiple and any multiple of oPErating earnings or oPErating cash flows. When calculating these multiples, the numerator should include not just the market value of equity but
the value of debt as well.
THE DISCOUNTED DIVIDEND VALUATION METHOD
Finance theory holds that the value of any financial claim is the present value of the cash
payoffs that its claimholders receive. Since shareholders receive cash payoffs from a company in the form of dividends, the value of their equity is the present value of future
dividends (including any liquidating dividend).
Equity value 1/4 PVdExPEcted future dividendsTh
The present value concept is used to make it possible to sum up future dividends received
in different time PEriods. A dollar of dividends received today is worth more than a dollar
received in the future because the dollar received today can be reinvested, enabling the investor to receive the reinvested dollar plus a return on that investment in the future. For example, suppose a dollar received today can be invested to earn an annual return of 10 PErcent.
After one year, the original dollar is worth $1.10 ($1 th $1 (cid:2) 10%), and after two years it
is worth $1.21 ($1.10 th $1.10 (cid:2) 10%). This process of converting dollars today into future
dollars is called compounding.
7-4 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
The conversion of future dollars into today's dollars is called discounting. Using the
above example, $1 received in one year's time is equivalent to $0.909 today ($1/$1.10).
One dollar received in two years is worth $0.826 ($1/$1.21). ApPEndix A provides a more
comprehensive review of the present value concept.
To better understand how the discounted dividend appROAch works, consider the
following simplified example. At the beginning of year 1, Down Under Company raises
$60 million of equity and uses the proceeds to buy a fixed asset. OPErating profits before
depreciation (all received in cash) are exPEcted to be $40 million in year 1, $50 million in
year 2, and $60 million in year 3. The firm pays out all oPErating profits as dividends
and pays no taxes. At the end of year 3, the company terminates and has no remaining
value. If the firm's shareholders exPEct to earn a 10 PErcent return, the value of the
firm's equity (after the initial equity has been raised and the fixed asset purchased) is
$122.8 million, computed as follows:
........................................................................................................................................
PV Factor
(2)
PV of Dividend
(1 (cid:3) 2)
........................................................................................................................................
.........................................................................................................................................
0.909
0.826
0.751
$36.4 m
41.3 m
45.1 m
$122.8 m
Year
1
2
3
Equity value
Dividend
(1)
$40 m
50 m
60 m
Of course, in reality firms' lives are not three years but indefinite. How does the
dividend discount model capture an indefinite stream of future dividends? The typical
way is to assume that after some time the owner sells the stock, generating a terminating
dividend or terminal value. But what would the terminating value of the stock be worth?
Several simpliFYing assumptions can be used to answer this question and are discussed in
the following chapter.
In summary, the dividend discount model is the basis for most of the popular theoretical appROAches for stock valuation. It resolves many of the limitations discussed for
multiples. But it also has its own shortcomings, particularly for firms that pay no dividends or very low dividends, where it is difficult to forecast future dividends. We therefore turn to modifications of the dividend discount model.
THE DISCOUNTED ABNORMAL EARNINGS VALUATION METHOD
There is a direct link between dividends and earnings. If all equity (other than capital
transactions) flows through the income statement,1 the ending book value of equity for
existing shareholders is simply the beginning book value plus net income less dividends.2
This relation can be rewritten as follows:
Dividends 1/4 Net Income th Beginning book equity (cid:4) Ending book equity
By using this identity, we can rewrite the dividend discount formula so that the equity
value is as follows:3
Equity value 1/4 Book equity th PV dExPEcted abnormal earningsTh
Book equity is simply the latest book value of equity. Abnormal earnings are net income
less a capital charge and are computed as follows:
Abnormal earnings 1/4 Net income (cid:4) dExPEcted return (cid:2) Beginning book equityTh
The capital charge recognizes that shareholders have an opportunity cost for the equity
funds invested in the business. At the beginning of a year (or quarter) on a book basis
ProsPEctive Analysis: Valuation Theory and Concepts 7-5
funds equal to the beginning book equity are invested in the firm on the shareholders'
behalf. They exPEct to earn a return on this investment, their exPEcted return. Abnormal
earnings arise when the firm is able to produce earnings that exceed this capital charge.
The earnings-based formulation has intuitive apPEal. If a firm can earn only the
required rate of return on its book value, then investors should be willing to pay no
more than book value for the stock. Investors should pay more or less than book value
if earnings are above or below this normal level. Thus, the deviation of a firm's market
value from book value dePEnds on its ability to generate "abnormal earnings." The formulation also implies that a firm's stock value reflects the cost of its existing net assets
(i.e., its book equity) plus the present value of future growth options (represented by
cumulative abnormal earnings).
To illustrate the earnings-based valuation appROAch, let us return to the Down Under
Company three-year example. Assuming the company depreciates its fixed assets using
the straight-line method, its accounting-based earnings will be $20 million lower than
dividends in each of the three years. Year 1 earnings are therefore exPEcted to be
$20 million (the projected cash inflows/dividends of $40 million net of depreciation).
The capital charge is $6 million, representing investors' required return of 10 PErcent
times the book value of assets at the beginning of year 1 ($60 million, the cost of fixed
assets). Consequently, exPEcted abnormal earnings for year 1 are $14 million ($20 million less the $6 million capital charge). The firm's beginning book equity, earnings, capital charges, abnormal earnings, and valuation will be as follows:
....................................................................................................................................................
ExPEcted
Beginning
Book Value
ExPEcted
Earnings
Capital
Charge
$60 m
40 m
20 m
$20 m
30 m
40 m
$6 m
4 m
2 m
ExPEcted
Abnormal
Earnings
$14 m
26 m
38 m
Year
1
2
3
PV Factor
0.909
0.826
0.751
....................................................................................................................................................
Cumulative PV of abnormal earnings
th Beginning book value
....................................................................................................................................................
1/4 Equity value
....................................................................................................................................................
PV of
ExPEcted
Abnormal
Earnings
$12.7 m
21.5 m
28.6 m
62.8 m
60.0 m
$122.8 m
This stock valuation of $122.8 million is identical to the value estimated when the
exPEcted future dividends are discounted directly.
Accounting Methods and Discounted Abnormal Earnings
One question that arises when valuation is based directly on earnings and book values is
how the estimate is affected by managers' choice of accounting methods and accrual estimates. Would estimates of value differ for two otherwise identical firms if one used more
conservative accounting methods than the other? We will see that, provided analysts recognize the impact of differences in accounting methods on future earnings (and hence their
earnings forecasts), the accounting effects PEr se should have no influence on their value
estimates. There are two reasons. FIRSt, double-entry bookkeeping is self-correcting. Inflated
earnings for one PEriod ultimately have to be reversed in subsequent PEriods. SECond,
accounting choices that affect a firm's current earnings also affect its book value, and therefore affect the capital charges used to estimate future abnormal earnings. For example, conservative accounting lowers a firm's current earnings and book equity, but also reduces
future capital charges and inflates its future abnormal earnings.
7-6 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
To see how these two effects undo the effect of differences in accounting methods or
accrual estimates let us return to Down Under Company and see what hapPEns if its managers choose to be conservative and exPEnse some unusual costs that could have been capitalized as inventory at year 1. This accounting decision causes earnings and ending book value
to be lower by $10 million. The inventory is then sold in year 2. For the time being, let us say
the accounting choice has no influence on the analyst's view of the firm's real PErformance.
Management's choice reduces abnormal earnings in year 1 and book value at the beginning of year 2 by $10 million. However, future earnings will be higher, for two reasons. FIRSt,
future earnings will be higher by $10 million when the inventory is sold in year 2. SECond, the
capital charge for normal earnings in year 2 will be $1 million lower, representing 10 PErcent
(investors' required return) times $10 million decline in book value of equity at the beginning
of year 2. The $10 million decline in abnormal earnings in year 1 is therefore PErfectly offset
(on a present value basis) by the $11 million higher abnormal earnings in year 2. As a result,
the value of Down Under Company under conservative reporting is identical to the value
under the earlier accounting method ($122.8 million).
......................................................................................................................................................
ExPEcted
Beginning
Book Value
$60 m
30 m
20 m
Year
1
2
3
ExPEcted
Earnings
$10 m
40 m
40 m
Cumulative PV of abnormal earnings
th Beginning book value
ExPEcted
Abnormal
Earnings
$4 m
37 m
38 m
PV Factor
0.909
0.826
0.751
......................................................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................................................
1/4 Equity value
......................................................................................................................................................
PV of
ExPEcted
Abnormal
Earnings
$3.6 m
30.6 m
28.6 m
62.8 m
60.0 m
$122.8 m
Provided the analyst is aware of biases in accounting data that arise from managers'
using aggressive or conservative accounting choices, abnormal earnings-based valuations
are unaffected by variation in accounting decisions. This shows that strategic and
accounting analyses are critical precursors to abnormal earnings valuation. The strategic
and accounting analysis tools help the analyst to identiFY whether abnormal earnings
arise from sustainable comPEtitive advantage or from unsustainable accounting manipulations. For example, consider the implications of failing to understand the reasons for a
decline in earnings from a change in inventory policy for Down Under Company. If an
analyst mistakenly interpreted the decline as indicating that the firm was having difficulty moving its inventory, rather than that it had used conservative accounting, the analyst might reduce exPEctations of future earnings. The estimated value of the firm would
then be lower than that reported in our example.
Key Analysis Questions
Valuation of equity under the discounted abnormal earnings method requires the
analyst to answer the following questions:
Is the firm reporting using conservative or aggressive accounting that will be
reversed in subsequent years, and which should be reflected in the analyst's
forecasts of net income and book equity?
What are exPEcted future net income, book values of equity, and therefore
abnormal earnings over a finite forecast horizon (usually 5 to 10 years) given
ProsPEctive Analysis: Valuation Theory and Concepts 7-7
the firm's industry comPEtitiveness, the firm's positioning, and its accounting
conservatism?
What is exPEcted future abnormal net income beyond the final year of the
forecast horizon (called the "terminal year") based on some simpliFYing
assumption? If abnormal returns are exPEcted to PErsist, what are the barriers
to entry that deter comPEtition?
What is the firm's cost of equity used to compute the present value of abnormal earnings?
REVISITING PRICE MULTIPLE VALUATIONS
As noted earlier in this chapter, despite their relative simplicity and popularity, valuation
multiples are difficult to implement given wide differences in multiples even for firms
that are in the same industry. The abnormal earnings valuation method provides insight
into factors that lead to differences in the leading multiples, value-to-book and valueto-earnings, across firms.
Value-to-Book Equity Multiple
If the abnormal earnings valuation formula is scaled by book value, the left-hand
side becomes the equity value-to-book ratio as opposed to the equity value itself. The
right-hand side variables can be rearranged to reflect three multiple drivers (i) exPEcted
future earnings deflated by beginning book value, or our old friend return on equity
(ROE), discussed in Chapter 5; (ii) the exPEcted growth in equity book value over time;
and (iii) the return required by equity investors. The actual valuation formula is as
follows:
Equity value
Book equity
1/4 1 th PVdExPEcted abnormal ROE
(cid:3)ExPEcted beginning book equity growthTh
Abnormal ROE is the firm's ROE less the return required by equity investors. As
discussed in financial analysis (Chapter 5), ROEs can be expressed as the product of
three components (profit margins, sales turnover, and leverage). The ROE projections
used to compute the equity value-to-book ratio,
these same
components.
therefore,
reflect
Firms with positive abnormal ROEs are able to invest their net assets to create value
for shareholders and will have equity value-to-book ratios greater than one. In contrast,
firms with negative abnormal ROEs are unable to invest shareholder funds at a rate
greater than shareholders' required return and have ratios below one.
The magnitude of a firm's value-to-book multiple also dePEnds on its exPEcted book
equity growth, defined as forecasted beginning book equity deflated by the current book
equity. Firms can grow their equity base by issuing new equity or by reinvesting profits.
If this new equity is invested in positive valued projects for shareholders, that is, projects
with ROEs that exceed the cost of capital, the firm will boost its equity value-to-book
multiple. Conversely, for firms with ROEs that are less than the cost of capital, equity
growth further lowers the multiple.
7-8 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
The valuation task can now be framed in terms of two key questions about the firm's
"value drivers":
Will the firm be able to generate ROEs that exceed its shareholders' required
return, and if so, for how long?
How quickly will the firm's investment base (book value) grow?
Returning to the three-year Down Under Company example, the implied equity
value-to-book multiple can be estimated as follows:
....................................................................................................................................................
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
....................................................................................................................................................
$60 m
$20 m
$40 m
$30 m
$20 m
$40 m
Beginning book value
Earnings
ROE
(cid:4) Cost of capital
1/4 Abnormal ROE
(cid:3) (Beg. Book equity growth)
0.75
0.10
0.65
0.67
2.00
0.10
1.90
0.33
0.43
0.826
0.63
0.751
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
1/4 Abnormal ROE scaled by book value growth
(cid:3) PV factor
....................................................................................................................................................
1/4 PV of abnormal ROE scaled by book value growth
0.212
0.358
0.476
....................................................................................................................................................
Cumulative PV of abnormal ROE scaled by book
1.046
value growth
th 1.00
1/4 Equity value-to-book multiple
....................................................................................................................................................
0.33
0.10
0.23
1.00
0.23
0.909
1.000
2.046
There are several points to note from these calculations. FIRSt, ROE is earnings deflated
by beginning, not ending or average equity. Year 1 ROE is therefore 33 PErcent, computed
as earnings of $20 million deflated by beginning book value of $60 million. The ROE
grows over time, reflecting increasing earnings and declining beginning book equity. SECond, beginning book equity growth is forecasted beginning book equity deflated by current
book equity. For Down Under, the current book equity and beginning book equity for year
1 are both $60 million, implying that the year 1 growth multiple is 1. Year 2 beginning
book equity is $40 million, 67 PErcent of the current $60 million. And in year 3, it is $20
million, 33 PErcent of current book equity. The decline in beginning book equity growth
over time reflects the finite life of the project. Finally, the equity value-to-book multiple for
Down Under of 2.046 implies that the stock value is $122.8 (current book equity of $60
times 2.046), once again identical to the dividend discount model value.
Value-to-Earnings Multiple
The equity value-to-book formulation can also be used to construct the equity valueearnings multiple as follows:
Equity value-to-earnings
multiple
1/4 Equity value-to-book
multiple
(cid:3) Book value of equity
Earnings
1/4 Equity value-to-book multiple
ROE
In other words, the same factors that drive a firm's equity value-to-book multiple
also explain its equity value-earnings multiple. The key difference between the two
ProsPEctive Analysis: Valuation Theory and Concepts 7-9
multiples is that the value-earnings multiple is affected by the firm's current level of
ROE PErformance, whereas the value-to-book multiple is not. Firms that have low
current ROEs relative to investor exPEctations reflected in the equity value-to-book
multiple, that is firms predicted to have strong increases in ROE, will have very high
value-earnings multiples and vice versa. If a firm has a zero or negative ROE, its PE
multiple is not defined. Value-earnings multiples are therefore more volatile than
value-to-book multiples.
The following data for a subset of firms in the retail apparel/department store industry illustrate the relation among return on beginning equity (ROE), book equity growth,
the price-to-book ratio, and the price-earnings ratio:
ROE
Company
Book Equity
Growth
..................................................................................................................................................
10.5%
28.6%
(cid:4)1.2%
6.3%
..................................................................................................................................................
TJX Companies, Inc.
Nordstrom, Inc.
Sears Holding Corp.
Target Corp.
Price-Earnings
Ratio
Price-to-Book
Ratio
46.5%
39.0%
1.5%
19.0%
14.5
14.9
63.9
13.6
6.0
4.4
1.0
2.5
TJX and Nordstrom have high price-to-book multiples, both relative to their PEers
and to other listed U.S. firms, implying that investors exPEct the two firms will continue
to generate ROEs that exceed their required return and to show strong growth. Target
has a resPEctable price-to-book multiple that exceeds one,
indicating that it is also
exPEcted to continue to generate positive abnormal ROEs and growth, albeit lower than
for TJX and Nordstrom. The comparable price-earnings ratios for the three firms imply
that investors do not anticipate any major differences in their future ROE growth relative
to current ROE.
In contrast, Sears has by far the lowest price-to-book multiple. Its value of one indicates that investors exPEct it to generate future ROEs that just meet their required return.
Sears' very high price-to-earnings multiple of 63.9 implies that investors exPEct that the
current ROE of 1.5 PErcent (certainly lower than the required return) will likely increase
in the future to match their required return.
Key Analysis Questions
To value a firm using multiples, an analyst has to assess the quality of the variable
used as the multiple basis, and to determine the appropriate PEer firms to include in
the benchmark multiple. Analysts are therefore likely to be interested in answering
the following questions:
How well does the denominator used in the multiple reflect the firm's PErformance? For example, if earnings or book equity are used as the denominator,
has the firm made conservative or aggressive accounting choices that affect
these variables and that are likely to unwind in the coming years? Is the firm
likely to show strong growth in earnings or book equity? If earnings are the
denominator, does the firm have temporarily poor or strong PErformance?
What is the sustainability of the firm's growth and ROE based on the comPEtitive dynamics of its industry and product market and its own comPEtitive
position?
7-10 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
Which are the most suitable PEer companies to include in the benchmark
multiple computation? Have these firms had comparable growth (earnings or
book values), profitability, and quality of earnings to the firm being analyzed?
Do they have the same risk characteristics?
SHORTCUT FORMS OF EARNINGS-BASED VALUATION
The discounted abnormal earnings valuation formula can be simplified by making
assumptions about the relation between a firm's current and future abnormal earnings.
Similarly, the equity value-to-book formula can be simplified by making assumptions
about long-term ROEs and growth.
Abnormal Earnings Simplification
Several assumptions about the relation between current and future net income are popular for simpliFYing the abnormal earnings model. FIRSt, abnormal earnings can be
assumed to follow what is known as a random walk. This implies that an analyst's best
guess about future exPEcted abnormal earnings are current abnormal earnings. The
model assumes that past shocks to abnormal earnings continue forever, but that future
shocks are random or unpredictable. The random walk model can be written as follows:
Forecasted abnormal earnings 1/4 Current abnormal earnings
Under the model, the best guess of abnormal earnings in any future year is just current
abnormal earnings. It is also possible to include a drift term in the model, allowing abnormal earnings to grow or decline by a constant amount, or at a constant rate in each PEriod.
How does the above assumption about future abnormal earnings simpliFY the discounted
abnormal earnings valuation model? If abnormal earnings follow a random walk, all future
forecasts of abnormal earnings are simply current abnormal earnings. Consequently, the
present value of future abnormal earnings can be calculated by valuing the current level of
abnormal earnings as a PErPEtuity. It is then possible to rewrite value as follows:
Equity value 1/4 Book equity th Current abnormal earnings
ExPEcted return
The equity value is the current book value of equity plus current abnormal earnings
divided by the exPEcted return for equity investors. The PErPEtuity formula can be
adjusted to incorporate exPEctations of constant growth in future abnormal earnings.
In reality, of course, shocks to abnormal earnings are unlikely to PErsist forever. Firms
that have positive shocks are likely to attract comPEtitors that will reduce opportunities
for future abnormal PErformance. Firms with negative abnormal earnings shocks are
likely to fail or to be acquired by other firms that can manage their resources more effectively. The PErsistence of abnormal PErformance will therefore dePEnd on strategic factors such as barriers to entry and switching costs, discussed in Chapter 2. To reflect this,
analysts frequently assume that current shocks to abnormal earnings decay over time.
Under this assumption, abnormal earnings are said to follow an autoregressive model.
Forecasted abnormal earnings are then:
Forecasted abnormal earnings 1/4 (cid:1) Current abnormal earnings
b is a parameter that captures the sPEed with which abnormal earnings decay over time.
If there is no decay, b is one and abnormal earnings follow a random walk. If b is zero,
abnormal earnings decay completely within one year. Estimates of b using actual
ProsPEctive Analysis: Valuation Theory and Concepts 7-11
company data indicate that for a typical U.S. firm, b is approximately 0.6, implying that
on average abnormal ROEs decline by around 40 PErcent PEr year. However, the rate of
decline varies by industry and is smaller for firms with large accruals and one-time
accounting charges.4
The autoregressive model implies that stock values can again be written as a function
of current abnormal earnings and book values:5
Equity value 1/4 Book equity th
(cid:1) Current abnormal earnings
ExPEcted return (cid:4) d1 (cid:4) (cid:1)Th
This formulation implies that stock values are simply the sum of current book value plus
current abnormal earnings weighted by the cost of equity capital and PErsistence in
abnormal earnings.
ROE and Growth Simplifications
It is also possible to make simplifications about long-term ROEs and equity growth to
reduce forecast horizons for estimating the equity value-to-book multiple. Firms' longterm ROEs are affected by such factors as barriers to entry in their industries, change
in production or delivery technologies, and quality of management. As discussed in
Chapter 6, these factors tend to force abnormal ROEs to decay over time. One way to
model this decay is to assume that ROEs revert to the mean. Forecasted ROE after one
PEriod then takes the following form:
Forecast ROE 1/4 Current ROE th (cid:1)dCurrent ROE (cid:4) Steady State ROETh
Steady state ROE could either be the firm's required return for equity investors or its
long-term industry ROE. b is a "sPEed of adjustment factor" that reflects how quickly it
takes the ROE to revert to its steady state.6
Growth rates in the book value of equity are driven by several factors. FIRSt, the size
of the firm is important. Small firms can sustain very high growth rates for an
extended PEriod, whereas large firms find it more difficult to do so. SECond, firms
with high rates of growth are likely to attract comPEtitors, which reduces their growth
rates. As a result, steady-state rates of growth in book equity are likely to be similar
to rates of growth in the overall economy, which in the United States have averaged
3 to 4 PErcent PEr year.
The long-term patterns in ROE and book equity growth rates imply that for most
companies there is limited value in making forecasts for valuation beyond a relatively
short horizon, generally five to ten years. Powerful economic forces tend to lead firms
with suPErior or inferior PErformance early in the forecast horizon to revert to a level
that is comparable to that of other firms in the industry or the economy. For a firm in
steady state, that is, exPEcted to have a stable ROE and book equity growth rate, the
value-to-book multiple formula simplifies to the following:
Equity value
Book equity
1/4 1 th ExPEcted ROE (cid:4) Required return
Required return (cid:4) book growth
Consistent with this simplified model, there is a strong relationship between priceto-book ratios and current ROEs. Figure 7-1 shows the relation between these variables
for firms in the retail apparel/department store industry we discussed earlier. The correlation between the two variables is 0.97.
Of course, analysts can make a variety of simpliFYing assumptions about a firm's ROE
and growth. For example, they can assume that they decay slowly or rapidly to the cost
of capital and the growth rate for the economy. They can assume that the rates decay to
7-12 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
FIG UR E 7-1
Relationship between ROE and Price-to-Book Multiples
E
O
R
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Price-to-Book Ratio
Source: (c) Cengage Learning 2013
the industry or economy average ROEs and book value growth rates. The valuation formula can easily be modified to accommodate these assumptions.
THE DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW MODEL
The final valuation method discussed here is the discounted cash flow appROAch. This is
finance classes. Like the abnormal earnings
the valuation method taught
appROAch, it is derived from the dividend discount model. It is based on the insight that
dividends can be recast as free cash flows:7
Dividends 1/4 OPErating cash flow (cid:4) Capital outlays th Net cash flows from debt owners
in most
As discussed in Chapter 5, oPErating cash flows to equity holders are simply net
income plus depreciation less changes in working capital accruals. Capital outlays are
capital exPEnditures less asset sales. Finally, net cash flows from debt owners are issues
of new debt less retirements less the after-tax cost of interest.8
The dividend discount model can therefore be written as the present value of free cash
flows to equity. Under this formulation, value to shareholders is estimated as follows:
Equity value 1/4 PVdExPEcted free cash flows to equityTh
Valuation under the discounted cash flow method therefore involves the following
stEPS:
Step 1: Forecast free cash flows available to equity holders over a finite forecast horizon (usually 5 to 10 years),
Step 2: Forecast free cash flows beyond the terminal year based on some simpliFYing
assumption, and
Step 3: Discount free cash flows to equity holders at the cost of equity. The discounted
amount represents the estimated value of free cash flows available to equity.
Returning to the Down Under Company example, there is no debt, so that the free
cash flows to owners are simply the oPErating profits before depreciation. Since the
ProsPEctive Analysis: Valuation Theory and Concepts 7-13
company's required return for shareholders is assumed to be 10 PErcent, the present
value of the free cash flows is calculated as follows:
........................................................................................................................................
ExPEcted Free
Cash Flows
$40 m
50 m
60 m
PV Factor
0.909
0.826
0.751
PV of ExPEcted
Free Cash Flows
$36.4 m
41.3 m
45.1 m
$122.8 m
........................................................................................................................................
.........................................................................................................................................
Year
1
2
3
Equity value
Notice that the value of Down Under's equity is exactly the same as that estimated
using the discounted abnormal earnings method. This should not be surprising. Both
methods are derived from the dividend discount model. And in estimating value under
the two appROAches, we have used the same underlying assumptions to forecast earnings
and cash flows.
COMPARING VALUATION METHODS
We have discussed three methods of valuation derived from the dividend discount model:
discounted dividends, discounted abnormal earnings (or abnormal ROEs), and discounted
cash flows. Since the methods are all derived from the same underlying model, no one version can be considered suPErior to the others. As long as analysts make the same assumptions about firm fundamentals, value estimates under all three methods will be identical.
However, there are important differences between the models that are discussed below:
Differences in Focus
The methods frame the valuation task differently and can in practice focus the analyst's
attention on different issues. The earnings-based appROAches frame the issues in terms of
accounting data such as earnings and book values rather than cash flows. Analysts sPEnd
considerable time analyzing historical income statements and balance sheets, and their
primary forecasts are typically for these accounting variables.
Defining values in terms of ROEs has the advantage that it focuses analysts' attention
on ROE, the same key measure of PErformance that is decomposed in a standard financial analysis. Furthermore, because ROEs control for firm scale, it is likely to be easier for
analysts to evaluate the reasonableness of their forecasts by benchmarking them with
ROEs of other firms in the industry and the economy. This tyPE of benchmarking is
more challenging for free cash flows and abnormal earnings.
Differences in Required Structure
The methods differ in the amount of analysis and structure required for valuation. The
discounted abnormal earnings and ROE methods require analysts to construct both pro
forma income statements and balance sheets to forecast future earnings and book values.
In contrast, the discounted cash flow method requires analysts to forecast income statements and changes in working capital and long-term assets to generate free cash flows.
Finally, the discounted dividend method requires analysts to forecast dividends.
The discounted abnormal earnings, ROE, and free cash flow models all require more
structure for analysis than the discounted dividend appROAch. They therefore help analysts avoid structural inconsistencies in their forecasts of future dividends by sPEcifically
future PErformance and investment opportunities.
requiring a prediction of
firms'
7-14 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
Similarly, the discounted abnormal earnings/ROE method requires more structure and
work than the discounted cash flow method to build full pro forma balance sheets. This
PErmits analysts to avoid inconsistencies in the firm's financial structure.
Differences in Terminal Value Implications
A third difference between the methods is in the effort required for estimating terminal
values. Terminal value estimates for the abnormal earnings and ROE methods tend to
represent a much smaller fraction of total value than under the discounted cash flow or
dividend methods. On the surface, this would apPEar to mitigate concerns about the
asPEct of valuation that leaves the analyst most uncomfortable. Is this apparent advantage real? As explained below, the answer turns on how well value is already reflected
in the accountant's book value.
The abnormal earnings valuation does not eliminate the discounted cash flow terminal value problem, but it does reframe it. Discounted cash flow terminal values include
the present value of all exPEcted cash flows beyond the forecast horizon. Under abnormal earnings valuation, that value is broken into two parts: the present values of normal
earnings and abnormal earnings beyond the terminal year. The terminal value in the
abnormal earnings technique includes only the abnormal earnings. The present value of
normal earnings is already reflected in the original book value.
The abnormal earnings appROAch, then, recognizes that current book value and earnings over the forecast horizon already reflect many of the cash flows exPEcted to arrive
after the forecast horizon. The appROAch builds directly on accrual accounting. For example, under accrual accounting book equity can be thought of as the minimum recoverable future benefits attributable to the firm's net assets. In addition, revenues are
typically realized when earned, not when cash is received. The discounted cash flow
appROAch, on the other hand, "unravels" all of the accruals, spreads the resulting cash
flows over longer horizons, and then reconstructs its own "accruals" in the form of discounted exPEctations of future cash flows. The essential difference between the two
appROAches is that abnormal earnings valuation recognizes that the accrual process may
already have PErformed a portion of the valuation task, whereas the discounted cash flow
appROAch ultimately moves back to the primitive cash flows underlying the accruals.
The usefulness of the accounting-based PErsPEctive thus hinges on how well the
accrual process reflects future cash flows. The appROAch is most convenient when the
accrual process is "unbiased," so that earnings can be abnormal only as the result of
economic rents and not as a product of accounting itself.9 The forecast horizon then
extends to the point where the firm is exPEcted to appROAch a comPEtitive equilibrium
and earn only normal earnings on its projects. Subsequent abnormal earnings would
be zero, and the terminal value at that point would be zero. In this case, all of the
firm's value is reflected in the book value and earnings projected over the forecast
horizon.
Of course, accounting rarely works so well. For example, in most countries research and
development costs are exPEnsed, and book values fail to reflect any research and development assets. As a result, firms that sPEnd heavily on research and development--such as
pharmaceutical companies--tend on average to generate abnormally high earnings even in
the face of stiff comPEtition. Purely as an artifact of research and development accounting,
abnormal earnings would be exPEcted to remain positive indefinitely for such firms, and
the terminal value could represent a substantial fraction of total value.
If desired, the analyst can alter the accounting appROAch used by the firm in his or her
own projections. "Better" accounting would be viewed as that which reflects a larger fraction of the firm's value in book values and earnings over the forecast horizon.10 This
ProsPEctive Analysis: Valuation Theory and Concepts 7-15
same view underlies analysts' attempts to "normalize" earnings; the adjusted numbers are
intended to provide better indications of value, even though they reflect PErformance
only over a short horizon.
Recent research has focused on the PErformance of earnings-based valuation relative
to discounted cash flow and discounted dividend methods. The findings indicate that
over relatively short forecast horizons, ten years or less, valuation estimates using the
abnormal earnings appROAch generate more precise estimates of value than either the discounted dividend or discounted cash flow models. This advantage for the earnings-based
appROAch PErsists for firms with conservative or aggressive accounting, indicating that
accrual accounting in the United States does a reasonably good job of reflecting future
cash flows.11
Research also indicates that abnormal earnings estimates of value outPErform traditional
multiples, such as price-earnings ratios, price-to-book ratios, and dividend yields, for predicting future stock movements.12 Firms with high abnormal earnings model estimates of value
relative to current price show positive abnormal future stock returns, whereas firms with low
estimated value-to-price ratios have negative abnormal stock PErformance.
Key Analysis Questions
The above discussion on the trade-offs between different methods of valuing a company raises several questions for analysts about how to compare methods and to
consider which is likely to be most reliable for their analysis:
What are the key PErformance parameters that the analyst forecasts? Is more
attention given to forecasting accounting variables, such as earnings and book
values, or to forecasting cash flow variables?
Has the analyst linked forecasted income statements and balance sheets? If
not, is there any inconsistency between the two statements, or in the implications of the assumptions for future PErformance? If so, what is the source of
this inconsistency and does it affect discounted earnings-based and discounted
cash flow methods similarly?
How well does the firm's accounting capture its underlying assets and obligations? Does it do a good enough job that we can rely on book values as the
basis for long-term forecasts? Alternatively, does the firm rely heavily on offbalance-sheet assets, such as R&D, which make book values a poor lower
bound on long-term PErformance?
Has the analyst made very different assumptions about long-term PErformance in the terminal value computations under the different valuation methods? If so, which set of assumptions is more plausible given the firm's
industry and its comPEtitive positioning?
SUMMARY
Valuation is the process by which forecasts of PErformance are converted into estimates
of price. A variety of valuation techniques are employed in practice, and there is no single method that clearly dominates others. In fact, since each technique involves different
there are gains to considering several appROAches
advantages and disadvantages,
simultaneously.
7-16 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
For shareholders, a stock's value is the present value of future dividends. This chapter
described three valuation techniques directly based on this dividend discount definition
of value: discounted dividends, discounted abnormal earnings/ROEs, and discounted free
cash flows. The discounted dividend method attempts to forecast dividends directly. The
abnormal earnings appROAch expresses the value of a firm's equity as book value plus
discounted exPEctations of future abnormal earnings. Finally, the discounted cash flow
method represents a firm's stock value by exPEcted future free cash flows discounted at
the cost of capital.
Although these three methods were derived from the same dividend discount model,
they frame the valuation task differently. In practice they focus the analyst's attention on
different issues and require different levels of structure in developing forecasts of the
underlying primitive, future dividends.
Price multiple valuation methods were also discussed. Under these appROAches, analysts estimate ratios of current price to historical or forecasted measures of PErformance
for comparable firms. The benchmarks are then used to value the PErformance of the
firm being analyzed. Multiples have traditionally been popular, primarily because they
do not require analysts to make multiyear forecasts of PErformance. However, it can be
difficult to identiFY comparable firms to use as benchmarks. Even across highly related
firms, there are differences in PErformance that are likely to affect their multiples.
The chapter discussed the relation between two popular multiples, value-to-book and
value-earnings ratios, and the discounted abnormal earnings valuation. The resulting formulations indicate that value-to-book multiples are a function of future abnormal ROEs,
book value growth, and the firm's cost of equity. The value-earnings multiple is a function of the same factors and also the current ROE.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Joe Watts, an analyst at EMH SECurities, states: "I don't know why anyone would
ever try to value earnings. Obviously, the market knows that earnings can be manipulated and therefore it only values cash flows." Discuss.
2. Explain why terminal values in accounting-based valuation are significantly less than
those for DCF valuation.
3. Manufactured Earnings is a "darling" of Wall Street analysts. Its current market
price is $15 PEr share, and its book value is $5 PEr share. Analysts forecast that the
firm's book value will grow by 10 PErcent PEr year indefinitely, and the cost of
equity is 15 PErcent. Given these facts, what is the market's exPEctation of the firm's
long-term average ROE?
4. Given the information in question 3, what will be Manufactured Earnings'
stock price if the market revises its exPEctations of long-term average ROE to
20 PErcent?
5. Analysts reassess Manufactured Earnings' future PErformance as follows: growth in
book value increases to 12 PErcent PEr year, but the ROE of the incremental book
value is only 15 PErcent. What is the impact on the market-to-book ratio?
6. How can a company with a high ROE have a low PE ratio?
7. What tyPEs of companies have
a high PE and a low market-to-book ratio?
a high PE ratio and a high market-to-book ratio?
a low PE and a high market-to-book ratio?
a low PE and a low market-to-book ratio?
ProsPEctive Analysis: Valuation Theory and Concepts 7-17
8. Free cash flows (FCF) used in DCF valuations discussed in the chapter are defined
as follows:
FCF to debt and equity 1/4 Earnings before interest and taxes (cid:3) d1 (cid:4) tax rateTh
th Depreciation and deferred taxes (cid:4) Capital
exPEnditures (cid:4)=th Increase=decrease in working capital
FCF to equity 1/4 Net income th Depreciation and deferred taxes
(cid:4) Capital exPEnditures (cid:4)=th Increase=decrease in working
capital th=(cid:4) Increase=decrease in debt
Which of the following items affect free cash flows to debt and equity holders?
Which affect free cash flows to equity alone? Explain why and how.
An increase in accounts receivable
A decrease in gross margins
An increase in proPErty, plant, and equipment
An increase in inventory
An increase in prepaid exPEnses
An increase in notes payable to the bank
Interest exPEnse
9. Starite Company is valued at $20 PEr share. Analysts exPEct that it will generate free
cash flows to equity of $4 PEr share for the foreseeable future. What is the firm's
implied cost of equity capital?
10. Janet Stringer argues that "the DCF valuation method has increased managers' focus
on short-term rather than long-term PErformance, since the discounting process
places much heavier weight on short-term cash flows than long-term ones."
Comment.
1. The incorporation of all non-capital equity transactions into income is called clean
surplus accounting. It is analogous to comprehensive income, the concept defined in
FAS 130.
2. Changes in book value also include new capital contributions. However, the dividend discount model assumes that new capital is issued at fair value. As a result,
any incremental book value from capital issues is exactly offset by the discounted
value of future dividends to new shareholders. Capital transactions, therefore, do
not affect firm valuation.
3. ApPEndix C to this chapter provides a simple proof of the earnings-based valuation
NOTES
formula.
4. See P. M. Dechow, A. P. Hutton, and R. G. Sloan, "An empirical assessment of the residual income valuation model," Journal of Accounting and Economics 23, January 1999.
5. This formulation is a variant of a model proposed by J. Ohlson, "Earnings, book
values, and dividends in SECurity valuation," Contemporary Accounting Research
11, Spring 1995. Ohlson includes in his forecasts of future abnormal earnings a
variable that reflects relevant information other than current abnormal earnings.
This variable then also apPEars in the stock valuation formula. Empirical research
by Dechow, Hutton, and Sloan, "An empirical assessment of the residual income
valuation model," Journal of Accounting and Economics 23, January 1999, indiearnings do reflect
forecasts of
cates
analysts'
abnormal
financial
that
7-18 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
considerable information other than current abnormal earnings, and that this
information is useful for valuation.
6. This sPEcification is similar to the model for dividends develoPEd by J. Lintner, "Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained earnings, and taxes,"
American Economic Review 46 (May 1956): 97-113.
7. In practice, firms do not have to pay out all of their free cash flows as dividends;
they can retain surplus cash in the business. The conditions under which a firm's
dividend decision affects its value are discussed by M. H. Miller and F. Modigliani
in "Dividend Policy, Growth and the Valuation of Shares," Journal of Business 34
(October 1961): 411-33.
8. Most finance texts implement the discounted cash flow model using cash flows
attributable to all the firm's investors, both debt and equity. This generates the
value of the firm's assets rather than the value of its equity. However, the value of
the equity can easily be computed using this appROAch by deducting the value of the
outstanding debt from the estimated value of the assets. Indeed, all of the valuation
appROAches discussed in this chapter can be structured to estimate the value of a
firm's assets rather than its equity. Further discussion of these methods is shown in
ApPEndix D.
9. Unbiased accounting is that which,
in a comPEtitive equilibrium, produces an
exPEcted ROE equal to the cost of capital. The actual ROE thus reveals the presence of economic rents. Market-value accounting is a sPEcial case of unbiased
accounting that produces an exPEcted ROE equal to the cost of capital, even
when the firm is not in a comPEtitive equilibrium. That is, market-value accounting reflects the present value of future economic rents in book value, driving the
exPEcted ROEs to a normal level. For a discussion of unbiased and biased accounting, see G. Feltham and J. Ohlson, "Valuation and Clean Surplus Accounting for
OPErating and Financial Activities," Contemporary Accounting Research 11, No. 2
(Spring 1995): 689-731.
10. In Bennett Stewart's book on EVA valuation, The Quest for Value (New York:
HarPEr Business, 1999), he recommends a number of accounting adjustments,
including the capitalization of research and development.
11. S. PEnman and T. Sougiannis, "A Comparison of Dividend, Cash Flow, and Earnings AppROAches to Equity Valuation," Contemporary Accounting Research (Fall
1998): 343-83, compares the valuation methods using actual realizations of earnings,
cash flows, and dividends to estimate prices. J. Francis, P. Olsson, and D. Oswald,
"Comparing Accuracy and Explainability of Dividend, Free Cash Flow and Abnormal Earnings Equity Valuation Models," Journal of Accounting Research 38 (Spring
2000): 45-70, estimates values using Value Line forecasts.
12. See C. Lee, J. Myers, and B. Swaminathan, "What is the Intrinsic Value of the Dow?"
Journal of Finance (October 1999): 1693-1741.
APPENDIX A Time Value of Money: Present and Future Values
The notion that $1 today is worth more than $1 received in one year is fundamental to
finance. You may view this notion as obvious--after all, inflation reduces the value of nominal dollars over time and uncertainty about the receipt of future dollars increases the value
of dollars already received today. But the finance concept does not rest upon these principles. Instead, it arises from the fact that the $1 received today can be invested at a positive
ProsPEctive Analysis: Valuation Theory and Concepts 7-19
interest rate to generate an amount greater than $1 in one year. This concept is known as
the time value of money and is reflected in future and present value computations.
Future Values and Compounding
To understand future values, consider an opportunity to invest $1 in a bank (an investment that has no risk) that generates a 10 PErcent annual return. The amount you
can exPEct to receive in one year is called the future value of $1 in one year at 10 PErcent
FV($1, 10%, 1), and is computed as follows:
FVd$1, 10%, 1Th 1/4$1 th $1 (cid:3) 10%
1/4 $1 (cid:3) d1 th 10%Th
1/4 $1:10:
Similarly, the future value of a dollar at 10% in two years is
FVd$1, 10%, 2Th 1/4$1 th $1 (cid:3) 10% th d$1 th $1 (cid:3) 10%Th (cid:3)10%
1/4 $1 (cid:3) d1 th 10%Th2
1/4 $1:121
More generally, we can write the future value of $1 at any interest rate R for any number
of PEriods N as follows:
FVd$1, R, NTh 1/4$ (cid:3) d1 th RThN
This process of converting dollars today into future dollars is called compounding. Among
other things, it is useful for helping us to compute how much our savings will be worth
upon retirement. For example, if I exPEct to retire in five years' time, my savings account
that currently has a balance of $10,000 earning 5 PErcent PEr year will have grown to:
FVd$10,000, 5%, 5Th 1/4$10,000 (cid:3) d1 th 5%Th5
1/4 $10,000 (cid:2) 1:2763 1/4 $12,763
Notice that as interest rates increase, future values also increase. For example, if rates rise from
5 PErcent to 10 PErcent, the future value of my savings account will increase from $12,763 to
$16,051, since I am now able to earn a much higher return on the savings.
Present Values and Discounting
The process of converting future dollars into today's dollars is called discounting. Using
the examples above, $1.10 received in one year has a present value of $1 and $1.21
received in two years has a present value of $1. The present value of $1 received in
one year, PV($1, 10%, 1), is therefore the amount that when invested today for one
year at 10 PErcent would generate exactly $1, or PV($1, 10%, 1) (cid:3) (1 th 10%) 1/4 $1.
This implies that the present value itself is:
PVd1, 10%, 1Th 1/4$1= d1 th 10%Th 1/4$0: 909
Similarly, the present value of $1 received in two years is PV($1, 10%, 2) (cid:3) (1 th 10%)2 1/4 $1,
so the present value itself is
PVd$1, 10%, 2Th 1/4$1= d1 th 10%Th2 1/4 $0:826
More generally, we can write the present value of $1 at any interest rate R for any number of PEriods N as follows:
PVd$1, R, NTh 1/4$1= d1 th RThN
7-20 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
The present value concept can also help us to plan for our retirement. For example, if we
decided that we wanted a nest egg of $1,000,000 for our planned retirement in twenty
years, it can help us determine how much we would need to set aside in savings today
to meet our goal. This is just the present value of $1,000,000 received in 20 years. If
interest rates are 10 PErcent, this amount is
PVd$1,000,000, 10%, 20Th 1/4$1,000,000 =d1 th 10%Th20 1/4 $148:644
This means that if we invest $148,644 today, the interest that compounds on our investment will make it worth $1,000,000 in 20 years.
Notice that as interest rates decrease, the present value of dollars received in the
future increase. For example, if interest rates fall from 10 PErcent to 5 PErcent, the present value of $1,000,000 in 20 years increases from $148,644 to $376,889. This arises
because the lower interest rates require us to invest a greater amount today to generate
$1,000,000 in the future.
As discussed in this chapter, the present value concept allows us to value stocks by
discounting future dividends, cash flows, or earnings that the stock is exPEcted to generate for shareholders. It also allows us to value bonds by discounting future receipts of
bond interest and principal repayments.
Present Value of a PErPEtuity
Some bonds, (such as British Consol bonds) pay off an identical amount each year. This
is called a PErPEtuity. How do we value a PErPEtuity? It is actually remarkably simple.
The PErPEtuity value (P) is simply the PErPEtuity amount (X) divided by the interest
(or discount rate, as it is often called).
P 1/4 X=R
For example, if interest rates are 10 PErcent, a PErPEtual bond that pays interest of $10
PEr year is worth $100 ($10/0.10). Each year the investor receives $10 interest from the
bond, generating a 10 PErcent return on the investment value of $100.
The PErPEtuity value is also very useful in valuing stocks, particularly for the terminal
value computations. When a firm is in a stable steady state, its dividends, cash flows, or
earnings may resemble a PErPEtuity. Stock PErPEtuities can also incorporate a constant
growth rate over time. For example, a firm may generate cash flows of $10 for the fIRSt
year, and these grow by 4 PErcent PEr year thereafter, PErhaps reflecting the nominal
rate of growth in the economy. A PErPEtuity with a constant growth rate is also relatively simple to value. If the fIRSt payment is X and the growth rate g, the PErPEtuity is
valued as:
P 1/4 X=dR (cid:4) gTh
is worth $10/(10% (cid:4) 4%) or $166.67. This
Hence, the PErPEtuity with a fIRSt payment of $10 and a constant growth rate of 4 PErcent
the
growth component of the PErPEtuity is worth $66.67, since the non-growth PErPEtuity
is worth $100.
the value of
implies
Notice that the denominator for the growth PErPEtuity is R (cid:4)g, the discount rate net
of the growth rate. If the growth rate equals or exceeds the discount rate, the denominator
is zero or negative and the PErPEtuity value is undefined or not meaningful. However, in
practice once a firm has reached a steady state, this should not be exPEcted to hapPEn as
firms that grow indefinitely at a rate that is much higher than the overall growth of the
economy will soon dominate the economy.
that
ProsPEctive Analysis: Valuation Theory and Concepts 7-21
APPENDIX B Valuation Formulas
All of the valuation appROAches discussed in this chapter can be expressed mathematically. The formulas for the various appROAches are presented below:
Abnormal Earnings Valuation
Under the earnings-based appROAch, the value of the equity is
Equity value 1/4 BE0 th NI1 (cid:4) Re (cid:2) BE0
th NI2 (cid:4) Re (cid:2) BE1
d1 th ReTh2
th (cid:5) (cid:5) (cid:5)
d1 th ReTh
BE0 is the firm's current book equity, BEt is the exPEcted beginning book equity in
PEriod t, NIt is exPEcted net income for PEriod t, and Re is the return required by the
firm's equity investors.
Valuation Using Price Multiples
The abnormal earnings valuation can be restructured into the equity value-to-book value
multiple by deflating the equity value by book equity by scaling. The valuation formula
then becomes:
Equity value
Book equity
1/4 1 th
dROE1
(cid:4) ReTh (cid:2) GBE0
d1 th ReTh
th
dROE2
(cid:4) ReTh (cid:2) GBE1
d1 th ReTh2
th
dROE3
(cid:4) ReTh (cid:2) GBE2
d1 th ReTh3
th (cid:5) (cid:5)(cid:5)
ROEt is net income in year t deflated by beginning book equity; GBEt is exPEcted
book equity growth, defined as exPEcted beginning book equity in year t (BEt) deflated
by the current book equity (BE0); and Re is the required return for equity investors.
Discounted Cash Flow Model
Under the free cash flow method, the value of equity is as follows:
Equity value 1/4 PVdExPEcted free cash flows to equityTh
1/4 NI1 (cid:4) DBVA1 th DBVND1
d1 th ReTh
th NI2 (cid:4) DBVA2 th DBVND2
d1 th ReTh2
th (cid:5) (cid:5) (cid:5)
NI is exPEcted net income, DBVA is the change in exPEcted book value of net oPErating
assets (including changes in working capital plus capital exPEnditures less depreciation
exPEnse), DBVND is the change in exPEcted book value of net debt (interest-bearing
debt less excess cash), and Re is the required return for equity investors.
APPENDIX C Reconciling the Discounted Dividends and Discounted
Abnormal Earnings Models
To derive the earnings-based valuation from the dividend discount model, consider the
following two-PEriod valuation:
Equity value 1/4 DIV1
d1 th reTh
th DIV2
d1 th reTh2
With clean surplus accounting, dividends (DIV) can be expressed as a function of net
income (NI) and the book value of equity (BVE):
DIVt 1/4 NIt th BVEt(cid:4)1 (cid:4) BVEt
7-22 PART 2 Business Analysis and Valuation Tools
Substituting this expression into the dividend discount model yields the following:
Equity value 1/4 NI1 th BVE0 (cid:4) BVE1
d1 th reTh
th NI2 th BVE1 (cid:4) BVE2
d1 th reTh2
This can be rewritten as follows:
Equity value 1/4 NI1 (cid:4) re BVE0 th BVE0d1 th reTh (cid:4) BVE1
d1 th reTh
th NI2 (cid:4) re BVE1 th BVE1d1 th reTh (cid:4)BVE 2
d1 th reTh2
1/4 BVE0 th NI1 (cid:4) re BVE0
d1 th reTh
th NI2 (cid:4) re BVE1
d1 th reTh2
(cid:4) BVE2
d1 th reTh2
As the forecast horizon expands, the final term (the present value of liquidating book
value) becomes inconsequential. The value of equity is therefore the current book value
plus the present value of future abnormal earnings.
APPENDIX D Asset Valuation Methodologies
All of the valuation appROAches discussed in this chapter can also be structured to estimate the value of a firm's assets (or the combined debt and equity) rather than its equity.
Switching from equity valuation to asset valuation is often as simple as substituting
financial measures related to equity for financial measures related to the entire firm.
For example, in the earnings-based valuation model, Net Income (the earnings flow to
equity) is replaced by NOPAT (the earnings available for debt and equity), and book
values of net oPErating assets replace the book value of equity. Value multiples are
based on ROEs for the equity formulation and on ROAs for valuing asset multiples.
And the discount rate for equity models is the required return for equity owners compared to the weighted average cost of debt and equity owners, called the weighted average cost of capital (or WACC) for asset valuation models.
The formulas used for asset valuation under the various appROAches are presented below:
Abnormal Earnings Valuation
Under the earnings-based appROAch, the value of the assets is
Asset value 1/4 Book assets th PVdExPEcted abnormal NOPATTh
1/4 BA0 th NOPAT1 (cid:4) WACC (cid:2) BA0
d1 th WACCTh
th NOPAT2 (cid:4) WACC (cid:2) BA1
d1 th WACCTh2
th (cid:5) (cid:5) (cid:5)
BA is the book value of the firm's assets, NOPAT is net oPErating profit (before interest)
after tax, and WACC is the firm's weighted-average cost of debt and equity. From this
asset value, the analyst can deduct the market value of net debt to generate an estimate
of the value of equity.
Valuation Using Price Multiples
The multiple valuation can be structured as the debt plus equity value-to-book assets
ratio by scaling the abnormal NOPAT formula by book value of net oPErating assets.
The valuation formula then becomes
ProsPEctive Analysis: Valuation Theory and Concepts 7-23
Asset value
Book assets
1/4 1 th PVdExPEcted abnormal ROA (cid:2) ExPEcted beg: book asset growthTh
1/4 1 th
dROA1
(cid:4) WACCTh (cid:2) GBA0
d1 th WACCTh
th
dROA2
(cid:4) WACCTh (cid:2) GBA1
d1 th WACCTh2
th (cid:5) (cid:5) (cid:5)
where ROA 1/4 ExPEcted oPErating return on assets 1/4 NOPAT/(OPErating working captial th Net long-term assets)
WACC 1/4 Weighted average cost of capital (debt and equity)
GBA 1/4 Book asset growth factor, defined as exPEcted beginning book equity in
year t (BEt) deflated by the current book equity (BE0).
The value of a firm's debt and equity to net oPErating assets multiple therefore dePEnds
on its ability to generate asset returns that exceed its WACC, and on its ability to grow
its asset base. The value of equity under this appROAch is then the estimated multiple
times the current book value of assets less the market value of debt.
Discounted Cash Flow Model
The free cash flow formulation can be structured by estimating the value of claims to net
debt and equity and then deducting the market value of net debt. This appROAch is more
widely used in practice because it does not require explicit forecasts of changes in debt
balances. The value of debt plus equity is computed as follows:
Asset value 1/4 PVdExPEcted free cash flows to net debt and equity ownersTh
The firm's asset valuation therefore dePEnds on the exPEcted free cash flows to debt and
equity holders during the forecast horizon, the forecasted terminal value of free cash
flows, and the weighted average cost of capital.