INVENTORIES
This topic review discusses the different inventory cost flow methods: FIFO, LIFO, and weighted average cost. You must understand how to calculate COGS, ending inventory, and gross profit under each of these methods. Also, you must understand the effects of each method on a firm’s liquidity, profitability, activity, and solvency ratios. Be able to apply the appropriate inventory valuation method under IFRS (lower of cost or net realizable value) and U.S. GAAP (lower of cost or market), and calculate inventory losses and loss reversals, if allowed. Finally, be able to evaluate a firm’s effectiveness in managing its inventory.
Introduction to Inventory Accounting
Merchandising firms, such as wholesalers and retailers, purchase inventory that is ready for sale. In this case, inventory is reported in one account on the balance sheet. Manufacturing firms normally report inventory using three separate accounts: raw materials, work-in-process, and finished goods.
Cost of goods sold (COGS), also referred to as cost of sales (COS) under IFRS, is related to the beginning balance of inventory, purchases, and the ending balance of inventory. The relationship is summarized in the following equation:
Cost of goods sold (COGS), also referred to as cost of sales (COS) under IFRS, is related to the beginning balance of inventory, purchases, and the ending balance of inventory. The relationship is summarized in the following equation:
COGS = beginning inventory + purchases − ending inventory
This equation can be rearranged to solve for any of the four variables:
purchases = ending inventory − beginning inventory + COGS
beginning inventory = COGS − purchases + ending inventory
ending inventory = beginning inventory + purchases − COGS
Professor’s Note: Many candidates find the inventory equation easiest to remember in this last form. If you start with beginning inventory, add the goods that came in (purchases), and subtract the goods that went out (COGS), the result must be ending inventory.
Professor’s Note: Many candidates find the inventory equation easiest to remember in this last form. If you start with beginning inventory, add the goods that came in (purchases), and subtract the goods that went out (COGS), the result must be ending inventory.
Cost is the basis for most inventory valuation. The main issue involves determining the amounts that should be included in cost.
The costs included in inventory are similar under IFRS and U.S. GAAP. These costs, known as product costs, are capitalized in the Inventories account on the balance sheet and include:
	•	Purchase cost less trade discounts and rebates
	•	Conversion (manufacturing) costs including labor and overhead
	•	Other costs necessary to bring the inventory to its present location and condition
By capitalizing inventory cost as an asset, expense recognition is delayed until the inventory is sold and revenue is recognized.
Not all inventory costs are capitalized; some costs are expensed in the period incurred. These costs, known as period costs, include:
	•	Abnormal waste of materials, labor, or overhead
	•	Storage costs (unless required as part of production)
	•	Administrative overhead
	•	Selling costs
Example: Costs included in inventory
Vindaloo Company manufactures a single product. The following information was taken from the company’s production and cost records last year:
Assuming no abnormal waste is included in conversion cost, calculate the capitalized cost of one unit.
Answer:
Capitalized inventory cost includes the raw materials cost, conversion cost, and freight-in to plant, as follows:
The storage cost, abnormal waste, and the freight-out to customers are expensed as incurred.
If the cost of inventory remains constant over time, determining the firm’s COGS and ending inventory is simple. To compute COGS, simply multiply the number of units sold by the cost per unit. Similarly, to compute ending inventory, multiply the number of units remaining by the cost per unit.
However, it is likely that the cost of purchasing or producing inventory will change over time. As a result, firms must select a cost flow method (known as the cost flow assumption under U.S. GAAP and cost flow formula under IFRS) to allocate the inventory cost to the income statement (COGS) and the balance sheet (ending inventory).
Under IFRS, the permissible methods are:
	•	Specific identification
	•	First-in, first-out (FIFO)
	•	Weighted average cost
U.S. GAAP permits these same cost flow methods, as well as the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method. LIFO is not allowed under IFRS.
A firm can use one or more of the inventory cost flow methods. However, the firm must employ the same cost flow method for inventories of similar nature and use.
Under the specific identification method, each unit sold is matched with the unit’s actual cost. Specific identification is appropriate when inventory items are not interchangeable and is commonly used by firms with a small number of costly and easily distinguishable items, such as jewelry. Specific identification is also appropriate for special orders or projects outside a firm’s normal course of business.
Under the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method, the first item purchased is assumed to be the first item sold. The advantage of FIFO is that ending inventory is valued based on the most recent purchases, arguably the best approximation of current cost. Conversely, FIFO COGS is based on the earliest purchase costs. In an inflationary environment, COGS will be understated compared to current cost. As a result, earnings will be overstated.
Under the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method, the item purchased most recently is assumed to be the first item sold. In an inflationary environment, LIFO COGS will be higher than FIFO COGS, and earnings will be lower. Lower earnings translate into lower income taxes, which increase cash flow. Under LIFO, ending inventory on the balance sheet is valued using the earliest costs. Therefore, in an inflationary environment, LIFO ending inventory is less than current cost.
Professor’s Note: The income tax advantages of using LIFO explain its popularity among U.S. firms. The tax savings result in the peculiar situation where lower reported earnings are associated with higher cash flow from operations.
Weighted average cost is a simple and objective method. The average cost per unit of inventory is computed by dividing the total cost of goods available for sale (beginning inventory + purchases) by the total quantity available for sale. To compute COGS, the average cost per unit is multiplied by the number of units sold. Similarly, to compute ending inventory, the average cost per unit is multiplied by the number of units that remain.
During inflationary or deflationary periods, the weighted average cost method will produce an inventory value between those produced by FIFO and LIFO.
Answer:
In the case of FIFO, ending inventory and COGS will be the same as with the PEriodic system illustrated in
the earlier example.
FIFO PErPEtual System
The January 12 sale of 4 units consists of:
FIFO COGS and ending inventory are the same whether a PErPEtual or PEriodic system is used because the
fIRSt-in (and therefore the fIRSt-out) values are the same regardless of subsequent purchases.
In the case of LIFO, COGS and ending inventory under a PEriodic system will be different from those
calculated under a PErPEtual system. In our earlier example, LIFO COGS and ending inventory for January
were $31 and $7, resPEctively, using a PEriodic system. Using a PErPEtual system, LIFO COGS and ending
inventory are $26 and $12.
LIFO PErPEtual System
The January 12 sale of 4 units consists of:
The January 29 sale of 3 units consists of:
A PEriodic system matches the total purchases for the month with the total withdrawals of inventory units
for the month. Conversely, a PErPEtual system matches each unit withdrawn with the immediately
preceding purchases.
Summary
Notice the relationship of higher COGS under LIFO and lower ending inventory under LIFO (assuming
inflation) still holds whether the firm uses a PEriodic or PErPEtual inventory system. The point of this
example is that under a PErPEtual system, LIFO COGS and ending inventory will differ from those
calculated under a PEriodic system.
During inflationary PEriods and with stable or increasing inventory quantities, LIFO
COGS is higher than FIFO COGS. This is because the last units purchased have a higher
cost than the fIRSt units purchased. Under LIFO, the more costly last units purchased
are assumed to be the fIRSt units sold (to COGS). Of course, higher COGS under LIFO
will result in lower gross profit and net income compared to FIFO.
Using similar logic, we can see that LIFO ending inventory is lower than FIFO ending
inventory because under LIFO, ending inventory is valued using older, lower costs.
During deflationary PEriods and stable or increasing inventory quantities, the cost flow
effects of using LIFO and FIFO will be reversed; that is, LIFO COGS will be lower and
LIFO ending inventory will be higher. This makes sense because the most recent lowercost purchases are assumed to be sold fIRSt under LIFO, and the units in ending
inventory are assumed to be the earliest purchases with higher costs.
Consider the diagram in Figure 2 to help visualize the FIFO-LIFO difference during
PEriods of rising prices and growing inventory levels.
Figure 2: LIFO and FIFO Diagram--Rising Prices and Growing Inventory Balances
Remember, it's not the older or newer physical inventory units that are reported in the
income statement and balance sheet; rather, it is the costs that are assigned to the
units sold and to the units remaining in inventory.
Professor's Note: Be able to describe the effects of LIFO and FIFO, assuming inflation, in your
sleep. When prices are falling, the effects are simply reversed. When you are finished with this
review, take the time to look at these graphs and relationships again to solidiFY the concepts in
your mind.
During PEriods of stable prices, all three cost flow methods will yield the same results
for inventory, COGS, and gross profit. During PEriods of trending prices (up or down),
different cost flow methods may result in significant differences in these items.
Professor's Note: The presumption in this SECtion is that inventory quantities are stable or
increasing.
Ending inventory. When prices are rising or falling, FIFO provides the most useful
measure of ending inventory. This is a critical point. Recall that FIFO inventory is made
up of the most recent purchases. These purchase costs can be viewed as a better
approximation of current cost, and thus a better approximation of economic value.
LIFO inventory, by contrast, is based on older costs that may differ significantly from
current economic value.
Cost of goods sold. Changing prices can also produce significant differences between
COGS under LIFO and FIFO. Recall that LIFO COGS is based on the most recent
purchases. As a result, when prices are rising, LIFO COGS will be higher than FIFO
COGS. When prices are falling, LIFO COGS will be lower than FIFO COGS. Because LIFO
COGS is based on the most recent purchases, LIFO produces a better approximation of
current cost in the income statement.
When prices are changing, the weighted average cost method will produce values of
COGS and ending inventory between those of FIFO and LIFO.
Gross profit. Because COGS is subtracted from revenue in calculating gross profit, gross
profit is also affected by the choice of cost flow method. Assuming inflation, higher
COGS under LIFO will result in lower gross profit. In fact, all profitability measures
(gross profit, oPErating profit, income before taxes, and net income) will be affected by
the choice of cost flow method.
Figure 3: Effects of Inventory Valuation Methods
Cost of sales
Ending inventory
Gross profit
FIFO
Lower
Higher
Higher
LIFO
Higher
Lower
Lower
Note: Assumes increasing prices and stable or increasing inventory levels.
LOS 28.e: Explain LIFO reserve and LIFO liquidation and their effects on financial
statements and ratios.
LOS 28.f: Convert a company's reported financial statements from LIFO to FIFO for
purposes of comparison.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 415
When prices are rising, firms that report inventory under LIFO will report lower
inventory values and higher cost of goods sold than firms that report under FIFO.
Because these differences affect key ratios used to evaluate and compare companies,
analysts may adjust the financial statements of LIFO firms so they can be compared to
those of FIFO firms.
These four relations hold when prices have been rising over the relevant PEriod:
1. LIFO inventory < FIFO inventory.
2. LIFO COGS > FIFO COGS.
3. LIFO net income < FIFO net income.
4. LIFO tax < FIFO tax.
Firms that report under LIFO must also report a LIFO reserve, the amount by which
LIFO inventory is less than FIFO inventory. To make financial statements prepared
under LIFO comparable to those of FIFO firms, an analyst must:
1. add the LIFO reserve to LIFO inventory on the balance sheet.
2. increase the retained earnings component of shareholders' equity by the LIFO
reserve.
When prices are increasing, a LIFO firm will pay less in taxes than it would pay under
FIFO. For this reason, analysts often decrease a LIFO firm's cash by the tax rate times
the LIFO reserve and increase its retained earnings by the LIFO reserve times (1 - tax
rate) instead of the full LIFO reserve.
For example, consider a firm with a LIFO reserve of $150 that faces a tax rate of 40%.
To convert the balance sheet to FIFO, increase inventory by $150, decrease cash by
$60 ($150 x 40%), and increase stockholders' equity (retained earnings) by $90 [$150 x
(1 - 40%)]. This will bring the accounting equation back into balance. The net effect of
the adjustments is an increase in assets and shareholders' equity of $90, which is equal
to the LIFO reserve net of tax.
For comparison purposes, it is also necessary to convert the LIFO firm's COGS to FIFO
COGS. The difference between LIFO COGS and FIFO COGS is equal to the change in the
LIFO reserve for the PEriod. To convert COGS from LIFO to FIFO, simply subtract the
change in the LIFO reserve:
FIFO COGS = LIFO COGS - (ending LIFO reserve - beginning LIFO reserve)
Assuming inflation, FIFO COGS is lower than LIFO COGS, so subtracting the change in
the LIFO reserve from LIFO COGS makes intuitive sense. When prices are falling, we
still subtract the change in the LIFO reserve to convert from LIFO COGS to FIFO COGS.
In this case, however, the change in the LIFO reserve is negative and subtracting it will
result in higher COGS. This again makes sense. When prices are falling, FIFO COGS is
greater than LIFO COGS.
Example: Converting ending inventory and COGS from LIFO to FIFO
Witz Company, which uses LIFO, reported end-of-year inventory balances of $500 in 20X5 and $700 in
20X6. The LIFO reserve was $200 for 20X5 and $300 for 20X6. COGS during 20X6 was $3,000. Convert
20X6 ending inventory and COGS to a FIFO basis.
Answer:
Inventory:
InvF = InvL + LIFO reserve = $700 + $300 = $1,000
COGS:
COGSF = COGSL - (ending LIFO reserve - beginning LIFO reserve)
= $3,000 - ($300 - $200) = $2,900
Professor's Note: Later in this topic review, we present a more comprehensive example of
converting financial statements from LIFO to FIFO for comparison with other companies.
Effects on Ratios
Again assuming increasing prices, we can trace the ratio effects of the adjustments of
LIFO values to FIFO values.
Profitability. As compared to FIFO, LIFO produces higher COGS in the income
statement and results in lower earnings. Any profitability measure that includes COGS
will be higher under FIFO. For example, reducing COGS will result in higher gross,
oPErating, and net profit margins as compared to LIFO.
Liquidity. Compared to FIFO, LIFO results in a lower inventory value on the balance
sheet. Because inventory (a current asset) is higher under FIFO, the current ratio, a
popular measure of liquidity, is also higher under FIFO. Working capital is higher under
FIFO as well, because current assets are higher. The quick ratio is unaffected by the
firm's inventory cost flow method because inventory is excluded from its numerator.
Activity. Inventory turnover (COGS / average inventory) is higher for firms that use LIFO
compared to firms that use FIFO. Under LIFO, COGS is valued at more recent, higher
costs (higher numerator), while inventory is valued at older, lower costs (lower
denominator). Adjusting to FIFO values will result in lower turnover and higher days of
inventory on hand (365 / inventory turnover).
Solvency. Adjusting to FIFO results in higher total assets because inventory is higher.
Higher total assets under FIFO result in higher stockholders' equity (assets - liabilities).
Because total assets and stockholders' equity are higher under FIFO, the debt ratio and
the debt-to-equity ratio are lower under FIFO compared to LIFO.
LIFO Liquidation
Recall that the LIFO reserve is equal to the difference between LIFO inventory and FIFO
inventory. The LIFO reserve will increase when prices are rising and inventory
quantities are stable or increasing. If a firm is liquidating its inventory, or if prices are
falling, the LIFO reserve will decline.
A LIFO liquidation occurs when a LIFO firm's inventory quantities decline. Older, lower
costs are included in COGS compared to a situation in which inventory quantities are
not declining. LIFO liquidation results in higher profit margins and higher income taxes
compared to what they would be if inventory quantities were not declining. The extra
profit reported with a LIFO liquidation inflates oPErating margins by recognizing
historical inflationary gains from increasing inventory prices as income in the current
PEriod. Increases in profit margins from LIFO liquidation are not sustainable, however,
because a firm cannot continue forever to sell existing inventory without
replenishment.
Management could use a LIFO liquidation (draw down inventory) to artificially inflate
current PEriod earnings. Inventory declines can also be caused by events outside
management's control, such as strikes or materials shortages at a key supplier that
make inventory reduction involuntary, or a decline in exPEcted customer orders that
results in a voluntary reduction in inventory to suit market conditions.
Analysts must look to the LIFO reserve disclosures in the footnotes to see if the LIFO
reserve has decreased over the PEriod, which would indicate the possibility of a LIFO
liquidation that requires adjustment of profit margins if its impact has been significant.
Regardless of the underlying reason for a LIFO liquidation, the resulting decrease in
COGS will increase gross profits, pretax income, and net income. Decreased cash
exPEnses (from not producing inventory) will increase oPErating cash flow, although
higher income taxes on higher earnings will partially offset this increase in cash flows.
The following example illustrates the calculation of the extra profits earned as a result
of inventory liquidation for a firm that uses LIFO for inventory valuation.
Example: LIFO liquidation
At the beginning of 20X8, Big 4 Manufacturing Company had 560 units of inventory as follows:
Big 4 reports inventory under LIFO. Due to a strike, no units were produced during 20X8. During 20X8, Big
4 sold 440 units. In the ABSence of the strike, Big 4 would have had a cost of $14 for each unit produced.
Compute the extra profit that resulted from the inventory liquidation.
Answer:
Because of the LIFO liquidation, actual COGS was $5,300 as follows:
Units
Cost
Beginning Inventory
560
$6,500
+ Purchases
- Ending Inventory
= COGS (Actual)
-0120
440
-01,200
($10 x 120 units)
$5,300
Had Big 4 replaced the 440 units sold, COGS would have been $6,160 as follows:
Units
Cost
Beginning Inventory
+ Purchases
- Ending Inventory
= COGS (If replaced)
560
440
560
440
$6,500
6,160
6,500
$6,160
($14 x 440 units)
Due to the LIFO liquidation, COGS was lower by $860 ($6,160 - $5,300); thus, pretax profit was higher by
$860. The higher profit is unsustainable because Big 4 will eventually run out of inventory.
LOS 28.g: Describe the measurement of inventory at the lower of cost and net
realisable value.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 426
Under IFRS, companies that use inventory cost methods other than LIFO or the retail
method report inventories at the lower of cost or NRV. For companies using LIFO or
the retail method, inventory is reported on the balance sheet at the lower of cost or
net realizable value. Net realizable value (NRV) is equal to the exPEcted sales price less
the estimated selling costs and completion costs. If net realizable value is less than the
balance sheet value of inventory, the inventory is "written down" to net realizable
value and the loss is recognized in the income statement. If there is a subsequent
recovery in value, the inventory can be "written up" and the gain is recognized in the
income statement by reducing COGS by the amount of the recovery. Because
inventory is valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value, inventory cannot be
written up by more than it was previously written down.
Professor's Note: The writedown, or subsequent write-up, of inventory is usually accomplished
through the use of a valuation allowance account. A valuation allowance account is a contraasset account, similar to accumulated depreciation. By using a valuation allowance account,
the firm is able to separate the original cost of inventory from the carrying value of the
inventory.
Under U.S. GAAP, inventory is reported on the balance sheet at the lower of cost or
market. Market is usually equal to replacement cost, but cannot be greater than NRV
or less than NRV minus a normal profit margin. If replacement cost exceeds NRV, then
market is NRV. If replacement cost is less than NRV minus a normal profit margin, then
market is NRV minus a normal profit margin.
Professor's Note: Think of lower of cost or market, where "market" cannot be outside a range of
values. The range is from net realizable value minus a normal profit margin, to net realizable
value. So the size of the range is the normal profit margin. "Net" means sales price less selling
and completion costs.
If cost exceeds market, the inventory is written down to market on the balance sheet.
The decrease in value is recognized in the income statement by increasing COGS for
relatively small changes in value or by recording the loss from the inventory writedown separately for a relatively large change in value. The market value becomes the
new cost basis.
If there is a subsequent recovery in value, no write-up is allowed under U.S. GAAP. This
applies to companies using lower of cost or NRV as well as those using lower of cost or
market.
Example: Inventory writedown
Zoom, Inc. sells digital cameras. PEr-unit cost information PErtaining to Zoom's inventory is as follows:
What are the PEr-unit carrying values of Zoom's inventory using lower of cost or NRV and lower of cost or
market?
Answer:
Using the lower of cost or net realizable value, because original cost of $210 exceeds net realizable value
($225 - $22 = $203), the inventory is written down to the net realizable value of $203 and the $7 decrease
in value ($203 net realizable value - $210 original cost) is reported in the income statement.
Using the lower of cost or market, market is equal to replacement cost of $197, since net realizable value
of $203 is greater than replacement cost, and net realizable value minus a normal profit margin ($203 -
$12 = $191) is less than replacement cost. Since original cost exceeds market (replacement cost), the
inventory is written down to $197 and a $13 loss ($197 replacement cost - $210 original cost) is reported
in the income statement.
Example: Inventory write-up
Assume that in the year after the writedown in the previous example, net realizable value and
replacement cost both increase by $10. What is the impact of the recovery under IFRS, and under U.S.
GAAP if lower of cost or market is used?
Answer:
Under IFRS, Zoom will write up inventory to $210 PEr unit and recognize a $7 gain in its income statement.
The write-up (gain) is limited to the original writedown of $7. The carrying value cannot exceed original
cost.
Under U.S. GAAP, no write-up is allowed. The PEr-unit carrying value will remain at $197. Zoom will simply
recognize higher profit when the inventory is sold.
Recall that LIFO ending inventory is based on older, lower costs (assuming inflation)
than under FIFO. Because cost is the basis for determining whether an impairment has
occurred, LIFO firms are less likely to recognize inventory writedowns than firms using
FIFO or weighted average cost.
Analysts must understand how an inventory writedown or write-up affects a firm's
ratios. For example, a writedown may significantly affect inventory turnover in current
and future PEriods. Thus, comparability of ratios across PEriods may be an issue.
In certain industries, reporting inventory above historical cost is PErmitted under IFRS
and U.S. GAAP. This exception applies primarily to producers and dealers of
commodity-like products, such as agricultural and forest products, mineral ores, and
precious metals. Under this exception, inventory is reported at net realizable value and
any unrealized gains and losses from changing market prices are recognized in the
income statement. If an active market exists for the commodity, the quoted market
price is used to value the inventory. Otherwise, recent market transactions are used.
LOS 28.h: Describe implications of valuing inventory at net realisable value for
financial statements and ratios.
A writedown of inventory to net realizable value affects the financial statements and
ratios in several ways. Assuming the writedown is reported as part of the cost of sales,
these effects in the PEriod of the writedown include:
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 428
As inventory is part of current assets, an inventory writedown decreases both
current and total assets.
Current ratio (CA/CL) decreases. However, the quick ratio is unaffected because
inventories are not included in the numerator of the quick ratio.
Inventory turnover (COGS/average inventory) is increased, which decreases
days' inventory on hand and the cash conversion cycle.
The decrease in total assets increases total asset turnover and increases the
debt-to-assets ratio.
Equity is decreased, increasing the debt-to-equity ratio.
The increase in COGS reduces gross margin, oPErating margin, and net margin.
The PErcentage decrease in net income can be exPEcted to be greater than the
PErcentage decrease assets or equity. As a result, both ROA and ROE are
decreased.
For PEriods subsequent to a writedown of inventory to net realizable value, COGS may
be decreased by lower inventory carrying values, which will increase profitability.
Together with the decreases in assets and equity from the prior-PEriod writedown, an
increase in net income from decreased COGS will increase reported ROA and ROE in
subsequent PEriods.
LOS 28.i: Describe the financial statement presentation of and disclosures relating to
inventories.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 433
Inventory disclosures, usually found in the financial statement footnotes, are useful in
evaluating the firm's inventory management. The disclosures are also useful in making
adjustments to facilitate comparisons with other firms in the industry.
Required inventory disclosures are similar under U.S. GAAP and IFRS and include:
The cost flow method (LIFO, FIFO, etc.) used.
Total carrying value of inventory, with carrying value by classification (raw
materials, work-in-process, and finished goods) if appropriate.
Carrying value of inventories reported at fair value less selling costs.
The cost of inventory recognized as an exPEnse (COGS) during the PEriod.
Amount of inventory writedowns during the PEriod.
Reversals of inventory writedowns during the PEriod, including a discussion of
the circumstances of reversal (IFRS only because U.S. GAAP does not allow
reversals).
Carrying value of inventories pledged as collateral.
Inventory Changes
Although rare, a firm can change inventory cost flow methods. In most cases, the
change is made retrosPEctively; that is, the prior years' financial statements are recast
based on the new cost flow method. The cumulative effect of the change is reported as
an adjustment to the beginning retained earnings of the earliest year presented.
Under IFRS, the firm must demonstrate that the change will provide reliable and more
relevant information. Under U.S. GAAP, the firm must explain why the change in cost
flow method is preferable.
An exception to retrosPEctive application applies when a firm changes to LIFO from
another cost flow method. In this case, the change is applied prosPEctively; no
adjustments are made to the prior PEriods. With prosPEctive application, the carrying
value of inventory under the old method simply becomes the fIRSt layer of inventory
under LIFO in the PEriod of the change.
LOS 28.j: Explain issues that analysts should consider when examining a company's
inventory disclosures and other sources of information.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 433
Merchandising firms, such as wholesalers and retailers, purchase inventory that is
ready for sale. In this case, inventory is reported in one account on the balance sheet.
On the other hand, manufacturing firms normally report inventory using three
separate accounts: raw materials, work-in-process, and finished goods. Analysts can
use these disclosures, along with other sources of information such as Management's
Discussion and Analysis, economic data sPEcific to the industry, industry trade
publications, and other SECtions of the firm's financial reports, as a signal of a firm's
future revenues and earnings.
For example, an increase in raw materials and/or work-in-process inventory may be an
indication of an exPEcted increase in demand. Higher demand should result in higher
revenues and earnings. Conversely, an increase in finished goods inventory, while raw
materials and work-in-process are decreasing, may be an indication of decreasing
demand and potential inventory writedowns in the future.
Analysts should also examine the relationship between sales and finished goods.
Finished goods inventory growing faster than sales may indicate declining demand and
excessive or potentially obsolete inventory. Obsolete inventory will result in lower
earnings in the future when the inventory is written down. In addition, too much
inventory is costly as the firm may incur storage costs, insurance premiums, and
inventory taxes. Too much inventory uses cash that might be more efficiently used
somewhere else.
The inventory turnover ratio measures how quickly a firm is selling its inventory.
Generally, high inventory turnover (low days of inventory on hand) is desirable.
However, inventory turnover can be too high. A firm with an inventory turnover ratio
that is too high may not be carrying enough inventory to satisFY customers' needs,
which can cause the firm to lose sales. High inventory turnover may also indicate that
inventory writedowns have occurred. Writedowns are usually the result of poor
inventory management.
To further assess the explanation for high inventory turnover, we can look at inventory
turnover relative to sales growth within the firm and industry. High turnover with
slower growth may be an indication of inadequate inventory quantities. Alternatively,
sales growth at or above the industry average supports the conclusion that high
inventory turnover reflects greater efficiency.
LOS 28.k: Calculate and compare ratios of companies, including companies that use
different inventory methods.
LOS 28.l: Analyze and compare the financial statements of companies, including
companies that use different inventory methods.
In the following example, we calculate key ratios for a corporation that reports under
LIFO and compare them to those that would be reported if the firm had used the FIFO
cost flow method.
CFA(r) Program Curriculum, Volume 3, page 435
Example: Comparing financial ratios under LIFO and FIFO
ViPEr Corp. is a high-PErformance bicycle manufacturer. ViPEr's balance sheets for 20X5 and 20X6 and an
income statement for 20X6 are as shown. The balance sheets and income statement were prepared using
LIFO. Calculate the current ratio, inventory turnover, long-term debt-to-equity ratio, gross profit margin,
net profit margin, and return on assets ratio for 20X6 for both LIFO and FIFO inventory cost flow methods.
ViPEr Balance Sheet
ViPEr Income Statement
Inventory footnote: The company uses the LIFO inventory cost flow method. Had FIFO been used,
inventories would have been $100 higher in 20X6 and $90 higher in 20X5.
Income tax footnote: The tax rate for 20X5 and 20X6 was 20%.
Answer:
The analyst would recast the financial statements assuming FIFO for comparison purposes as follows:
ViPEr Balance Sheet
ViPEr Income Statement
Current ratio
The current ratio (current assets / current liabilities) under LIFO is $630 / $325 = 1.9.
To convert to FIFO, the 20X6 LIFO reserve of $100 is added to current assets (inventory) and income taxes
on the LIFO reserve of $20 are subtracted from cash.
Thus, under FIFO, the current ratio is ($630 + $100 LIFO reserve - $20 taxes) / $325 = 2.2. The current
ratio is higher under FIFO as ending inventory now approximates current cost.
Inventory turnover
The inventory turnover ratio (COGS / average inventory) under LIFO is $3,000 / $300 = 10.0.
To convert to FIFO COGS, it is necessary to subtract the change in the LIFO reserve from LIFO COGS. The
change in the LIFO reserve is $100 ending reserve - $90 beginning reserve = $10.
To convert LIFO average inventory to FIFO, the average LIFO reserve is added to average LIFO inventory:
($90 beginning reserve + $100 ending reserve) / 2 = $95. Alternatively, we can calculate average FIFO
inventory by averaging the beginning and ending FIFO inventory: ($290 beginning LIFO inventory + $90
beginning LIFO reserve + $310 ending LIFO inventory + $100 ending LIFO reserve) / 2 = $395.
Thus, under FIFO, inventory turnover is ($3,000 - 10 change in LIFO reserve) / ($300 + $95 average LIFO
reserve) = 7.6. Inventory turnover is lower under FIFO due to higher average inventory in the denominator
and lower COGS in the numerator (assuming inflation).
Long-term debt-to-equity ratio
The long-term debt-to-equity ratio (long-term debt / stockholders' equity) under LIFO is $715 / $1,030 =
0.6942.
To convert to FIFO, the 20X6 LIFO reserve, net of tax, is added to stockholders' equity. The adjustment to
stockholders' equity is necessary to make the accounting equation balance. The 20X6 LIFO reserve of $100
was added to inventory and $20 of income taxes was subtracted from cash, so the difference of $80 is
added to stockholders' equity.
Thus, under FIFO, long-term debt-to-equity is $715 / ($1,030 + $80 ending LIFO reserve, net of tax) =
0.6441. Long-term debt-to-equity is lower under FIFO (assuming inflation) because stockholders' equity is
higher, since it reflects the effects of bringing the LIFO reserve onto the balance sheet.
Gross profit margin
The gross profit margin (gross profit / revenue) under LIFO is $1,000 / $4,000 = 25.0%.
To convert to FIFO gross profit margin, the $10 change in the LIFO reserve is subtracted from LIFO COGS.
Thus, under FIFO, gross profit margin is ($1,000 + $10 change in LIFO reserve) / $4,000 = 25.3%. Gross
profit margin is higher under FIFO because COGS is lower under FIFO.
Net profit margin
The net profit margin (net income / revenue) under LIFO is $210 / $4,000 = 5.25%.
To convert to FIFO net profit margin, subtract the $10 change in the LIFO reserve from LIFO COGS to get
FIFO COGS and increase income taxes $2 ($10 increase in reserve x 20% tax rate). The increase in income
taxes is the result of applying the 20X6 tax rate to the increase in taxable profit (lower COGS).
Thus, under FIFO, net profit margin is ($210 + $10 change in LIFO reserve - $2 taxes) / $4,000 = 5.45%. The
net profit margin is greater under FIFO because COGS is less under FIFO (assuming inflation).
Professor's Note: We did not recognize the entire tax effect of the 20X6 LIFO reserve in
the 20X6 income statement. The change from LIFO to FIFO is handled retrosPEctively. In
other words, had we been using FIFO all along, the resulting higher taxes would have
already been recognized in the previous years' income statements.
Return on assets
Return on assets (net income/average assets) under LIFO is $210 / $2,005 = 10.47%.
To convert to FIFO return on assets, LIFO net income is increased by the change in the LIFO reserve, net of
tax. Thus, FIFO net income is equal to $210 + $10 change in reserve - $2 taxes = $218.
To convert LIFO average assets, add the beginning and ending LIFO reserves, net of tax, to total assets.
Thus, FIFO average assets is equal to ($2,070 20X6 assets + $80 20X6 reserve, net of tax + $1,940 20X5
assets + $72 20X5 reserve, net of tax) / 2 = $2,081.
Thus, the FIFO return on assets is $218 / $2,081 = 10.48%. In this example, the increase in FIFO net income
is roughly proportionate to the increase in FIFO average assets. This is not always the case.
For comparison purposes, the following table summarizes our findings. The results of
ViPEr's PEer group have been included for analytical purposes.
Figure 4: Ratio Comparison
Year Ended 20X6
ViPEr
PEer Group
Current ratio
Inventory turnover
Long-term debt-to-equity
LIFO
1.9
10.0
0.7
FIFO
FIFO
2.2
7.6
0.6
1.7
9.8
0.6
Gross profit margin
25.0%
25.3%
32.1%
Net profit margin
5.25%
5.45%
6.5%
Return on assets
10.47%
10.48%
11.2%
Analysis of ViPEr's ratios relative to a group of industry PEers
Liquidity: The after-tax LIFO adjustment resulted in an increase in ViPEr's current ratio.
The adjusted ratio exceeds the PEer group, indicating greater liquidity. Because
inventory is the largest component of ViPEr's current assets, additional analysis is
needed.
Activity: ViPEr's adjusted inventory turnover declined as exPEcted due to the decrease
in COGS and the increase in average inventory. Adjusted inventory turnover is less than
the PEer group, which indicates that it takes ViPEr longer to sell its goods. In terms of
inventory days (365 / inventory turnover), ViPEr has 48.0 days of inventory on hand
while the PEer group has 37.2 days on hand. Too much inventory is costly and can also
be an indication of obsolescence.
Solvency: ViPEr's adjusted long-term debt-to-equity ratio of 0.6 is in line with the PEer
group.
Profitability: As exPEcted, ViPEr's adjusted gross profit and net profit margin ratios
increased because COGS is lower under FIFO. However, the adjusted margin ratios are
significantly less than the PEer group's ratios. Coupled with lower adjusted inventory
turnover, ViPEr's lower gross profit margin may be an indication that ViPEr is reducing
sales prices to move its inventory. This is another indication that some of ViPEr's
inventory may be obsolete. As previously discussed, obsolete (impaired) inventory
must be written down.
KEY CONCEPTS
LOS 28.a
Costs included in inventory on the balance sheet include purchase cost, conversion
costs, and other costs necessary to bring the inventory to its present location and
condition. All of these costs for inventory acquired or produced in the current PEriod
are added to beginning inventory value and then allocated either to cost of goods sold
for the PEriod or to ending inventory.
PEriod costs, such as abnormal waste, most storage costs, administrative costs, and
selling costs, are exPEnsed as incurred.
LOS 28.b
Inventory cost flow methods:
FIFO: The cost of the fIRSt item purchased is the cost of the fIRSt item sold.
Ending inventory is based on the cost of the most recent purchases, thereby
approximating current cost.
LIFO: The cost of the last item purchased is the cost of the fIRSt item sold. Ending
inventory is based on the cost of the earliest items purchased. LIFO is prohibited
under IFRS.
Weighted average cost: COGS and inventory values are between their FIFO and
LIFO values.
SPEcific identification: Each unit sold is matched with the unit's actual cost.
LOS 28.c
Under LIFO, cost of sales reflects the most recent purchase or production costs, and
balance sheet inventory values reflect older outdated costs.
Under FIFO, cost of sales reflects the oldest purchase or production costs for inventory,
and balance sheet inventory values reflect the most recent costs.
Under the weighted average cost method, cost of sales and balance sheet inventory
values are between those of LIFO and FIFO.
When purchase or production costs are rising, LIFO cost of sales is higher than FIFO
cost of sales, and LIFO gross profit is lower than FIFO gross profit as a result. LIFO
inventory is lower than FIFO inventory.
When purchase or production costs are falling, LIFO cost of sales is lower than FIFO
cost of sales, and LIFO gross profit is higher than FIFO gross profit as a result. LIFO
inventory is higher than FIFO inventory.
In either case, LIFO cost of sales and FIFO inventory values better represent economic
reality (replacement costs).
In a PEriodic system, inventory values and COGS are determined at the end of the
accounting PEriod. In a PErPEtual system, inventory values and COGS are updated
continuously.
In the case of FIFO and sPEcific identification, ending inventory values and COGS are
the same whether a PEriodic or PErPEtual system is used. LIFO and weighted average
cost, however, can produce different inventory values and COGS dePEnding on
whether a PEriodic or PErPEtual system is used.
LOS 28.d
When prices are increasing and inventory quantities are stable or increasing:
LIFO results in:
higher COGS
FIFO results in:
lower COGS
lower gross profit
higher gross profit
lower inventory balances
higher inventory balances
higher inventory turnover
lower inventory turnover
When prices are decreasing and inventory quantities are stable or increasing:
LIFO results in:
lower COGS
FIFO results in:
higher COGS
higher gross profit
lower gross profit
higher inventory balances
lower inventory balances
lower inventory turnover
higher inventory turnover
The weighted average cost method results in values between those of LIFO and FIFO if
prices are increasing or decreasing.
LOS 28.e
A firm that reports under LIFO must disclose a LIFO reserve, which is the difference
between LIFO inventory reported and inventory had the firm used the FIFO method.
LIFO reserve will be positive during PEriods of rising inventory costs and negative
during PEriods of falling inventory costs.
A LIFO liquidation occurs when a firm using LIFO sells more inventory during a PEriod
than it produces. During PEriods of rising prices, this drawdown in inventory reduces
cost of goods sold because the lower cost of previously produced inventory is used,
resulting in an unsustainable increase in gross profit margin.
LOS 28.f
To convert a firm's financial statements from LIFO to what they would have been
under FIFO:
1. Add the LIFO reserve to LIFO inventory.
2. Subtract the change in the LIFO reserve for the PEriod from COGS.
3. Decrease cash by LIFO reserve x tax rate.
4. Increase retained earnings (equity) by LIFO reserve x (1 - tax rate).
LOS 28.g
Under IFRS, inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value.
Inventory write-ups are allowed, but only to the extent that a previous writedown to
net realizable value was recorded.
Under U.S. GAAP, inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value for
companies using cost methods other than LIFO or the retail method. For companies
using LIFO or the retail method, inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market.
Market is usually equal to replacement cost but cannot exceed net realizable value or
be less than net realizable value minus a normal profit margin. No subsequent write-up
is allowed for any company reporting under U.S. GAAP.
LOS 28.h
A writedown of inventory value from cost to net realizable value will:
Decrease inventory, assets, and equity.
Increase asset turnover, the debt to equity ratio and the debt to assets ratio.
Result in a loss on the income statement, which will decrease net income and
the net profit margin, as well as ROA and ROE for a typical firm.
LOS 28.i
Required inventory disclosures:
The cost flow method (LIFO, FIFO, etc.) used.
Total carrying value of inventory and carrying value by classification (raw
materials, work-in-process, and finished goods) if appropriate.
Carrying value of inventories reported at fair value less selling costs.
The cost of inventory recognized as an exPEnse (COGS) during the PEriod.
Amount of inventory writedowns during the PEriod.
Reversals of inventory writedowns during the PEriod (IFRS only because U.S.
GAAP does not allow reversals).
Carrying value of inventories pledged as collateral.
LOS 28.j
An analyst should examine inventory disclosures to determine whether:
The finished goods category is growing while raw materials and goods in
process are declining, which may indicate decreasing demand and potential
future inventory writedowns.
Raw materials and goods in process are increasing, which may indicate
increasing future demand and higher earnings.
Increases in finished goods are greater than increases in sales, which may
indicate decreasing demand or inventory obsolescence and potential future
inventory writedowns.
LOS 28.k
Inventory turnover, days of inventory on hand, and gross profit margin can be used to
evaluate the quality of a firm's inventory management.
Inventory turnover that is too low (high days of inventory on hand) may be an
indication of slow-moving or obsolete inventory.
High inventory turnover together with low sales growth relative to the industry
may indicate inadequate inventory levels and lost sales because customer
orders could not be fulfilled.
High inventory turnover together with high sales growth relative to the industry
average suggests that high inventory turnover reflects greater efficiency rather
than inadequate inventory.
LOS 28.l
Comparison of company financial statements may require statements to be adjusted
to reflect the same inventory costing methods for both firms, or for the subject firm
and any industry or PEer group of firms used for comparison.