DCF (discounted cash flows) valuation has had a long tradition that dates
back to early works of Miller, Modigliani, Gordon and Shapiro. Major contributions in the field of discounted cash flows valuation have been made by CoPEland[1], Damodaran[2]and Fernandez[3].
In colloquial terms, DCF valuation, the concept fIRSt known for valuing
projects, is based on measuring the value of milk given by a cow (the market
value dePEnds on future payment surpluses - the stream of cash flow is discounted) instead of focusing on the price of the meat of a cow offered by a
butcher (the value of assets).
DCF method (sometimes called "intrinsic value method") is mentioned in
the fIRSt line of this book not without a reason. This is without a doubt the major
valuation method used in most company valuations.
There is also the "PEer comparison" [4] method (or multiple appROAch), where
a company is valued by analogy with other assets or companies of the same
tyPE. This pragmatic appROAch assumes that markets are efficient, and the value
of one company should be measured by reference to another's value. SPEaking
of the market and its efficiency, it must be admitted that the market value (and
other methods referring to market values, just like the PEer comparison method)
and present values of cash flows should converge.
In another appROAch (sum-of-the-parts method, or restated net asset value) a
company is valued as the sum of its assets less its net debt. There are numerous
variations of the method, starting with a crude one based on book values.
There are attempts to apply options theory - this seems a tempting theoretical concept, which may potentially represent a profound shift in the way equity capital is valued. At present, the structural appROAch is more often used for
credit risk estimation. Real options are more often in use, although after the dot
com craze (at the end of XX century) they have fallen out of fashion.

Mixed methods, which usually boil down to being a weighted average of
DCF and restated net asset value, should be treated with caution. Some are
tempted to use them as the valuation results can be easily manipulated. Instead,
the differences stemming from using various methods should be analyzed, not
averaged.
This short review of valuation methods shows that there are three basic appROAches: cash flow-based, market-based and asset-based. The methods will be
referred to again in Chapter 1.1.
The set of valuation methods that is actually in use in a given country is usually shaPEd by its history and economic environment[5]. Typically, the list may
include:
1. replacement method,
2. restated net asset value method,
3. liquidation value method,
4. multiple method,
5. DCF method.
Once the list is created, it often becomes a benchmark for company valuations. The choice (with regard to methods) made by companies PErforming
company valuations dePEnds on a number of factors.
1. If the financial markets are stable, market values may be used and then
the multiple method is preferred. However, the multiple method derived
value, being greater than DCF derived value, clearly shows that the company should go public.
2. The fact that a company is able to generate positive cash flows is an indication that the DCF method should be used. If this is the case, the DCF
derived value is typically higher than the values generated by any other
methods.
3. Companies that barely break even, but have a lot of marketable assets are
valuated with the use of restated net value method. The restated net value
being higher than the DCF value may be an indicator that the company
should gradually divest and liquidate its assets to boost profitability.
4. Those already in the red are bound to use the liquidation value method.
5. In most cases, as suggested by the applicable provision, at least two methods are utilized so that the brackets with the lowest and highest values
are formed and facilitate negotiations with potentials investors. If the financial market is stable and a company generates positive cash flows,
5 In Poland for example, after the fall of communism in 1989, a lot of previously state-owned proPErty started
to be commercialized and then privatized. One of the provisions of the Ministry of Treasury issued at that
time (3.06.1997) sPEcified that at least two out of the five valuation methods that were listed there must
be used whenever any of the state-owned companies were to be privatized and sold. Since then, the five
methods have become a benchmark for company valuations even if they were done for purposes other than
commercialization and privatization.
8
DCF and comparative methods are used in most cases. Some of the differences in the values generated by the methods stem from the lifecycle
theory of company value[6]. For example, quite naturally if the company
enters a post-maturity phase, its profits decline and the cash flow value
slips below the restated net asset value.
The DCF method clearly dominates in most of the valuations of economically sound companies. Besides, other methods are quite straightforward, and
do not require sophisticated theories or mathematical models to support. DCF
does. The concepts of PErfect market, time value of money, cost of capital, portfolio theory and many others laid the foundation for DCF valuation. There are
certain standards that apply when DCF is used, some are the part of the common knowledge and are clearly codified, and others have to be presented in detail.
This book is focused on the DCF method, the one that is most complicated
- hence needs sPEcial explanations, the one that is most sophisticated - hence
needs attention. Another reason is that the DCF method captures best the value
of profitable, economically sound companies. We believe it works for all firms
which have real exPErtise - this is the core of the economy, its salt of the earth.
The main purpose of this book is to explain the inner workings of the DCF
method, esPEcially the variant in which capital structure constantly affects cost
of equity, as it does in reality.
The basic notion of the DCF method can be introduced with the following
valuation formula:
where subscripts 1, 2, ... represent the fIRSt and further PEriods [7].
This is how the company's value is determined: certain cash flows are discounted with the cost of capital. There are three components involved: cash
flows, cost of capital and the model (or engine, technically sPEaking) explaining
how the fIRSt two are related and eventually put together into a coherent system.
Consequently, the book revolves around these three issues. The three chapters are devoted to the value of cash flows (modules A, B, C, see Figure 1 below),
the model focused on capital structure (modules G, H), and the cost of capital

that expresses risk (modules D, E, F). All of them are intertwined throughout
the whole book as they cannot be separated from other problems discussed.
The figure below shows a complete procedure for company valuation. The
book will focus on certain issues, and neglect others as in our view, there is
enough information on CAPM (Capital Assets Pricing Model) available elsewhere.
I. Value
The main goal of a company is to increase its value for the shareholders.
By the value we mean today's value of future cash flows generated by the
company and discounted by a proPEr discount rate. The proPEr discount rate
is meant as a rate that reflects risk, and as suchis the cost of capital.
Let us justiFY this point of view on a company's value. Obviously, it is not
based on book values and to some extent it ignores the company's proPErty,
which with DCF is treated as a means of generating cash flows and not an asset PEr se.
In the case of companies listed and traded on a stock exchange, valuation
does not seem to be a problem - it is merely a question of multiplying the
number of shares in circulation by their price, and the market value (of equity)
is instantly obtained. Companies that are not listed may be offered for sale,
and the price from tenders can be used to estimate their value. Here we encounter the problem of a slight difference between price and value. The prime
difference stems from the fact that buyers and sellers look at the company
from two different points of view. For example, for a seller fixed assets may
seem to have the most value, whereas a buyer may be anxious to have access
to the market only, since he has better production potential himself. Or vice
versa, and the buyer is eager to get the assets. Each of the buyers may look at
the company from another angle; the same assets in various hands may represent a range of prices understood as potential to generate cash flows. Thus,
value is a relative concept and it is not identical to the market price. Whenever
dealing with the market price determined by a stock exchange or "PEer comparison" methods of valuation (where a company is valued by analogy with
other assets or companies of the same tyPE), one must remember that price
and value are different notions.
11
P/E ratio is one of the best known profit-related indicators (often used in a
multiple method). As the name suggests (price to earnings ratio), it is the stock
price divided by profits generated by a company (attributable to one share, EPS
- earnings PEr share). The ratio would be useful, if it bore decent information.
We could value a company that is not listed on a stock exchange by using a P/E
ratio of a listed company and multiplying by the profit (E instead of EPS) of the
not-listed company. So the value of a not-listed company could be calculated using the following:
The problem however, is that the P/E ratio does not include debt, so the assumption that the benchmark company is financed by equity only has to be
made. Still, the problem can be solved by making one simpliFYing assumption.
Suppose we know the following: the share price P, P/E ratio of a company that
is financed partially by debt whose value D is known (as well as the interest I
the company pays), the number of shares in circulation N, and that the company
pays tax rate T.
Example 1.
Suppose P/E = 6.1 and P = 32.50. Hence, EPS = 32.50/6.1 = 5.3279.
If the number of shares N = 10 000, EAT = 53.279. If D = 150 000 and the company pays an 8% interest rate, the amount of interest paid by the company equals
I = 12 000. Should the company have no debt (and the tax rate was 30%), the profit
would be:
53 279 + 1200(1-30%) = 61 679.
Having replaced debt by equity, the number of shares is increased by
15 000/32.5 = 4615, and the total number of shares now is 14 615. Hypothetically, we can calculate a new ratio for a company that is financed by equity only; the
share price should be divided by EPS = 61679/14615 = 4.22:
P/E = 32.50/4.22 = 7.7.
The example shows how misleading the P/E ratio can be. When the company is debt financed, EPS was higher and P/E was lower than when the company
was financed by equity only.
The simpliFYing assumption that was used for the calculations says that the
share price will not change after debt is exchanged for equity. However, this as12
sumption is not met, as we will see later: any change in capital structure will influence its share price. We should and we will try to acquire formulae that take
the change into account further on.
Value of a company that is calculated with P/E ratio may be faulty:
One problem can be attributed to the difference between price and value.
The other is referred to the book value of profit.
A modified ratio that takes cash flows into consideration would be of better
use than P/E. Still, mere cash flows do not contain any information about the
future or prosPEcts of growth of a company. A part of net profits may be reinvested, the other paid out as dividends. The balance between paid out dividends,
growth that has been created, and risk may influence the company's value. The
problem will be discussed later.
The menu of multiples is quite wide: P/NOPAT, P/EBIT, and P/EBITDA.
The ratios, such as price to sales, and price to EBIT, have the same drawbacks
as P/E. Any attempts to enhance any of these ratios in order to improve their
effectiveness are fruitless. One of the few sensible improvements that is often
tried is the use of the mean or median of the multiples of the sample of comparable companies. The sample of several companies is better than one, but the
medians or means should not be applied mechanically. The multiple method
has to be used with extreme caution.
There are many more obstacles in using market prices. The current market price does not reflect the actual value of a company, since any attempt to
buy a significant amount of shares may immediately affect the share price.
Market prices fluctuate, sometimes violently. The market price cannot be
ignored, but one should make an attempt to answer the question of how
much the company is really worth. In particular, in case of imPErfect markets (low liquidity) the value of a company may be easily over or under estimated. Recognizing this fact is crucial for buyers, sellers, or investors taking any long-term positions. It may also be important for a company when
planning a new issue. Finally, when a company is a start-up, or exists but is
about to take a strategic decision that may apPEar to be a big leap, we are
devoid of market-based information, when estimating the value of a company is a must.
Setting the proPEr company value may also facilitate remuneration of managers. Any system that is based on book values may be vulnerable to manipulation. For example, the management may easily increase ROA of a company by
taking a decision to cease investing in fixed assets. As an investment in R&D
may mean losses that the company will incur for a few years, the management
that is rewarded based on net profit will never take such decisions. They will
13
ignore new technologies, avoid entering new markets or developing new products.
The comPEtence in company valuation will provide us with a lot of insight
into the role of the components from the formula below:
1.1.1. Cash flows
It is clear that cash flows are a better indicator of the value of a company
than book profits as book values are often far from reality. Positive book profits do not even exclude bankruptcy, let alone an increase in value. Moreover,
(book) profits may be difficult to exercise due to delayed or bad receivables. An
extreme case would be fictional profits generated by so-called creative accounting. The simple difference between book profit and cash flow that is a result of
depreciation is straightforward and must be taken into account. However, it (depreciation) is not related to our criticism concerning book profit as a company
value driver.
Going back to cash flows, they are the true proxy of the value of company.
Its value dePEnds very much on how big the future cash flows might be, how
soon they will materialize, and how certain they are.
If the cash flows were certain, then valuation would be a piece of cake. The
certain cash flows would have to be discounted with the risk-free interest rate,
otherwise one would create a money machine (assuming short positions in CF
are available). It would also be against the notion of the well known free lunch
concept. Let's assume we are considering buying a financial instrument that
will generate 105 in one year's time (t = 1). If the risk free rate is 5%, then the
value of the purchase is 100 (assuming the asset is fully tradable):
This, however, is not the case of cash flows generated by a company. A company by definition is a risky asset. How to value under uncertainty? There are a
few theoretical concepts that may be applied.
1. Certainty equivalent is, in a nut shell, a payment that would be accepted instead of any risky cash flows. Let's assume we exPEct a cash flow
of 150 (if the market goes up), or 90 (if it goes down). We exPEct to get
150 or 90, both with the same probability of 50%. The exPEcted value of
14
the cash flow is then 120. The question however is: what cash flow (that
would be certain) shall we accept instead? If we are indifferent between
the certain payment of 105 and the risk of having either 150 or 90, then
105 is the certainty equivalent:
2. The risk adjusted discount rate method (cost of capital) is much more
practical. It assumes making some adjustments to the denominator,
such that the discount factor reflects the risk of the uncertain cash flows
(where E[FCF] representsmathematical exPEctations). The risk premium
kRP captures the risk. The cost of capital method dominates since we
find it easier to estimate appropriate discount rates than certainty equivalent cash flows:
3. In the risk-neutral probabilities appROAch, the risk free rate is still used
for discounting. In the numerator, risk-neutral probabilities are used instead of the subjective ones (the risk is removed). Such exPEctation is denoted by EM (for martingale probabilities)[8]. The relevant numbers here
have a risk-neutral (p) probability of 25% (up scenario), and (1-p) 75%
(down scenario):
where:
and u (50%) and d (-10%) are up and down scenario returns resPEctively.
1.1.2. Assets of a company - balance sheet
It is common practice to take the book value of assets as the value of a company. For this purpose, only fixed assets should be considered since in general current assets are financed by current liabilities. Only net working capital
8 For more information about the martingale probabilities go to: M. Capinski, T. Zastawniak, Mathematics for
Finance, Springer Verlag, London, 2003
15
should be added to the value of fixed assets. However, the book value of assets does not reflect the real value of a company - such an appROAch ignores a
number of critical factors. To name just a few:
intangible assets,
the role of environment,
the role of management,
the role of human resources.
*
*
*
*
The comments about the difference between book value and market value of
assets are still valid. For example, assets that are fully depreciated and have a
book value of zero can still be effectively used in the production process. Hence,
numerous attempts to use figures other than the book value of assets are made.
1. Restated net value.
When using the restated net value method, book values (which for many
reasons are far from reality) have to be restated and revalued before they
are able to represent a true asset's value. Certain components of a balance sheet are adjusted: receivables that are past due are cancelled or
their value is reduced relative to the chance of having the invoices paid,
inventory value is adjusted by rejecting the items hard to sell and replacing the book value with the market value, and the value of fixed assets
is adjusted on the basis of estimates by certified evaluators. In general,
each asset has to be valued, some at their market value (the assumption is
that we can sell the asset), while others at replacement cost (if the asset is
used in the company's oPErations). The method is easy to use and the result is hardly ever questioned. However, one has to aware of the fact that
such a valuation only makes sense if the assets can be used indePEndently of the company's oPErations. If not, the result obtained through the
restated net value method seems meaningless.
2. Liquidation value.
When using the liquidation value method, book values are replaced with
market values based on the assumption that the business is to be liquidated and quickly sold off (usually) in pieces.The resulting number will be a
lower limit of a price estimate of a company that is close to bankruptcy.
In addition to that, costs of the liquidation process (bankruptcy proceedings) must be taken into account, proPErly estimated and deducted from
the previously set value of a company.
3. Replacement value.
When using the replacement value method, we calculate a cost of building a company that has the same oPErational potential as the company
that is being analyzed. Components with no liquidation value should be
ignored. In fact (with the last statement) the method becomes a mixture
of other methods.
16
However, none of the above adjustments are satisfactory, since they do not
solve the basic problem of the discrepancy between the value of assets and the
value of a business. On one hand, market value may be misleading since, for example, exPEnsive highly sPEcialized machines that are difficult to relocate may
have low market value. On the other, replacement value may be too high - buying old equipment may pose a problem, since it is exPEnsive and its efficiency is
doubtful. Finally, the liquidation value is typically very low.
What is sometimes discussed is the notion of economic value. The notion is
very unclear. The only estimate of such value that makes sense is to calculate
cash flows that may be potentially generated, and at the same time taking into
account proPEr costs of production and product quality.
Example 2.
Let us consider a business: a copying centre. Suppose that instead of buying a copying machine, we buy a scanner, computer and printer. The cost of buying all the
equipment is higher that the cost of a copying machine (and the quality is comparable). The real value of the equipment if used for printing is low. We are not going to
be comPEtitive, as the costs will be higher and delivery time longer, and the fact that
we can easily change the fonts, correct the sPElling, or correct red eyes while copying will not be worth much.
There are a few other adjustment methods such as: book value of assets plus
certain PErcentage of revenues or turnover. They go in the right direction as an
attempt to recognize the ability of a company to generate cash, but they are arbitrary and extremely subjective. Such valuations dePEnd on the attitude of the
PErson that is doing the valuation and give extremely different results for companies that are similar.
1.1.3. Summary
The discussion above on company valuation methods leads to a thought that
sometimes assets PEr se are not important but it is more important how the assets are utilized, and all the organizational environment of a company is often
an essential component of the company's value. Let us name a few factors:
* business idea,
technology,
*
licences,
*
17
* staff, management,
* organizational structure,
* brand,
* market share.
Without these factors, equipment and machines themselves are not worth
much. They enable the production ofhigh quality, low cost products that are
sellable. Estimating their value without looking into the future is impossible.
The value of a company dePEnds on cash flows
that the company may generate in the future.
estimate future cash flows
determine a discount factor- cost of capital.
The problem we are facing is to:
*
*
Let us admit that historical data are of little value. In order to prove the value
of this statement it is enough to imagine two companies having very different
backgrounds but sharing the same rosy prosPEcts for the future. An argument
that the position on the market dePEnds on the historical value can be rejected
by proving that exPEcted cash flows should capture that. Risk is a factor of great
importance but this is included in the cost of capital.
Future exPEcted cash flows will be calculated on the basis of strategic plans
and financial documents pro forma of a company. The starting point for such
calculations is sales predictions which are preceded by a macROEconomic analysis. The prosPEcts of economic growth of the economy affect the predicted increase of purchasing power and demand. Such analysis should not ignore the
international environment, sPEcifics of the region or a given industry. What follows, is the micROEconomic analysis that may help calculate a unit price and the
level of sales. In practice, the sales from the previous PEriod of time is accepted
as a starting point, then an increase of several basis or PErcentage points is assumed. Costs can be predicted from analyzing company oPErations, but let us
not forget that they have to be viewed from a larger PErsPEctive, taking into account a number of other factors.For example, prices of materials may dePEnd on
certain international factors such as exchange rates.
Such predictions are usually made for a PEriod of 5 to 9 years. Further prognosis poses a challenge as predicting sales 10 years from now is not likely to
be precise. Here, a simpliFYing assumption is made, where cash flows are predicted, then discounted to some point in the future and this number is called the
residual value.
18
In practice, it is often assumed that future cash flows (e.g. after 5 years) become a PErPEtuity or growing PErPEtuity. It significantly simplifies calculations of the residual value.
The planned future cash flows are only exPEcted values. In practice, a certain amount risk is involved and there will always be some discrepancies between planned and realized values.
This fact is taken into account in choosing a discount rate (cost of capital)
that reflects the level of uncertainty that is risk.
1.2. Valuation methods
Once we have financial documents pro forma, we can calculate the cash
flows. There are two basic valuation methods, corresponding to two kinds of
cash flows.
1. FCF - Free Cash Flow (cash flow available for both shareholders and
debt holders)
FCF is cash that is generated by a company's oPErational activity without
taking interest payments into account. We hypothetically assume a situation
where a company is equity financed only. The formula below is used in this
case:
The correction involves adding back depreciation and the value of actual investments made by a company in working capital and fixed assets. Using the
formula means that the tax shield is not taken into account. This however is not
true. The tax shield is not ignored but included in the calculations of cost of capital (WACC- weighted average cost of capital). The WACC is defined as:
Free Cash Flows are discounted and the value of a company is obtained.
Then, the market value of debt can be deducted and what is left is the value
of equity. The value of each share can be easily found then. In a nutshell:
E = V - D.
19
The method is called Flow to Firm (FTF), or indirect method, since the value of equity is found indirectly - fIRSt the value of the whole company is found
and then equity.
2. CF - Cash Flow (Cash flow available for shareholders only).
We calculate cash flows CF available for shareholders:
Cash Flows (CF) are discounted by the cost of equity, which is the rate of return
required by shareholders. The value of debt is found indePEndently and the sum of
these two gives the value of the whole company: V = E + D
The method is called Flow to Equity (FTE) or the direct method.
There is a clearly defined relationship between CF and FCF and the two
equalities:
It is worth emphasizing that Free Cash Flows are purely hypothetical and
(except for a company that is fully equity financed) are not cash flows that
are obtained in reality.
It is also worth mentioning that sometimes CCF (Capital Cash Flow) or DCF
(Debt Cash Flow) are defined. The latter is easy to calculate - it equals interest
plus principal payments or taking additional loans. Then CCF can be defined as
a sum of DCF and CF:
The appropriate discount rate for CCF is (according to the equality above
and the proPErties of the portfolio theory) a weighted average cost of capital
(without a tax shield) kA:
There is also the APV (Adjusted Present Value) method, where FCF is discounted with the cost of capital kU (u stands for unleveraged) that does not include a tax shield (assuming that a company is equity financed), and then a correction including the current value of the tax shield, agency costs, etc. is added
or subtracted.
20
Example 3.
Here is the data concerning Hip Hop Inc.:
Balance sheet: (in millions)
Assets
Cash
Accounts receivable
Inventory
2008
96
455
553
Current assets
Fixed assets
1104
1644
2009
160
688
555
1403
1709
Liabilities
Account payable
Tax liabilities
Current liabilities
Debt
Equity
Retained earnings
Assets
2748
3112
Liabilities
2008
232
196
2009
266
123
428
400
600
1320
2748
389
454
640
1629
3112
Income statement: (in millions)
Sales
Cost of sales
Depreciation
EBIT
Interest
EBT
Tax (34%)
EAT
Dividend
Retained earnings
2009
1509
750
65
694
70
624
212
412
103
309
Here is the way to calculate the company's cash flows:
21
Let us check whether the formula that translates CF into FCF applies:
There are certain technical problems that are likely to apPEar in the calculations described so far.
1. One has to know the cost of capital WACC (and both its components:
cost of debt and cost of equity) in order to calculate the value of a company.
2. One has to know the capital structure, that is the value of debt and equity,
in order to calculate the cost of capital (cost of equity or WACC).
3. One has to know the value of interest payments, which is the value of
debt, in order to calculate cash flows.
The problems create a logical loop: step 1 needs step 2, but step 2 requires
step 1.In the next subSECtion we will show how to tackle the problem in a few
sPEcific situations. By the way, the problem seems technical, but as a matter of
fact it is a profound shift in the way the value can be found.
Another problem with cash flows is that the term is not clearly defined.
We cannot rely on IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards) or USGAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting Standards), or any of the local laws in
that resPEct. By no means are the two definitions of cash flows given above the
only ones that can be used. They are sPEcific enough to justiFY the use of two
methods of company valuation, and general enough to allow further differences.
For example, cash is often treated as a non-oPErational asset and removed from
cash flow calculations. By the way, our view is that a certain amount of cash is
always needed for company oPErations. There are even models for optimizing
the amount of cash a company should hold (Baumol, Stone's models) and therefore any decisions with regards to cash levels should definitely be treated as oPErational ones. Thus, there a whole gamut of methods used for cash flow calculations - a good review of them is presented in Velez-Pareja's paPEr[9] .
1.2.1. PErPEtuity, given capital structure.
There is a range of problems in the valuation of companies. We will make
some simplifications in order to come up with a result. Here are a few examples
of applying both methods of company valuation. FIRSt, an infinite investment
horizon is assumed (the company will never terminate its oPEration).
9 I. Velez-Pareja, "Construction of Free Cash Flow", Working PaPEr 1995/6, www.paPEr.ssrn.com
22
Example 4.
Suppose, sales of 200[10] are generated every year. Costs are always 70% of sales.
The company is financed by debt of 20%, that is D/V = 20%. The cost of debt is
16% and the cost of equity 26%. The company pays 30% corporate income tax.
FTF method (based on FCF)[10]
An income statement for the years to come is drawn up. Hypothetically, it
assumed that there is no debt (in order to determine free cash flows).
Sales
OPErational costs
EBIT
Interest
EBT
Tax
FCF
200
140
60
0
60
18
42
Now, it is easy to calculate the weighted average cost of capital:
The value of the whole firm is:
Debt is stipulated at 20% of the total value of the firm, so D = 36.46 and
E = 145.83.
The above income statement was calculated with no debt assumption.
The genuine profit can now be found, since interest can be found once debt is
known.
10 Money amounts in most of the examples and cases are expressed in thousands.
23
Sales
OPErationalcosts
EBIT
Interest
EBT
Tax
CF
200.00
140.00
60.00
5.83
54.17
16.25
37.92
We can also calculate the present value of cash flows by discounting them
with the cost of equity. The result is the same as before:
FTE method (based on CF)
Had we known both methods would give the same result, we could use the
above calculations (both), where the level of debt, interest and cash flows were
found. However, we did not know that and thecalculations had to be rePEated. It
is good practice to use both methods and prove the result by executing the calculations separately, otherwise we are in facing a tautology.
We have another series of relationships leading to a loop:
1. CF is calculated with the use of interest rates of 16% of debt - the value
of debt is not known yet.
2. The value of debt can be derived from a capital structure (D/E = 20%/
80% = 25%) - but this needs the value of equity as an input.
3. The value of E is equivalent to the value of cash flow discounted at the
cost of capital - the loop is complete, CF is not known yet.
The problem can be solved numerically, or by solving the set system of simultaneous equations:
24
By substituting CF and D from the equations above to the last equation, it is
easy to solve and will generate E:
(25% is the D/E ratio that is derived from the implied capital structure.)
Once we know the value of equity, the value of debt can also be found: D/E
= 20%/80%, so debt is 5% of equity, hence D = 36.46 as before.
It has been proven that this method leads to the same result as before. It is
not a coincidence. Let us analyze the case again by reformulating the equation
for E:
It is worth emphasizing an existing flaw in assuming a fixed capital structure. If the value of equity changes, the capital structure changes too. It could
hapPEn as a result of a change in risk or a change in exPEcted cash flows. It is
worth bearing in mind that changing share prices may affect even the value of
companies that are not listed, let alone those that are traded. We should then
adjust the level of debt, so the capital structure is always as planned. Obviously,
this is difficult as the value of debt is determined at the very beginning, and the
changes may take place later. Besides, it is easier to assume that the level of debt
at a particular point in time is given. It does not exclude using the policy aimed
at obtaining a certain required capital structure.
The assumption that the capital structure is known brings (apart from simplicity of calculations) a significant advantage. In most of the cases analyzed in
this chapter, it was assumed that cost of equity is given. However, the cost of equity dePEnds on financial risk, which is also represented by the capital structure.
Relying on debt that is given and used to determine the capital structure leads to
a logical loop: structure determines cost of equity, cost of equity determines the
value of equity, and finally equity defines capital structure. The problem will
be taken care of in Chapter 2, which is devoted to capital structure only. Here,
25
in this SECtion, it is assumed that the cost of equity is found indePEndent of the
structure of financing, e.g. by using CAPM.
1.2.2. PErPEtuity, given value of debt.
Taking for granted that the value of debt is given is reasonably realistic. The
capital structure is temporarily unknown and will be calculated as soon as the
value of equity is found.
Example 5.
Let's assume that sales do not change and are 200 every year. Costs are 70% of
sales. The company is partly financed by debt of 50. Interest is a PErPEtuity of 8,
since the cost of debt is 16%. Cost of equity is 26%. The company pays corporate
tax of 30%.
Method based on FCF.
For FCF calculations, the same data as before are used:
Sales
OPErational costs
EBIT
Interest
EBT
Tax
FCF
200
140
60
0
60
18
42
The following problem is encountered:
1. We need to know the weights (share of debt and equity in total financing), in order to calculate weighted average cost of capital.
2. We need to know the value of debt (this is given) and equity in order to
find the weights.
3. The sum of debt and equity gives the value of the company that we are
looking for.
26
An analytical solution to the problem is fairly straightforward: we are facing
the following system of equations, where V is the value of a company and k the
cost of capital:
The fIRSt equation shows the value of the whole company as a PErPEtuity
with an annual payment of 42 and an unknown discount rate k. The other shows
the formula for WACC, where "V - 50" is the value of equity. The system can
be easily solved by entering k =42/V into the other equation. We get:
and then,
Thus, E = 140 after deducting the value of debt from the value of the company.
The problem can also be solved numerically. FIRSt, let us accept any cost of
capital, e.g. 10%. This would provide the value of equity as follows:
FCF
K
V
D
E
42
10%
420
50
370
The value is incorrect, since for such values for D and E, the resulting value
of WACC would be different from 10%.
27
In order to make the necessary corrections, we should enter a formula for
WACC in the appropriate cell in Excel, replacing the k = 10% with the result
above. The loop is then complete and the final results, as shown below, are correct.
FCF
K
V
D
E
42
22.11%
190
50
140
The loop will work on one condition: a feedback loop must be activated in
Excel (go to Tools/Options/Calculations, tick Manual Calculation and Iteration
boxes)[11]. By setting the Maximal Number of Iterations to 1, it can be observed
how the computer gets closer and closer to the right answer. The computer will
only execute one loop and each following loop can be triggered by pressing the
F9 key.
Method based on CF.
The same result can be obtained by relying on CF. The income statement
looks as follows:
Sales
OPErational costs
EBIT
Interest
EBT
Tax
EAT = CF
200
140
60
8
52
15,6
36,4
The value of equity can be easily found, once we know the cost of equity.
The result is identical to the one found before:
11 In more recent versions of MS Office, the path is slightly different.
28
1.2.3. One PEriod - given capital structure
The assumption that oPErations of a company are represented by a PErPEtuity is an gross simplification. A one-PEriod case is essential since later on it will
become a starting point for developing a multi-PEriod case. It will be based on
rePEating a single-PEriod case.
Example 6.
Let us assume an investment horizon of one year. Starting the business involves investing 200, including working capital (say this is mostly land in order to avoid problems with depreciation). EBIT = 80 is generated at the end of the year, and the value
of assets does not change. The company pays 30% tax. The shareholders require
28% return on the money invested into the business. Cost of debt (that provides
40% of financing) is 10%.
Method based on FCF.
Let us calculate FCF: profit after taxation is 56, and so at the end of the year
200 is recovered:
FCF = 256.
Now, WACC can be found:
FCF can be discounted at WACC:
Finally, the values of E and D can be calculated:
We are able to determine how much has to be borrowed in order to finance
the business idea. The missing 114.38 must be invested by the shareholders.
Shortly afterwards, the value of the shares (if traded) grows to 128.43, as a result of the fact that the investment is characterized by a positive NPV of 14.05,
as shown below:
200 - 85.42 = 114.38
29
This is exactly the difference between the principal initially invested and the
market value of equity:
Let us put the phenomenon into a wider context. The value of the company
V is its discounted value of future cash flows, so the relationship NPV = - I + V
holds. There are some more relationships that follow:
where (I - D) is the sum of money supplied by shareholders in order to finance the business. This is an illustration of the general fact that equity is typically increased by the NPV of a project.
Method based on CF.
Let us fIRSt find a solution to the problem by solving a system of equations.
In the fIRSt equation, the fact that debt has to be paid back and assets can be sold
is taken into account. The SECond one shows the implied capital structure. The
last one defines equity as the discounted cash flow available to shareholders:
E may be easily obtained by solving the last equation:
30
D can be determined using the SECond equation. It also shows that the methods lead to the same result as before. To make sure this is not a single occurrence but a rule, let us reformulate the equation for E to see how both methods
(CF and FCF-based) are reconciled:
To complete the task, let us solve the problem numerically.
Here is the income statement (suppose D = 100):
EBIT
D
Interest
EBT
Tax
EAT
CF
80
100
10
70
21
49
149
Now, let us calculate E by discounting CF at cost of equity:
The loop may now be closed by entering the expression (0,4/0,6)E (implied
by the capital structure) instead of 100, and by executing iterations (F9). We
eventually get to the same result:
EBIT
D
Interest
EBT
Tax
EAT
CF
E
80.00
85.62
8.56
71.44
21.43
50.01
164.39
128.43
31
1.2.4. One PEriod - given debt
The calculations using the direct valuation method are facilitated using the
debt assumption,, since interest payments and cash flows (CF) can be easily
found. Applying the indirect method to the same set of data is more difficult
(compared to the situation with a given capital structure).
Example 7.
Let us assume that a business is carried out for one year, where the initial investment of 200 is financed 50% by shareholders and the other 50% by a loan. At the
end of the year EBIT of 80 is generated and the invested funds can be fully recovered. The company pays corporate income tax of 30%, and the cost of equity is
28%.
Method based on FCF
In the same fashion as before, free cash flows are calculated (taking into account that the assets are sold at the end of the year).
EBIT
Tax
Net profit
FCF
80
24
56
256
We are dealing with a logical loop once again: WACC is still unknown, the
value of the company cannot be calculated without WACC, so we don't know
the value of equity either, which means we do not know the capital structure of
the company, which we need to find the cost of capital (WACC).
The system of equations that PErmits to us to find the value of a company is
as follows:
32
The system can be solved (using simple algebra), or the solution can be found
with the use of iterations in spreadsheets (the rules of using iterations have already been explained). Here is the solution we obtain:
Since the value of debt (loan) is 100, the value of equity becomes:
Please note, that the financing structure (market-value wise) is different from
the initial one (where 50% of the seed money came from a loan), since debt represents 46.21% of the company value.
Method based on CF
Let us calculate cash flow available to the shareholders:
EBIT
Interest
EBT
Tax
EAT
CF
80
10
70
21
49
149
This appROAch requires paying back the loan at the end of the year. The available cash flow (100) (left after selling the assets) discounted at 28%, generates
the same value of equity E as before (in the indirect method).
1.2.5. Three PEriods - given structure
The multi-PEriod example will be limited to the method based on given capital structure. An appROAch which assumes a fixed level of debt, and that has
a changing capital structure, will be presented in Chapter 2 together with methods of determining the cost of capital in such a context.
The general case will be illustrated by an example of a company with an investment horizon of three years. The example is general enough, since methods
used to coPE with problems encountered here are helpful when dealing with
a three-PEriod (and more) case as well.
33
Example 8.
The company conducts oPErations for three years. Initially, 200 is invested in land.
At the end of each of the three years, EBIT of 80, 90 and 70 resPEctively is generated.
It is assumed that the value of land will not change and it can be sold as soon as the
company terminates its oPErations. The company is financed 40% by debt. Other
necessary parameters are as follows: T = 30%, kD = 10%, kE = 28%.
Method based on FCF
WACC has already been calculated (Example 6):
Let us proceed to calculating free cash flow for each of the years and disWACC = 19.60%.
counting it at WACC.
Year
EBIT
Tax
FCF
PV
1
80.00
24.00
56.00
46.82
2
90.00
27.00
63.00
44.04
3
70.00
21.00
249.00
145.55
The value of the whole company is obtained by summing the present values
of free cash flows: V = 236.41. The values of debt and equity can now easily be
found using the following formulae:
Now we can take advantage of the values and determine cash flow in the
fIRSt year. FIRSt, however, let us see what the value of company is each year.
The discounted cash flow from the end of year 3 represents the value of
the company at the end of year 2, and the discounted cash flows from years 2
and 3 represent the value of the company at the end of year 1. The same result
is obtained if cash flow and the value of company are discounted at the end of
year 2:
34
There is also another way to show the present value:
For each of the years, let us split V into debt and equity according to the assumed capital structure:
Year
FCF
V
D
E
0
236.41
94.57
141.85
1
56.00
226.75
90.70
136.05
2
63.00
208.19
83.28
124.92
3
249.00
Now, cash flows (CF) can be determined for each of the PEriods. They are
going to serve as data for a comparison analysis with the CF method that is to
follow. Net profits must be calculated fIRSt.
Year
EBIT
Interest
EBT
Tax
EAT
1
80.00
9.46
70.54
21.16
49.38
2
90.00
9.07
80.93
24.28
56.65
3
70.00
8.33
61.67
18.50
43.17
Finding the value of cash flow needs a great deal of attention. At the end of
year 3, the value of assets (after they are sold) must be added, and the debt (that
is paid back) can be deducted:
At the end of year 2, another correction has to be made: the value resulting
from a changed level of debt must be added. Debt diminishes, so every year
cash flow is lower than net profit.
35
Cash flows discounted at 28% generate the value of E = 141.85. We can also
find the value of equity each year (in the same fashion we did for the value of
company V) :
Year
CF
E
0
141.85
1
45.52
136.05
2
49.23
124.92
3
159.89
For example, 136.05 is calculated by discounting the sum of 45.52 and
124.92 using a 28% discount rate.
The convergence between the two methods is striking. Still, it does not prove
that the CF-based method will give the same result, since CFs were calculated
with the use of values obtained via FCF based method. Let us calculate the appropriate values separately.
Method based on CF
Let us pore over the one-PEriod example and use the exPErience to deal
with an investment horizon of many PEriods. This time, however, we will
limit ourselves to numerical solutions. Solving systems of equations for the
multi-PEriod case is viable but it would involve very complicated notation. We
will relax these restrictions later and present graphically how such systems of
equations might work. For the time being, a numerical solution will do - it is
good enough to draw conclusions of a general nature.
Temporarily, debt is assumed to be fixed at 50 every year. The formula for
CF takes into account changes in the level of debt, although now it is IRRelevant
since debt does not change.
Year
EBIT
D
Interest
EBT
Tax
EAT
CF
E
0
50.00
170.55
1
80.00
50.00
5.00
75.00
22.50
52.50
52.50
165.81
2
90.00
50.00
5.00
85.00
25.50
59.50
59.50
152.73
3
70.00
5.00
65.00
19.50
45.50
195.50
36
The value of equity E each year is the discounted value of cash flow from
the years to follow, or a discounted sum of one cash flow and the value of equity
from the following year. It can be seen that the level of debt must be adjusted,
because the capital structure is different from the one that was assumed. The
assumed ratio of D/E is 2/3 and the adjustment are entered into the appropriate
cells:
Year
EBIT
D
Interest
EBT
Tax
EAT
CF
E
0
94.57
1
80.00
90.70
9.46
70.54
21.16
49.38
45.52
2
90.00
83.28
9.07
80.93
24.28
56.65
49.23
3
70.00
8.33
61.67
18.50
43.17
159.89
141.85
136.05
124.92
The order of putting the formulae into the spreadsheet also matters. Let us
begin with the debt at the end of year 2. The numbers in bold are safe in that resPEct as their values are not related to other cells.
In conclusion, for the multi-PEriod case and a fixed capital structure, both
methods (CF and FCF-based) give identical results. The case of fixed debt will
be considered in Chapter 2.
1.2.6. Growing PErPEtuity - given structure
On one hand, the assumption that a company receives cash flows represented as a growing PErPEtuity is often criticized as being a gross simplification. On
the other hand, in real life a more precise prognosis is not available. Surely, accepting the growing PErPEtuity is a mistake, as in practice there will never be
such a scenario. Still, the assumption is justified by its simplicity, realism and
the fact that part of the risk (divergence from the exPEcted values) is reflected in
the cost of capital. The growth factor is not likely to be constant, but there is no
other reasonable alternative to use instead. Setting the value of the growth factor is a difficult task.
37
Example 9.
Let us assume that the company's oPErations will never terminate. Initially, 200 is
invested in land. At the end of the fIRSt year, EBIT of 80 is generated and then it will
grow at the pace of 5% every year. The company is financed 40% by debt. Other
necessary parameters are as follows: T = 30%, kD = 10%, kE = 28%.
Method based on FCF
Free cash flow at the end of the fIRSt year has already been calculated, so has
WACC = 19.60%.Both EBIT and FCF grow at 5% every year:
Let us calculate the present value of a growing PErPEtuity:
This is also the value of the whole company, which can be split into debt and
equity according to the assumed capital structure.
EBIT
Tax
FCF
V
D
E
80.00
24.00
56.00
383.56
153.42
230.14
Method based on CF
When using this method, we encounter the same logical loop leading to a
system of equations as many times before. Please note that because profit grows
at the g rate, equity grows accordingly and debt has to grow at the same rate
so the capital structure could be maintained. The initial level of debt D after
one year grows by gD to D(1+g). Consequently, CF (at the end of year 1) is increased by gD. Substituting these values into formulae x and y, we obtain the
following:
38
Here is the solution for E:
The numerical solution involves setting the value of debt at, say, D = 100, and
then calculating cash flow, discounting and finding D based on the assumed capital structure (fIRSt column below). Then, the loop has to be closed by referring the
100 cell (D) to the cell in the SECond column, including a proPEr formula for debt.
EBIT
D
Interest
EBT
Tax
EAT
CF
E
D
V
80.00
100.00
10.00
70.00
21.00
49.00
54.00
234.78
156.52
391.30
80.00
153.42
15.34
64.66
19.40
45.26
52.93
230.14
153.42
383.56
To sum up, the method based on FCF seems much simpler; though both
give the same results..
1.2.7. Growing PErPEtuity - given debt
To demonstrate this concept, we will assume an initial level of debt and then
assume that debt is growing at the same rate as profits. An alternative assumption that debt and profits grow at a different rates leads to many technical problems and is of little practical use.
The case is quite simple to solve.
39
Example 10.
Let us assume that oPErational profit (EBIT) at the end of the year is 60 (for simplicity depreciation is ignored), kD = 6%, kE = 14%, and initially the value of debt is 100.
T = 30%. Profits and debt both grow at 4% a year.
Net profit can be found by deducting interest payment and tax. Then we
have to take into account the fact that growing debt means a positive cash flow
for the shareholders. Thus, the cash flow exPEcted at the end of the year must be
increased by gD, that is, 4% of debt.
EBIT
I
EAT
CF
FCF
60.00
6.00
37.80
41.80
42.00
Now, Gordon's model can be used to calculate the cost of equity (here original S is replaced with E).
The same result is obtained if FCF is discounted at WACC (12.11%):
1.2.8. General case - given structure
What is often considered when PErforming real life company valuations is
oPErations that are not planned to terminate at any point of time, but cash flows
for the fIRSt, say, five years can be more or less precisely predicted, and then, it
is assumed the company will continue oPErations in a form of a growing PErPEtuity. Such a situation is easy to analyze: in Example 8 the amount acquired
from selling the assets can be replaced by the amount representing continuation.
40
1.2.9. APV - given structure
A company can be treated as a portfolio of equity and debt. Then, the rate
of return for the company can be found, providing costs of debt and equity are
available:.
The APV method involves discounting FCF at this very cost of capital, and
then adding some adjustments, such as adding the value of a tax shield. Typically, other adjustments are also included, such as flotation costs, costs of financial distress, etc. The APV method is more flexible than the methods where
such costs are only reflected in the discount factor. The tax shield adjustment
requires finding the value of the tax shield for each year, and then calculating its
present value. The problem that is encountered here relates to establishing the
proPEr value of the discount rate.
Example 11.
Company X generates EBIT = 200 (PErPEtuity), and pays 30% tax. It is financed
30% by debt. The cost of debt is 10% and cost of equity is 16%.
FCF (140) and cost of capital kA can be easily found:
In the next step, the basis for the further adjustment is calculated - it is the
present value of cash flows for a hypothetical situation in which the company is
fully financed by equity (then FCF = CF)
The final adjusted value of the company is denoted as APV. Debt is 30% of
the amount, and interest is 10% of the debt. Tax shield (TS) is 30% of the latter:
41
However, APV is unknown so the calculations cannot be PErformed. Additionally, there is the question of how to discount the tax shield. The answer dePEnds on how we PErceive the risk which is associated with the volatility of the
underlying instruments (mostly debt). Here are three different points of view.
1. If the structure is fixed, the value of debt will correspond to the changes
in the company value. Thus, we should discount at kA which reflects the
volatility of the value of the company.
2. Initially, the value of debt is known, so the fIRSt tax shield is less risky
and should be discounted at the cost of debt, and all the others to follow
at kA.
3. The cash flows are as risky as debt is (debt is the key component of the
tax shield), therefore they should be discounted at the cost of debt.
Some argue that a risk free rate could also be used.Let us present the consequences of supporting the points of view number 1 and 2 above.
AppROAch 1.
Let us calculate the present value of a tax shield:
Let us correct the present value of cash flows and add the present value of
the tax shield:
Please note that we are facing a logical loop again: APV dePEnds on TS,
and TS cannot be calculated without APV. Still, the system of equations can be
solved:
Interestingly enough, if the formula for kA is entered in the denominator, we
obtain a formula that looks familiar:
42
Clearly, the method gives the same result as the ones used so far: the value
of the company is obtained by discounting FCF at WACC. Now, we can complete the calculations:
AppROAch 2 (Miles-Ezzell)
According to this appROAch, discounting of the tax shield is done as follows:
Then, we take the same stEPS as previously in an attempt to find APV:
After solving the equation for APV we get:
The rate in the denominator replaced WACC. It is also a tyPE of a weighted
average cost of capital that, in order to distinguish it from regular WACC and
appreciate the contribution of its authors, is marked as WACCME:
The calculations can now be completed:
43
The result is different from that of appROAch 1, but the difference is not striking. The discounting factor that was used in the fIRSt PEriod was lower (kD instead kE), so the resulting number (APV) is obviously higher.
Admittedly, the formulae are slightly complicated. Let us then present a simple iteration-based method for finding the value of APV. FIRSt, the present value
of FCF must be found (FCF is discounted at kA =14.2% and, for the time being,
the value is accepted as APV). Then, the tax shield is to be found according to
the formula below:
Here is the result of the attempt:
FCF
PV(FCF)
APV
D
TS
PV(TS)
140.00
985.92
985.92
295.77
8.87
64.87
The loop is completed by replacing APV with PV(FCF)+PV(TS). Eventually, we obtain the same results as before:
FCF
PV
APV
D
TS
PV(TS)
140.00
985.92
1 055.36
316.61
9.50
69.44
1.2.10. Company valuation via iterations
In case of a company represented by a PErPEtuity (as shown in many cases
above) finding the company's value by solving a system of equations is quite
viable. In a real life case, however, when one has to deal with numerous parameters and time PEriods, a numerical solution seems to be the only feasible ap44
pROAch. For example, in order to find the value V (for a given year t), one needs
to know the values of WACC, next E, and then kE. It is impossible to calculate
WACC without V (the one we look for), and E without kE. There apPEars to be
many logical loops in the formulae shown below. It is a chain of formulae that
becomes so integrated that the information between cash flows and cost of capital moves freely. The cost of capital "tracks" the capital structure and changes
accordingly, while CF is a reflection of future profits and also the level of debt
in the company. This is the value-add of the iteration-based method.
Similar loops will apPEar if one uses the FTE method (with CF) instead
of FTF (FCF-based). DePEnding on whether debt or capital structure is given,
loops will additionally run along columns (from V to WACC, and from E to k)
and lines (from one year to another). The valuation is recursive, going backwards in time. To conclude, calculating the value of a company without using
iterations is tantamount to applying the wrong weights to WACC and leads to an
inner contradiction.
In general, the recursive method of company valuation that has been shown
through many examples overcomes a fundamental problem that is often ignored
by many other methods: the fact that the cost of capital dePEnds on the financial
structure. It creates additional technical problems in a form of a logical loop but
this was also remedied. Admittedly, there are also many simplifications: one is
that we often use PErPEtuities as the last resort, and SECond is the assumption
that the required rate of return is equal to the exPEcted return (determined by
cash flows). However, the latter does not seem far from true; an exPEcted return
that is higher than required would lead to a positive NPV, an opportunity which
when confronted with comPEtitive markets quickly ceases to exist.
45
1.3. Growth
1.3.1. Growth of value
It goes without saying that growth in value may take place, providing the
company carries out projects with a positive NPV. Let us illustrate the issue by
showing a company that is financed by equity only, and whose profits it generates are represented by a PErPEtuity. Let us suppose its cost of capital is 20%,
and the company generates cash flows of 300 every year. The value of the company is easy to find:
Now suppose the company can invest 150 in a project that additionally
generates 50 a year. The value of the project is:
Another way to calculate the value of the company is:
The result is in compliance with our prediction and the rule of additivity: the
value of two projects is the sum of their values, providing the cash flow of the
joined projects is the sum of their individual cash flows. This is not always the
case however, since the effect of the growth in units sold may be spoilt by reduction in prices. If the project brings a return that is lower than its cost of capital, the value of the company falls. Let us suppose the project earns only 25k a
year. Then:
Generating profits is not enough. Profits have to be above the hurdle set by
the cost of capital.
A question arises: how to find projects with a positive NPV. In nine out of
ten cases these are a result of a comPEtitive advantage. Here are a few such situations:
46
1. Technological advantage,
2. Organizational advantage,
3. Monopolistic position.
None of these advantages last long as the comPEtition is quick to catch up.
Case (below) shows technical and numerical asPEcts of this phenomenon.
1.3.2. Growth versus value
Profits generated by a company are the basic source of funds that can be
reinvested in order for the company to grow. However, any reinvestment decisions (which may trigger growth) and decisions involving paying out dividends
(which may satisFY shareholders) are contradictory. Let us analyze which decision is genuinely rewarding shareholders. It is obvious though that a positive
NPV is a sine qua non condition concerning all growth prosPEcts.
We will consider equity financing fIRSt, so that we focus on one issue, putting
the debt versus value problem aside. The simplest situation imaginable is a company that does not grow: it generates a profit of 25 000 every year, all of which is
paid out to shareholders (cost of capital is 15%). Both the value of the company
and the share price (assuming that there are 1000 shares in circulation) can be
calculated as follows:
Suppose some investment opportunities apPEar at the end of year 1. The
whole profit can be reinvested and generate a profit in a form of a PErPEtuity
(for simplicity's sake, in the following years we do not allow any investment).
Case 1
Suppose the return exPEcted from the investment is the same as the cost of capital (15%). This means that the 25 000 that is to be invested will bring the profit of 3
750 every year. The exPEcted net present value of the project is no surprise:
At the end of year 1, nothing will be paid out to the shareholders, but in the
years to come the company will generate profit of:
47
The shareholders miss the dividend in the fIRSt year, but then the dividend
grows as shown below:
Dividend / year
No reinvestment
Reinvestment in year 1
1
25.00
0
2
25.00
28.75
3
25.00
28.75
...
...
...
The value of the company is the present value of all future cash flows, shown
as follows:
To make the calculations easier, let us find the value at year 1, so the PErPEtuity formula can be used.
The amount V(1) has to be discounted to year 0 to find V(0). Apparently, the
reinvestment decision did not affect the value of the company.
Case 2
Suppose now the return that is exPEcted from the investment is 20%. It
means that the investment will bring an additional 5 000 a year, starting year 2.
The value of the project at year 1 is:
The table below shows the amount of dividends in both situations:
Dividend / year
No reinvestment
Reinvestment in year 1
1
25.00
0
2
25.00
30.00
3
25.00
30.00
...
...
...
The value of the company is the present value of all future cash flows, so we
follow the calculation procedure from the previous case (Case 1):
48
The reinvestment positively affects the value of the company and share
price:
The present value of the company has grown by 7 246.38, (that is 7.25 PEr
share) thanks to some growth opportunities. The amount (7.25) is denoted by
PVGO (present value of growth opportunities). The example can be a starting point for analyzing PVGO in a wider context. It is clear that growth higher
than zero (investment with the rate of return that is equal to the cost of capital also generates zero growth) increases the share price. This growth potential
(denoted by PVGO) can be defined as:
The formula can be rewritten so that it provides a more natural definition of
a share price:
The share price is broken into two components: value without growth and an
additional component derived from the growth potential.
1.3.3. Dividend policy and growth
Let us check how dividend policy (or reinvestment policy - both are two
sides of the same coin) influences growth and value of a company.
Example 12.
An evaluator analyses a firm that is fully financed by equity (100 book value), that
generates cash flow in a form of PErPEtuity with ROE = 30%. The cost of capital is
25%. There is an option to reinvest part of the profit (30 a year) into a project that
may yield 30% return.
49
If the firm does not take the opportunity[12], 30 will be distributed among the
shareholders every year, and the value of the firm will reach 120. If, however,
the firm decides to take advantage of the (5%) growth opportunity, they will
have to reinvest 16.67% of the profit, increase assets to 105 and pay out only
25 to the shareholders. Technically sPEaking, growth is defined as a product of
ROE and plow-back ratio (reinvestment ratio - p).
Another year will bring a profit of 31.5, out of which 83.33% (100% -
16.67%) will be paid out to shareholders (5% more than previously). The growth
can be sustained and then the value of the company will reach 125 (using Gordon's model). At 10% growth, the value of the company will reach 133.3, at
15% 150. SPEaking of PVGO, at different levels of growth (resPEctively 0%,
5%, 10% and 15% its value (PEr share) is:
PVGO = 0
PVGO = 5.00
PVGO = 13.33
PVGO = 30.00.
Companies with a high PVGO can be defined as growth companies. From
the point of view of an investor who is considering buying the shares, profits may be delayed: we swap high dividends now for even higher dividends
promised to be paid out in a distant future. The delay involves risk: if the growth
is not sustained, the promise may never materialize.
In practice, high growth cannot be sustained in the long run. The market
will not be insatiable forever, and so we will eventually have a lower the return
from selling our product. The model can be used to simulate moderate growth
only (related to GDP, or population growth). Dynamic growth must be analyzed
separately.
1.3.4. Growth versus cost of capital.
Let us consider the problem of finding the cost of capital for a public company (listed on the stock exchange). In a zero-growth scenario, the cost of capital
can be easily found.
and all the dividends are equal to EPS:
12 cf: A. Damodaran, Damodaran on Valuation, John Wiley & Sons, New York 1994, p. 86.
50
Hence,
In a scenario with given growth, the formula looks as follows:
However, the growth is usually unstable - it is hardly possible to express it
through only one rate. Let us then go back to the PVGO formula:
Let us suppose the share price is 50, PVGO is 50, and profit PEr share is 10:
Now, the cost of capital can be found by solving the equation:
Computing the PVGO remains the main problem, of course.
It is extremely educational to use spreadsheets in order to analyze the relationship.
In practice, P/E ratio (price/earnings) is easily available:
In the example, the P/E ratio is 5. The flipPEd ratio gives the cost of capital
for a zero-growth scenario. In other words, in a zero-growth scenario, P/E =
1/k.Hence we are able to determine the cost of capital. In this example it equals
20%. Thanks to growth opportunities, the cost of capital grows too. The larger
the contribution of the share price that comes from PVGO, the higher the share
price is. For example, (ceteris paribus) suppose:
Then,
51
It goes in line with our understanding of the cost of capital as a risk-related
required rate of return. For a company, in which a large share of its value is
based on growth, the level of risk is understandably higher.
What if a company generates losses? The only justification of a positive market price is faith (of the market) in future profits and PVGO is then higher than
share price. The classic example (dated 2000) might be IT companies. Suppose:
Then,
which obviously is more than the share price of 50.
To conclude, investment pays off (it initiates growth), providing the rate of
return on the projects is higher than the cost of capital of the company. Such
opportunities are difficult to find and due to comPEtition's activity, hard to sustain.
1.3.5. Residual value
ExPEcted cash flows are the foundation of the model of company valuation.
Unfortunately, predicting value of cash flows for 7, 9, or 15 years from now is
problematic. Working under the assumption that a company has a finite lifespan
would mean that beyond a certain point in time, cash flow is no longer generated, and the company would not have any value at that point.This is controversial, since companies are usually set up for the long run. Should we suggest
that companies live infinitely. A reasonable appROAch requires setting a certain
finite investment horizon (and then predicting cash flows with a great deal of
precision). Beyond that point in time, it should be assumed that the company
is still active and has some residual value. The residual value concept typically
involves simpliFYing cash flows generated by a company to a PErPEtuity. Let us
discuss some sPEcific assumptions made for the residual value.
1. Assumption that after some time T a company will generate cash flows
in theform of a growing PErPEtuity.
Once this assumption has been accepted, one has to estimate the growth factor, cost of capital, and fIRSt cash flow after time T. Next, Gordon's model can
be applied. There are pros and cons to this appROAch. Its simplicity is the biggest
52
advantage, with the disadvantage being a high sensitivity of the results with resPEct to the assumed (estimated) growth factor.
2. Comparison with another company that has reached a phase of development our company is planning to reach at time T.
Once we find such a company, some of the ratios that refer to the market
value can be used. Suppose the company has P/E ratio that equals 8. The ratio
can be applied to our prediction with resPEct to the level of profits at time T. The
profit can be multiplied by 8 to obtain the value of the company.
Or suppose that the company's MV/BV is 2. We should be able to predict the
book value of our company at time T, and multiply it by 2 to obtain the residual
value of the company.
3. Estimating the length of the comPEtitive advantage phase.
Once the comPEtitive advantage phase ends,the growth opportunities will
vanish, which, on one hand, is bad news, but on the hand makes valuation much
easier (we can completely ignore one of the parameters, namely the growth factor). The residual value can be calculated with the use of a PErPEtuity only.
1.4. Real options
ExPEcted cash flows are the foundation of the model of company valuation.
The uncertainty related to future cash flows cannot eliminated, hence we tend
to underline the expression "exPEcted". During the life of a project, the cash
flows may be lower or higher than the exPEcted ones. When the cash flows are
lower e.g. due to diminished demand, we might have a chance to abandon the
project. In case of success, we might be able to increase production. This tyPE
of flexibility, which is unique to some projects, is not captured by traditional
methods of valuation.
Both decisions; to withdraw after failure or expand after success, have some
financial consequences and dePEnd on future events that are highly uncertain.
The similarity with options theory seems obvious. A buyer of a "put" may exercise the option if the price of underlying asset goes down, likewise buyer of a
"call" may benefit from a situation when the price of an underlying instrument
goes up. The analogies are actually much deePEr than it seems at fIRSt glance.
Hence, the expression "real options" is often used whenever referring to an option whose underlying assets are not financial instruments.
Hence, here is a brief presentation of the basic ideas demonstrating the concept of a real option. If a company conducts market research, it in fact buys an
option: if the research is fruitful the company will launch the product. The exPEnses incurred during the market research phase represent the option premi53
um, and the cost of further investment incurred at some future time T is the exercise price. The payoff dePEnds on the success of the new product and it is the
difference between the value of the future exPEcted cash flows (discounted to
time T) and the investment. The payoff is then given by the following formula:
max(0,R(T)-K), where K is the value of the investment and R (T) is the value
of the generated cash flows at time T (a situation known in the world of finance
under the name"call option"). Obviously, it is zero when the result of the market
research is negative and the company does not invest. As another example, consider production facilities allowing for expansion, which will be employed only
in case of success. Classical cases here are also concerned with oil-drilling and
research and development. On the other hand, "put options" may provide insurance against risk a company may face in case of a failure and a necessity to reduce the production facilities.
Such options as they apPEar in real business activities are very sPEcific, as
the examples above show. They can be rarely written or sold, we cannot hedge,
nor can we replicate them using the underlying assets and bonds. These features
distinguish them sharply from financial options. This raises the question: how
to valuate real options?
If the real option can be related to a financial option, which is the case when
there is a financial asset PErfectly correlated with the underlying asset of the
real option, then applying the valuation tools develoPEd for financial options is
justified. However, we face a danger of mispricing if the correlation is not PErfect [13].
1.4.1. Option to abandon
The fIRSt example below deals with the additional value resulting from an
option to abandon a project.
Example 13.
A project requires an investment of 100. Two future scenarios are conceivable: cash
flows of 60 (success), or 10 (flop) for three years. The probability of each scenario
materializing is 50%. At any time the oPEration may be terminated (assets can be
sold) for 80. The cost of capital is 30%.
13 Capinski M., Patena W. "Real Options - Realistic Valuation", Journal of Business and Society, 2006/3
54
A classic appROAch suggests finding the exPEcted cash flows. Here, the cash
flows are as follows:
NPV of the project is negative (- 0.02). However, we make a mistake by ignoring thepossibility to abandon the project. The previous calculations are correct if the abandonment option is not available. Let us make the calculations
again. The oPErations should be terminated after one year, if the PEssimistic
scenario materializes (the cash flow is 90 then). NPV of the project now changes significantly and is 7.31.
Financial options use sPEcific terminology, which we will apply here in order to help us identiFY crucial components of the real option (option to abandon):
1. Maturity - the end of year 1.
2. Underlying asset: the value of project. At time 1, it is the value of cash
flows as shown below:
It is clear that in the PEssimistic scenario we are better off by terminating
the project and selling the assets, as the cash flow is 90 then (instead of
70.95).
3. Exercise price - 90 (underlying instrument includes abandoning the
project and selling the assets).
55
4. Put option payoff - max(0,K - R(T)), 0 in a optimistic scenario and(90 -
70.95) = 19.05 in a PEssimistic one.
5. Option premium - price of the option (present value of cash flows calculated usingthe cost of capital) is 7.33.
The project with the option to abandon is worth 7.33 more than the same
project without the option. The difference is simply the value of the option (option premium). Please note that the suggested method of valuing the option is
based on physical probabilities and as such is not the classic one.Typically, financial options valuation involves the replication method or the use of martingale probabilities. It is important to notice that (because the option is worth
7.33) it is worth investing 105 (including 5 for the option), instead of 100 to have
the extra opportunity to abandon the project.
1.4.2. Option to abandon revisited
Example 14.
A project requires an investment of 100 and will generate cash flows of 130 (success), or 95 (flop) after one year. The probability of each scenario materializing is
50%. At any time, the oPEration may be terminated and assets can be sold for 100
provided the infrastructure is up to the buyer's needs. The cost of capital is 30% and
the risk-free rate is 5%. How much to invest in order to have the option?
The option can be valued with the use of physical probabilities, using the
same technique as before. Comparing the values with (4.54) and without (2.27)
the option gives an idea of how much the option itself is worth (2.27).
However, it would be tempting to use financial options theory to valuate the
real options. The technique relies on replication. One needs to create a portfolio
that would generate the same payoffs as the option. The number below (denoted
56
as delta) will be helpful (difference in the option payoffs divided by the difference in the project's payoffs):
The portfolio composed of the stock (bought in proportion implied by the
delta) and bond generates the same payoff as the option (0, 5). Delta is the position in the underlying asset which completed in cash position replicates the
payoff.
Scenario
up
Stock
Bond
Total
-18.57
18.57
0
down
-13.57
18.57
5
The payoffs of the portfolio and option are the same and hence their present
values must be equal too.
The option is then worth 3.40. The discrepancy (2.27 versus 3.4) between
the values given by the two methods stems from the fact that both appROAches
have flaws. In the fIRSt appROAch, the physical probabilities have been arbitrarily
chosen, while in the SECond, replication is hardly possible if the real business is
at stake (how to short sell the business that is not publicly traded).
1.4.3. Option to expand
Another example illustrates the benefits from having an option to expand.
When starting a business, we can build a bigger warehouse or buy more efficient (than necessary) machines, which may allow a business to increase production in case of larger demand without having to incur additional investments
later on.
57
Example 15.
A project requires an investment of 100 and will bear cash flows of 80 (success),
or 20 (flop) for three years. The probability of each scenario materializing is 50%.
Sales in years 2 and 3 may be doubled if an investment of 70 is made at the end of
year 1. The cost of capital is 30%.
NPV of the success and flop scenarios (without the option to expand) are
45.29 and - 63.68, resPEctively. It means that NPV of the project is negative
( -9.19). Exercising the option to expand generates cash flows (in the optimistic scenario) of 10, 160, 160 in the three subsequent years. NPV of the project
becomes 75.19 and the option is worth 5.76. Here are the components of the option:
1. Maturity T: the end of year 1.
2. Underlying instrument: value of cash flows, 108.88 or 27.22 that is.
3. Exercise price K: 70.
4. Payoff of the call option: max(0,R(T) - K); 38.88 in a positive and0 in a
negative scenario.
5. Call premium: price of the option (present value of cash flows at the cost
of capital) is 14.95.
Options of that kind are often used in projects concerned with oil-drilling
and research and development, where significant amounts of money have to be
invested into research and the eventual building of a well dePEnds on the research results.
58
1.5. Case study - documents pro forma
A firm's value is determined by its ability to generate cash flow, both now
and in the future. When appROAching a company valuation, a considerable
amount of time must be sPEnt on estimating future cash flows.
Let us analyze the case of Tea.dot company - it is a successful but new company which reinvests most of its earnings. The company's PErformance has to
be predicted for, at least, the next five years so the free cash flows and then
horizontal value of the company were calculated. However, pro forma financial
statements, such as income statements, balance sheets and cash flow statements
could not be produced, if we did not make a number of assumptions.
Before doing so, however, let us have a look at the financial situation of the
company to see how it is doing. As investment analysts, we are mainly interested in assessing the future PErformance of the company. The basis of traditional
analysis is comparison, as ABSolute numbers carry little information value. The
framework for comparison should be:
1. The company's own PErformance in other years (trend)
2. An industry average
Let us do the benchmarking fIRSt and compare the ratios for the relevant in-
(benchmarking)
dustry (Bakery Products) with those of the company:
Industry
Tea.dot (2008)
Quick ratio
Current ratio
Liabilities/equity
DSO
Total assets turnover
ROA
ROE
1,0
1,6
99,7%
24,1
33,4%
7,4%
16,5%
2,39
2,64
358%
79,56
93%
11%
48%
OK
OK
high/risky
poor
OK
OK
OK
The company's liquidity position is very strong. However, it also means that
it has a lot of money tied up in nonproductive assets (cash). The company should
pay more attention to cash management as well as to inventory control. The
average collection PEriod is very long - the company has to wait 80 days after making a sale before receiving cash. This suggests that some stEPS should
be taken to exPEdite the collection of accounts receivables or at least monitor
the receivables position to start with. The turnover of all the firm's assets is
high which means that the company is generating a sufficient volume of business given its total assets investment. The analysis raises a few questions about
59
the company's gearing and its investment strategy. Tea.dot is highly leveraged.
Creditors may be reluctant to lend the firm more money and the management is
subjecting the firm to the risk of bankruptcy if it still seeks to increase the debt
ratio by borrowing additional funds. Both profitability ratios are fine, although
it is obvious that its significantly better result in ROE is due to the company's
great use of debt.
Now let us have a look at the trends at Tea.dot over the last 3 years.
Ratios
Liquidity Ratios
current ratio
quick ratio
cash ratio
Asset Management Ratios
inventory turnover
DSO
Evaluating Assets
fixed asset turnover
total asset turnover
Debt Management Ratios
debt ratio
debt to equity
times interest earned
Profitability Ratios
profit margin on sales
basic earning power
return on assets
return on equity
-2
-1
0
3.44
3.26
1.69
9.32
74.16
1.94
0.91
0.26
0.35
9.76
0.21
0.26
0.19
0.26
2.46
2.24
0.76
3.47
78.84
1.51
0.90
0.71
2.49
1.66
0.13
0.19
0.12
0.41
2.64
2.39
0.94
3.76
79.56
1.73
0.93
0.78
3.58
1.44
0.11
0.20
0.11
0.48
The company has gone through a major expansion over the last 3 years
(fixed assets increased by almost 200% every year) which was financed largely
by an increase in debt. This has resulted in increased sales, but at the same time
decreased margins on sales. The company was lucky not to have been hit by
higher interest costs. The company does not seem to use internal cash flow to
finance investment sensibly (fixed assets increase but not as dynamically as the
debt). The debt ratio moved from an unremarkable 26% to a much more danger60
ous 71% and then 78 %. Overall impressions are that the company set up a very
ambitious expansion plan, financed mainly by borrowing. However, it is lucky
since demand is not slowing down. It should be able to oPErate successfully
provided bad times do not come soon. They have to generate a lot of profit to
reduce gearing. The company's profitability has not improved, even though the
sales sky rocketed. ROE is the only ratio that grew significantly, but that was
mainly due to more and more debt the company used to finance its oPErations.
Thus, debt was used to increase the rate of return on equity.
Having analyzed the company's financial situation, we can make a set of
assumptions for the next few years a savvy manager would make, being in the
shoes of Tea.dot. Here is a set of assumptions for the most likely scenario. The
country's economy is not booming any more and recession is much more likely,
thus we can not exPEct sales to grow at more than 9% and then 5%, 2%, over
the next 3 years, and eventually no growth is exPEcted. The debt has to be handled and the company should not take more long term loans. The quick ratio is
definitely too high, as there is no point in having so much cash, although in this
kind of business it may be justified to some extent. The company should try to
be a bit more efficient and reduce administration costs and overheads to at most
30% of sales. Interest rates in the country will gradually fall which is in line
with the recent tendency and the central bank's policy. The company should
have a stable dividend policy.
Balancesheet
1
2
3
4
5
1 Cash and cash equivalents
7605
7453
6516
6516
10270
2 Accounts receivable
11154
11712
11946
11946
11946
3 Inventory
4 Prepaid exPEnses
5 Current assets
6 ProPErty and equipment
7 ProPErty at cost
8
9
Less accumulated
depreciation
Net proPErty
and equipment
2028
2535
2129
2662
2172
2715
2172
2715
2172
2715
23322
23956
23349
23349
27103
35489
36199
36923
36923
36923
-9065
-12614
-16234 -19926
-23618
26425
23586
20690
16997
13305
10 Total assets
49746
47541
44038
40346
40408
11 Accounts payable
9126
9582
9774
9774
9774
12 Income taxes payable
13
35
44
36
36
61
Balancesheet
13 Other current liabilities
14 Current liabilities
15 Long-term debt
16 Total liabilities
17 Common stock
1
507
9646
23858
2
532
3
543
4
543
5
543
10149
18175
10361
11448
10353
10353
1988
0
33503
28324
21808
12341
10353
6243
6243
6243
6243
6243
18 Retained earnings
10000
12974
15987
21762
23812
19 Stockholders' equity
20 Total liabilities and equity
16243
49746
19217
22230
28005
30055
47541
44038
40346
40408
A complete set of assumptions now should be incorporated in a balance
sheet and income statement and linked sensibly with the most recent financial
documents. This is relatively easy.However, the main problem that is faced is
that the balance sheet is not in balance automatically. Due to the new assumptions, almost all the components are changed. The common practice then is to
use debt (for example short term debt) as a plug. It simply means that the difference between assets and liabilities that stems from the set of assumptions and
the internal mechanics of the balance sheet lands in the debt entry. The issue
seems technical, but it is crucial in the process of smooth preparation of a pro
forma balance sheet. Let us go into the details.
In the simplified balance sheet above, long-term debt is an offset (plug). In
the columns 1 to 4, the assets and liabilities are in equilibrium, because debt
(line 15) is given by the formula:
The appROAch has a handicap - some of the liabilities (retained earnings for
example) may grow to the extent that the debt (calculated according to the formula) becomes negative, which (in terms of accounting rules) is ABSurd.
The formula must be changed into the following:
Now the debt never becomes negative, but the assets and liabilities are still
not in balance. The excess of money (from line 15) must be transferred (for example) to the cash and cash equivalents entry (line 1). The formula there must
be altered too (f stands for the cash forecasted):
62
In real life cases, we follow the same procedure, although the number of entries in the formulae is much larger. Once the pro forma financial documents
are ready, the cash flows can be calculated according to the rule presented in
SECtion 1.2.
