Beginners' Guide to Financial Statements
The Basics
If you can read a nutrition label or a baseball box score, you can learn to read basic
financial statements. If you can follow a reciPE or apply for a loan, you can learn basic
accounting. The basics aren't difficult and they aren't rocket science.
This brochure is designed to help you gain a basic understanding of how to read financial
statements. Just as a CPR class teaches you how to PErform the basics of cardiac pulmonary
resuscitation, this brochure will explain how to read the basic parts of a financial statement.
It will not train you to be an accountant (just as a CPR course will not make you a cardiac
doctor), but it should give you the confidence to be able to look at a set of financial
statements and make sense of them.
Let's begin by looking at what financial statements do.
"Show me the money!"
We all remember Cuba Gooding Jr.'s immortal line from the movie Jerry Maguire, "Show me
the money!" Well, that's what financial statements do. They show you the money. They
show you where a company's money came from, where it went, and where it is now.
There are four main financial statements. They are: (1) balance sheets; (2) income
statements; (3) cash flow statements; and (4) statements of shareholders' equity. Balance
sheets show what a company owns and what it owes at a fixed point in time. Income
statements show how much money a company made and sPEnt over a PEriod of time. Cash
flow statements show the exchange of money between a company and the outside world
also over a PEriod of time. The fourth financial statement, called a "statement of
shareholders' equity," shows changes in the interests of the company's shareholders over
time.
Let's look at each of the fIRSt three financial statements in more detail.
Balance Sheets
A balance sheet provides detailed information about a company's assets, liabilities and
shareholders' equity.
Assets are things that a company owns that have value. This typically means they can
either be sold or used by the company to make products or provide services that can be
sold. Assets include physical proPErty, such as plants, trucks, equipment and inventory. It
also includes things that can't be touched but nevertheless exist and have value, such as
trademarks and patents. And cash itself is an asset. So are investments a company makes.
Liabilities are amounts of money that a company owes to others. This can include all kinds
of obligations, like money borrowed from a bank to launch a new product, rent for use of a
building, money owed to suppliers for materials, payroll a company owes to its employees,
environmental cleanup costs, or taxes owed to the government. Liabilities also include
obligations to provide goods or services to customers in the future.
Shareholders' equity is sometimes called capital or net worth. It's the money that would be
left if a company sold all of its assets and paid off all of its liabilities. This leftover money
belongs to the shareholders, or the owners, of the company.
The following formula summarizes what a balance sheet shows:
ASSETS = LIABILITIES + SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY
A company's assets have to equal, or "balance," the sum of its liabilities and
shareholders' equity.
A company's balance sheet is set up like the basic accounting equation shown above. On the
left side of the balance sheet, companies list their assets. On the right side, they list their
liabilities and shareholders' equity. Sometimes balance sheets show assets at the top,
followed by liabilities, with shareholders' equity at the bottom.
Assets are generally listed based on how quickly they will be converted into cash. Current
assets are things a company exPEcts to convert to cash within one year. A good example is
inventory. Most companies exPEct to sell their inventory for cash within one year.
Noncurrent assets are things a company does not exPEct to convert to cash within one year
or that would take longer than one year to sell. Noncurrent assets include fixed assets.
Fixed assets are those assets used to oPErate the business but that are not available for
sale, such as trucks, office furniture and other proPErty.
Liabilities are generally listed based on their due dates. Liabilities are said to be either
current or long-term. Current liabilities are obligations a company exPEcts to pay off within
the year. Long-term liabilities are obligations due more than one year away.
Shareholders' equity is the amount owners invested in the company's stock plus or minus
the company's earnings or losses since inception. Sometimes companies distribute earnings,
instead of retaining them. These distributions are called dividends.
A balance sheet shows a snapshot of a company's assets, liabilities and shareholders' equity
at the end of the reporting PEriod. It does not show the flows into and out of the accounts
during the PEriod.
Income Statements
An income statement is a report that shows how much revenue a company earned over a
sPEcific time PEriod (usually for a year or some portion of a year). An income statement also
shows the costs and exPEnses associated with earning that revenue. The literal "bottom
line" of the statement usually shows the company's net earnings or losses. This tells you
how much the company earned or lost over the PEriod.
Income statements also report earnings PEr share (or "EPS"). This calculation tells you how
much money shareholders would receive if the company decided to distribute all of the net
earnings for the PEriod. (Companies almost never distribute all of their earnings. Usually
they reinvest them in the business.)
To understand how income statements are set up, think of them as a set of staIRS. You start
at the top with the total amount of sales made during the accounting PEriod. Then you go
down, one step at a time. At each step, you make a deduction for certain costs or other
oPErating exPEnses associated with earning the revenue. At the bottom of the staIRS, after
deducting all of the exPEnses, you learn how much the company actually earned or lost
during the accounting PEriod. PEople often call this "the bottom line."
At the top of the income statement is the total amount of money brought in from sales of
products or services. This top line is often referred to as gross revenues or sales. It's called
"gross" because exPEnses have not been deducted from it yet. So the number is "gross" or
unrefined.
The next line is money the company doesn't exPEct to collect on certain sales. This could be
due, for example, to sales discounts or merchandise returns.
When you subtract the returns and allowances from the gross revenues, you arrive at the
company's net revenues. It's called "net" because, if you can imagine a net, these revenues
are left in the net after the deductions for returns and allowances have come out.
Moving down the staIRS from the net revenue line, there are several lines that represent
various kinds of oPErating exPEnses. Although these lines can be reported in various orders,
the next line after net revenues typically shows the costs of the sales. This number tells you
the amount of money the company sPEnt to produce the goods or services it sold during the
accounting PEriod.
The next line subtracts the costs of sales from the net revenues to arrive at a subtotal called
"gross profit" or sometimes "gross margin." It's considered "gross" because there are
certain exPEnses that haven't been deducted from it yet.
The next SECtion deals with oPErating exPEnses. These are exPEnses that go toward
supporting a company's oPErations for a given PEriod - for example, salaries of
administrative PErsonnel and costs of researching new products. Marketing exPEnses are
another example. OPErating exPEnses are different from "costs of sales," which were
deducted above, because oPErating exPEnses cannot be linked directly to the production of
the products or services being sold.
Depreciation is also deducted from gross profit. Depreciation takes into account the wear
and tear on some assets, such as machinery, tools and furniture, which are used over the
long term. Companies spread the cost of these assets over the PEriods they are used. This
process of spreading these costs is called depreciation or amortization. The "charge" for
using these assets during the PEriod is a fraction of the original cost of the assets.
After all oPErating exPEnses are deducted from gross profit, you arrive at oPErating profit
before interest and income tax exPEnses. This is often called "income from oPErations."
Next companies must account for interest income and interest exPEnse. Interest income is
the money companies make from keeping their cash in interest-bearing savings accounts,
money market funds and the like. On the other hand, interest exPEnse is the money
companies paid in interest for money they borrow. Some income statements show interest
income and interest exPEnse separately. Some income statements combine the two
numbers. The interest income and exPEnse are then added or subtracted from the oPErating
profits to arrive at oPErating profit before income tax.
Finally, income tax is deducted and you arrive at the bottom line: net profit or net losses.
(Net profit is also called net income or net earnings.) This tells you how much the company
actually earned or lost during the accounting PEriod. Did the company make a profit or did it
lose money?
Earnings PEr Share or EPS
Most income statements include a calculation of earnings PEr share or EPS. This calculation
tells you how much money shareholders would receive for each share of stock they own if
the company distributed all of its net income for the PEriod.
To calculate EPS, you take the total net income and divide it by the number of outstanding
shares of the company.
Cash Flow Statements
Cash flow statements report a company's inflows and outflows of cash. This is important
because a company needs to have enough cash on hand to pay its exPEnses and purchase
assets. While an income statement can tell you whether a company made a profit, a cash
flow statement can tell you whether the company generated cash.
A cash flow statement shows changes over time rather than ABSolute dollar amounts at a
point in time. It uses and reorders the information from a company's balance sheet and
income statement.
The bottom line of the cash flow statement shows the net increase or decrease in cash for
the PEriod. Generally, cash flow statements are divided into three main parts. Each part
reviews the cash flow from one of three tyPEs of activities: (1) oPErating activities;
(2) investing activities; and (3) financing activities.
OPErating Activities
The fIRSt part of a cash flow statement analyzes a company's cash flow from net income or
losses. For most companies, this SECtion of the cash flow statement reconciles the net
income (as shown on the income statement) to the actual cash the company received from
or used in its oPErating activities. To do this, it adjusts net income for any non-cash items
(such as adding back depreciation exPEnses) and adjusts for any cash that was used or
provided by other oPErating assets and liabilities.
Investing Activities
The SECond part of a cash flow statement shows the cash flow from all investing activities,
which generally include purchases or sales of long-term assets, such as proPErty, plant and
equipment, as well as investment SECurities. If a company buys a piece of machinery, the
cash flow statement would reflect this activity as a cash outflow from investing activities
because it used cash. If the company decided to sell off some investments from an
investment portfolio, the proceeds from the sales would show up as a cash inflow from
investing activities because it provided cash.
Financing Activities
The third part of a cash flow statement shows the cash flow from all financing activities.
Typical sources of cash flow include cash raised by selling stocks and bonds or borrowing
from banks. Likewise, paying back a bank loan would show up as a use of cash flow.
Read the Footnotes
A horse called "Read The Footnotes" ran in the 2004 Kentucky Derby. He finished seventh,
but if he had won, it would have been a victory for financial literacy proponents everywhere.
It's so important to read the footnotes. The footnotes to financial statements are packed
with information. Here are some of the highlights:
* Significant accounting policies and practices - Companies are required to disclose the
*
accounting policies that are most important to the portrayal of the company's
financial condition and results. These often require management's most difficult,
subjective or complex judgments.
Income taxes - The footnotes provide detailed information about the company's
current and deferred income taxes. The information is broken down by level -
federal, state, local and/or foreign, and the main items that affect the company's
effective tax rate are described.
* PEnsion plans and other retirement programs - The footnotes discuss the company's
PEnsion plans and other retirement or post-employment benefit programs. The notes
contain sPEcific information about the assets and costs of these programs, and
indicate whether and by how much the plans are over- or under-funded.
* Stock options - The notes also contain information about stock options granted to
officers and employees, including the method of accounting for stock-based
comPEnsation and the effect of the method on reported results.
Read the MD&A
You can find a narrative explanation of a company's financial PErformance in a SECtion of the
quarterly or annual report entitled, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of OPErations." MD&A is management's opportunity to provide
investors with its view of the financial PErformance and condition of the company. It's
management's opportunity to tell investors what the financial statements show and do not
show, as well as important trends and risks that have shaPEd the past or are reasonably
likely to shaPE the company's future.
The SEC's rules governing MD&A require disclosure about trends, events or uncertainties
known to management that would have a material impact on reported financial information.
The purpose of MD&A is to provide investors with information that the company's
management believes to be necessary to an understanding of its financial condition,
changes in financial condition and results of oPErations. It is intended to help investors to
see the company through the eyes of management. It is also intended to provide context
for the financial statements and information about the company's earnings and cash flows.
Financial Statement Ratios and Calculations
You've probably heard PEople banter around phrases like "P/E ratio," "current ratio" and
"oPErating margin." But what do these terms mean and why don't they show up on financial
statements? Listed below are just some of the many ratios that investors calculate from
information on financial statements and then use to evaluate a company. As a general rule,
desirable ratios vary by industry.
* Debt-to-equity ratio compares a company's total debt to shareholders' equity. Both
of these numbers can be found on a company's balance sheet. To calculate debt-toequity ratio, you divide a company's total liabilities by its shareholder equity, or
Debt-to-Equity Ratio = Total Liabilities / Shareholders' Equity
If a company has a debt-to-equity ratio of 2 to 1, it means that the company has two
dollars of debt to every one dollar shareholders invest in the company. In other
words, the company is taking on debt at twice the rate that its owners are investing
in the company.
*
Inventory turnover ratio compares a company's cost of sales on its income statement
with its average inventory balance for the PEriod. To calculate the average inventory
balance for the PEriod, look at the inventory numbers listed on the balance sheet.
Take the balance listed for the PEriod of the report and add it to the balance listed
for the previous comparable PEriod, and then divide by two. (Remember that balance
sheets are snapshots in time. So the inventory balance for the previous PEriod is the
beginning balance for the current PEriod, and the inventory balance for the current
PEriod is the ending balance.) To calculate the inventory turnover ratio, you divide a
company's cost of sales (just below the net revenues on the income statement) by
the average inventory for the PEriod, or
Inventory Turnover Ratio = Cost of Sales / Average Inventory for the PEriod
If a company has an inventory turnover ratio of 2 to 1, it means that the company's
inventory turned over twice in the reporting PEriod.
* OPErating margin compares a company's oPErating income to net revenues. Both of
these numbers can be found on a company's income statement. To calculate
oPErating margin, you divide a company's income from oPErations (before interest
and income tax exPEnses) by its net revenues, or
OPErating Margin = Income from OPErations / Net Revenues
OPErating margin is usually expressed as a PErcentage. It shows, for each dollar of
sales, what PErcentage was profit.
* P/E ratio compares a company's common stock price with its earnings PEr share. To
calculate a company's P/E ratio, you divide a company's stock price by its earnings
PEr share, or
P/E Ratio = Price PEr share / Earnings PEr share
If a company's stock is selling at $20 PEr share and the company is earning $2 PEr
share, then the company's P/E Ratio is 10 to 1. The company's stock is selling at 10
times its earnings.
* Working capital is the money leftover if a company paid its current liabilities (that is,
its debts due within one-year of the date of the balance sheet) from its current
assets.
Working Capital = Current Assets - Current Liabilities
Bringing It All Together
Although this brochure discusses each financial statement separately, keep in mind that
they are all related. The changes in assets and liabilities that you see on the balance sheet
are also reflected in the revenues and exPEnses that you see on the income statement,
which result in the company's gains or losses. Cash flows provide more information about
cash assets listed on a balance sheet and are related, but not equivalent, to net income
shown on the income statement. And so on. No one financial statement tells the complete
story. But combined, they provide very powerful information for investors. And information
is the investor's best tool when it comes to investing wisely.
http://www.SEC.gov/investor/pubs/begfinstmtguide.htm