1
CHAPTER 3
UNDERSTANDING FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Financial statements provide the fundamental information that we use to analyze and
answer valuation questions. It is important, therefore, that we understand the principles
governing these statements by looking at four questions:
* How valuable are the assets of a firm? The assets of a firm can come in several forms -
assets with long lives such as land and buildings, assets with shorter lives such
inventory, and intangible assets that still produce revenues for the firm such as patents
and trademarks.
* How did the firm raise the funds to finance these assets? In acquiring these assets, firms
can use the funds of the owners (equity) or borrowed money (debt), and the mix is
likely to change as the assets age.
* How profitable are these assets? A good investment, we argued, is one that makes a
return greater than the hurdle rate. To evaluate whether the investments that a firm has
already made are good investments, we need to estimate what returns we are making on
these investments.
* How much uncertainty (or risk) is embedded in these assets? While we have not directly
confronted the issue of risk yet, estimating how much uncertainty there is in existing
investments and the implications for a firm is clearly a fIRSt step.
We will look at the way accountants would answer these questions, and why the
answers might be different when doing valuation. Some of these differences can be traced to
the differences in objectives - accountants try to measure the current standing and
immediate past PErformance of a firm, whereas valuation is much more forward looking.
The Basic Accounting Statements
There are three basic accounting statements that summarize information about a
firm. The fIRSt is the balance sheet, shown in Figure 3.1, which summarizes the assets
owned by a firm, the value of these assets and the mix of financing, debt and equity, used to
finance these assets at a point in time.
1
2
Figure 3.1: The Balance Sheet
Assets
Liabilities
Long Lived Real Assets
Fixed Assets
Current
Liabilties
Short-term liabilities of the firm
Short-lived Assets
Current Assets
Debt
Debt obligations of firm
Investments in SECurities &
assets of other firms
Financial Investments
Other
Liabilities
Other long-term obligations
Assets which are not physical,
like patents & trademarks
Intangible Assets
Equity
Equity investment in firm
The next is the income statement, shown in Figure 3.2, which provides information on the
revenues and exPEnses of the firm, and the resulting income made by the firm, during a
PEriod. The PEriod can be a quarter (if it is a quarterly income statement) or a year (if it is an
annual report).
2
3
Figure 3.2: Income Statement
Gross revenues from sale
of products or services
Revenues
ExPEnses associates with
generating revenues
- OPErating ExPEnses
OPErating income for the
PEriod
= OPErating Income
ExPEnses associated with
borrowing and other financing
- Financial ExPEnses
Taxes due on taxable income
- Taxes
Earnings to Common &
Preferred Equity for
Current PEriod
Profits and Losses not
associated with oPErations
Profits or losses associated
with changes in accounting
rules
Dividends paid to preferred
stockholders
= Net Income before extraordinary items
Extraordinary Losses (Profits)
Income Changes Associated with Accounting Changes
- Preferred Dividends
= Net Income to Common Stockholders
Finally, there is the statement of cash flows, shown in figure 3.3, which sPEcifies the
sources and uses of cash of the firm from oPErating, investing and financing activities,
during a PEriod.
3
-
-
Figure 3.3: Statement of Cash Flows
4
Net cash flow from oPErations,
after taxes and interest exPEnses
Cash Flows From OPErations
Includes divestiture and acquisition
of real assets (capital exPEnditures)
and disposal and purchase of
financial assets. Also includes
acquisitions of other firms.
Net cash flow from the issue and
repurchase of equity, from the
issue and repayment of debt and after
dividend payments
+ Cash Flows From Investing
+ Cash Flows from Financing
The statement of cash flows can be viewed as an attempt to explain how much the cash
flows during a PEriod were, and why the cash balance changed during the PEriod.
= Net Change in Cash Balance
Asset Measurement and Valuation
When analyzing any firm, we would like to know the tyPEs of assets that it owns, the
values of these assets and the degree of uncertainty about these values. Accounting
statements do a reasonably good job of categorizing the assets owned by a firm, a partial job
of assessing the values of these assets and a poor job of reporting uncertainty about asset
values. In this SECtion, we will begin by looking at the accounting principles underlying
asset categorization and measurement, and the limitations of financial statements in
providing relevant information about assets.
Accounting Principles Underlying Asset Measurement
An asset is any resource that has the potential to either generate future cash inflows
or reduce future cash outflows. While that is a general definition bROAd enough to cover
almost any kind of asset, accountants add a caveat that for a resource to be an asset. A firm
has to have acquired it in a prior transaction and be able to quantiFY future benefits with
reasonable precision. The accounting view of asset value is to a great extent grounded in the
notion of historical cost, which is the original cost of the asset, adjusted upwards for
improvements made to the asset since purchase and downwards for the loss in value
associated with the aging of the asset. This historical cost is called the book value. While
4
5
the generally accepted accounting principles for valuing an asset vary across different kinds
of assets, three principles underlie the way assets are valued in accounting statements.
* An Abiding Belief in Book Value as the Best Estimate of Value: Accounting estimates of
asset value begin with the book value. Unless a substantial reason is given to do
otherwise, accountants view the historical cost as the best estimate of the value of an
asset.
* A Distrust of Market or Estimated Value: When a current market value exists for an
asset that is different from the book value, accounting convention seems to view this
market value with suspicion. The market price of an asset is often viewed as both much
too volatile and too easily manipulated to be used as an estimate of value for an asset.
This suspicion runs even deePEr when values are is estimated for an asset based upon
exPEcted future cash flows.
* A Preference for under estimating value rather than over estimating it: When there is
more than one appROAch to valuing an asset, accounting convention takes the view that
the more conservative (lower) estimate of value should be used rather than the less
conservative (higher) estimate of value. Thus, when both market and book value are
available for an asset, accounting rules often require that you use the lesser of the two
numbers.
Measuring Asset Value
The financial statement in which accountants summarize and report asset value is the
balance sheet. To examine how asset value is measured, let us begin with the way assets are
categorized in the balance sheet. FIRSt, there are the fixed assets, which include the longterm assets of the firm, such as plant, equipment, land and buildings. Next, we have the
short-term assets of the firm, including inventory (including raw materials, work in progress
and finished goods), receivables (summarizing moneys owed to the firm) and cash; these
are categorized as current assets. We then have investments in the assets and SECurities of
other firms, which are generally categorized as financial investments. Finally, we have what
is loosely categorized as intangible assets. These include assets, such as patents and
trademarks that presumably will create future earnings and cash flows, and also uniquely
accounting assets such as goodwill that arise because of acquisitions made by the firm.
Fixed Assets
Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) in the United States require the
valuation of fixed assets at historical cost, adjusted for any estimated gain and loss in value
from improvements and the aging, resPEctively, of these assets. While in theory the
adjustments for aging should reflect the loss of earning power of the asset as it ages, in
5
6
practice they are much more a product of accounting rules and convention, and these
adjustments are called depreciation. Depreciation methods can very bROAdly be categorized
into straight line (where the loss in asset value is assumed to be the same every year over
its lifetime) and accelerated (where the asset loses more value in the earlier years and less
in the later years). [While tax rules, at least in the United States, have restricted the freedom
that firms have on their choice of asset life and depreciation methods, firms continue to have
a significant amount of flexibility on these decisions for reporting purposes. Thus, the
depreciation that is reported in the annual reports may not, and generally is not, the same
depreciation that is used in the tax statements.
Since fixed assets are valued at book value and are adjusted for depreciation
provisions, the value of a fixed asset is strongly influenced by both its depreciable life and
the depreciation method used. Many firms in the United States use straight line depreciation
for financial reporting while using accelerated depreciation for tax purposes, since firms can
report better earnings with the former1, at least in the years right after the asset is acquired.
In contrast, Japanese and German firms often use accelerated depreciation for both tax and
financial reporting purposes, leading to reported income which is understated relative to that
of their U.S. counterparts.
Current Assets
Current assets include inventory, cash and accounts receivables. It is in this category
that accountants are most amenable to the use of market value, esPEcially in valuing
marketable SECurities.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable represent money owed by entities to the firm on the sale of
products on credit. When the Home Depot sells products to building contractors and gives
them a few weeks to make the payment, it is creating accounts receivable. The accounting
convention is for accounts receivable to be recorded as the amount owed to the firm, based
upon the billing at the time of the credit sale. The only major valuation and accounting issue
is when the firm has to recognize accounts receivable that are not collectible. Firms can set
aside a portion of their income to cover exPEcted bad debts from credit sales, and accounts
receivable will be reduced by this reserve. Alternatively, the bad debts can be recognized as
they occur and the firm can reduce the accounts receivable accordingly. There is the danger,
1 Depreciation is treated as an accounting exPEnse. Hence, the use of straight line depreciation (which is
lower than accelerated depreciation in the fIRSt few years after an asset is acquired) will result in lower
exPEnses and higher income.
6
7
however, that ABSent a decisive declaration of a bad debt, firms may continue to show as
accounts receivable amounts that they know are unlikely to be ever collected.
Cash
Cash is one of the few assets for which accountants and financial analysts should
agree on value. The value of a cash balance should not be oPEn to estimation error. Having
said this, we should note that fewer and fewer companies actually hold cash in the
conventional sense (as currency or as demand deposits in banks). Firms often invest the
cash in interest-bearing accounts or in treasuries, so as to earn a return on their investments.
In either case, market value can deviate from book value, esPEcially if the investments are
long term. While there is no real default risk in either of these investments, interest rate
movements can affect their value. We will examine the valuation of marketable SECurities
later in this SECtion.
Inventory
Three basis appROAches to valuing inventory are allowed by GAAP: FIFO, LIFO
and Weighted Average.
(a) FIRSt-in, FIRSt-out (FIFO): Under FIFO, the cost of goods sold is based upon the cost
of material bought earliest in the PEriod, while the cost of inventory is based upon the cost
of material bought latest in the year. This results in inventory being valued close to the
current replacement cost. During PEriods of inflation, the use of FIFO will result in the
lowest estimate of cost of goods sold among the three valuation appROAches, and the highest
net income.
(b) Last-in, FIRSt-out (LIFO): Under LIFO, the cost of goods sold is based upon the cost
of material bought latest in the PEriod, while the cost of inventory is based upon the cost of
material bought earliest in the year. This results in finished goods being valued close to the
current production cost. During PEriods of inflation, the use of LIFO will result in the
highest estimate of cost of goods sold among the three valuation appROAches, and the lowest
net income.
(c) Weighted Average: Under the weighted average appROAch, both inventory and the cost of
goods sold are based upon the average cost of all materials bought during the PEriod. When
inventory turns over rapidly, this appROAch will more closely resemble FIFO than LIFO.
Firms often adopt the LIFO appROAch for its tax benefits during PEriods of high
inflation. The cost of goods sold is then higher because it is based upon prices paid towards
to the end of the accounting PEriod. This, in turn, will reduce the reported taxable income
and net income, while increasing cash flows. Studies indicate that larger firms with rising
7
8
prices for raw materials and labor, more variable inventory growth and an ABSence of other
tax loss carry forwards are much more likely to adopt the LIFO appROAch.
Given the income and cash flow effects of inventory valuation methods, it is often
difficult to compare the inventory values of firms that use different methods. There is,
however, one way of adjusting for these differences. Firms that choose the LIFO appROAch
to value inventories have to sPEciFY in a footnote the difference in inventory valuation
between FIFO and LIFO, and this difference is termed the LIFO reserve. It can be used to
adjust the beginning and ending inventories, and consequently the cost of goods sold, and to
restate income based upon FIFO valuation.
Investments (Financial) and Marketable SECurities
In the category of investments and marketable SECurities, accountants consider
investments made by firms in the SECurities or assets of other firms, and other marketable
SECurities including treasury bills or bonds. The way in which these assets are valued
dePEnds upon the way the investment is categorized and the motive behind the investment.
In general, an investment in the SECurities of another firm can be categorized as a minority,
passive investment; a minority, active investment; or a majority, active investment.
The accounting rules vary dePEnding upon the categorization.
Minority, Passive Investments
If the SECurities or assets owned in another firm represent less than 20% of the
overall ownership of that firm, an investment is treated as a minority, passive investment.
These investments have an acquisition value, which represents what the firm originally paid
for the SECurities and often a market value. Accounting principles require that these assets be
sub-categorized into one of three groups: investments that will be held to maturity,
investments that are available for sale and trading investments. The valuation principles vary
for each.
* For investments that will be held to maturity, the valuation is at historical cost or book
value, and interest or dividends from this investment are shown in the income statement
under net interest exPEnses
* For investments that are available for sale, the valuation is at market value, but the
unrealized gains or losses are shown as part of the equity in the balance sheet and not in
the income statement. Thus, unrealized losses reduce the book value of the equity in the
firm, and unrealized gains increase the book value of equity.
* For trading investments, the valuation is at market value and the unrealized gains and
losses are shown in the income statement.
8
9
Firms are allowed an element of discretion in the way they classiFY investments and,
subsequently, in the way they value these assets. This classification ensures that firms such
as investment banks, whose assets are primarily SECurities held in other firms for purposes
of trading, revalue the bulk of these assets at market levels each PEriod. This is called
marking-to-market and provides one of the few instances in which market value trumps
book value in accounting statements.
Minority, Active Investments
If the SECurities or assets owned in another firm represent between 20% and 50% of
the overall ownership of that firm, an investment is treated as a minority, active
investment. While these investments have an initial acquisition value, a proportional share
(based upon ownership proportion) of the net income and losses made by the firm in which
the investment was made, is used to adjust the acquisition cost. In addition, the dividends
received from the investment reduce the acquisition cost. This appROAch to valuing
investments is called the equity appROAch.
The market value of these investments is not considered until the investment is
liquidated, at which point the gain or loss from the sale, relative to the adjusted acquisition
cost is shown as part of the earnings under extraordinary items in that PEriod.
Majority, Active Investments
If the SECurities or assets owned in another firm represent more than 50% of the
overall ownership of that firm, an investment is treated as a majority active investment2.
In this case, the investment is no longer shown as a financial investment but is instead
replaced by the assets and liabilities of the firm in which the investment was made. This
appROAch leads to a consolidation of the balance sheets of the two firms, where the assets
and liabilities of the two firms are merged and presented as one balance sheet. The share of
the firm that is owned by other investors is shown as a minority interest on the liability
side of the balance sheet. A similar consolidation occurs in the financial statements of the
other firm as well. The statement of cash flows reflects the cumulated cash inflows and
outflows of the combined firm. This is in contrast to the equity appROAch, used for minority
active investments, in which only the dividends received on the investment are shown as a
cash inflow in the cash flow statement.
2 Firms have evaded the requirements of consolidation by keeping their share of ownership in other firms
below 50%.
9
10
Here again, the market value of this investment is not considered until the ownership
stake is liquidated. At that point, the difference between the market price and the net value of
the equity stake in the firm is treated as a gain or loss for the PEriod.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets include a wide array of assets ranging from patents and trademarks
to goodwill. The accounting standards vary across intangible assets.
1. Patents and Trademarks
Patents and trademarks are valued differently dePEnding on whether they are
generated internally or acquired. When patents and trademarks are generated from internal
sources, such as research, the costs incurred in developing the asset are exPEnsed in that
PEriod even though the asset might have a life of several accounting PEriods. Thus, the
intangible asset is not usually valued in the balance sheet of the firm. In contrast, when an
intangible asset is acquired from an external party, it is treated as an asset.
Intangible assets have to be amortized over their exPEcted lives, with a maximum
amortization PEriod of 40 years. The standard practice is to use straight-line amortization.
For tax purposes, however, firms are not allowed to amortize goodwill or other intangible
assets with no sPEcific lifetime.
2. Goodwill
Intangible assets are sometimes the by-products of acquisitions. When a firm
acquires another firm, the purchase price is fIRSt allocated to tangible assets and then
allocated to any intangible assets such as patents or trade names. Any residual becomes
goodwill. While accounting principles suggest that goodwill captures the value of any
intangibles that are not sPEcifically identifiable, it is really a reflection of the difference
between the market value of the firm owning the assets and the book value of assets. This
appROAch is called purchase accounting and it creates an intangible asset (goodwill) which
has to be amortized over 40 years. Firms, which do not want to see this charge against their
earnings, often use an alternative appROAch called pooling accounting, in which the
purchase price never shows up in the balance sheet. Instead, the book values of the two
companies involved in the merger are aggregated to create the consolidated balance of the
combined firm.3
3 The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) was considering eliminating the use of pooling and
reducing the amortization PEriod for goodwill in purchase accounting to 20 years at the time this book went
to print.
10
Illustration 3.1: Asset Values for Boeing and the Home Depot
Table 3.1 summarizes asset values, as measured in the balance sheets of Boeing, the
aerospace giant, and The Home Depot, a building suppliers retailer, at the end of the 1998
financial year:
Table 3.1: Assets: Boeing and the Home Depot
Boeing
Home Depot
11
Net Fixed Assets
Goodwill
Investments and Notes Receivable
Deferred Income Taxes
Prepaid PEnsion ExPEnse
Customer Financing
Other Assets
Current Assets
Cash
Short-term Marketable Investments
Accounts Receivables
Current Portion of Customer Financing
Deferred Income Taxes
Inventories
Other Current Assets
Total Current Assets
Total Assets
$8,589
$2,312
$0
$411
$3,513
$4,930
$542
$2,183
$279
$3,288
$781
$1,495
$8,349
$0
$16,375
$36,672
$8,160
$140
$41
$0
$0
$0
$191
$62
$0
$469
$0
$0
$4,293
$109
$4,933
$13,465
There are a number of points worth noting about these asset values.
1. Goodwill: Boeing, which acquired Rockwell in 1996 and MCDOnnell Douglas in 1997,
used purchase accounting for the Rockwell acquisition and pooling for MCDOnnell
Douglas. The goodwill on the balance sheet reflects the excess of acquisition value over
book value for Rockwell and is being amortized over 30 years. With MCDOnnell
Douglas, there is no recording of the premium paid on the acquisition among the assets.
2. Customer Financing and Accounts Receivable: Boeing often either provides financing
to its customers to acquire its planes or acts as the lessor on the planes. Since these
contracts tend to run over several years, the present value of the payments due in future
years on the financing and the lease payments is shown as customer financing. The
current portion of these payments is shown as accounts receivable. The Home Depot
provides credit to its customers as well, but all these payments due are shown as
accounts receivable, since they are all short term.
11
12
3. Inventories: Boeing values inventories using the weighted average cost method, while
The Home Depot uses the FIFO appROAch for valuing inventories.
4. Marketable SECurities: Boeing classifies its short term investments as trading
investments and records them at market value. The Home Depot has a mix of trading,
available-for-sale and held-to-maturity investments and therefore uses a mix of book
and market value to value these investments.
5. Prepaid PEnsion ExPEnse: Boeing records the excess of its PEnsion fund assets over its
exPEcted PEnsion fund liabilities as an asset on the balance sheet.
Finally, the balance sheet for Boeing fails to report the value of a very significant asset,
which is the effect of past research and development exPEnses. Since accounting convention
requires that these be exPEnsed in the year that they occur and not capitalized, the research
asset does not show up in the balance sheet. In chapter 9, we will consider how to capitalize
research and development exPEnses and the effects on balance sheets.
Measuring Financing Mix
The SECond set of questions that we would like to answer and accounting statements
to shed some light on relates to the current value and subsequently the mixture of debt and
equity used by the firm. The bulk of the information about these questions is provided on
the liability side of the balance sheet and the footnotes.
Accounting Principles Underlying Liability and Equity Measurement
Just as with the measurement of asset value, the accounting categorization of
liabilities and equity is governed by a set of fairly rigid principles. The fIRSt is a strict
categorization of financing into either a liability or equity based upon the nature of the
obligation. For an obligation to be recognized as a liability, it must meet three requirements:
1. It must be exPEcted to lead to a future cash outflow or the loss of a future cash inflow at
some sPEcified or determinable date,
2. The firm cannot avoid the obligation.
3. The transaction giving rise to the obligation has hapPEned already.
In keeping with the earlier principle of conservatism in estimating asset value, accountants
recognize as liabilities only cash flow obligations that cannot be avoided.
The SECond principle is that the value of both liabilities and equity in a firm are
better estimated using historical costs with accounting adjustments, rather than with
exPEcted future cash flows or market value. The process by which accountants measure the
value of liabilities and equities is inextricably linked to the way they value assets. Since
assets are primarily valued at historical cost or at book value, both debt and equity also get
12
measured primarily at book value. In the SECtion that follows, we will examine the
accounting measurement of both liabilities and equity.
Measuring the Value of Liabilities and Equities
Accountants categorize liabilities into current liabilities, long term debt and long term
liabilities that are neither debt nor equity. Next, we will examine the way they measure each
13
of these.
Current Liabilities
Current liabilities categorizes all obligations that the firm has coming due in the next
accounting PEriod. These generally include:
1. Accounts Payable - representing credit received from suppliers and other vendors to the
firm. The value of accounts payable represents the amounts due to these creditors. For
this item, book and market value should be similar.
2. Short term borrowing - representing short term loans (due in less than a year) taken to
finance the oPErations or current asset needs of the business. Here again, the value
shown represents the amounts due on such loans, and the book and market value should
be similar, unless the default risk of the firm has changed dramatically since it borrowed
the money.
3. Short term portion of long term borrowing - representing the portion of the long term
debt or bonds that is coming due in the next year. Here again, the value shown is the
actual amount due on these loans, and market and book value should converge as the
due date appROAches.
4. Other short term liabilities - which is a catch-all component for any other short term
liabilities that the firm might have, including wages due to its employees and taxes due
to the government.
Of all the items on the liability side of the balance sheet, ABSent outright fraud, current
liabilities should be the one for which the accounting estimates of book value and financial
estimates of market value are the closest.
Long Term Debt
Long term debt for firms can take one of two forms. It can be a long-term loan from
a bank or other financial institution or it can be a long-term bond issued to financial
markets, in which case the creditors are the investors in the bond. Accountants measure the
value of long term debt by looking at the present value of payments due on the loan or bond
at the time of the borrowing. For bank loans, this will be equal to the nominal value of the
loan. With bonds, however, there are three possibilities: When bonds are issued at par value,
13
14
for instance, the value of the long-term debt is generally measured in terms of the nominal
obligation created, in terms of principal (face value) due on the borrowing. When bonds are
issued at a premium or a discount on par value, the bonds are recorded at the issue price, but
the premium or discount to the face value is amortized over the life of the bond. As an
extreme example, companies that issue zero coupon debt have to record the debt at the issue
price, which will be significantly below the principal (face value) due at maturity. The
difference between the issue price and the face value is amortized each PEriod and is treated
as a non-cash interest exPEnse that is tax deductible.
In all these cases, the book value of debt is unaffected by changes in interest rates
during the life of the loan or bond. Note that as market interest rates rise (fall), the present
value of the loan obligations should decrease (increase). This updated market value for debt
is not shown on the balance sheet. If debt is retired prior to maturity, the difference between
book value and the amount paid at retirement is treated as an extraordinary gain or loss in
the income statement.
Finally, companies which have long term debt denominated in non-domestic
currencies have to adjust the book value of debt for changes in exchange rates. Since
exchange rate changes reflect underlying changes in interest rates, it does imply that this
debt is likely to be valued much nearer to market value than is debt in the home currency.
Other Long Term Liabilities
Firms often have long term obligations that are not captured in the long term debt
item. These include obligations to lessors on assets that firms have leased, to employees in
the form of PEnsion fund and health care benefits yet to be paid, and to the government in
the form of taxes deferred. In the last two decades, accountants have increasingly moved
towards quantiFYing these liabilities and showing them as long term liabilities.
1. Leases
Firms often choose to lease long-term assets rather than buy them. Lease payments
create the same kind of obligation that interest payments on debt create, and they must be
viewed in a similar light. If a firm is allowed to lease a significant portion of its assets and
keep it off its financial statements, a PErusal of the statements will give a very misleading
view of the company's financial strength. Consequently, accounting rules have been devised
to force firms to reveal the extent of their lease obligations on their books.
There are two ways of accounting for leases. In an oPErating lease, the lessor (or
owner) transfers only the right to use the proPErty to the lessee. At the end of the lease
PEriod, the lessee returns the proPErty to the lessor. Since the lessee does not assume the
risk of ownership, the lease exPEnse is treated as an oPErating exPEnse in the income
14
15
statement and the lease does not affect the balance sheet. In a capital lease, the lessee
assumes some of the risks of ownership and enjoys some of the benefits. Consequently, the
lease, when signed, is recognized both as an asset and as a liability (for the lease payments)
on the balance sheet. The firm gets to claim depreciation each year on the asset and also
deducts the interest exPEnse component of the lease payment each year. In general, capital
leases recognize exPEnses sooner than equivalent oPErating leases.
Since firms prefer to keep leases off the books and sometimes to defer exPEnses
they have a strong incentive to report all leases as oPErating leases. Consequently the
Financial Accounting Standards Board has ruled that a lease should be treated as a capital
lease if it meets any one of the following four conditions.
(a) The lease life exceeds 75% of the life of the asset.
(b) There is a transfer of ownership to the lessee at the end of the lease term.
(c) There is an option to purchase the asset at a "bargain price" at the end of the lease term.
(d) The present value of the lease payments, discounted at an appropriate discount rate,
exceeds 90% of the fair market value of the asset.
The lessor uses the same criteria for determining whether the lease is a capital or oPErating
lease and accounts for it accordingly. If it is a capital lease, the lessor records the present
value of future cash flows as revenue and recognizes exPEnses. The lease receivable is also
shown as an asset on the balance sheet and the interest revenue is recognized over the term
of the lease as paid.
From a tax standpoint, the lessor can claim the tax benefits of the leased asset only if
it is an oPErating lease, though the revenue code uses slightly different criteria4 for
determining whether the lease is an oPErating lease.
2. Employee Benefits
Employers provide PEnsion and health care benefits to their employees. In many
cases, the obligations created by these benefits are extensive and a failure by the firm to
adequately fund these obligations needs to be revealed in financial statements.
a. PEnsion Plans
In a PEnsion plan, the firm agrees to provide certain benefits to its employees, either
by sPEciFYing a 'defined contribution' (wherein a fixed contribution is made to the plan each
year by the employer, without any promises as to the benefits which will be delivered in the
4 The requirements for an oPErating lease in the revenue code are as follows - (a) the proPErty can be used by
someone other than the lessee at the end of the lease term, (b) the lessee cannot buy the asset using a
bargain purchase option, (c) the lessor has at least 20% of its capital at risk, (d) the lessor has a positive
cash flow from the lease indePEndent of tax benefits and (e) the lessee does not have an investment in the
15
16
plan) or a 'defined benefit' (wherein the employer promises to pay a certain benefit to the
employee). In the latter case, the employer has to put sufficient money into the plan each
PEriod to meet the defined benefits.
Under a defined contribution plan, the firm meets its obligation once it has made the
pre-sPEcified contribution to the plan. Under a defined-benefit plan, the firm's obligations
are much more difficult to estimate, since they will be determined by a number of variables
including the benefits that employees are entitled to, the prior contributions made by the
employer, the returns the plan have earned, and the rate of return that the employer exPEcts
to make on current contributions. As these variables change, the value of the PEnsion fund
assets can be greater than, less than or equal to PEnsion fund liabilities (which is the present
value of promised benefits). A PEnsion fund whose assets exceed its liabilities is an overfunded plan, whereas one whose assets are less than its liabilities is an under-funded plan
and disclosures to that effect have to be included in financial statements, generally in the
footnotes.
When a PEnsion fund is over-funded, the firm has several options. It can withdraw
the excess assets from the fund, it can discontinue contributions to the plan, or it can
continue to make contributions on the assumption that the over-funding is a transitory
phenomenon that could well disapPEar by the next PEriod. When a fund is under-funded,
the firm has a liability, though accounting standards require that firms reveal only the excess
of accumulated5 PEnsion fund liabilities over PEnsion fund assets on the balance sheet.
b. Health Care Benefits
A firm can provide health care benefits in one of two ways: by making a fixed
contribution to a health care plan, without promising sPEcific benefits (analogous to a
defined contribution plan), or by promising sPEcific health benefits and setting aside the
funds to provide these benefits (analogous to a defined benefit plan). The accounting for
health care benefits is very similar to the accounting for PEnsion obligations. The key
difference between the two is that firms do not have to report6 the excess of their health care
obligations over the health care fund assets as a liability on the balance sheet, though a
footnote to that effect has to be added to the financial statement.
lease.
5 The accumulated PEnsion fund liability does not take into account the projected benefit obligation, where
actuarial estimates of future benefits are made. Consequently, it is much smaller than the total PEnsion
liabilities.
6 While companies might not have to report the excess of their health care obligations over assets as a
liability, some firms choose to do so anyway.
16
17
3. Deferred Taxes
Firms often use different methods of accounting for tax and financial reporting
purposes, leading to a question of how tax liabilities should be reported. Since accelerated
depreciation and favorable inventory valuation methods for tax accounting purposes lead to
a deferral of taxes, the taxes on the income reported in the financial statements will generally
be much greater than the actual tax paid. The same principles of matching exPEnses to
income that underlie accrual accounting suggest that the 'deferred income tax' be recognized
in the financial statements. Thus a company which pays taxes of $55,000 on its taxable
income based upon its tax accounting, and which would have paid taxes of $75,000 on the
income reported in its financial statements, will be forced to recognize the difference
($20,000) as deferred taxes in liabilities. Since the deferred taxes will be paid in later years,
they will be recognized as paid.
It is worth noting that companies that actually pay more in taxes than the taxes they
report in the financial statements create an asset on the balance sheet called a deferred tax
asset. This reflects the fact that the firm's earnings in future PEriods will be greater as the
firm is given credit for the deferred taxes.
The question of whether the deferred tax liability is really a liability is an interesting
one. Firms do not owe the amount categorized as deferred taxes to any entity, and treating it
as a liability makes the firm look more risky than it really is. On the other hand, the firm will
eventually have to pay its deferred taxes, and treating it as a liability seems to be the
conservative thing to do.
Preferred Stock
When a company issues preferred stock, it generally creates an obligation to pay a
fixed dividend on the stock. Accounting rules have conventionally not viewed preferred
stock as debt because the failure to meet preferred dividends does not result in bankruptcy.
At the same time, the fact the preferred dividends are cumulative makes them more onerous
than common equity. Thus, preferred stock is viewed in accounting as a hybrid SECurity,
sharing some characteristics with equity and some with debt.
Preferred stock is valued on the balance sheet at its original issue price, with any
cumulated unpaid dividends added on. Convertible preferred stock is treated similarly, but it
is treated as equity on conversion.
Equity
The accounting measure of equity is a historical cost measure. The value of equity
shown on the balance sheet reflects the original proceeds received by the firm when it issued
the equity, augmented by any earnings made since (or reduced by losses, if any) and
17
18
reduced by any dividends paid out during the PEriod. While these three items go into what
we can call the book value of equity, a few other items also end up in this estimate.
1. When companies buy back stock for short PEriods, with the intent of reissuing the stock
or using it to cover option exercises, they are allowed to show the repurchased stock as
treasury stock, which reduces the book value of equity. Firms are not allowed to keep
treasury stock on the books for extended PEriods and have to reduce their book value of
equity by the value of repurchased stock in the case of actions such as stock buybacks.
Since these buybacks occur at the current market price, they can result in significant
reductions in the book value of equity.
2. Firms that have significant losses over extended PEriods or carry out massive stock
buybacks can end up with negative book values of equity.
3. Relating back to our discussion of marketable SECurities, any unrealized gain or loss in
marketable SECurities that are classified as available-for-sale is shown as an increase or
decrease in the book value of equity in the balance sheet.
As part of their financial statements, firms provide a summary of changes in shareholders
equity during the PEriod, where all the changes that occurred to the accounting (book value)
measure of equity value are summarized.
Accounting rules still do not seem to have come to grips with the effect of warrants
and equity options (such as those granted by many firms to management) on the book value
of equity. If warrants are issued to financial markets, the proceeds from this issue will show
up as part of the book value of equity. In the far more prevalent case where options are
given or granted to management, there is no effect on the book value of equity. When the
options are exercised, the cash inflows from the exercise do ultimately show up in the book
value of equity and there is a corresponding increase in the number of shares outstanding.
The same point can be made about convertible bonds, which are treated as debt until
conversion, at which point they become part of equity. In partial defense of accountants, we
must note that the effect of options outstanding is often revealed when earnings and book
value are computed on a PEr share basis. Here, the computation is made on two bases, the
fIRSt on the current number of shares outstanding (primary shares outstanding) and the
SECond on the number of shares outstanding after all options have been exercised (fully
diluted shares outstanding).
As a final point on equity, accounting rules still seem to consider preferred stock,
with its fixed dividend, as equity or near-equity, largely because of the fact that preferred
dividends can be deferred or cumulated without the risk of default. To the extent that there
can still be a loss of control in the firm (as opposed to bankruptcy), we would argue that
18
19
preferred stock shares almost as many characteristics with unSECured debt as it does with
equity.
Illustration 3.2: Measuring Liabilities and Equity: Boeing and the Home Depot
Table 3.2 summarizes the accounting estimates of liabilities and equity at Boeing
and The Home Depot for the 1998 financial year:
Table 3.2: Liabilities - Boeing and Home Depot
Boeing
Home Depot
Current Liabilities
Accounts Payable & other liabilities
$10,733
Accrued Salaries and ExPEnses
Advances in excess of costs
Taxes payable
Short term debt and Current LT debt
Total Current Liabilities
Accrued Health Care Benefits
Other Long Term Liabilities
Deferred Income Taxes
Long-term Debt
$0
$1,251
$569
$869
$13,422
$4,831
$0
$0
$1,586
$1,010
$0
$247
$14
$2,857
$0
$210
$83
$6,103
$1,566
Minority Interests
$0
$9
Shareholder's Equity
Par Value
Additional Paid-in Capital
Retained Earnings
Total Shareholder's Equity
Total Liabilities
$5,059
$0
$7,257
$12,316
$36,672
$37
$2,891
$5,812
$8,740
$13,465
The most significant difference between the companies is the accrued health care liability,
representing the present value of exPEcted health care obligations promised to employees in
excess of health care assets. The shareholders' equity for both firms represents the book
value of equity and is significantly different from the market value of equity. Table 3.3
summarizes the difference at the end of the 1998.
Table 3.3: Book and Market Value of Equity Comparison
Book Value of Equity
$12,316
$8,740
Boeing
Home Depot
19
20
Market Value of Equity
$32,595
$85,668
One final point needs to be made about the Home Depot's liabilities. The Home
Depot has substantial oPErating leases. Because these leases are treated as oPErating
exPEnses, they do not show up in the balance sheet. Since they represent commitments to
make payments in the future, we would argue that oPErating leases should be capitalized and
treated as part of the liabilities of the firm. We will consider how best to do this later in this
book.
Measuring Earnings and Profitability
How profitable is a firm? What did it earn on the assets that it invested in? These are
the fundamental questions we would like financial statements to answer. Accountants use
the income statement to provide information about a firm's oPErating activities over a
sPEcific time PEriod. In terms of our description of the firm, the income statement is
designed to measure the earnings from assets in place. In this SECtion, we will examine the
principles underlying earnings and return measurement in accounting, and the methods that
they are put into practice.
Accounting Principles Underlying Measurement of Earnings and Profitability
Two primary principles underlie the measurement of accounting earnings and
profitability. The fIRSt is the principle of accrual accounting. In accrual accounting, the
revenue from selling a good or service is recognized in the PEriod in which the good is sold
or the service is PErformed (in whole or substantially). A corresponding effort is made on
the exPEnse side to match7 exPEnses to revenues. This is in contrast to cash accounting,
where revenues are recognized when payment is received and exPEnses are recorded when
they are paid.
The SECond principle is the categorization of exPEnses into oPErating, financing and
capital exPEnses. OPErating exPEnses are exPEnses that, at least in theory, provide benefits
only for the current PEriod; the cost of labor and materials exPEnded to create products that
are sold in the current PEriod is a good example. Financing exPEnses are exPEnses arising
from the non-equity financing used to raise capital for the business; the most common
example is interest exPEnses. Capital exPEnses are exPEnses that are exPEcted to generate
benefits over multiple PEriods; for instance, the cost of buying land and buildings is treated
as a capital exPEnse.
7 If a cost (such as an administrative cost) cannot be easily linked with a particular revenues, it is usually
recognized as an exPEnse in the PEriod in which it is consumed.
20
21
OPErating exPEnses are subtracted from revenues in the current PEriod to arrive at a
measure of oPErating earnings from the firm. Financing exPEnses are subtracted from
oPErating earnings to estimate earnings to equity investors or net income. Capital exPEnses
are written off over their useful life (in terms of generating benefits) as depreciation or
amortization.
Measuring Accounting Earnings and Profitability
Since income can be generated from a number of different sources, generally
accepted accounting principles (GAAP) require that income statements be classified into
four SECtions: income from continuing oPErations, income from discontinued oPErations,
extraordinary gains or losses and adjustments for changes in accounting principles.
Generally accepted accounting principles require the recognition of revenues when
the service for which the firm is getting paid has been PErformed in full or substantially and
for which it has received in return either cash or a receivable that is both observable and
measurable. ExPEnses linked directly to the production of revenues (like labor and
materials) are recognized in the same PEriod in which revenues are recognized. Any
exPEnses that are not directly linked to the production of revenues are recognized in the
PEriod in which the firm consumes the services.
While accrual accounting is straightforward in firms that produce goods and sell
them, there are sPEcial cases where accrual accounting can be complicated by the nature of
the product or service being offered. For instance, firms that enter into long term contracts
with their customers, for instance, are allowed to recognize revenue on the basis of the
PErcentage of the contract that is completed. As the revenue is recognized on a PErcentage of
completion basis, a corresponding proportion of the exPEnse is also recognized. When there
is considerable uncertainty about the capacity of the buyer of a good or service to pay for a
service, the firm providing the good or service may recognize the income only when it
collects portions of the selling price under the installment method.
Reverting back to our discussion of the difference between capital and oPErating
exPEnses, oPErating exPEnses should reflect only those exPEnses that create revenues in the
current PEriod. In practice, however, a number of exPEnses are classified as oPErating
exPEnses that do not seem to meet this test. The fIRSt is depreciation and amortization. While
the notion that capital exPEnditures should be written off over multiple PEriods is reasonable,
the accounting depreciation that is computed on the original historical cost often bears little
resemblance to the actual economical depreciation. The SECond exPEnse is research and
development exPEnses, which accounting standards in the United States classiFY as
21
22
oPErating exPEnses, but which clearly provide benefits over multiple PEriods. The rationale
used for this classification is that the benefits cannot be counted on or easily quantified.
Much of financial analysis is built around the exPEcted future earnings of a firm, and
many of these forecasts start with the current earnings. It is therefore important that we
know how much of these earnings come from the ongoing oPErations of the firm, and how
much can be attributed to unusual or extraordinary events, that are unlikely to recur on a
regular basis. From that standpoint, it is useful that firms categorize exPEnses into oPErating
and nonrecurring exPEnses, since it is the earnings prior to extraordinary items that should
be used in forecasting. Nonrecurring items include the following:
a. Unusual or Infrequent items, such as gains or losses from the divestiture of an asset or
division and write-offs or restructuring costs. Companies sometimes include such items
as part of oPErating exPEnses. As an example, Boeing in 1997 took a write-off of
$1,400 million to adjust the value of assets it acquired in its acquisition of MCDOnnell
Douglas, and it showed this as part of oPErating exPEnses.
b. Extraordinary items, which are defined as events that are unusual in nature, infrequent
in occurrence and material in impact. Examples include the accounting gain associated
with refinancing high coupon debt with lower coupon debt, and gains or losses from
marketable SECurities that are held by the firm.
c. Losses associated with discontinued oPErations, which measure both the loss from the
phase out PEriod and the estimated loss on the sale of the oPErations. To qualiFY,
however, the oPErations have to be separable separated from the firm.
d. Gains or losses associated with accounting changes, which measure earnings changes
created by accounting changes made voluntarily by the firm (such as a change in
inventory valuation and change in reporting PEriod) and accounting changes mandated
by new accounting standards.
Illustration 3.3: Measures of Earnings
Table 3.4 summarizes the income statements of Boeing and the Home Depot for the
1998 financial year:
Table 3.4: Income Statements: Boeing and Home Depot
Boeing
Home Depot
(in millions)
(in millons)
Sales & Other OPErating Revenues
$56,154.00
$30,219.00
- OPErating Costs & ExPEnses
$51,022.00
$27,185.00
- Depreciation
- Research and Development ExPEnses
$1,517.00
$1,895.00
$373.00
$0.00
22
23
OPErating Income
+ Other Income (Includes Interest Income)
- Interest ExPEnses
Earnings before Taxes
- Income Taxes
Net Earnings (Loss)
$1,720.00
$2,661.00
$130.00
$453.00
$30.00
$37.00
$1,397.00
$2,654.00
$277.00
$1,040.00
$1,120.00
$1,614.00
Boeing's oPErating income is reduced by the research and development exPEnse, which is
treated as an oPErating exPEnse by accountants. The Home Depot's oPErating exPEnses
include oPErating leases. As noted earlier, the treatment of both these items skews earnings
and we will consider how best to adjust earnings when such exPEnses exist, in chapter 9.
Measures of Profitability
While the income statement allows us to estimate how profitable a firm is in
ABSolute terms, it is just as important that we gauge the profitability of the firm in
comparison terms or PErcentage returns. Two basic gauges measure profitability. One
examines the profitability relative to the capital employed to get a rate of return on
investment. This can be done either from the viewpoint of just the equity investors, or by
looking at the entire firm. Another examines profitability relative to sales, by estimating a
profit margin.
I. Return on Assets (ROA) & Return on Capital (ROC)
The return on assets (ROA) of a firm measures its oPErating efficiency in
generating profits from its assets, prior to the effects of financing.
ROA =
EBIT
(
- 1
Total
rate
tax
Assets
)
Earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) is the accounting measure of oPErating income
from the income statement and total assets refers to the assets as measured using accounting
rules, i.e., using book value for most assets. Alternatively, return on assets can be written as:
Net
Income
+
ROA
=
Interest
Total
ExPEnses
Assets
(
- 1
tax
rate
)
By separating the financing effects from the oPErating effects, the return on assets provides
a cleaner measure of the true return on these assets.
ROA can also be computed on a pre-tax basis with no loss of generality, by using
the earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT), and not adjusting for taxes -
23
24
-Pre
tax
ROA
=
EBIT
Total
Assets
This measure is useful if the firm or division is being evaluated for purchase by an acquirer
with a different tax rate or structure.
A more useful measure of return relates the oPErating income to the capital invested
in the firm, where capital is defined as the sum of the book value of debt and equity. This is
the return on capital (ROC). When a substantial portion of the liabilities is either current
(such as accounts payable) or non-interest bearing, this appROAch provides a better measure
of the true return earned on capital employed in the business.
After
-
Tax
ROC
=
EBIT
+
(
)
t-1
of BV
of BV
Debt
Equity
-Pre
Tax
ROC
=
EBIT
+
of BV
Debt
of BV
Equity
Illustration 3.4: Estimating Return on Capital
Table 3.5 summarizes the after-tax return on asset and return on capital estimates for
Boeing, the Home Depot and InfoSoft, using both average and beginning measures of
capital in 1998:
Table 3.5: Return on Capital
Boeing
Home Depot
After-tax OPErating Income
BV of Capital - Beginning
BV of Capital - Ending
BV of Capital - Average
ROC (based on average)
ROC (based on beginning)
$1,118
$19,807
$19,288
$19,548
5.72%
5.64%
$1,730
$8,525
$10,320
$9,423
18.36%
20.29%
Boeing had a terrible year in terms of after-tax returns. The Home Depot had a much better
year.
Decomposing Return on Capital
The return on capital of a firm can be written as a function of its oPErating profit
margin and its capital turnover ratio.
24
25
After - Tax ROC = EBIT 1-t
)
(
BV of Capital
(
= EBIT 1-t
Sales
)
X
Sales
BV of Capital
= After -Tax OPErating Margin * Capital Turnover Ratio
Pre- Tax ROC = Pre -Tax OPErating Margin * Capital Turnover Ratio
Thus, a firm can arrive at a high ROC by either increasing its profit margin or more
efficiently utilizing its capital to increase sales. There are likely to be comPEtitive constraints
and technological constraints on increasing sales, but firms still have some freedom within
these constraints to choose the mix of profit margin and capital turnover that maximizes
their ROC. The return on capital varies widely across firms in different businesses, largely
as a consequence of differences in profit margins and capital turnover ratios.
mgnroc.xls: There is a dataset on the web that summarizes the oPErating margins,
turnover ratios and returns on capital of firms in the United States, classified by industry.
II. Return on Equity
While the return on capital measures the profitability of the overall firm, the return
on equity (ROE) examines profitability from the PErsPEctive of the equity investor by
relating profits to the equity investor (net profit after taxes and interest exPEnses) to the
book value of the equity investment.
ROE =
Net
of
Income
Common
Equity
Book
Value
Since preferred stockholders have a different tyPE of claim on the firm than do common
stockholders, the net income should be estimated after preferred dividends and the book
value of common equity should not include the book value of preferred stock. This can be
accomplished by using net income after preferred dividends in the numerator and the book
value of common equity in the denominator.
Determinants of ROE
Since the ROE is based upon earnings after interest payments, it is affected by the
financing mix the firm uses to fund its projects. In general, a firm that borrows money to
finance projects and that earns a ROC on those projects exceeding the after-tax interest rate
25
it pays on its debt will be able to increase its ROE by borrowing. The ROE can be written as
26
follows8:
where,
ROC
=
ROE
=
ROC
+
(
ROC
)t-1i-
)
(
D
E
EBIT
+
(
)
t-1
of BV
of BV
Debt
Equity
D =
E
of BV
of BV
Debt
Equity
i =
Interest
ExPEnse
on
Debt
of BV
Debt
t = Marginal tax rate on ordinary income
The SECond term captures the benefit of financial leverage.
Illustration 3.5: ROE Computations
Table 3.6 summarizes the return on equity for Boeing and the Home Depot in 1998:
Table 3.6: Return on Equity
Return Ratios
Net Income
BV of Equity- Beginning
BV of Equity- Ending
BV of Equity - Average
ROE (based on average)
ROE (based on beginning)
Boeing
Home Depot
$1,120
$12,953
$12,316
$12,635
8.86%
8.65%
$1,614
$7,214
$8,740
$7,977
20.23%
22.37%
The results again indicate that Boeing had a poor year in 1998, while the Home Depot
reported a healthier return on equity. The returns on equity can also be estimated by
decomposing into the components sPEcified above (using the adjusted beginning of the year
numbers):
After-tax ROC
Boeing
Home Depot
5.82%
16.37%
8
ROC
+
D
E
(
ROC
(
t-1i-
)
)
=
NI
=
)
+
(
t-1IE
+
ED
+
1
D
E
NI
+
(
t-1IE
+
ED
(
)
t-1IE
E
=
)
+
D
E
NI
+
NI
E
(
t-1IE
E
+
(
t-1IE
+
ED
)
(
t-1IE
E
)
)
(
t-1IE
D
)
=
NI
E
=
ROE
26
-
-
(cid:247)
l
(cid:246)
(cid:231)
L
(cid:230)
(cid:247)
l
(cid:246)
(cid:231)
L
(cid:230)
(cid:247)
l
(cid:246)
(cid:231)
L
(cid:230)
-
27
Debt/Equity Ratio
Book Interest Rate (1-tax rate)
ROE
35.18%
4.22%
6.38%
48.37%
4.06%
22.33%
Note that we used a tax rate of 35% on both the return on capital and the book interest rate.
This appROAch results in a return on equity that is different from the one estimated using the
net income and the book value of equity.
rocROE.xls: There is a dataset on the web that summarizes the return on capital,
debt equity ratios, book interest rates and returns on equity of firms in the United States,
classified by industry.
Measuring Risk
How risky are the investments the firm has made over time? How much risk do
equity investors in a firm face? These are two more questions that we would like to find the
answer to in the course of an investment analysis. Accounting statements do not really claim
to measure or quantiFY risk in a systematic way, other than to provide footnotes and
disclosures where there might be risk embedded in the firm. In this SECtion, we will examine
some of the ways in which accountants try to assess risk.
Accounting Principles Underlying Risk Measurement
To the extent that accounting statements and ratios do attempt to measure risk, there
seem to be two common themes.
a. The fIRSt is that the risk being measured is the risk of default, i.e. the risk that a fixed
obligation, such as interest or principal due on outstanding debt, will not be met. The
bROAder equity notion of risk, which measures the variance of actual returns around
exPEcted returns, does not seem to receive much attention. Thus, an all-equity-financed
firm with positive earnings and few or no fixed obligations will generally emerge as a
low-risk firm from an accounting standpoint, in spite of the fact that its earnings are
unpredictable.
b. Accounting risk measures generally take a static view of risk, by looking at the capacity
of a firm at a point in time to meet its obligations. For instance, when ratios are used to
assess a firm's risk, the ratios are almost always based upon one PEriod's income
statement and balance sheet.
27
28
Accounting Measures of Risk
Accounting measures of risk can be bROAdly categorized into two groups. The fIRSt
is disclosures about potential obligations or losses in values that show up as footnotes on
balance sheets, which are designed to alert potential or current investors to the possibility of
significant losses. The SECond is the ratios that are designed to measure both liquidity and
default risk.
Disclosures in Financial Statements
In recent years, the number of disclosures that firms have to make about future
obligations has proliferated. Consider, for instance, the case of contingent liabilities.
These refer to potential liabilities that will be incurred under certain contingencies, as is the
case when a firm is the defendant in a lawsuit. The general rule that has been followed is to
ignore contingent liabilities which hedge against risk, since the obligations on the contingent
claim will be offset9 by benefits elsewhere. In recent PEriods, however, significant losses
borne by firms from supposedly hedged derivatives positions (such as options and futures)
have led to FASB requirements that these derivatives be disclosed as part of a financial
statement. In fact, PEnsion fund and health care obligations have moved from mere footnotes
to actual liabilities for firms.
Financial Ratios
Financial statements have long been used as the basis for estimating financial ratios
that measure profitability, risk and leverage. In the SECtion on earnings, we looked at two of
the profitability ratios - return on equity and return on capital . In this SECtion, we will look
at some of the financial ratios that are often used to measure the financial risk in a firm.
1. Short-Term Liquidity Risk
Short-term liquidity risk arises primarily from the need to finance current
oPErations. To the extent that the firm has to make payments to its suppliers before it gets
paid for the goods and services it provides, there is a cash shortfall that has to be met,
usually through short-term borrowing. Though this financing of working capital needs is
done routinely in most firms, financial ratios have been devised to keep track of the extent of
the firm's exposure to the risk that it will not be able to meet its short-term obligations. The
two most frequently used to measure short-term liquidity risk are the current ratio and the
quick ratio.
9 This assumes that the hedge is set up comPEtently. It is entirely possible that a hedge, if sloPPIly set up,
can end up costing the firm money.
28
The current ratio is the ratio of current assets (cash, inventory, accounts receivable)
to its current liabilities (obligations coming due within the next PEriod).
29
Current
Ratio
=
Current
Assets
Liabilitie
s
Current
A current ratio below one, for instance, would indicate that the firm has more obligations
coming due in the next year than assets it can exPEct to turn to cash. That would be an
indication of liquidity risk.
While traditional analysis suggests that firms maintain a current ratio of 2 or greater,
there is a trade-off here between minimizing liquidity risk and tying up more and more cash
in net working capital (Net working capital = Current Assets - Current Liabilities). In fact, it
can be reasonably argued that a very high current ratio is indicative of an unhealthy firm,
which is having problems reducing its inventory. In recent years, firms have worked at
reducing their current ratios and managing their net working capital better.
Reliance on current ratios has to be temPEred by a few concerns. FIRSt, the ratio can
be easily manipulated by firms around the time of financial reporting dates to give the
illusion of safety; SECond, current assets and current liabilities can change by an equal
amount, but the effect on the current ratio will dePEnd upon its level10 before the change.
The quick or acid test ratio is a variant of the current ratio. It distinguishes current
assets that can be converted quickly into cash (cash, marketable SECurities) from those that
cannot (inventory, accounts receivable).
Quick
Ratio
=
Cash
+
Marketable
SECurities
s
Liabilitie
Current
The exclusion of accounts receivable and inventory is not a hard and fast rule. If there is
evidence that either can be converted into cash quickly, it can, in fact, be included as part of
the quick ratio.
Turnover ratios measure the efficiency of working capital management by looking
at the relationship of accounts receivable and inventory to sales and to the cost of goods
sold.
Accounts
Receivable
Turnover
=
Sales
Accounts
Average
Receivable
10 If the current assets and current liabilities increase by an equal amount, the current ratio will go down if
29
30
Inventory
Turnover
=
Cost
of
Average
Goods
Sold
Inventory
These ratios can be interpreted as measuring the sPEed with which the firm turns accounts
receivable into cash or inventory into sales. These ratios are often expressed in terms of the
number of days outstanding.
Days
Receivable
Outstandin
g
=
365
Receivable
Turnover
Days
Inventory
Held
=
365
Inventory
Turnover
A similar pair of ratios can be computed for accounts payable, relative to purchases.
Accounts
Payable
Turnover
=
Purchases
Accounts
Average
Payable
Days
Accounts
Payable
Outstandin
g
=
365
Payable
Turnover
Accounts
Since accounts receivable and inventory are assets and accounts payable is a liability, these
three ratios (standardized in terms of days outstanding) can be combined to get an estimate
of how much financing the firm needs to fund working capital needs.
Required
Financing
PEriod
=
Days
Receivable
Outstandin
g
+(cid:247)
Days
Inventory
Held
+(cid:247)
Days
Payable
Outstandin
g
The greater the financing PEriod for a firm, the greater is its short-term liquidity risk.
wcdata.xls: This is a dataset on the web that summarizes working capital ratios for
firms in the United States, classified by industry.
it was greater than one before the increase and go up if it was less than one.
30
(cid:247)
(cid:247)
l
(cid:246)
(cid:231)
(cid:231)
L
(cid:230)
(cid:247)
l
(cid:246)
(cid:231)
(cid:231)
L
(cid:230)
(cid:247)
l
(cid:246)
(cid:231)
(cid:231)
L
(cid:230)
31
finratio.xls: This spreadsheet allows you to compute the working capital ratios for a
firm, based upon financial statement data.
2. Long-term Solvency and Default risk
Measures of long-term solvency attempt to examine a firm's capacity to meet interest
and principal payments in the long term. Clearly, the profitability ratios discussed earlier in
the SECtion are a critical component of this analysis. The ratios sPEcifically designed to
measure long term solvency try to relate profitability to the level of debt payments, to
identiFY the degree of comfort with which the firm can meet these payments.
Interest Coverage Ratios
The interest coverage ratio measures the capacity of the firm to meet interest
payments from pre-debt, pre-tax earnings.
Interest
Coverage
Ratio
=
EBIT
Interest
ExPEnses
The higher the interest coverage ratio, the more SECure is the firm's capacity to make interest
payments from earnings. This argument however has to be temPEred by the recognition that
earnings before interest and taxes is volatile and can drop significantly if the economy
enters a recession. Consequently, two firms can have the same interest coverage ratio but be
viewed very differently in terms of risk.
The denominator in the interest coverage ratio can be easily extended to cover other
fixed obligations such as lease payments. If this is done, the ratio is called a fixed charges
coverage ratio.
Fixed Chargeds Coverage Ratio = EBIT + Fixed Charges
Fixed Charges
Finally, this ratio, while stated in terms of earnings, can be restated in terms of cash flows,
by using earnings before interest, taxes and depreciation (EBITDA) in the numerator and
cash fixed charges in the denominator.
Cash
Fixed
Charges
Coverage
Ratio
=
EBITDA
Fixed
Charges
Cash
Both interest coverage and fixed charge ratios are oPEn to the criticism that they do not
consider capital exPEnditures, a cash flow that may be discretionary in the very short term,
31
but not in the long term if the firm wants to maintain growth. One way of capturing the
extent of this cash flow, relative to oPErating cash flows, is to compute a ratio of the two.
32
OPErating
Cash
flow
to
Capital
ExPEnditur
es
=
Cash
flows
Capital
from
ExPEnditur
OPErations
es
While there are a number of different definitions of cash flows from oPErations, the most
reasonable way of defining it is to measure the cash flows from continuing oPErations,
before interest but after taxes, and after meeting working capital needs.
Cash flow from oPErations = EBIT (1-tax rate) - D Working Capital
covratio.xls: There is a dataset on the web that summarizes the interest coverage
and fixed charge coverage ratios for firms in the United States, classified by industry.
Illustration 3.6: Interest and Fixed Charge Coverage Ratios
Table 3.7 summarizes interest and fixed charge coverage ratios for Boeing and
Home Depot in 1998:
Table 3.7: Interest and Fixed Charge Coverage Ratios
EBIT
Interest ExPEnse
Interest Coverage Ratio
Boeing
Home Depot
$1,720
$453
3.80
$2,661
$37
71.92
EBIT
$1,720
$2,661
OPErating Lease ExPEnses
Interest ExPEnses
Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio
EBITDA
Cash Fixed Charges
Cash Fixed Charge Coverage
Cash Flows from OPErations
Capital ExPEnditures
CF/Cap Ex
$215
$453
2.90
$290
$37
9.02
$3,341
$3,034
$668
5.00
$2,161
$1,584
1.36
$327
9.28
$1,662
$2,059
0.81
32
33
Boeing, based upon its oPErating income in 1998, looks riskier than the Home Depot on
both the interest coverage ratio and fixed charge coverage ratio basis. On a cash flow basis,
however, Boeing does look much better. In fact, when capital exPEnditures are considered,
the Home Depot has a lower ratio. For Boeing, the other consideration is the fact that
oPErating income in 1998 was depressed, relative to income in earlier years, and this does
have an impact on the ratios across the board. It might make more sense when computing
these ratios to look at the average figures over time.
finratio.xls: This spreadsheet allows you to compute the interest coverage and fixed
charge coverage ratios for a firm, based upon financial statement data.
Debt Ratios
Interest coverage ratios measure the capacity of the firm to meet interest payments
but do not examine whether it can pay back the principal on outstanding debt. Debt ratios
attempt to do this, by relating debt to total capital or to equity. The two most widely used
debt ratios are:
Debt to
Capital
Ratio
=
Debt
+
Debt
Equity
Debt to
Equity
Ratio
=
Debt
Equity
The fIRSt ratio measures debt as a proportion of the total capital of the firm and cannot
exceed 100%. The SECond measures debt as a proportion of equity in the firm and can be
easily derived from the fIRSt.
Debt/Equit
y
Ratio
=
1
Debt/Capit
al
Debt/Capit
Ratio
al
Ratio
While these ratios presume that capital is raised from only debt and equity, they can
be easily adapted to include other sources of financing, such as preferred stock. While
preferred stock is sometimes combined with common stock under the 'equity' label, it is
better to keep it separate and to compute the ratio of preferred stock to capital (which will
include debt, equity and preferred stock).
33
-
a. Variants on Debt Ratios
There are two close variants of debt ratios. In the fIRSt, only long-term debt is used
rather than total debt, with the rationale that short-term debt is transitory and will not affect
34
the long-term solvency of the firm.
Long
term
Debt to
Capital
Ratio
=
Long
term
term
Debt
Debt
+
Equity
Long
Long
term
Debt to
Equity
Ratio
=
Long
Debt
term
Equity
Given the ease with which firms can roll over short-term debt, and the willingness of many
firms to use short-term financing to fund long-term projects, these variants can provide a
misleading picture of the firm's financial leverage risk.
The SECond variant of debt ratios uses market value (MV) instead of book value,
primarily to reflect the fact that some firms have a significantly greater capacity to borrow
than their book values indicate.
Market
Value
Debt to
Capital
Ratio
=
of MV
Debt
Debt
of MV
+
Equity
of MV
Market
Value
Debt to
Equity
Ratio
=
of MV
of MV
Debt
Equity
Many analysts disavow the use of market value in their calculations, contending that market
values, in addition to being difficult to get for debt, are volatile and hence unreliable. These
contentions are oPEn to debate. It is true that the market value of debt is difficult to get for
firms which do not have publicly traded bonds, but the market value of equity is not only
easy to obtain, it is constantly updated to reflect market-wide and firm-sPEcific changes.
Furthermore, using the book value of debt as a proxy for market value in those cases where
bonds are not traded does not significantly shift11 most market-value based debt ratios.
Illustration 3.7: Book Value Debt Ratios and Variants- Boeing and Home Depot
Table 3.8 summarizes different estimates of the debt ratio for Boeing, the Home
Depot and InfoSoft, using book values of debt and equity for all three firms:
Table 3.8: Book Value Debt Ratios
11 Deviations in the market value of equity from book value are likely to be much larger than deviation for
debt and are likely to dominate in most debt ratio calculations.
34
35
Long Term Debt
Short Term Debt
BV of Equity
LT Debt/Equity
LT Debt / (LT Debt + Equity)
Debt/Equity
Debt/ (Debt + Equity)
Boeing
Home Depot
$6,103
$869
$12,316
49.55%
33.13%
56.61%
36.15%
$1,566
$14
$8,740
17.92%
15.20%
18.08%
15.31%
Boeing has a much higher book value debt ratio, both long term and total debt, than the
Home Depot.
dbtfund.xls: There is a dataset on the web that summarizes the book value debt
ratios and market value debt ratios for firms in the United States, classified by industry.
Other issues in analyzing financial statements
Two more issues bear consideration before we conclude this SECtion on financial
statements. The fIRSt relates to differences in accounting standards and practices and how
these differences may color comparisons across companies and the SECond relates to
accounting for acquisitions and how this can affect both the acquisition method and price.
Differences in accounting standards and practices
Differences in accounting standards across countries affect the measurement of
earnings. These differences, however, are not so great as they are made out to be and they
cannot explain away radical departures from fundamental principles of valuation12. Choi
and Levich, in a survey of accounting standards across develoPEd markets, note that most
countries subscribe to basic accounting notions of consistency, realization and historical
cost principles in preparing accounting statements. Table 3.9 summarizes accounting
standards in eight major financial markets and reveals that the common elements vastly
outnumber those areas where there are differences.
12 At the PEak of the Japanese market, there were many investors who explained away the price-earnings
multiples of 60 and greater in the market, by noting that Japanese firms were conservative in measuring
earnings. Even after taking into account the general provisions and excess depreciation used by many of
these firms to depress current earnings, the price-earnings multiples were greater than 50 for many firms,
suggesting either extraordinary exPEcted growth in the future or overvaluation.
35
36
The two countries that offer the strongest contrast to the United States are Germany
and Japan. The key differences and their implications are as follows. FIRSt, companies in the
United States generally maintain separate tax and financial reporting books, which in turn
generates items like deferred taxes to cover differences between the two books. Companies
in Germany and Japan do not maintain separate books. Consequently, depreciation methods
in financial reports are much more likely to be accelerated and hence to reduce stated
income. SECond, the requirement that leases be capitalized and shown as a liability is much
more tightly enforced in the United States. In Japan, leases are generally treated as oPErating
leases and do not show up as liabilities in the balance sheet. In Germany, firms can
capitalize leases, but they have more leeway in classiFYing leases as oPErating and capital
leases than U.S. companies. Third, goodwill, once created, can be amortized over 40 years in
the United States and over much shorter time PEriods in Germany and Japan, again
depressing stated income. Fourth, reserves in the United States can be created only for
sPEcific purposes, whereas German and Japanese companies can use general reserves to
equalize earnings across PEriods, leading earnings to be understated during the good years,
and overstated during bad years.
Most of these differences can be accounted and adjusted for when comparisons are
made between companies in the U.S. and companies in other financial markets. Ratios such
as price earnings, which use stated and unadjusted earnings, can be misleading when
accounting standards vary widely across the companies being compared.
Summary
Financial statements remain the primary source of information for most investors
and analysts. There are differences, however, in how accounting and financial analysis
appROAch answering a number of key questions about the firm. We examine these
differences in this chapter.
The fIRSt question that we examined related to the nature and the value of the assets
owned by a firm. Categorizing assets into investments already made (assets in place) and
investments yet to be made (growth assets), we argued that accounting statements provide a
substantial amount of historical information about the former and very little about the latter.
The focus on the original price of assets in place (book value) in accounting statements can
lead to significant differences between the stated value of these assets and their market
value. With growth assets, accounting rules result in low or no values for assets generated
by internal research.
The SECond issue that we examined was the measurement of profitability. The two
principles that seem to govern how profits are measured are accrual accounting - revenues
36
37
and exPEnses are shown in the PEriod where transactions occur rather than when the cash is
received or paid - and the categorization of exPEnses into oPErating, financing and capital
exPEnses. OPErating and financing exPEnses are shown in income statements. Capital
exPEnditures take the form of depreciation and amortization and are spread over several time
PEriods. Accounting standards miscategorize oPErating leases and research and development
exPEnses as oPErating exPEnses (when the former should be categorized as financing
exPEnses and the latter as capital exPEnses).
In the last part of the chapter, we examine how financial statements deal with shortterm liquidity risk and long-term default risk. While the emphasis in accounting statements
is on examining the risk that firms may be unable to make payments that they have
committed to make, there is very little focus on risk to equity investors.
37
Coca Cola's balance sheet for December 1998 is summarized below (in millions of dollars)
Problems
38
3141
4462
1037
8640
687
1415
2102
3060
5343
8403
for problems 1 through 9:
Cash & Near Cash
Marketable SECurities
Accounts Receivable
Other Current Assets
Current Assets
Long term investments
Depreciable Fixed Assets
1648
159
1666
2017
6380
1863
5486
Accounts Payable
Short term Borrowings
Other Short term liabilities
Current Liabilities
Long term Borrowings
Other long term Liabilities
Non-current liabilities
Non-depreciable Fixed Assets
199
Accumulated Depreciation
Net Fixed Assets
Other Assets
Total Assets
2016
3669
7233
Share Capital (Paid-in)
Retained Earnings
Shareholder Equity
19145
Total Liabilities & Equity
19145
1. Consider the assets on Coca Cola's balance sheet and answer the following questions:
a. Looking at the assets that Coca Cola has on its balance sheet, which assets are likely
to be assessed closest to market value? Explain.
b. Coca Cola has net fixed assets of $3,669 million. Can you estimate how much Coca
Cola paid for these assets? Is there any way to know the age of these assets?
c. Coca Cola seems to have far more invested in current assets, rather than fixed assets.
Is this significant? Explain.
d. In the early 1980s, Coca Cola sold off its bottling oPErations, with the bottlers
becoming indePEndent companies. How would this action have impacted the assets on
Coca Cola's balance sheet? (The manufacturing plants are most likely to be part of the
bottling oPErations)
2. Examine the liabilities on Coca Cola's balance sheet.
a. Based upon the balance sheet, how much interest-bearing debt does Coca Cola have
outstanding. (You can assume that other short term liabilities represent sundry
payables, and other long term liabilities represent health care and PEnsion obligations.)
b. Based upon the balance sheet, how much did Coca Cola obtain in equity capital
when it issued stock originally to the financial markets?
c. Is there any significance to the fact that retained earnings is much larger than the
original paid-in capital?
38
39
d. The market value of Coca Cola's equity is $140 billion. What is the book value of
equity in Coca Cola? Why is there such a large difference between the market value of
equity and the book value of equity?
3. Coca Cola's most valuable asset is its brand name. Where in the balance sheet do you
see its value? Is there any way to adjust the balance sheet to reflect the value of this asset?
4. Assume that you have been asked to analyze Coca Cola's working capital management.
a. Estimate the net working capital and non-cash working capital for Coca Cola.
b. Estimate the firm's current ratio.
c. Estimate the firm's quick ratio.
d. Would you draw any conclusions about the riskiness of Coca Cola as a firm by
looking at these numbers? Why or why not?
Coca Cola's income statements for 1997 and 1998 are summarized below (in millions of
dollars):
Net Revenues
Cost of Goods Sold
Selling, G & A ExPEnses
Earnings before interest and taxes
Interest ExPEnses
Non-oPErating Gains
Income Tax ExPEnses
Net Income
Dividends
1997
$18,868
1998
$18,813
6,105
7,852
5,001
258
1,312
1,926
4,129
1,387
5,562
8,284
4,967
277
508
1,665
3,533
1,480
The following questions relate to Coca Cola's income statement.
5. How much oPErating income did Coca Cola earn, before taxes, in 1998? How does this
compare to how much Coca Cola earned in 1997? What are the reasons for the differences?
6. The biggest exPEnse for Coca Cola is advertising, which is part of the selling, general and
administrative exPEnses. A large portion of these exPEnses are designed to build up Coca
Cola's brand name. Should advertising exPEnses be treated as oPErating exPEnses or are
they really capital exPEnses? If they are to be treated as capital exPEnses, how would you
capitalize them? (Use the capitalization of R&D as a guide.)
39
40
7. What effective tax rate did Coca Cola have in 1998? How does it compare with what they
paid in 1997 as an effective tax rate? What might account for the difference?
8. You have been asked to assess the profitability of Coca Cola, as a firm. To that end,
estimate the pre-tax oPErating and net margins in 1997 and 1998 for the firm. Are there any
conclusions you would draw from the comparisons across the two years.
9. The book value of equity at Coca Cola in 1997 was $7,274 million. The book value of
interest-bearing debt was $3,875 million. Estimate:
a. the return on equity (beginning of the year) in 1998
b. the pre-tax return on capital (beginning of the year) in 1998
c. the after-tax return on capital (beginning of the year) in 1998, using the effective tax
rate in 1998.
10. SeeSaw Toys reported that it had a book value of equity of $1.5 billion at the end of
1998 and 100 million shares outstanding. During 1999, it bought back 10 million shares at
a market price of $40 PEr share. The firm also reported a net income of $150 million for
1999, and paid dividends of $50 million.
a. Estimate the book value of equity at the end of 1999
b. Estimate the return on equity, using beginning book value of equity.
c. Estimate the return on equity, using the average book value of equity.
40