The ABC corp. Company, founded in 1866 and incorporated in Ohio in 1884, is engaged in the
development, manufacture, distribution and sale of paint, coatings and related products to
professional, industrial, commercial and retail customers primarily in North and South America with
additional operations in the Caribbean region, Europe, Asia and Australia. Our principal executive
offices are located at 101 West Prospect Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44115-1075, telephone (216)
566-2000. As used in this report, the terms “ABC corp.,” “Company,” “we”, “us” and “our” mean
The ABC corp. Company and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Available Information
We make available free of charge on or through our website our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly
Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K and amendments to these reports, as soon as
reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish such material to,
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). You may access these documents on our Investor
Relations website, investors.sherwin.com.
We also make available free of charge on our website our Corporate Governance Guidelines, our
Director Independence Standards, our Code of Conduct and the charters of our Audit Committee, our
Compensation and Management Development Committee and our Nominating and Corporate Governance
Committee. You may access these documents on our Investor Relations website, investors.sherwin.com.
Basis of Reportable Segments
The Company reports its segment information in the same way that management internally organizes its
business for assessing performance and making decisions regarding allocation of resources. The
Company has three reportable operating segments: Paint Stores Group, Consumer Brands Group and
Performance Coatings Group (individually, a Reportable Segment and collectively, the Reportable
Segments). The Company reports all other business activities and immaterial operating segments that
are not reportable in the Administrative function. For more information about the Reportable
Segments, see Note 22 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Paint Stores Group
Paint Stores Group consisted of 4,773 company-operated specialty paint stores in the United States,
Canada and the Caribbean region at December 31, 2024. Each store is engaged in servicing the needs of
architectural and industrial paint contractors and do-it-yourself homeowners. These stores market and
sell ABC corp. ® and other controlled brand architectural paint and coatings, protective and
marine products, OEM product finishes and related products. The majority of these products are
produced by manufacturing facilities in the Consumer Brands Group. In addition, each store sells
select purchased associated products. The loss of any single customer would not have a material
adverse effect on the business of this segment.
Consumer Brands Group
The Consumer Brands Group manufactures and distributes a broad portfolio of branded and private-label
architectural paint, stains, varnishes, industrial products, wood finishes products, wood
preservatives, applicators, corrosion inhibitors, aerosols, caulks and adhesives to retailers,
including home centers and hardware stores, dedicated dealers and distributors throughout North
America, Latin America and Europe. Sales and marketing of certain controlled brand and private-label
products are performed by a direct sales staff. The products distributed through third-party
customers are intended for resale to the ultimate end-user of the product. The Consumer Brands Group
also consisted of 334 company-operated specialty paint stores in Latin America at December 31, 2024.
Each store is engaged in servicing the needs of home, commercial and industrial projects to
contractors and do-it-yourself customers in Latin America. These stores market and sell Sherwin-
Williams ® and other controlled brand architectural paint and coatings, protective and marine
products, OEM product finishes and related products which are branded for the Latin America market.
In addition, each store sells select purchased associated products. The Consumer Brands Group also
supports the Company’s other businesses around the world with new product research and development,
manufacturing, distribution and logistics. Approximately 63% of the total sales of the Consumer
Brands Group in 2024 were intersegment transfers of products primarily sold through the Paint Stores
Group. The Consumer Brands Group had sales to certain customers that, individually, may be a
significant portion of the sales and related profitability of the segment. This segment incurred most
of the Company’s capital expenditures related to ongoing environmental compliance measures,
manufacturing capacity expansion, operational efficiencies and maintenance projects at sites
currently in operation.
 1 
Performance Coatings Group
The Performance Coatings Group develops and sells industrial coatings for wood finishing and general
industrial (metal and plastic) applications, automotive refinish, protective and marine coatings,
coil coatings, packaging coatings and performance-based resins and colorants worldwide. This segment
licenses certain technology and trade names worldwide. ABC corp. ® and other controlled brand
products are distributed through the Paint Stores Group, this segment’s 324 company-operated
branches, a direct sales staff and outside sales representatives to retailers, dealers, jobbers,
licensees and other third-party distributors. The Performance Coatings Group had sales to certain
customers that, individually, may be a significant portion of the sales of the segment. However, the
loss of any single customer would not have a material adverse effect on the overall profitability of
the segment.
Administrative Function
The Administrative function includes the administrative expenses and assets of the Company’s new
global headquarters and research and development center, both currently under construction. In
addition, it includes the operations of a real estate management unit that is responsible for the
ownership, management and leasing of non-retail properties held primarily for use by the Company,
including the Company’s current global headquarters and research and development center and disposal
of idle facilities. The Administrative function’s remaining assets consist primarily of cash and cash
equivalents, investments and deferred pension assets. Also included in the Administrative function
was interest expense, interest and investment income, certain expenses related to closed facilities
and environmental-related matters and other expenses that were not directly associated with the
Reportable Segments. Sales of this function represented external leasing revenue. The Administrative
function did not include any significant foreign operations. Gains and losses from the sale of
property were not a significant operating factor in determining the performance of the Administrative
function.
Raw Materials and Products Purchased for Resale
Raw materials and products purchased for resale make up the majority of our consolidated Cost of
goods sold. Raw materials may vary considerably by the specific paint or coating being manufactured
but can generally be divided into the following categories: resins and latex, pigments, additives,
solvents and metal or plastic containers. A significant portion of these raw materials are derived
from various upstream petrochemical and related commodity feedstocks, notably propylene. Raw
materials are sourced from multiple suppliers globally, typically within the geographic region where
our products are being manufactured. A portion of specialized resins and other products are
manufactured in house. We also purchase a variety of products for resale that are highly
complementary to our paint and coating offerings, notably spray equipment and parts, floorcovering
and assorted sundries. We attempt, if feasible, to mitigate our potential risk associated with the
sourcing of our raw materials and other products through inventory management, strategic
relationships with key suppliers, alternative sourcing strategies and long-term investments to expand
our manufacturing capabilities.
Seasonality
The majority of the sales for the Reportable Segments traditionally occur during the second and third
quarters. Periods of economic downturn, however, can alter these seasonal patterns. There is no
significant seasonality in sales for the Administrative function.
Working Capital
In order to meet increased demand during the second and third quarters, the Company usually builds
its inventories during the first quarter. Working capital items (inventories and accounts receivable)
are generally financed through short-term borrowings, which include the use of lines of credit and
the issuance of commercial paper. For a description of the Company’s liquidity and capital resources,
see Item 7 Financial Condition, Liquidity and Cash Flow.
Trademarks and Trade Names
Customer recognition of trademarks and trade names owned or licensed by the Company collectively
contribute significantly to our sales. The major trademarks and trade names used by each of the
Reportable Segments are set forth below.
• Paint Stores Group: ABC corp.®, A-100®, Builders Solution®, Captivate®, Cashmere®,
Duration®, Emerald®, Gallery Series™, Kem Tone®, Latitude®, Loxon®, Metalatex®, Novacor®, Painters
Edge Plus®, ProClassic®, ProCraft®, Pro Industrial™, ProMar®, Scuff Tuff®, SuperDeck®, SuperPaint®,
Woodscapes®
• Consumer Brands Group: Cabot®, Colorgin®, Condor®, Dupli-Color®, Dutch Boy®, Geocel®, HGTV HOME® by
ABC corp., Krylon®, Minwax®, Purdy®, Ronseal®, Thompson’s® WaterSeal®, Valspar®, White
Lightning®
• Performance Coatings Group: ABC corp.®, Acrolon®, AcromaPro®, ATX®, DeBeer Refinish®,
Duraspar®, EcoDex®, Envirolastic®, Excelo®, EzDex®, Fastline®, Firetex®, Fluropon®, Gross & Perthun™,
Heat-Flex®, House of Kolor®, Huarun®, ICA®, Inver®, Kem Aqua®, Klumpp Coatings™, Lazzuril®,
Macropoxy®, Martin
 2 
Senour®, Matrix Edge®, M.L. Campbell®, Octoral®, Oskar Nolte™, PermaClad®, Polane®, Powdura®,
Sayerlack®, Sher-Wood®, Sumaré®, Ultra 9K®, Ultra 7000®, ValPure®, Valspar®
Patents
Although patents and licenses are not of material importance to our business as a whole or any
segment, each segment derives a portion of its income from the licensing of technology, trademarks
and trade names to foreign companies.
Backlog and Productive Capacity
Backlog orders are not typically significant in the business of any Reportable Segment since there is
normally a short period of time between the placing of an order and shipment. We believe that
sufficient productive capacity currently exists to fulfill our needs for paint, coatings and related
products during 2025.
Competition
We experience competition from many local, regional, national and international competitors of
various sizes in the manufacture, distribution and sale of our paint, coatings and related products.
We are a leading manufacturer and retailer of paint, coatings and related products to professional,
industrial, commercial and retail customers, however, our competitive position varies for our
different products and markets.
In the Paint Stores Group, competitors include other paint and wallpaper stores, mass merchandisers,
home centers, independent hardware stores, hardware chains and manufacturer-operated direct outlets.
Product quality, product innovation, breadth of product line, technical expertise, service and price
determine the competitive advantage for this segment.
In the Consumer Brands Group, domestic and foreign competitors include manufacturers and distributors
of branded and private-label paint and coatings products as well as other paint and wallpaper stores,
mass merchandisers, home centers, independent hardware stores, hardware chains and manufacturer-
operated direct outlets. Technology, product quality, product innovation, breadth of product line,
technical expertise, distribution, service and price are key competitive factors for this segment.
The Performance Coatings Group has numerous competitors in its domestic and foreign markets with
broad product offerings and several others with niche products. Key competitive factors for this
segment include technology, product quality, product innovation, breadth of product line, technical
expertise, distribution, service and price.
The Administrative function has many competitors consisting of other real estate owners, developers
and managers in areas in which this segment owns property. The main competitive factors are the
availability of property and price.
Human Capital Resources
Our commitment to our people is embedded in the Company’s corporate purpose and guiding values.
Through the development, manufacture, distribution and sale of innovative paint and coatings
products, our employees are instrumental in fulfilling our corporate purpose to inspire and improve
the world by coloring and protecting what matters. The Company’s seven guiding values — integrity,
people, service, quality, performance, innovation and growth — drive how we fulfill our purpose,
emphasize the importance of our global workforce and serve as the foundation of our culture of
excellence.
At December 31, 2024, we employed 63,890 people worldwide, of which approximately 75% were in the
United States. The success of our business and our ability to execute on our strategy depend in large
part on our ability to attract, retain, develop and progress qualified employees with a broad range
of skills, experiences and perspectives at all levels of our organization. To deliver on these
objectives, we have developed key programs, policies and initiatives focused on belonging and
culture, talent acquisition and employee engagement, occupational health and safety and total
rewards.
Belonging and Culture. We strive to foster a strong workplace culture that drives belonging, employee
engagement, performance and above market growth while attracting, retaining, developing and
progressing a pipeline of talent ready to serve the communities in which we operate. As reflected in
our Code of Conduct and reinforced through our values, fostering a strong culture and a positive
employee experience is imperative for long-term sustainable growth. The building blocks of our
culture of belonging include:
• Communicating impact : Sharing the Company story, goals and priorities at all levels and supporting
our employees in life, career and connections.
• Leading with intention : Creating a culture where we inspire employees to Create Your Possible and
leverage the unique contributions of each employee to foster a positive employee experience for all
and drive above-market growth.
 3 
opportunities to drive retention, progression and engagement.
• Committing to action : Empowering and engaging leaders at all levels to use tools and resources to
take meaningful action to foster a culture of belonging for all employees.
While our commitment starts at the top, with a Board of Directors with a broad range of skills,
backgrounds and experiences, creating a supportive, welcoming environment across our global footprint
is the shared responsibility of all of our employees, including our senior leaders. We strive to
ensure our senior leaders have the resources they need to foster a positive employee experience for
all and ultimately leverage our workforce to deliver customer-focused differentiated products,
services and solutions. In 2024, we continued supporting employees in life, career and connection.
Our employee-led communities have served as champions of the employee value proposition, Create Your
Possible, a framework for initiatives with a shared purpose of driving professional development,
employee engagement and business results. We have over 400 employee-led communities that bring
together employees from various groups, divisions and functional teams to create greater synergy
around business objectives and serve as a hub for innovation, professional development and mentorship
opportunities that enable our employees to thrive and find long-term success at ABC corp..
Talent Acquisition and Employee Engagement. We strive to attract, retain, develop and progress a
workforce that embraces our culture through an integrated talent management strategy. This strategy
connects major milestones in the employee journey, including talent acquisition, onboarding,
performance management, leadership and management development, succession and career progression. The
Company’s early talent programs, including our management trainee program and similar programs across
our global business, play a critical role in attracting, developing and advancing a pipeline of
talent with a broad mix of skills, backgrounds and experiences. During 2024, we hired approximately
1,500 professionals through our management trainee program as part of our long-term growth
initiatives.
We invest in our people by providing learning and employee networking opportunities to drive
retention, development and engagement and help employees excel in their current and future roles.
During 2024, our employees collectively completed thousands of hours of online and instructor-led
courses across a broad range of categories, including leadership, professional skills, technical
skills and compliance. We measure our progress toward creating a culture of excellence that empowers
employees to learn, grow and achieve their aspirations by conducting periodic pulse surveys and a
global engagement survey, which we conducted in 2023 and expect to conduct every other year. We are
focused on using these survey results to drive continued progress with our efforts.
Occupational Health and Safety. Providing safe and healthy working environments for our employees is
a core value. We have a consistent focus on Environmental, Health and Safety excellence that promotes
employee health and safety, process safety and occupational health, including evaluation and
implementation of preventative measures to reduce workplace injuries and illness. We strive for
incident-free workplaces and are continuously seeking to improve the programs that are in place to
help keep our employees, customers and communities safe, including by regularly re-evaluating our
global management systems, standards and performance measures.
Total Rewards. We prioritize the fair and consistent treatment of our employees in relation to
working conditions, wages, benefits, policies and procedures. The Company’s policies and programs are
designed to respond to the needs of our employees in a manner that provides a safe, professional,
efficient and rewarding workplace. Our total rewards programs are designed to offer competitive
compensation, comprehensive benefits and other programs to support employees’ growth, both personally
and professionally, and the needs and well-being of our employees worldwide.
Over the past few years, we have enhanced certain of the Company’s benefits and practices to support
the health and well-being of our employees. Our enhanced benefits have included paid sick leave,
family leave and voluntary leave of absence policies and programs. In 2024, we introduced a new
education benefit that offers bachelors’ degrees, associates’ degrees and certificates for in-demand
fields, with tuition fully paid by our Company. More recently, in 2025 we added a new backup child
and elder care benefit. We continue to permit remote, alternate and flexible work arrangements where
possible to promote increased flexibility and support employee health and well-being, while
maintaining our focus on collaboration and engagement.
Regulatory Compliance
For additional information regarding environmental-related matters, see Notes 1, 10 and 19 to the
consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
 4 
Certain statements contained in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations” and elsewhere in this report constitute “forward-looking statements” within
the meaning of federal securities laws. These forward-looking statements are based upon management’s
current expectations, predictions, estimates, assumptions and beliefs concerning future events and
conditions and may discuss, among other things, anticipated future performance (including sales and
earnings), expected growth, future business plans and the costs and potential liability for
environmental-related matters and lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation. Any statement that is
not historical in nature is a forward-looking statement and may be identified by the use of words and
phrases such as “anticipate,” “aspire,” “believe,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “goal,” “intend,”
“may,” “plan,” “potential,” “project,” “seek,” “should,” “strive,” “target,” “will,” or “would” or
the negative thereof or comparable terminology.
Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. Forward-looking
statements are necessarily subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors, many of which are
outside our control, that could cause actual results to differ materially from such statements and
from our historical results, performance and experience. These risks, uncertainties and other factors
include such things as:
• general business and economic conditions in the United States and worldwide;
• inflation rates, interest rates, unemployment rates, labor costs, healthcare costs, recessionary
conditions, geopolitical conditions, terrorist activity, armed conflicts and wars, public health
crises, pandemics, outbreaks of disease and supply chain disruptions;
• shifts in consumer behavior driven by economic downturns in cyclical segments of the economy;
• shortages and increases in the cost of raw materials and energy;
• catastrophic events, adverse weather conditions and natural disasters (including those that may be
related to climate change);
• the loss of any of our largest customers;
• increased competition or failure to keep pace with developments in key competitive areas of our
business;
• disruptions to our information technology systems, including due to digitization efforts or
cybersecurity incidents;
• our ability to attract, retain, develop and progress a qualified global workforce;
• our ability to successfully integrate past and future acquisitions into our existing operations;
• risks and uncertainties associated with our expansion into and our operations in South America,
Asia, Europe and other foreign markets;
• policy changes affecting international trade, including import/export restrictions and tariffs;
• our ability to achieve our strategies or expectations relating to sustainability considerations,
including as a result of evolving legal, regulatory and other standards, processes and assumptions,
the pace of scientific and technological developments, increased costs, the availability of requisite
suppliers, energy sources, or financing and changes in carbon markets;
• damage to our business, reputation, image or brands due to negative publicity;
• the infringement or loss of our intellectual property rights or the theft or unauthorized use of
our trade secrets or other confidential business information;
• a weakening of global credit markets or changes to our credit ratings;
• our ability to generate cash to service our indebtedness;
• fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and changing monetary policies;
• our ability to comply with a variety of complex U.S. and non-U.S. laws, rules and regulations;
• increases in tax rates, or changes in tax laws or regulations;
• our ability to comply with numerous, complex and increasingly stringent domestic and foreign
health, safety and environmental laws, regulations and requirements;
• our liability related to environmental investigation and remediation activities at some of our
currently- and formerly-owned sites;
• the nature, cost, quantity and outcome of pending and future litigation, including lead pigment and
lead-based paint litigation; and
• the other risk factors discussed in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and our other
reports filed with the SEC.
 5 
Readers are cautioned that it is not possible to predict or identify all of the risks, uncertainties
and other factors that may affect future results and that the above list should not be considered a
complete list. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is
made, and we undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a
result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as otherwise required by law.
The risks described below and in other documents we file from time to time with the SEC could
materially and adversely affect our business, results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or
financial condition. Although the risks are organized by headings, and each risk is discussed
separately, many are interrelated. While we believe we have identified and discussed below the key
risks affecting our business, there may be additional risks and uncertainties that are not presently
known or that are not currently believed to be significant that may adversely affect our business,
results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition in the future. Readers should not
interpret the disclosure of any risk factor to imply that the risk has not already materialized.
 ECONOMIC AND STRATEGIC RISKS 
Adverse changes in general business and economic conditions in the United States and worldwide have
in the past adversely affected and may in the future adversely affect our results of operations, cash
flow, liquidity or financial condition.
We operate all over the world serving customers in more than 120 countries. Our business, operations
and business plans and strategies are sensitive to global and regional business and economic
conditions. Adverse changes in such conditions in the United States and worldwide have in the past
impacted and may in the future reduce the demand for some of our products, adversely impact our
ability to predict and meet any future changes in the demand for our products and impair the ability
of those with whom we do business to satisfy their obligations to us, each of which could adversely
affect our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition. Changes in inflation
rates, interest rates, tax rates, unemployment rates, labor costs, healthcare costs, recessionary
conditions, geopolitical conditions, governmental policies, laws and regulations (including import
and export requirements such as new or increased tariffs, sanctions, quotas or trade barriers),
business disruptions due to cybersecurity incidents, terrorist activity, armed conflicts and wars
(including the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine and Israel and Hamas), public health
crises, pandemics, outbreaks of disease, catastrophic events, adverse weather conditions or natural
disasters (including those that may be related to climate change or otherwise), supply chain
disruptions (including those caused by industry capacity constraints, labor shortages, raw material
availability and transportation and logistics delays and constraints) and other economic factors have
in the past and could in the future adversely affect demand for some of our products, our ability to
predict and meet any future changes in the demand for our products, the availability, delivery or
cost of raw materials, our ability to adequately staff and maintain operations at affected facilities
and our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition and that of our customers,
vendors and suppliers.
In particular, high levels of ongoing global inflation have impacted consumer and manufacturing
behavior in recent years. We expect inflationary pressure to continue to impact consumer and
manufacturing customer behavior during 2025, including in the United States housing market as a
result of elevated mortgage rates and in global industrial markets as a result of softer demand. Such
impacts could adversely affect the demand for some of our products and our results of operations,
cash flow, liquidity or financial condition. In addition, market uncertainty and volatility in
various geographies have been magnified as a result of potential shifts in U.S. and foreign trade,
economic and other policies following the 2024 U.S. presidential and congressional elections, and any
such actual shifts, including price increases on certain raw materials, or changes in the
availability of, or tariffs on certain imported raw materials, could adversely impact our results of
operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
Protracted duration of economic downturns in cyclical segments of the economy may depress the demand
for some of our products and adversely affect our sales, earnings, cash flow or financial condition.
Portions of our business involve the sale of paint, coatings and related products to segments of the
economy that are cyclical in nature, particularly segments relating to construction, housing,
manufacturing and oil production, refining, storage and transportation. Our sales to these segments
are affected by the levels of discretionary consumer and business spending in these segments. During
economic downturns in these segments, the levels of consumer and business discretionary spending have
in the past decreased. A decrease in consumer and business discretionary spending has in the past and
could in the future reduce the demand for some of our products and has in the past and could in the
future adversely affect our sales, earnings, cash flow or financial condition.
Interest rates, in particular, drive shifts in consumer behavior with respect to the housing market,
and have in the past adversely affected and may in the future adversely affect demand for new
residential homes, existing home turnover and new non-residential construction. These shifts in
consumer behavior have in the past adversely impacted and may in the future adversely
 6 
impact demand for some of our products, and our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or
financial condition. Although the Federal Reserve cut interest rates in 2024, mortgage rates have
remained high and we have not experienced meaningful positive impacts on demand for our products that
serve these segments of the economy to date. Although changes in inflation, the interest rate
environment and the mortgage market are difficult to predict, we expect the recent and continued
combination of high interest rates and high inflation to continue to impact consumer and
manufacturing customer behavior in 2025. Any worsening in these segments will reduce the demand for
some of our products and may adversely impact sales, earnings and cash flow.
In the U.S. construction and housing segments, labor markets are impacted by a number of factors,
including high employment levels, unemployment programs and subsidies, immigration laws and
volatility in general macroeconomic factors. We continue to see project backlogs in these segments
due to contractors experiencing a shortage of skilled workers, resulting in an adverse effect on the
growth rate of demand for our products. While we would typically expect to see higher demand for our
products as project backlogs are reduced in the future, inflation and other economic conditions may
delay a recovery in demand, which may result in the labor shortage and such other conditions
adversely impacting our sales, earnings, cash flow or financial condition.
 OPERATIONAL RISKS 
Unexpected shortages and increases in the cost of raw materials and energy may adversely affect our
earnings or cash flow.
We purchase raw materials (including petrochemical-derived resins, latex and solvents, titanium
dioxide and various additives) and energy for use in the manufacturing, distribution and sale of our
products. Factors such as political instability, higher tariffs, import/export restrictions, supply
chain disruptions, adverse weather conditions and natural disasters (including those that may be
related to climate change or otherwise), armed conflicts and wars, or public health crises have
impacted and may in the future adversely impact the availability and cost of raw materials and fuel
supplies, our ability to meet customer demands for some of our products, adequately staff and
maintain operations at affected facilities and our costs generally. In addition, environmental and
social regulations, including regulations related to climate change or otherwise, have in the past
and may in the future negatively impact us or our suppliers in terms of availability and cost of raw
materials, as well as sources and supply of energy.
Although raw materials and energy supplies (including oil and natural gas) are generally available
from various sources in sufficient quantities, unexpected shortages and increases in the cost of raw
materials and energy, supplier capacity constraints, or any deterioration in our relationships with
or the financial viability of our suppliers, may have an adverse effect on our earnings or cash flow.
Although we generally have a number of suppliers, in some cases we have limited or single-sources of
supply. We purchase raw materials globally from sources around the world, including in the Middle
East, Central and South America and other areas that may be less politically stable than other areas.
Wars, armed conflicts, political instability, civil disturbances and unrest, terrorist attacks and
actions by governments in these areas (such as the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine and
Israel and Hamas and any expansion or increase in the severity and intensity of such) may decrease
the supply and increase the price of raw materials that we use for our business, which could have a
material adverse effect on our sales, earnings, cash flow or results of operations. For example,
although we do not have significant operations in the region, the conflict between Israel and Hamas
has caused disruption, instability and volatility in supply chains and logistics, including shipping
disruptions in the Red Sea and surrounding waterways.
In the event we experience supply chain disruptions from our suppliers, we may not be able to timely
shift to internal production or secure alternate sources in order to prevent significant impacts to
our business, or we may experience quality issues with raw materials and energy sourced from
alternate sources. If we are unable to offset such disruptions through internal production or
alternate sources, we may experience adverse impacts to our business, including adverse effects to
our earnings and cash flow.
If the cost of raw materials and energy increases, we may not be able to offset higher costs in a
timely manner by sufficiently decreasing our operating costs or raising the prices of our products.
Following two years of historic inflation, certain raw material and energy prices decreased in 2023
and 2024, particularly resins and solvents derived from petrochemical feedstock sources such as
propylene and ethylene. Ongoing global supply and demand dynamics drive the cost of raw materials and
energy, which could continue to experience periods of volatility in the future and may adversely
affect our earnings and cash flow.
Catastrophic events, adverse weather conditions and natural disasters (including those that may be
related to climate change or otherwise) may temporarily reduce the demand for some of our products,
impact our ability to meet the demand for our products or cause supply chain disruptions and
increased costs, and could have a negative effect on our sales, earnings or cash flow.
Our business is seasonal in nature, with the second and third quarters typically generating a higher
proportion of sales and earnings than other quarters. From time to time, catastrophic events, adverse
weather conditions and natural disasters (including
 7 
those that may be related to climate change or otherwise) have caused business disruptions and have
had an adverse effect on our sales, manufacture and distribution of paint, coatings and related
products. Our facilities and systems are not fully redundant and our disaster recovery planning may
not be sufficient to meet business needs in the event of disruptions. In the event of catastrophic
events, adverse weather conditions or a natural disaster causing significant damage to any one or
more of our principal manufacturing or distribution facilities, we may not be able to manufacture the
products needed to meet customer demand, which could have an adverse effect on our sales of certain
paint, coatings and related products.
Also from time to time, the impact of these risks to our suppliers has had or may have an adverse
effect on our sales, manufacture and distribution of certain of our products. Catastrophic events,
adverse weather conditions or natural disasters and their impacts have in the past resulted, and may
in the future result, in industry-wide supply chain disruptions, increased raw material and other
costs and our hindered ability to manufacture the products needed to fully meet customer demand.
In any of these instances, an adverse effect on sales may cause a reduction in our earnings or cash
flow.
Although we have an extensive customer base, the loss of any of our largest customers could adversely
affect our sales, earnings or cash flow.
We have a large and varied customer base due to our extensive distribution platform. During 2024, no
individual customer accounted for sales totaling more than ten percent of our sales. However, we have
some customers that, individually, purchase a large amount of products from us. Although our broad
distribution channels help to minimize the impact of the loss of any one customer or the loss of a
significant amount of sales to any one customer, the loss of any of these large customers, or the
loss of significant amount of sales to any of these large customers, could have an adverse effect on
our sales, earnings or cash flow.
Increased competition or failure to keep pace with developments in key competitive areas of our
business may reduce our sales, earnings or cash flow performance.
We face substantial competition from many international, national, regional and local competitors of
various sizes in the manufacture, distribution and sale of our paint, coatings and related products.
Some of our competitors operate more extensively in certain regions around the world and have greater
financial or operational resources to compete internationally. They may secure better terms from
certain vendors, adopt more aggressive pricing and devote more resources to certain product lines or
parts of their business. Other competitors are smaller and may be able to offer more specialized
products. Technology, product quality, product composition, raw material sourcing, product innovation
and development (including relating to increased customer interest in the sustainability attributes
of products and our related key strategies and initiatives for expanding our product offerings),
breadth of product line, technical expertise, distribution, service and price are key competitive
factors for our business. Competition in any of these areas, or failure to keep pace with
developments in any of these areas, may reduce our sales and adversely affect our earnings or cash
flow by resulting in decreased sales volumes, reduced prices and increased costs of manufacturing,
distributing and selling our products.
Disruptions to our information technology systems, including due to digitization efforts or
cybersecurity incidents, may interfere with our operating and financial processes, result in the
compromise or loss of critical and confidential information and severely harm our business.
We rely on information technology systems to conduct our business. Information technology systems are
important to many of our business-critical operating and financial processes, including production
planning, manufacturing, distribution, communication with our employees, customers and suppliers,
sales and customer service, research and development, recording and processing transactions and the
production of accurate and timely reports on our financial and operating results. In connection with
our digitization initiative, we have begun a multi-year phased process to upgrade and harmonize
certain components of our information technology systems, including our financial processing systems.
We are making significant investments in this complex, enterprise-wide initiative. Planned
implementations will lead to changes in our operating and financial processes as well as our internal
control over financial reporting. Disruptions to our information technology systems could occur if we
do not effectively design or implement these systems solutions, or otherwise fail to manage resulting
changes in processes and controls. This could adversely affect our operations, negatively impact our
financial reporting and the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting and have a
material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Some of the information technology systems we rely on are maintained or operated by third-party
providers, including cloud-based systems. Cybersecurity incidents, attacks and cybersecurity threats
are increasingly sophisticated, constantly evolving and originate from many sources globally and
often cannot be recognized or understood until the target has already been attacked. Despite our
efforts to prevent these threats and disruptions to our information technology systems, these systems
and those of our third-party providers may be affected by damage or interruption resulting from,
among other causes, cybersecurity incidents, attacks, security breaches, power outages, system or
operational failures or malware (including ransomware and other programs that operate with malicious
intent). These risks are expected to continue to be magnified due to the increased reliance on
information technology systems to conduct our business, including those used in furtherance of
supporting remote and
 8 
hybrid in-office work environments and managing our global operating and financial processes.
Disruptions to these systems may impair our ability to conduct business and threaten the
availability, confidentiality and integrity of our systems and information and have a material
adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
As part of our business, we collect and handle information about our business, customers, employees
and suppliers. Despite the security measures we have in place, our facilities and systems and those
of third parties we rely on or do business with, may be vulnerable to cybersecurity incidents,
attacks, security breaches, malware (including ransomware and other programs that operate with
malicious intent), power outages, system failures, acts of vandalism, human or technical errors,
fraud (including through phishing or other social engineering attempts) or other similar events or
disruptions.
Our information, facilities and systems and those hosted or supported by third parties on our behalf
could also be impacted by the intentional or unintentional improper conduct of our employees, vendors
or others who have access to and may mishandle or misappropriate information or access systems or
facilities. Any such event involving the misappropriation, loss or other unauthorized disclosure of
information or disruption of our systems, whether impacting us or third parties we rely on or do
business with, could result in losses, damage our reputation or relationships with customers and
suppliers, expose us to the risks of litigation, regulatory action and liability, including
individual claims or consumer class actions, commercial litigation, administrative and civil or
criminal investigations or actions, regulatory intervention and sanctions or fines, investigation and
remediation costs, loss of intellectual property, release of confidential information, alteration or
corruption of data or systems, costs related to remediation or the payment of ransom, and litigation
and possible prolonged negative publicity, and disrupt our operations and have a material adverse
effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
We and third parties we rely on or do business with have experienced cybersecurity attacks and
incidents in the past, some of which have resulted in unauthorized access to our information and
systems and other disruptions to our business operations, and we could in the future experience
similar incidents. Although we implement various controls to try to mitigate risks to our systems,
information and other property, there can be no guarantee that the actions and controls we have
implemented, or which we have caused third-party service providers to implement, will be sufficient
to protect and mitigate risks to our systems, information or other property.
The domestic and international regulatory environment related to information security, data
collection and transfer, digital marketing or telemarketing and privacy is increasingly rigorous and
complex, with new and rapidly changing requirements applicable to our business, which often require
changes to our business practices. Compliance with these requirements, including the European Union’s
General Data Protection Regulation, China’s Personal Information Protection, Data Security and Cyber
Security Laws, the California Consumer Privacy Act as amended by the California Privacy Rights Act,
other U.S. state privacy laws and a growing number of other international and domestic regulations,
are costly and will result in additional costs in our efforts to continue to comply. These laws and
regulations can provide for significant penalties for non-compliance, which could result in
additional costs of compliance, enforcement actions, regulatory investigations and fines, individual
or class action litigation, commercial litigation or reputational harm. Ongoing efforts to comply
with these laws also may divert management and employee attention from other business and growth
initiatives.
Our ability to attract, retain, develop and progress a qualified global workforce could adversely
impact our business and impair our ability to meet our strategic objectives and the needs of our
customers.
Our continued success depends in part on our ability to identify, attract and onboard qualified
candidates with the requisite education, background, skills and experience and our ability to retain,
develop, progress and engage qualified employees across our business, including our stores, fleet,
manufacturing, research and development, information technology, corporate and other operations and
functions. To the extent we are unable to remain competitive with our total rewards programs (which
include compensation and benefits programs and practices), talent management strategy, workplace
culture and strategies, initiatives, programs and practices that drive belonging and a positive
employee experience, or if qualified candidates or employees become more difficult to attract or
retain under reasonable terms, we may experience higher labor-related costs and may be unable to
attract, retain, develop and progress a qualified global workforce, which could adversely affect our
business and future success and impair our ability to meet our strategic objectives and the needs of
our customers .
A number of factors may adversely affect the labor force available to us or increase labor costs
generally, including high employment levels, population migration, unemployment programs and
subsidies, immigration laws and volatility in general macroeconomic factors impacting the labor
market. Although we have not experienced any material labor shortage to date, over the past few
years, we have experienced an increasingly competitive labor market. A sustained labor shortage or
increased turnover rates within our employee base (or within the employee base of key suppliers or
third-party manufacturers), could negatively affect our supply chain or our ability to efficiently
operate our manufacturing and distribution facilities and overall business.
 9 
Our results of operations, cash flow or financial condition may be negatively impacted if we do not
successfully integrate past and future acquisitions into our existing operations and if the
performance of the businesses we acquire do not meet our expectations.
We have historically made strategic acquisitions of businesses in the paint and coatings industry and
likely will acquire additional businesses in the future as part of our long-term growth strategy and
initiatives. The success of past and future acquisitions depends in large part on our ability to
integrate the operations and personnel of the acquired companies and manage challenges that may arise
as a result of the acquisitions, particularly when the acquired businesses operate in new or foreign
markets. In the event we do not successfully integrate such past and future acquisitions into our
existing operations so as to realize the expected return on our investment, our results of
operations, cash flow or financial condition could be adversely affected.
Risks and uncertainties associated with our expansion into and our operations in South America, Asia,
Europe and other foreign markets have in the past and could in the future adversely affect our
results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
Net sales of our consolidated foreign subsidiaries totaled approximately 19.2%, 19.2% and 19.4% of
our total consolidated Net sales in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Sales outside of the United
States make up a significant part of our current business and future strategic plans. Our results of
operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition have in the past and could in the future be
adversely affected by a variety of domestic and international factors, including general economic
conditions, political instability, inflation rates, recessions, sanctions, tariffs, foreign currency
exchange rates, foreign currency exchange controls, interest rates, foreign investment and
repatriation restrictions, legal and regulatory constraints, civil unrest, armed conflicts and wars
(including the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine and Israel and Hamas), difficulties in
staffing and managing foreign operations and other economic and political factors. In addition,
public health crises in foreign jurisdictions may temporarily reduce the demand for some of our
products and adversely affect the availability and cost of raw materials. Our inability to
successfully manage the risks and uncertainties relating to any of these factors could adversely
affect our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
In many foreign countries, it is not uncommon for others to engage in certain business practices we
are prohibited from engaging in because of regulations applicable to us, such as the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act and the UK Bribery Act. Recent years have seen a substantial increase in anti-bribery
law enforcement activity, with more frequent and aggressive investigations and enforcement
proceedings by both U.S. and non-U.S. regulators, and an increase in criminal and civil proceedings
brought against companies and individuals. Although we have internal control policies and procedures
designed to promote compliance with these regulations, there can be no assurance our policies and
procedures will prevent a violation of these regulations. Any violation could cause an adverse effect
on our results of operations, cash flow or financial condition.
Policy changes affecting international trade could adversely impact the demand for our products and
our competitive position.
International, national and regional laws, regulations and policies that have the effect of
restricting global trade and markets and restricting the import and export of products, services and
technology, or those of our customers, or for the benefit of favored industries or sectors, could
interfere with our operations, supply chain, manufacturing costs and customer relationships and harm
our business. Due to the global scope of our operations, changes in government policies on foreign
trade and investment may affect the demand for our products and services, impact the competitive
position of our products or prevent us from being able to sell products in certain countries.
Expanding export controls or limits on foreign investment, for example, has in the past and could in
the future impact the global supply of raw materials. Government actions taken in connection with the
United States-China trade conflict has in the past and could in the future impact business, including
sales, imports and exports. Our business benefits from free trade agreements, which may include the
United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement and EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement, and efforts to
withdraw from, or substantially modify such agreements, in addition to trends such as protectionism
or nationalism and the implementation of more restrictive trade policies, such as more detailed
inspections, higher tariffs, import or export licensing requirements, exchange controls or new
barriers to entry, could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial
condition or cash flow and that of our customers, vendors and suppliers.
We may not achieve our strategies or expectations relating to sustainability considerations, which
could expose us to potential liabilities, increased costs, reputational harm and other adverse
effects on our business.
We have established strategies and expectations for our business relating to certain sustainability
considerations, including regarding reducing greenhouse gas emissions, increasing energy efficiency,
increasing use of electricity from renewable energy sources, reducing waste and improving safety
performance. These strategies and expectations reflect our current business plans and aspirations,
and there is no guarantee that they will be achieved. Our ability to achieve any such strategies or
expectations is subject to numerous factors and conditions, many of which are outside of our control.
Examples of such factors include, but are not limited to, evolving legal, regulatory and other
standards, processes and assumptions; the pace of scientific and
 10 
technological developments; increased costs; the availability of requisite suppliers, energy sources,
or financing; and changes in carbon markets. Failures or delays (whether actual or perceived) in
achieving our strategies or expectations related to these matters could expose us to potential
liabilities, increased costs, reputational harm and other adverse effects on our business.
Furthermore, many governments, regulators, investors, employees, customers, media outlets and other
stakeholders are focused on sustainability considerations relating to businesses, including climate
change and greenhouse gas emissions, natural capital circularity, human capital and belonging,
culture and employee experience. Our business may face scrutiny from such stakeholders and if our
strategies relating to sustainability considerations do not meet stakeholder expectations and
standards (including with respect to establishing science-based targets), which continue to evolve
and may differ across jurisdictions in which we operate, our business, financial condition, results
of operations and reputation could be adversely impacted. Similarly, our failure or perceived failure
to pursue or fulfill our strategies and expectations; comply with federal, state, or international
ethical, environmental, or other standards, regulations, or expectations; adhere to public
statements; satisfy new and emerging reporting standards; or meet evolving and varied stakeholder
expectations within the timelines we announce, or at all, could have adverse operational,
reputational, financial and legal impacts.
Our business, reputation, image and brands could be damaged by negative publicity.
Our reputation, image and recognized brands significantly contribute to our business and success, as
they are critical to retaining and growing our customer base and our relationships with other
stakeholders. Specifically, our ability to maintain a positive perception of us and our business,
including through our guiding values. Significant negative claims or publicity involving us, our
business or our products, services, culture, values, strategies and practices, including postings,
articles, or comments on social media and the internet, undermine confidence in our Company, and
could materially damage our reputation and image, even if such claims or publicity are inaccurate.
Damage to our reputation and image could adversely impact our ability to attract new and retain
existing customers, employees and other business and stakeholder relationships, and could adversely
affect the demand for some of our products and adversely affect our sales, earnings, cash flow or
financial condition.
Our business could be adversely affected by the infringement or loss of our intellectual property
rights or by the theft or unauthorized use of our trade secrets or other confidential business
information.
Our competitive position and the value of our products and brands could be reduced and our business
adversely affected if we are unable to maintain or adequately protect our intellectual property. We
have numerous patents, trade secrets, trademarks, trade names copyrights and know-how that are
valuable to our business. Despite our efforts to protect such intellectual property and other
proprietary information from unauthorized use or disclosure, third parties may attempt to disclose,
obtain or use our trademarks or such other intellectual property and information without our
authorization. We also face attempts, including through cybersecurity attacks and social engineering
tactics, to gain unauthorized access to our systems for the purpose of improperly acquiring our trade
secrets or confidential business information. In addition, advances in artificial intelligence
technology and increasingly widespread use of generative artificial intelligence tools may increase
the risk of unauthorized access to intellectual property, may increase the risk that existing
intellectual property law may not provide adequate protection and may introduce potential liability
from the use of artificial intelligence tools. The theft or unauthorized use or publication of our
trade secrets and other co nfidential business information as a result of such incidents could
adversely affect the value of our investment in research and development and our business. Although
we rely on the patent, trademark, trade secret and copyright laws of the United States and other
countries to protect our intellectual property rights, the laws of some countries may not protect
such rights to the same extent as the laws of the United States. Unauthorized use of our intellectual
property by third parties, the failure of foreign countries to have laws to protect our intellectual
property rights, or an inability to effectively enforce such rights in foreign countries could have
an adverse effect on our business.
 FINANCIAL RISKS 
A weakening of global credit markets or changes to our credit ratings may adversely affect our
results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
A weakening of global credit markets has in the past and could in the future adversely impact our net
sales, the collection of accounts receivable, funding for working capital needs, expected cash flow
generation from current and acquired businesses, access to capital and our investments, which has in
the past and could in the future adversely impact our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or
financial condition.
We finance a portion of our sales through trade credit. Credit markets remain tight, and some
customers who require financing for their businesses have not been able to obtain, and may in the
future have difficulty obtaining, necessary financing. A continuation or worsening of these
conditions could limit our ability to collect our accounts receivable, which could adversely affect
our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
We generally fund a portion of our seasonal working capital needs and obtain funding for other
general corporate purposes through short-term borrowings backed by our revolving credit facility and
other financing facilities. If any of the banks in these
 11 
credit and financing facilities are unable to perform on their commitments, such inability could
adversely impact our cash flow, liquidity or financial condition, including our ability to obtain
funding for working capital needs and other general corporate purposes.
Although we have available credit facilities to fund our current operating needs, we cannot be
certain we will be able to replace our existing credit facilities or refinance our existing or future
debt when necessary. Our cost of borrowing and ability to access the capital markets are affected not
only by market conditions, but also by our debt and credit ratings assigned by the major credit
rating agencies. Rating agencies regularly evaluate our business and could downgrade our credit
rating based on a number of factors, including factors beyond our control, such as general business
or economic conditions. Downgrades in these ratings likely would increase our cost of borrowing and
could have an adverse effect on our access to the capital markets, including our access to the
commercial paper market. An inability to access the capital markets with the same flexibility we have
now and on terms commercially acceptable to us, or at all, could have a material adverse effect on
our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
We have goodwill and intangible assets recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We periodically
evaluate the recoverability of the carrying value of our goodwill and intangible assets whenever
events or changes in circumstances indicate such value may not be recoverable. An impairment
assessment involves judgment as to assumptions regarding future sales and cash flow and the impact of
market conditions on those assumptions. Future events, such as the integration or rebranding of
trademarks acquired in acquisitions and changing market conditions may impact our assumptions and
change our estimates of future sales and cash flow, including our ability to track trademark specific
sales and cash flow, resulting in us incurring substantial impairment charges, which could adversely
affect our results of operations or financial condition.
We hold investments in equity and debt securities in some of our defined benefit pension plans. A
decrease in the value of plan assets resulting from a general financial downturn may cause a negative
pension plan investment performance, which may adversely affect our results of operations, cash flow,
liquidity or financial condition.
We require a significant amount of cash to service the substantial amount of debt we have
outstanding. Our ability to generate cash depends on many factors beyond our control. We also depend
on the business of our subsidiaries to satisfy our cash needs. If we cannot generate the required
cash, we may not be able to make the necessary payments required under our indebtedness.
At December 31, 2024, we had total debt of approximately $9.888 billion, which is an increase of
$37.5 million since December 31, 2023. We have the ability under our existing credit facilities and
otherwise to incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future. Our ability to make payments on
our debt, fund other liquidity needs and make planned capital expenditures will depend on our ability
to generate cash in the future. Our historical financial results have been, and we anticipate our
future financial results will be, subject to fluctuations. Our ability to generate cash, to a certain
extent, is subject to general business, economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and
other factors beyond our control, including supply chain disruptions, adverse weather conditions or
natural disasters, armed conflicts and wars, changes in raw material and energy supplies, public
health crises and pricing and related impacts. We cannot guarantee our business will generate
sufficient cash flow from our operations or future borrowings will be available to us in an amount
sufficient to enable us to make payments of our debt, fund other liquidity needs and make planned
capital expenditures.
The degree to which we are leveraged could have important consequences for shareholders. For example,
it could:
• require us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to the payment of
debt service, reducing the availability of our cash flow to fund working capital, capital
expenditures, acquisitions and other long-term growth initiatives and general corporate purposes;
• increase our vulnerability to adverse business, economic or industry conditions;
• limit our ability to obtain additional financing in the future to enable us to react to changes in
our business or general business, economic or industry conditions; or
• place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to businesses in our industry that have less debt.
Additionally, any failure to comply with covenants in the instruments governing our debt could result
in an event of default which, if not cured or waived, would have a material adverse effect on us.
A significant portion of our operations are conducted through our subsidiaries. As a result, our
ability to generate sufficient cash flow for our needs is dependent to some extent on the earnings of
our subsidiaries and the payment of those earnings to us in the form of dividends, loans or advances
and through repayment of loans or advances from us. Our subsidiaries are separate and distinct legal
entities. Our subsidiaries have no obligation to pay any amounts due on our debt or to provide us
with funds to meet our cash flow needs, whether in the form of dividends, distributions, loans or
other payments. Further, any payment of dividends, loans or advances by our subsidiaries could be
subject to statutory or contractual restrictions. Payments to us by our
 12 
subsidiaries will also be contingent upon our subsidiaries’ earnings and business considerations. Our
right to receive any assets of any of our subsidiaries upon their liquidation or reorganization will
be effectively subordinated to the claims of that subsidiary’s creditors, including trade creditors.
Even if we are a creditor of any of our subsidiaries, our rights as a creditor would be subordinate
to any security interest in the assets of our subsidiaries and any indebtedness of our subsidiaries
senior to that held by us. Finally, changes in the laws of foreign jurisdictions in which we operate
have in the past and may in the future adversely affect the ability of some of our foreign
subsidiaries to repatriate funds to us.
Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and changing monetary policies could adversely affect
our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
Because of our international operations, we are exposed to risk associated with interest rates and
value changes in foreign currencies, including as a result of inflation, central bank monetary
policies, currency controls and other exchange restrictions, which may adversely affect our business.
Historically, our reported net sales, earnings, cash flow and financial condition have been subjected
to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates. Our primary exchange rate exposure is with the euro, the
Mexican peso, the Brazilian real, the Canadian dollar, the British pound, the Chinese yuan, the
Chilean peso and the Argentine peso, each against the U.S. dollar. While we actively manage the
exposure of our foreign currency risk as part of our overall financial risk management policy, we
have in the past and may in the future experience losses from foreign currency exchange rate
fluctuations and currency controls and restrictions, and such losses could adversely affect our
sales, earnings, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition. Currency controls or restrictions may
limit our ability to convert foreign currencies into U.S. dollars, or to remit dividends and other
payments from our subsidiaries or businesses located in or conducted within a country imposing such
controls or restrictions. For example, we experienced a loss of $41.8 million in 2023 as a result of
the significant devaluation of the Argentine peso in December 2023 as part of economic reforms
implemented by the government of Argentina, and we may experience similar losses in the future.
 LEGAL AND REGULATORY RISKS 
We are subject to a wide variety of complex U.S. and non-U.S. laws, rules and regulations, as well as
compliance risks related to new and existing laws and regulations, compliance with which could
increase our costs and could adversely affect our results of operations, cash flow or financial
condition.
We maintain significant operations in the U.S. and outside of the U.S. We are subject to a wide
variety of complex U.S. and non-U.S. federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations and legal
compliance risks, including laws, rules and regulations involving securities, tax, employment and
pensions, competition, environmental, export and trade, intellectual property, data privacy and
cybersecurity and improper business practices, such as anti-bribery and corruption. We are affected
by new laws and regulations and changes to existing laws and regulations, including interpretations
by courts and regulators. We are also subject to compliance risks related to contract requirements
and risks that any third-party we engage to do work on our behalf might conduct business in a manner
that is inconsistent with our Code of Conduct or with legal requirements. Compliance with
continuously evolving U.S. and non-U.S. federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and related
interpretations applicable to our business, may increase our costs or require significant capital
investment, and our results of operations could be adversely impacted if these costs are greater than
we have projected. If we are unable to comply with all of the laws, rules, regulations and
interpretations applicable to us, we could become the subject of inquiries, reviews or investigations
by regulators and related adverse outcomes of which could lead to enforcement actions, the imposition
of fines or costs, requirements to suspend operations at certain facilities, the assertion of private
litigation claims and damages or damage to our reputation.
The domestic and international regulatory environment related to information security, data
collection and transfer, digital marketing or telemarketing, and privacy is increasingly rigorous and
complex, with new and rapidly changing requirements applicable to our business, which often require
changes to our business practices. Compliance with these requirements, including the European Union’s
General Data Protection Regulation, China’s Personal Information Protection, Data Security, and Cyber
Security Laws, the California Consumer Privacy Act as amended by the California Privacy Rights Act,
other U.S. state privacy laws, and a growing number of other international and domestic regulations,
are costly and will result in additional costs in our efforts to continue to comply. These laws and
regulations can provide for significant penalties for non-compliance, which could result in
additional costs of compliance, enforcement actions, regulatory investigations, and fines, individual
or class action litigation, commercial litigation, or reputational harm. Ongoing efforts to comply
with these laws also may divert management and employee attention from other business and growth
initiatives.
Although we believe we have adopted appropriate risk management and compliance programs to mitigate
these risks, the global and diverse nature of our operations means compliance risks will continue to
exist. We face liability and reputational risks even if we comply with all laws and regulations.
Investigations, examinations and other proceedings, the nature and outcome of which cannot be
predicted, likely will arise from time to time. These investigations, examinations and other
proceedings could subject us to significant liability and require us to take significant accruals or
pay significant settlements, fines and penalties, which could have a material adverse effect on our
results of operations, cash flow or financial condition.
 13 
Increases in tax rates, or changes in tax laws or regulations, could increase our costs and could
adversely affect our results of operations, cash flow or financial condition.
We are subject to tax laws and regulations in the U.S. and multiple jurisdictions outside of the U.S.
We are affected by changes in tax laws and regulations, as well as changes in related interpretations
and other tax guidance. Economic and political conditions in the countries where we are subject to
taxes, including in the U.S., have in the past and may in the future result in significant changes to
tax laws or regulations. Our effective tax rates are affected by changes in our mix of earnings in
countries with different tax rates, and changes in laws, regulations and interpretations regarding
deferred tax assets and liabilities, among other things. If our effective tax rate were to increase,
that could have an adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flow or financial condition. In
addition, the increasingly complex global tax environment has in the past and may in the future
result in higher compliance costs. In the ordinary course of our business, we are subject to
examinations and investigations by various tax authorities and other regulators. In addition to
existing examinations and investigations, there could be additional examinations and investigations
in the future, and existing examinations and investigations could be expanded.
For non-income tax risks, we estimate material loss contingencies and accrue for such loss
contingencies as required by U.S. generally accepted accounting principles based on our assessment of
contingencies where liability is deemed probable and reasonably estimable in light of the facts and
circumstances known to us at a particular point in time. Subsequent developments may affect our
assessment and estimates of the loss contingency. In the event the loss contingency is ultimately
determined to be significantly higher than currently accrued, the recording of the additional
liability may result in a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition
for the annual or interim period during which such additional liability is accrued. In those cases
where no accrual is recorded because it is not probable a liability has been incurred and cannot be
reasonably estimated, any potential liability ultimately determined to be attributable to us may
result in a material adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flow or financial condition
for the annual or interim period during which such liability is accrued or paid. For income tax
risks, we recognize tax benefits based on our assessment that a tax benefit has a greater than 50%
likelihood of being sustained upon ultimate settlement with the applicable taxing authority that has
full knowledge of all relevant facts. For those income tax positions where we determine there is not
a greater than 50% likelihood such tax benefits will be sustained, we do not recognize a tax benefit
in our financial statements. Subsequent events may cause us to change our assessment of the
likelihood of sustaining a previously-recognized benefit which could result in a material adverse
effect on our results of operations, cash flow or financial position for the annual or interim period
during which such liability is accrued or paid.
We discuss risks and uncertainties with regard to income taxes in more detail in Note 20 to the
consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
We are required to comply with, and may become subject to additional, numerous complex and
increasingly stringent domestic and foreign health, safety and environmental laws, regulations and
requirements, the cost of which is likely to increase and may adversely affect our results of
operations, cash flow or financial condition.
Our operations are subject to various domestic and foreign health, safety and environmental laws,
regulations and requirements, including those related to climate change, producer responsibility and
chemicals registration and management. These laws, regulations and requirements not only govern our
current operations and products, but also may impose potential liability on us for our past
operations.
Global focus on climate change and chemical use and management may result in the imposition of new or
additional regulations or requirements applicable to, and new or additional financial and transition
risks for, our business and industry. A number of government authorities and agencies have
introduced, or are contemplating, regulatory changes to address climate change, including the
regulation and disclosure of greenhouse gas emissions and the management and use of chemicals in
operations and products. For example, the European Union Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive
requires that we make expansive disclosures on various environmental- and social-related topics.
Similarly, California has enacted legislation that will require broad disclosures, including of
greenhouse gas emissions. Chemicals we use in our products, packaging and operations may be
restricted or prohibited by initiatives to address new and existing chemicals under current laws and
regulations or by emerging laws and regulations in domestic and foreign jurisdictions. The outcome of
new and emerging legislation or regulation in the U.S., European Union and other jurisdictions in
which we operate may result in fees or restrictions on certain activities or materials (including
changes to our products or product packaging) and new or additional requirements, including to fund
energy efficiency activities or renewable energy use and to disclose information regarding our
greenhouse gas emissions performance, renewable energy usage and efficiency, waste generation and
recycling rates, climate-related risks, opportunities and oversight and related strategies and
initiatives across our global operations. Compliance with these climate change, chemical management
and other initiatives has in the past and may in the future result in additional costs to us,
including, among other things, increased production costs, additional taxes, additional investments
in renewable energy use and other initiatives, reduced emission allowances, additional restrictions
on production or operations and increased costs associated with reporting and data assurance. They
may also require us to alter the 
alter the performance and profitability of such products and packaging. We may not be able to timely
recover the cost of compliance with such new or more stringent laws and regulations, which could
adversely affect our results of operations, cash flow or financial condition. Despite our efforts to
timely comply with such initiatives, implement measures to improve our operations and execute on our
related strategies and initiatives, any actual or perceived failure to comply with new or additional
requirements or meet stakeholder expectations with respect to the impacts of our operations on the
environment or on our customers or employees and related strategies and initiatives may result in
adverse publicity, increased litigation risk and adversely affect our business and reputation, which
could adversely impact our results of operations, cash flow and financial condition.
We expect health, safety and additional environmental laws, regulations and requirements to continue
to evolve and to be applied with increasing stringency on our industry. Our costs to comply with
these laws, regulations and requirements may increase as they become more stringent in the future,
and these increased costs may adversely affect our results of operations, cash flow or financial
condition.
We are involved with environmental investigation and remediation activities at some of our currently-
and formerly-owned sites, as well as a number of third-party sites, for which our ultimate liability
may exceed the current amount we have accrued.
We are involved with environmental investigation and remediation activities at some of our currently-
and formerly-owned sites and a number of third-party sites. We accrue for estimated costs of
investigation and remediation activities at these sites for which commitments or clean-up plans have
been developed and when such costs can be reasonably estimated based on industry standards and
professional judgment. These estimated costs are based on currently available facts regarding each
site. We routinely assess our potential liability for investigation and remediation activities and
adjust our environmental-related accruals as information becomes available, including as a result of
sites progressing through investigation and remediation-related activities, upon which more accurate
costs can be reasonably estimated. Due to the uncertainties surrounding environmental investigation
and remediation activities, our liability may result in costs that are significantly higher than
currently accrued and may have an adverse effect on our earnings. We discuss these risks and
uncertainties in more detail in the “Environmental-Related Liabilities” and “Environmental Matters”
sections in Item 7 and in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
The nature, cost, quantity and outcome of pending and future litigation could have a material adverse
effect on our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity and financial condition.
In the course of our business, we are subject to a variety of claims and lawsuits, including, but not
limited to, litigation relating to product liability and warranty, raw materials used in our
products, personal injury, environmental (including natural resource damages), intellectual property,
commercial, contractual and antitrust claims that are inherently subject to many uncertainties
regarding the possibility of a loss to us. These uncertainties will ultimately be resolved when one
or more future events occur or fail to occur confirming the incurrence of a liability or the
reduction of a liability. In accordance with the Contingencies Topic of the Accounting Standards
Codification (ASC), we accrue for these contingencies by a charge to income when it is both probable
that one or more future events will occur confirming the fact of a loss and the amount of the loss
can be reasonably estimated. In the event a loss contingency is ultimately determined to be
significantly higher than currently accrued, the recording of the additional liability may result in
a material impact on our results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for the annual or
interim period during which such additional liability is accrued. In those cases where no accrual is
recorded because it is not probable that a liability has been incurred or the amount of any such loss
cannot be reasonably estimated, any potential liability ultimately determined to be attributable to
us may result in a material impact on our results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for
the annual or interim period during which such liability is accrued.
For example, our past operations included the manufacture and sale of lead pigments and lead-based
paints. Along with other companies, we are and have been a defendant in a number of legal
proceedings, including individual personal injury actions, purported class actions and actions
brought by various counties, cities, school districts and other government-related entities, arising
from the manufacture and sale of lead pigments and lead-based paints. The plaintiffs’ claims have
been based upon various legal theories, including negligence, strict liability, breach of warranty,
negligent misrepresentations and omissions, fraudulent misrepresentations and omissions, concert of
action, civil conspiracy, violations of unfair trade practice and consumer protection laws,
enterprise liability, market share liability, public nuisance, unjust enrichment and other theories.
The plaintiffs seek various damages and relief, including personal injury and property damage, costs
relating to the detection and abatement of lead-based paint from buildings, costs associated with a
public education campaign, medical monitoring costs and others. We have also been a defendant in
legal proceedings arising from the manufacture and sale of non-lead-based paints that seek recovery
based upon various legal theories, including the failure to adequately warn of potential exposure to
lead during surface preparation when using non-lead-based paint on surfaces previously painted with
lead-based paint. We are vigorously defending such litigation. We expect additional lead pigment and
lead-based paint litigation may be filed against us in the future asserting similar or different
legal theories and seeking similar or different types of damages and relief. The Company will
 15 
continue to vigorously defend against any additional lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation
that may be filed, including utilizing all avenues of appeal, if necessary.
Litigation is inherently subject to many uncertainties, and we ultimately may not prevail. Adverse
court rulings, determinations of liability, or third-party funding of litigation, among other
factors, could affect litigation against us, including the lead pigment and lead-based paint
litigation, and encourage an increase in the number and nature of future claims and proceedings. In
addition, from time to time, various legislation and administrative regulations have been enacted,
promulgated or proposed to impose obligations on present and former manufacturers of lead pigments
and lead-based paints respecting asserted health concerns associated with such products or to
overturn the effect of court decisions in which we and other manufacturers have been successful.
Legislation and administrative regulations also may be enacted, promulgated, or proposed to impose
obligations for the manufacture or sale of other raw materials that are or were used in paints and
coatings.
Due to the uncertainties involved, management is unable to predict the outcome of the litigation
against us, the number or nature of possible future claims and proceedings, or the effect of any
legislation and/or administrative regulations. Further, management cannot reasonably determine the
scope or amount of the potential costs and liabilities related to such litigation, or resulting from
any such legislation and regulations. Except with respect to the California public nuisance
litigation, we have not accrued any amounts for such litigation because we do not believe it is
probable that a loss has occurred, and we believe it is not possible to estimate the range of
potential losses as there is no substantive information upon which an estimate could be based. In
addition, any potential liability that may result from any changes to legislation and regulations
cannot reasonably be estimated. Due to the uncertainties associated with the amount of any such
liability and/or the nature of any other remedy which may be imposed in such litigation, any
potential liability determined to be attributable to us arising out of such litigation may have a
material adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition. We
discuss the risks and uncertainties related to litigation, including the lead pigment and lead-based
paint litigation, in more detail in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
None.
We maintain a cybersecurity program that is aligned with our business and focused on managing risks
to our Company. As described below, we have established policies, standards, processes and practices
for assessing, identifying and managing material risks from cybersecurity threats, which are
integrated into our overall risk management program and governance structure.
We use various controls, technologies and other processes designed to identify, protect against,
detect, respond to and mitigate cybersecurity risks, in alignment with the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity Framework 2.0 . These include, but are not limited to,
internal reporting, monitoring and detection tools, threat intelligence and general and role-based
training. We also maintain third-party management processes to identify and manage the cybersecurity
risks associated with third-party service providers. We periodically evaluate and improve the
effectiveness of our cybersecurity program internally and by engaging with consultants and other
third-party advisors to conduct reviews and assessments of our program.These periodic assessments and
reviews may include penetration and vulnerability testing, simulations, table-tops and other
exercises.
Overseeing the assessment and management of our exposure to various risks, including cybersecurity,
is a key oversight responsibility for the Board of Directors. We have an enterprise risk management
(ERM) program that includes the processes used to identify, assess and manage our most significant
enterprise risks and uncertainties that could materially impact the long-term health of the Company
or prevent the achievement of strategic objectives. These risks are identified, measured, monitored
and managed across key risk categories, which include the consideration of cybersecurity risks. Our
chief financial officer (CFO) facilitates the Company’s ERM program, which includes a formal
assessment of the Company’s risk environment at least once per year. The ERM program also facilitates
the incorporation of risk assessment and evaluation into the strategic planning process and the
provision of regular reports to senior management, including our CEO. The Audit Committee assists the
Board with its oversight of both the ERM program and cybersecurity risk, providing regular reports to
the Board. Our CFO reviews the ERM program with the Audit Committee at least once per year, including
reviewing existing risks and significant emerging risks across the Company’s key risk categories. In
reviewing specific threats and risks with the Board, senior management may incorporate reports from
consultants and other third-party advisors.
Our Chief Information Security Officer(CISO) leads our global cybersecurity program and is
responsible for management of our cybersecurity risks. Our CISO reports to our CFO. Our CISO has
served in that position since 2022 and has relevant
 16 
experience in cybersecurity leadership positions, including prior experience as CISO of a public
company. The Audit Committee regularly reviews our risk exposures relating to cybersecurity with our
CISO and CFO, including review of the state of the Company’s cybersecurity and emerging cybersecurity
developments and threats and the steps management has taken to monitor and mitigate such exposures.
Our CISO manages a team of cybersecurity professionals with expertise and experience in information
security.
Our CISO is informed of cybersecurity incidents by the cybersecurity team’s security operations
center, which is generally responsible for monitoring the prevention, detection, mitigation and
remediation of cybersecurity incidents. We have an established process governing our assessment,
response and notifications internally and externally upon the occurrence of a cybersecurity incident,
including for our evaluation of materiality. Depending on the nature and severity of an incident,
this process provides for escalating notification to our CEO and Board of Directors.
Despite our efforts to prevent cybersecurity threats and incidents, our systems may be affected by
damage or interruption resulting from, among other causes, cyber attacks, security breaches, power
outages, system failures or malware (including ransomware and other programs that operate with
malicious intent). Disruptions to these systems may impair our ability to conduct business and have a
material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. Despite the
security measures we have in place, our facilities and systems and those of third parties we rely on
or do business with, may be vulnerable to cyber attacks, security breaches, malware (including
ransomware and other programs that operate with malicious intent), power outages, system failures,
acts of vandalism, human or technical errors, or other similar events or disruptions. Any such event
involving the misappropriation, loss or other unauthorized disclosure of information, whether
impacting us or third parties we rely on or do business with, could result in losses, damage our
reputation or relationships with customers and suppliers, expose us to the risks of litigation,
regulatory action and liability, disrupt our operations and have a material adverse effect on our
business, results of operations and financial condition.
To date, we have not experienced a cybersecurity threat or incident that has had a material adverse
affect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. We, and third parties we do
business with, have experienced cybersecurity attacks and incidents in the past, some of which have
resulted in unauthorized access to our information and systems, and other disruptions to our business
operations, and we could in the future experience similar incidents. See Risk Factors in Item 1A for
additional information on cybersecurity risks.
 17 
The Company’s global headquarters, which includes the global headquarters for the Paint Stores,
Consumer Brands and Performance Coatings Groups and the Administrative function, is located in
Cleveland, Ohio. During 2023, the Company closed on a transaction to sell and subsequently lease back
its current global headquarters and research and development center. Construction of the Company’s
new global headquarters and research and development center is expected to be completed in 2025.
Refer to Item 7 for further information on the construction of our new global headquarters and
research and development center.
Our principal manufacturing and distribution facilities are located as set forth below. We believe
our manufacturing and distribution facilities are well-maintained, suitable and adequate, with
sufficient productive capacity, to meet our current needs.
 Manufacturing(1) Distribution(1) 
 Leased Owned Total Leased Owned Total 
 Consumer Brands Group 
 Africa 1 1 1 1 
 Asia 3 6 9 3 4 7 
 Canada 3 3 1 1 
 Europe 2 16 18 3 13 16 
 Jamaica 1 1 1 1 
 Latin America 12 12 5 10 15 
 United States 6 42 48 14 12 26 
 Total 11 81 92 26 41 67 
 Performance Coatings 
 Group 
 Europe 1 8 9 4 4 8 
 Latin America 1 1 
 United States 1 1 2 2 
 Total 2 9 11 6 4 10 
(1) Certain locations may contain both manufacturing and distribution facilities.
The operations of the Paint Stores Group included 4,773 company-operated specialty paint stores, of
which 206 were owned, in the United States, Canada, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Grenada, Trinidad
and Tobago, St. Maarten, Jamaica, Curaçao, Aruba, St. Lucia and Barbados at December 31, 2024. These
paint stores are divided into five separate operating divisions based on their geographical region
and are responsible for the sale of predominantly ABC corp. ® and other controlled brand
architectural paint and coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and related
products. At the end of 2024:
• the Mid Western Division operated 1,204 paint stores primarily located in the mid west and upper
west coast states;
• the Eastern Division operated 921 paint stores along the upper east coast and New England states;
• the Canada Division operated 259 paint stores throughout Canada;
• the Southeastern Division operated 1,210 paint stores principally covering the lower east and gulf
coast states, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Grenada, Trinidad and Tobago, St. Maarten, Jamaica,
Curaçao, Aruba, St. Lucia and Barbados; and
• the Southwestern Division operated 1,179 paint stores in the central plains and lower west coast
states.
During 2024, the Paint Stores Group opened 79 net new stores, consisting of 84 new stores opened and
5 stores closed.
The Consumer Brands Group operated 334 specialty paint stores in Latin America at December 31, 2024.
These stores market and sell ABC corp. ® and other controlled brand architectural paint and
coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and related products which are branded
for the Latin America market. These paint stores are located in Mexico (180), Chile (57), Brazil
(49), Ecuador (37) and Uruguay (11). During 2024, the Consumer Brands Group opened 16 net new stores,
consisting of 18 new stores opened and 2 stores closed.
 18 
The Performance Coatings Group operated 225 branches in the United States and 99 branches
internationally at December 31, 2024. International locations consisted of branches in Europe (47),
Canada (22), Chile (11), Mexico (5), Peru (3), Ecuador (2), Brazil (2), Thailand (2), Indonesia (2),
Vietnam (1), Singapore (1) and China (1). During 2024, this segment added 2 new branches.
All real property within the Administrative function is owned with the exception of the current
global headquarters, current research and development center and new global headquarters currently
under construction. For additional information regarding real property within the Administrative
function, refer to Item 1 and Item 7 of this report, which are incorporated herein by reference.
For additional information regarding real property leases, see Note 9 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8.
SEC regulations require disclosure of certain environmental matters when a governmental authority is
a party to the proceedings and such proceedings involve potential monetary sanctions that the Company
reasonably believes will exceed a specified threshold. Pursuant to these regulations, the Company
uses a threshold of $1 million for purposes of determining whether disclosure of any such proceedings
is required.
For information regarding certain environmental matters and other legal proceedings, see the
information included under the captions titled “Other Long-Term Liabilities” and “Litigation and
Other Contingent Liabilities” of “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations” and Notes 1, 10, 11 and 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
The information contained in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements is incorporated herein
by reference.
Not applicable.
 19 
The following is the name, age and position of each of our executive officers and a brief description
of their business experience. Executive officers are generally elected annually by the Board of
Directors and hold office until their successors are elected and qualified or until their earlier
death, resignation or removal.
 Name Age Position 
 Heidi G. Petz 50 Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer 
 Allen J. Mistysyn 56 Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer 
 Marlena K. Boyce 46 Senior Vice President – Human Resources 
 Mary L. Garceau 52 Senior Vice President – Chief Legal Officer and Secretary 
 James R. Jaye 58 Senior Vice President – Investor Relations and Corporate 
 Communications 
 J. Paul Lang 48 Senior Vice President – Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting 
 Officer 
 Bryan J. Young 49 Senior Vice President – Corporate Strategy and Development 
 Justin T. Binns 49 President, Global Architectural 
 Karl J. Jorgenrud 48 President, Global Industrial 
 Todd D. Rea 50 President, Consumer Brands Group 
 Colin M. Davie 56 President & General Manager, Global Supply Chain Division, Consumer 
 Brands Group 
Ms. Petz has served as Chair of the Board of Directors since January 2025, and as President and Chief
Executive Officer since January 2024. Prior to her current role, Ms. Petz served as President and
Chief Operating Officer from March 2022 to January 2024, and President, The Americas Group (now known
as the Paint Stores Group) from March 2021 to March 2022, Senior Vice President, Marketing, The
Americas Group from November 2020 to March 2021 and President, Consumer Brands Group from September
2020 to November 2020. Also within the Consumer Brands Group, Ms. Petz served as President & General
Manager, Retail North America from March 2019 to September 2020 and Senior Vice President, Marketing
from June 2017 to March 2019. Ms. Petz has served as a Director since October 2023 and joined the
Company in June 2017 in connection with the Valspar acquisition.
Mr. Mistysyn has served as Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer since January
2017. Mr. Mistysyn has been employed with the Company since June 1990.
Ms. Boyce has served as Senior Vice President – Human Resources since January 2025. Ms. Boyce served
within the Performance Coatings Group as Senior Vice President, Human Resources from May 2022 to
December 2024, within the Consumer Brands Group as Senior Vice President, Human Resources from
January 2021 to May 2022 and as Vice President, Human Resources, Industrial Wood Division,
Performance Coatings Group from March 2019 to January 2021. Ms. Boyce has been employed with the
Company since October 2008.
Ms. Garceau has served as Senior Vice President – Chief Legal Officer and Secretary since February
2024. Ms. Garceau served as Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary from August 2017 to
February 2024. Ms. Garceau has been employed with the Company since February 2014.
Mr. Jaye has served as Senior Vice President – Investor Relations and Corporate Communications since
June 2019. Mr. Jaye served as Vice President – Investor Relations from October 2017 to June 2019. Mr.
Jaye has been employed with the Company since October 2017.
Mr. Lang has served as Senior Vice President – Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer since
January 2025. Mr. Lang served as Vice President – Enterprise Finance, Reporting & Controls from May
2022 to January 2025. Mr. Lang served as Vice President – Assistant Corporate Controller from August
2019 to May 2022 and Director – External Financial Reporting from February 2018 until August 2019.
Mr. Lang has been employed with the Company since February 2018.
Mr. Young has served as Senior Vice President – Corporate Strategy and Development since March 2021.
Mr. Young served as Vice President – Corporate Strategy and Development from June 2017 to March 2021.
Mr. Young joined the Company in June 2017 in connection with the Valspar acquisition.
Mr. Binns has served as President, Global Architectural since January 2024. Mr. Binns served as
President, Paint Stores Group from January 2023 to January 2024, President, The Americas Group from
March 2022 to January 2023, President, Performance Coatings Group from November 2020 to March 2022
and President & General Manager, Automotive Finishes Division,
 20 
Performance Coatings Group from July 2018 to November 2020. Mr. Binns has been employed with the
Company since August 1997.
Mr. Jorgenrud has served as President, Global Industrial since January 2024. Mr. Jorgenrud served as
President, Performance Coatings Group from March 2022 to January 2024, President & General Manager,
General Industrial Division, Performance Coatings Group from January 2020 to March 2022 and President
& General Manager, Protective & Marine Division, Performance Coatings Group from June 2017 to January
2020. Mr. Jorgenrud joined the Company in June 2017 in connection with the Valspar acquisition.
Mr. Rea has served as President, Consumer Brands Group since November 2021. Mr. Rea served within the
Consumer Brands Group as President of North America Sales from November 2020 to November 2021, Senior
Vice President of Sales, Retail and National Accounts from November 2019 to November 2020 and Senior
Vice President of Sales, Lowe’s Business Unit from March 2018 to November 2019. Mr. Rea has been
employed with the Company since April 1993.
Mr. Davie has served as President & General Manager, Global Supply Chain Division, Consumer Brands
Group since January 2024. Mr. Davie served as Senior Vice President and Chief Procurement Officer
from March 2022 to January 2024, Senior Vice President – Purchasing from October 2021 to March 2022,
President & General Manager, Industrial Wood Division, Performance Coatings Group from March 2019 to
October 2021 and President & General Manager, Engineered Polymer Solutions, Performance Coatings
Group from June 2017 to March 2019. Mr. Davie joined the Company in June 2017 in connection with the
Valspar acquisition.
 21 
Our common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange and traded under the symbol SHW. The number
of shareholders of record at January 31, 2025 was 4,864. The information regarding securities
authorized for issuance under the Company’s equity compensation plans is set forth in our Proxy
Statement under the caption “Equity Compensation Plan Information” and is incorporated by reference
into Part III of this report.
 Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities 
The following table sets forth a summary of the Company’s purchases of common stock during the fourth
quarter of 2024.
 Total Number Maximum Number 
 of Shares of Shares 
 Total Purchased as that May 
 Number of Average Price Part of a Yet Be 
 Period Shares Paid per Publicly Purchased Under 
 October 1 – October 31 Purchased Share Announced Plan the Plan 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Share repurchase 850,000 $ 364.96 850,000 34,425,000 
 program(1) 
 Employee 532 $ 389.91 N/A 
 transactions(2) 
 November 1 – November  
 30 
 Share repurchase 34,425,000 
 program(1) 
 Employee 1,156 $ 384.70 N/A 
 transactions(2) 
 December 1 – December  
 31 
 Share repurchase 34,425,000 
 program(1) 
 Employee 870 $ 358.75 N/A 
 transactions(2) 
 Total 
 Share repurchase 850,000 $ 364.96 850,000 34,425,000 
 program(1) 
 Employee 2,558 $ 376.96 — N/A 
 transactions(2) 
(1) Shares were purchased through the Company’s publicly announced share repurchase program. The
Company had remaining authorization at December 31, 2024 to purchase 34,425,000 shares. There is no
expiration date specified for the program.
(2) All shares were delivered to satisfy the exercise price and/or tax withholding obligations by
employees who exercised stock options or had restricted stock units vest.
 22 
The following graph compares the cumulative total shareholder return on the Company’s common stock
(NYSE: SHW) with the cumulative five-year total return of the companies listed on the Standard &
Poor’s 500 Stock 
cumulative five-year total return assumes $100 was invested on December 31, 2019 in ABC corp.
common stock, the S&P 500 and the peer group. The cumulative five-year total return, including
reinvestment of dividends, represents the cumulative value through December 31, 2024.
Peer group of companies is comprised of the following: Akzo Nobel N.V., Axalta Coating Systems Ltd.,
BASF SE, Genuine Parts Company, H.B. Fuller Company, The Home Depot, Inc., Lowe’s Companies, Inc.,
Masco Corporation, Newell Brands Inc., PPG Industries, Inc., RPM International Inc. and Stanley Black
& Decker, Inc.
 23 
Company Background
The ABC corp. Company, founded in 1866, is engaged in the development, manufacture,
distribution and sale of paint, coatings and related products to professional, industrial, commercial
and retail customers primarily in North and South America with additional operations in the Caribbean
region and throughout Europe, Asia and Australia.
The Company is structured into three reportable segments – Paint Stores Group, Consumer Brands Group
and Performance Coatings Group (collectively, the Reportable Segments) – and an Administrative
function in the same way it is internally organized for assessing performance and making decisions
regarding the allocation of resources. See Note 22 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8
for additional information on the Company’s Reportable Segments.
Summary
• Consolidated Net sales increased in the year to a record $23.099 billion
◦ Net sales from stores in the Paint Stores Group open more than twelve calendar months increased
1.7% in the year
• Diluted net income per share increased 14.1% to $10.55 per share in the year compared to $9.25 per
share in the full year 2023
◦ Adjusted diluted net income per share increased 9.5% to $11.33 per share in the year compared to
$10.35 per share in the full year 2023
• Generated Net operating cash of $3.153 billion, or 13.7% of Net sales, in the year
• Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (Adjusted EBITDA) increased
6.0% in the year to $4.492 billion or 19.4% of Net sales
Outlook
ABC corp. delivered strong 2024 results despite continued choppy macroeconomic conditions.
Full year Net sales grew to a record level, gross margin expanded and Diluted net income per share
increased by a double-digit percentage. We continued to generate strong cash flow from operations
which was used for investment, an acquisition and returning cash to shareholders through dividends
and repurchases of our common stock. We enter 2025 with confidence in our differentiated strategy,
Success by Design, that continues to deliver innovative and productive solutions for our customers.
Although we expect demand softness to persist in several end markets, we have significant above-
market growth opportunities in each business. We will continue to support our growth strategy by
executing initiatives within our enterprise priorities, including talent, simplification,
digitization, supply chain responsiveness and sustainability.
Within Paint Stores Group and Consumer Brands Group, we anticipate continued economic pressures to
impact consumer behavior in both North America and Europe in 2025. Our recent investments in sales
reps, training and digital tools, coupled with home builder relationships are expected to drive
above-market growth opportunities. The outlook for the Performance Coatings Group is varied by end
market and region with expected growth in Coil driven by significant new account wins and Packaging
as we support customer conversions to our ValPure® coating which complies with European regulations.
Demand softness is forecasted in General Industrial due to negative manufacturing trends in North
America and Europe and choppiness is expected in Automotive Refinish, Protective and Marine and
Industrial Wood. As it relates to consolidated expenses, we expect raw material and employee-related
costs to be up by a low-single digit percentage, offset by cost saving simplification efforts across
our supply chain such as capacity and productivity improvements.
Our capital deployment strategy remains balanced and consistent. We have a strong liquidity position,
with $210.4 million in cash and $3.274 billion of unused capacity under our credit facilities at
December 31, 2024 and expect to end 2025 within our target debt-to-EBITDA leverage ratio of 2 to 2.5
times. We are, and expect to remain, in compliance with all financing covenants. Long-term debt
maturities due in 2025 are $1.050 billion and are expected to be refinanced at higher interest rates.
Together with the long-term debt maturities refinanced during 2024, Interest expense is expected to
increase by approximately $40 million in 2025. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs
associated with the transition into our new global headquarters and research and development (R&D)
center in 2025 of approximately $100 million, which includes approximately $80 million of Selling,
general and administrative expenses and approximately $20 million of Interest expense. Lastly, we
plan to expand our footprint by opening 80 to 100 new stores in the United States and Canada in 2025,
continue to evaluate acquisitions that align with our long-term growth strategy and return value to
our shareholders through the payment of dividends and the reinvestment of excess cash for share
repurchases of Company stock.
 24 
See Item 1A Risk Factors for further information regarding the current and potential impact of
general business and macroeconomic conditions, including inflation rates and interest rates, supply
chain disruptions, raw material availability and fluctuations in foreign currency.
 RESULTS OF OPERATIONS 
The following discussion and analysis addresses comparisons of material changes in the consolidated
financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023. For comparisons of the years
ended December 31, 2023 and 2022, see Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations in Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2023 filed on February 20, 2024.
Net Sales
 Year 
 Ended Acquisi… 
 December and 
 31, Currency Divesti… 
 2024 2023 $ Change % Change Impact Impact 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Paint 
 Stores $ 13,188.0 $ 12,839.5 $ 348.5 2.7 % — % — % 
 Group 
 Consum… 
 Brands 3,108.0 3,365.6 -257.6 -7.7 % -2.9 % -1.4 % 
 Group 
 Perfor… 
 Coatin… 6,797.3 6,843.1 -45.8 -0.7 % -0.8 % 1.2 % 
 Group 
 Admini… 5.2 3.7 1.5 40.5 % 2.7 % — % 
 Total $ 23,098.5 $ 23,051.9 $ 46.6 0.2 % -0.7 % 0.1 % 
Consolidated Net sales for 2024 increased 0.2% primarily due to higher sales in the Paint Stores
Group. This increase was partially offset by lower sales in the Consumer Brands and Performance
Coatings Groups. Net sales of all consolidated foreign subsidiaries decreased to $4.426 billion in
2024 compared to $4.428 billion in 2023 primarily due to unfavorable currency translation impact in
Latin America and lower Net sales in Asia as a result of the divestiture of the China architectural
business, partially offset by higher Net sales in Europe as a result of acquisitions. Net sales of
all operations other than consolidated foreign subsidiaries increased to $18.673 billion for 2024
compared to $18.624 billion for 2023.
Net sales in the Paint Stores Group increased 2.7% primarily due to sales volume growth and selling
price increases, which both impacted Net sales by a low-single digit percentage. Net sales from
stores in the Paint Stores Group open for more than twelve calendar months increased 1.7% in the year
over the prior year comparable period. During 2024, the Paint Stores Group opened 84 new stores and
closed 5 locations for a net increase of 79 stores. The total number of stores in operation at
December 31, 2024 was 4,773 in the United States, Canada and the Caribbean region. The Paint Stores
Group’s objective is to expand its store base by an approximate average of 2% each year, primarily
through organic growth. Sales of products other than paint increased 0.6% over last year. A
discussion of changes in volume versus pricing for sales of products other than paint is not
pertinent due to the wide assortment of general merchandise sold.
Net sales in the Consumer Brands Group decreased 7.7% in 2024 primarily due to a low-single digit
percentage sales volume decline primarily due to soft DIY demand in North America, 2.9% unfavorable
foreign currency translation driven by Latin America and the impact from divestitures in the prior
year. In 2024, the Consumer Brands Group opened 18 new stores and closed 2 locations for a net
increase of 16 new stores. The total number of stores in operation at December 31, 2024 was 334 in
Latin America.
Net sales in the Performance Coatings Group decreased 0.7% in 2024 primarily due to selling price
decreases, largely attributable to product mix, which impacted Net sales by a low-single digit
percentage and unfavorable foreign currency translation. These decreases were partially offset by
low-single digit volume growth, inclusive of the acquisition of SIC Holding GmbH in 2023 and the
acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business in 2024. In 2024, the Performance Coatings Group
added 2 net new branches, increasing the total to 324 branches.
Net sales in the Administrative function, which primarily consists of external leasing revenue,
increased by an insignificant amount in 2024.
 25 
Income Before Income Taxes
The following table presents the components of Income before income taxes as a percent of Net sales:
 Year Ended 
 December 31, 2024 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 % of Net % of Net 
 Sales Sales 
 Net sales $ 23,098.5 100.0 % $ 23,051.9 100.0 % 
 Cost of 11,903.4 51.5 % 12,293.8 53.3 % 
 goods sold 
 Gross 11,195.1 48.5 % 10,758.1 46.7 % 
 profit 
 Selling, 
 general and 
 administra… 7,422.1 32.1 % 7,065.4 30.6 % 
 expenses 
 (SG&A) 
 Other 
 general 
 (income) -38.8 -0.1 % 67.1 0.3 % 
 expense - 
 net 
 Impairment — — % 57.9 0.3 % 
 Interest 415.7 1.8 % 417.5 1.8 % 
 expense 
 Interest -11.0 — % -25.2 -0.1 % 
 income 
 Other 
 (income) -44.7 -0.2 % 65.5 0.3 % 
 expense - 
 net 
 Income 
 before $ 3,451.8 14.9 % $ 3,109.9 13.5 % 
 income 
 taxes 
Consolidated Cost of goods sold decreased $390.4 million, or 3.2%, in 2024 compared to the same
period in 2023 primarily due to lower sales volume in the Consumer Brands Group and moderating raw
material costs, partially offset by higher sales volumes in the Paint Stores and Performance Coatings
Groups.
Consolidated Gross profit increased $437.0 million, or 4.1%, in 2024 compared to the same period in
2023 primarily due to higher sales volumes in the Paint Stores and Performance Coatings Groups and
moderating raw material costs, partially offset by lower sales volume in the Consumer Brands Group.
Consolidated Gross profit as a percent to consolidated Net sales increased to 48.5% in 2024 from
46.7% in 2023 for these same reasons.
The Paint Stores Group’s Gross profit for 2024 increased $242.1 million compared to the same period
in 2023 primarily due to higher Net sales driven by sales volume growth, selling price increases and
moderating raw material costs. The Paint Stores Group’s Gross profit as a percent of Net sales
increased for these same reasons. The Consumer Brands Group’s Gross profit increased $181.1 million
in 2024 compared to the same period in 2023 primarily due to higher fixed cost absorption in the
manufacturing and distribution operations within the segment and moderating raw material costs,
partially offset by lower Net sales. The Consumer Brands Group’s Gross profit as a percent of Net
sales increased for these same reasons. The Performance Coatings Group’s Gross profit increased $13.6
million compared to the same period in 2023 primarily due to moderating raw material costs, partially
offset by lower Net sales. The Performance Coatings Group’s Gross profit as a percent of Net sales
increased for these same reasons.
Consolidated SG&A increased by $356.7 million, or 5.0%, in 2024 compared to the same period in 2023
primarily due to investments in long-term growth strategies, including expenses to support net new
store openings and digital technologies and higher employee-related costs. As a percent of Net sales,
SG&A increased 150 basis points compared to the same period in 2023 for these same reasons.
The Paint Stores Group’s SG&A increased $194.1 million or 4.6% for the year primarily due to higher
employee-related costs and investments in long-term growth initiatives, including increased spending
from net new store openings and costs to support higher sales. The Consumer Brands Group’s SG&A
decreased $19.2 million or 2.2% for the year primarily due to effective cost control in managing the
operations of the business, partially offset by higher employee-related costs. The Performance
Coatings Group’s SG&A increased by $27.5 million or 1.9% for the year primarily due to investments in
long-term initiatives and higher employee-related costs. The Administrative function’s SG&A increased
$154.3 million or 27.7% primarily due to higher employee-related costs and increased expenses related
to digital technologies and systems.
Other general (income) expense - net changed by $105.9 million from expense of $67.1 million in 2023
to income of $38.8 million in 2024. The change was primarily attributable to a decrease in provisions
for environmental matters, net in the Administrative function and increased net gains on sale or
disposition of assets. This activity was partially offset by the non-recurring gain recognized in
2023 related to the divestiture of a non-core domestic aerosol business. See Note 19 to the
consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
 26 
There was no impairment in 2024. Asset impairment of $34.0 million related to the divestiture of the
China architectural business and impairment related to trademarks of $23.9 million primarily related
to a trademark in Europe were recorded in 2023. For information on impairment considerations, see
Notes 3 and 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Interest expense decreased $1.8 million in 2024 compared to 2023 primarily due to a decrease in long-
term debt, partially offset by higher interest expense as a result of an increase in short-term
borrowings. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information
on the Company’s outstanding debt.
Other (income) expense - net changed by $110.2 million from expense of $65.5 million in 2023 to
income of $44.7 million in 2024 primarily due to lower foreign currency transaction related losses in
2024 compared to 2023 and an increase in miscellaneous income. The foreign currency transaction
related losses in 2023 included a $41.8 million unfavorable impact from the significant devaluation
of the Argentine peso in December 2023 as part of economic reforms implemented by the government of
Argentina. In addition, a $12.8 million loss on extinguishment of debt was recognized in 2023. This
activity was partially offset by a decrease in miscellaneous pension income and investment gains. See
Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information related to
Other (income) expense - net.
The following table presents Income before income taxes by segment and as a percent of Net sales by
segment:
 Year Ended 
 December 
 31, 2024 2023 $ Change % Change 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Income 
 Before 
 Income 
 Taxes: 
 Paint 
 Stores $ 2,902.6 $ 2,860.8 $ 41.8 1.5 % 
 Group 
 Consumer 
 Brands 589.9 309.3 280.6 90.7 % 
 Group 
 Performan… 
 Coatings 1,027.9 991.6 36.3 3.7 % 
 Group 
 Administr… -1,068.6 -1,051.8 -16.8 -1.6 % 
 Total $ 3,451.8 $ 3,109.9 $ 341.9 11.0 % 
 Income 
 Before 
 Income 
 Taxes as a 
 percent 
 of Net 
 sales: 
 Paint 
 Stores 22.0 % 22.3 % 
 Group 
 Consumer 
 Brands 19.0 % 9.2 % 
 Group 
 Performan… 
 Coatings 15.1 % 14.5 % 
 Group 
 Administr… nm nm 
 Total 14.9 % 13.5 % 
 nm - not 
 meaningful 
Income Tax Expense
The effective income tax rate for 2024 was 22.3% compared to 23.2% in 2023. The decrease in the
effective rate was primarily due to a more favorable impact of tax benefits related to employee
share-based payments. The other significant components of the Company’s effective tax rate were
consistent year-over-year. See Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for
additional information.
Net Income Per Share
Diluted net income per share for 2024 increased to $10.55 per share from $9.25 per share in 2023.
Currency translation rate changes decreased diluted net income per share by $0.06 per share for 2024.
Diluted net income per share in 2024 included acquisition-related amortization expense of $0.78 per
share. Diluted net income per share for 2023 included acquisition-related amortization expense of
$0.78 per share, severance and other expense of $0.04 per share, expenses related to the divestiture
of the China architectural business of $0.11 per share, impairment related to trademarks of $0.07 per
share and expense related to the devaluation of the Argentine peso of $0.16 per share. These expenses
were partially offset by a gain on the divestiture of a non-core domestic aerosol business of $0.06
per share. See Notes 3, 6 and 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional
information.
 27 
Overview
The Company’s financial condition, liquidity and cash flow remained strong in 2024. The Company
generated $3.153 billion in Net operating cash and invested $1.014 billion in capital expenditures
and approximately $80 million in the acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business. The Company
also returned cash of $2.462 billion to shareholders in the form of cash dividends and share
repurchases during the year.
The Company’s EBITDA increased 8.2% to $4.492 billion. See the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section
for the definition and calculation of EBITDA. As of December 31, 2024, the Company had Cash and cash
equivalents of $210.4 million and total debt outstanding of $9.888 billion. Total debt, net of Cash
and cash equivalents, was $9.678 billion and was 2.2 times the Company’s EBITDA in 2024.
Net Working Capital
Net working capital, defined as Total current assets less Total current liabilities, decreased $293.9
million to a deficit of $1.408 billion at December 31, 2024 compared to a deficit of $1.114 billion
at December 31, 2023. The net working capital decrease is due to an increase in Short-term borrowings
and a decrease in current assets, particularly Accounts receivable, net and Cash and cash
equivalents, partially offset by an increase in Other current assets and a decrease in Accounts
payable.
Current asset balances decreased $112.1 million at December 31, 2024 compared to December 31, 2023
primarily due to a decrease in Accounts receivable, net of $79.1 million, a decrease in Cash and cash
equivalents of $66.4 million and a decrease in Inventories of $41.7 million. These decreases were
partially offset by an increase in Other current assets of $75.1 million, primarily related to
prepaid expenses.
Current liability balances increased $181.8 million at December 31, 2024 compared to December 31,
2023 primarily due to an increase in Short-term borrowings of $288.2 million and an increase in Other
accruals of $30.7 million primarily related to liabilities related to insurance, investments in U.S.
affordable housing and historic renovation real estate partnerships and contracts with customers,
partially offset by a decrease in short-term environmental liabilities. These increases were
partially offset by a decrease in Accounts payable of $61.8 million, a decrease in Current portion of
long-term debt of $49.6 million and a decrease in Accrued taxes of $23.1 million.
As a result of the net effect of these changes, the Company’s current ratio decreased to 0.79 at
December 31, 2024 from 0.83 at December 31, 2023. Accounts receivable as a percent of Net sales
decreased to 10.3% in 2024 from 10.7% in 2023. Accounts receivable days outstanding was 58 days in
2024 and 2023. In 2024, the allowance for current expected credit losses increased $0.8 million, or
1.3%. Inventories as a percent of Net sales decreased to 9.9% in 2024 from 10.1% in 2023. Inventory
days outstanding was 93 days in 2024 compared to 94 days in 2023. The Company has sufficient total
available borrowing capacity to fund its current operating needs.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment, net increased $696.4 million to $3.533 billion at December 31, 2024
primarily due to capital expenditures of $1.014 billion and assets acquired through a business
combination of $32.9 million, partially offset by depreciation expense of $297.4 million and foreign
currency translation and other adjustments of $52.6 million. During 2023, the Company closed on a
transaction to sell and subsequently lease back its current global headquarters and R&D center. In
connection with the sale, proceeds of $47.2 million were received and an immaterial gain was
recognized.
Capital expenditures during 2024 included expenditures related to construction activities associated
with the new global headquarters and R&D center in the Administrative function. Construction of the
new global headquarters and R&D center is expected to be complete in 2025. Also included in 2024
capital expenditures were expenditures related to manufacturing capacity expansion, operational
efficiencies and maintenance projects in the Consumer Brands and Performance Coatings Groups and the
opening of new paint stores and renovation and improvements in existing stores in the Paint Stores
Group.
In 2025, the Company expects to spend slightly less than 2024 for capital expenditures, which it will
fund primarily through the generation of operating cash. Core capital expenditures are expected to be
for investments in various productivity improvement and maintenance projects at existing
manufacturing, distribution and research and development facilities and new store openings.
Additionally, the Company expects to complete construction of its new global headquarters and R&D
center. Refer to the Real Estate Financing section herein for further information on the financing
transaction for the new global headquarters.
Real Estate Financing
In December 2022, the Company closed a transaction to sell and subsequently lease back its partially-
constructed new global headquarters. As part of the terms of the transaction, the Company is
contractually obligated for completing the
 28 
construction of the building and related improvements at the new global headquarters. Construction is
expected to complete in 2025. This transaction did not meet the criteria for recognition as an asset
sale under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (US GAAP) and as such, was accounted for as
a real estate financing transaction. The Company expects to receive total proceeds approximating $800
million to $850 million, with final proceeds expected in the first quarter of 2025. The initial lease
term includes the construction period and extends for 30 years thereafter, and the Company has the
right and option to extend the lease term. The lease payment amounts during the construction period
are dependent upon the timing and amount of total reimbursement of construction and other costs
received by the Company. Lease payments over the next twelve months are expected to be approximately
$50 million. The amount of the lease payments during the initial 30 year lease term will be
calculated upon completion of the construction period and receipt of total reimbursement of
construction and other costs. Once determinable, this is expected to result in a significant increase
in the Company’s long-term contractual obligations.
The following table summarizes the activity related to this transaction and the corresponding
balances recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 Activity: 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Proceeds received $ 244.2 $ 305.0 $ 210.0 
 Capitalized interest 45.2 23.8 
 Balances: 
 Short-term liability $ 49.7 $ 39.9 $ 20.0 
 Long-term liability 715.9 475.9 187.0 
 Total liability $ 765.6 $ 515.8 $ 207.0 
The net proceeds from this transaction and other real estate financing transactions are recognized as
proceeds from real estate financing transactions within the Financing Activities section of the
Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows. The Company will continue to recognize the related assets
within Property, plant and equipment, net on the Consolidated Balance Sheets under US GAAP. These
assets will be subject to depreciation over their useful lives in accordance with the Company’s
accounting policies. The Company will also allocate payments between interest and repayment of the
financing liability over the life of the agreement. See Note 10 to the consolidated financial
statements within Item 8 for further information.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill, which represents the excess of cost over the fair value of net assets acquired in business
combinations, decreased $45.9 million to $7.580 billion at December 31, 2024, due to foreign currency
translation rate fluctuations of $94.1 million, partially offset by purchase accounting allocations
of $48.2 million.
Intangible assets decreased $347.3 million to $3.533 billion at December 31, 2024 due to amortization
of finite-lived intangible assets of $326.7 million and foreign currency translation rate
fluctuations and other adjustments of $75.9 million, partially offset by purchase accounting
allocations of $28.0 million and capitalization of software of $27.3 million.
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information related to
acquisitions. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for a description of
goodwill, intangible assets, historical impairments and summaries of the remaining carrying values of
goodwill and intangible assets.
Other Assets
Other assets increased $420.7 million to $1.632 billion at December 31, 2024. The increase was
primarily due to an increase in finance lease right-of-use (ROU) assets of $187.5 million, largely
related to a new finance lease which commenced during 2024, an increase in assets related to
contracts with customers and investments in U.S. affordable housing and historic renovation real
estate partnerships. See Notes 1, 9 and 18 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for
additional information.
 29 
Debt (including Short-term borrowings)
 December 31, December 31, 
 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Long-term debt $ 9,226.0 $ 9,476.7 
 Short-term borrowings 662.4 374.2 
 Total debt outstanding $ 9,888.4 $ 9,850.9 
Total debt outstanding, including Short-term borrowings, increased by $37.5 million to $9.888 billion
in 2024. Short-term borrowings are primarily comprised of amounts outstanding under the Company’s
domestic commercial paper program and various foreign credit facilities. The Company’s Long-term debt
primarily consists of senior notes. The Company targets Net debt, which is total debt outstanding,
net of Cash and cash equivalents, to be 2.0 to 2.5 times EBITDA. At December 31, 2024, Net debt was
$9.678 billion and was 2.2 times the Company’s EBITDA in 2024. See the Non-GAAP Financial Measures
section for the definition and calculation of EBITDA.
In August 2024, the Company repaid principal of $600.0 million related to the Company’s 4.05% senior
notes due August 8, 2024 using commercial paper and subsequently issued $400.0 million of 4.55%
senior notes due 2028 and $450.0 million of 4.80% senior notes due 2031 in a public offering. The net
proceeds from the issuance of these notes were used to repay outstanding borrowings under the
Company’s domestic commercial paper program and for general corporate purposes. The newly issued
senior notes contain customary qualitative covenants as defined in their respective agreements.
During the second quarter of 2024, the Company repaid the principal of $500.0 million related to its
3.125% senior notes due June 1, 2024 using commercial paper.
In December 2023, the Company exercised its call provision to make-whole the entire outstanding
$119.4 million aggregate principal amount of its 7.38% Debentures due 2027 and the entire outstanding
$3.5 million aggregate principal amount of its 7.45% Debentures due 2097. The retirement of the
Debentures resulted in a loss of $12.8 million recorded in Other general (income) expense - net. See
Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
The Company’s available capacity under its committed credit agreements is reduced for amounts
outstanding under its domestic commercial paper program and letters of credit. At December 31, 2024,
the Company had unused capacity under its various credit agreements of $3.274 billion.
See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for a detailed description and summary
of the Company’s outstanding debt, short-term borrowings and other available financing programs.
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
In accordance with the accounting prescribed by the Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC, the
Company’s total liability for unfunded or underfunded defined benefit pension plans decreased $1.2
million to $67.8 million primarily due to changes in actuarial assumptions. The Company’s liability
for other postretirement benefits decreased $12.1 million to $135.1 million at December 31, 2024
primarily due to benefits paid and changes in actuarial assumptions.
The assumed discount rate used to determine the projected benefit obligation for the domestic defined
benefit pension plan increased to 5.8% at December 31, 2024 from 5.1% at December 31, 2023. The
assumed discount rate used to determine the projected benefit obligation for foreign defined benefit
pension plans increased to 5.5% at December 31, 2024 from 4.8% at December 31, 2023. The assumed
discount rate used to determine the projected benefit obligation for other postretirement benefit
obligations increased to 5.6% at December 31, 2024 from 5.0% at December 31, 2023. The increase in
the discount rates was primarily due to higher interest rates.
In determining the rates of compensation increases, management considered historical Company
increases as well as expectations for future increases. The rate of compensation increases used to
determine the projected benefit obligation at December 31, 2024 was 3.0% for the domestic pension
plan and 3.3% for foreign pension plans, which was comparable to the rates used in the prior year.
In establishing the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, management considered the
historical rates of return, the nature of investments and an expectation for future investment
strategies. The expected long-term rate of return on assets for the domestic defined benefit pension
plan was 6.5% and 6.3% at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. The expected long-term rate of
return on assets for the foreign defined benefit pension plans was 4.8% at December 31, 2024 and
2023.
In developing the assumed health care cost trend rates, management considered industry data,
historical Company experience and expectations for future health care costs. The assumed health care
cost trend rates used to determine the projected benefit
 30 
obligation for other postretirement benefit obligations at December 31, 2024 were 6.5% and 11.8% for
medical and prescription drug cost increases, respectively, both decreasing gradually to 4.5% in
2034. The assumed health care cost trend rates for medical and prescription costs used to determine
the projected benefit obligation for other postretirement benefit obligations at December 31, 2023
were 6.0% and 9.0%, respectively.
The respective year-end assumptions described above for the Company’s defined benefit plans are also
used to determine expense for the next year. Net pension (credit) cost in 2025 for the domestic
pension plan and foreign pension plans is expected to be approximately $(1.6) million and $5.3
million, respectively. Net periodic benefit credit for other postretirement benefits in 2025 is
expected to be approximately $9.7 million. This credit is primarily due to the remaining amortization
of the impact of a plan amendment executed in 2022. This impact will be fully amortized in 2025. See
Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information on the Company’s
obligations and funded status of its defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefits.
Deferred Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes at December 31, 2024 decreased $75.6 million to $607.5 million at December 31,
2024 primarily due to amortization of intangible assets in the current year. See Note 20 to the
consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information on deferred taxes.
Other Long-Term Liabilities
Other long-term liabilities increased $401.4 million to $2.309 billion at December 31, 2024 primarily
due to liabilities associated with real estate financing transactions, finance leases and commitments
related to investments in U.S. affordable housing and historic renovation real estate partnerships,
partially offset by the impact of expected settlements related to tax positions over the next twelve
months. See Notes 1, 9, 10 and 20 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Environmental Matters
The operations of the Company, like those of other companies in the same industry, are subject to
various federal, state and local environmental laws and regulations. These laws and regulations not
only govern current operations and products, but also impose potential liability on the Company for
past operations. Management expects environmental laws and regulations to impose increasingly
stringent requirements upon the Company and the industry in the future. Management believes that the
Company conducts its operations in compliance with applicable environmental laws and regulations and
has implemented various programs designed to protect the environment and promote continued
compliance.
Depreciation of capital expenditures and other expenses related to ongoing environmental compliance
measures were included in the normal operating expenses of conducting business. The Company’s capital
expenditures, depreciation and other expenses related to ongoing environmental compliance measures
were not material to the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, cash flow or results of operations
during 2024. Management does not expect that such capital expenditures, depreciation and other
expenses will be material to the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, cash flow or results of
operations in 2025. See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for further
information on environmental-related liabilities.
Contractual and Other Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The Company has certain obligations and commitments to make future payments under contractual and
other obligations and commercial commitments. The Company believes that cash generated from operating
activities and borrowings available under long-term and short-term debt, including its committed
credit agreements and commercial paper program, will be sufficient for it to meet its contractual and
other obligations and commercial commitments. The following tables summarize such obligations and
commitments as of December 31, 2024.
 31 
(2) Relates to open purchase orders for raw materials at December 31, 2024.
(3) Relates primarily to estimated future capital contributions for investments in the U.S.
affordable housing and historic renovation real estate partnerships and various other contractual
obligations.
Additionally, the Company has an obligation with respect to an agreement signed in February 2025 to
acquire the Brazilian decorative paints business of BASF SE, which is excluded from the preceding
table. The timing and amount of this obligation is uncertain as the transaction is expected to close
in the second half of 2025 and is subject to customary closing conditions, including Brazilian
regulatory approval and post-closing adjustments. Refer to Note 3 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8 for further information.
 Amount of 
 Commitment 
 Expiration Per 
 Commercial Period Less Than More Than 
 Commitments Total 1 Year 1–3 Years 3–5 Years 5 Years 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Standby 
 letters of $ 125.5 $ 125.5 
 credit 
 Surety bonds 216.1 216.1 
 Total 
 commercial $ 341.6 $ 341.6 $ — $ — $ — 
 commitments 
Warranties
The Company offers product warranties for certain products. The specific terms and conditions of such
warranties vary depending on the product or customer contract requirements. Management estimated the
costs of unsettled product warranty claims based on historical results and experience and included an
amount in Other accruals. Management periodically assesses the adequacy of the accrual for product
warranty claims and adjusts the accrual as necessary. Changes in the Company’s accrual for product
warranty claims during 2024 and 2023, including customer satisfaction settlements during the year,
were as follows:
 2024 2023 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1 $ 40.4 $ 36.2 
 Charges to expense 34.2 37.0 
 Settlements -28.2 -32.8 
 Balance at December 31 $ 46.4 $ 40.4 
Shareholders’ Equity
Shareholders’ equity increased $335.4 million to $4.051 billion at December 31, 2024 from $3.716
billion last year. The increase was primarily attributable to the generation of $2.681 billion of Net
income and benefits from stock option exercises and the recognition of stock-based compensation
expense of $367.5 million. This was partially offset by the repurchase of $1.739 billion in Treasury
stock, the payment of $723.4 million in cash dividends and a decrease in AOCI of $250.9 million
mainly due to foreign currency translation adjustments. See the Statements of Consolidated
Shareholders’ Equity and Statements of Consolidated Comprehensive Income in Item 8 for additional
information.
The Company purchased 5.2 million shares of its common stock for treasury purposes through open
market purchases during 2024. The Company acquires its common stock for general corporate purposes,
and depending on its cash position and market
 32 
conditions, it may acquire shares in the future. The Company had remaining authorization from its
Board of Directors at December 31, 2024 to purchase 34.4 million shares of its common stock.
The Company’s 2024 annual cash dividend of $2.86 per share represented 31% of 2023 diluted net income
per share. The 2024 annual dividend represented the 46 th consecutive year of increased dividend
payments. On February 19, 2025, the Board of Directors increased the quarterly cash dividend to $0.79
per share. This quarterly dividend, if approved in each of the remaining quarters of 2025, would
result in an annual dividend for 2025 of $3.16 per share, or a 30% payout of 2024 diluted net income
per share.
Cash Flow
Net operating cash decreased $368.7 million in 2024 to a cash source of $3.153 billion from a cash
source of $3.522 billion in 2023 primarily due to higher cash requirements for working capital
partially offset by higher Net income. Net operating cash decreased as a percent of Net sales to
13.7% in 2024 compared to 15.3% in 2023.
Net investing cash usage increased $157.0 million to a usage of $1.196 billion in 2024 from a usage
of $1.039 billion in 2023 primarily due to an increase in cash used for capital expenditures,
proceeds from the divestiture of a business in 2023 and reduced proceeds from the sale of assets,
partially offset by lower cash used for acquisitions. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8 for additional information on acquisitions and divestitures.
Net financing cash usage decreased $407.5 million to a usage of $2.017 billion in 2024 from a usage
of $2.425 billion in 2023. This decrease was primarily due to a net increase in short-term
borrowings, proceeds from long-term debt in 2024 and higher proceeds from stock options exercised,
partially offset by an increase in payments of long-term debt, treasury stock purchases and payment
of cash dividends.
Market Risk
The Company is exposed to market risk associated with interest rate, foreign currency and commodity
fluctuations. The Company occasionally utilizes derivative instruments as part of its overall
financial risk management policy, but does not use derivative instruments for speculative or trading
purposes. In 2024 and 2023, the Company entered into foreign currency forward contracts with maturity
dates of less than twelve months primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency and
cross currency swap contracts to hedge its net investment in European operations. See Notes 1, 16 and
19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information related to the
Company’s use of derivative instruments.
The Company believes it may be exposed to continuing market risk from foreign currency exchange rate
and commodity price fluctuations. However, the Company does not expect that foreign currency exchange
rate and commodity price fluctuations or hedging contract losses will have a material adverse effect
on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. See Notes 1 and 19 to the
consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information related to foreign currency
translation.
Financial Covenant
Certain borrowings contain a consolidated leverage covenant. The covenant states the Company’s
consolidated leverage ratio is not to exceed 3.75 to 1.00; however, the Company may elect to
temporarily increase the leverage ratio to 4.25 to 1.00 for a period of four consecutive fiscal
quarters immediately following the consummation of a qualifying acquisition, as defined in the credit
agreement dated July 31, 2024. The leverage ratio is defined as the ratio of total indebtedness (the
sum of Short-term borrowings, Current portion of long-term debt and Long-term debt) at the reporting
date to consolidated “Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization” (EBITDA), as
defined in the credit agreement, for the 12-month period ended on the same date. Refer to the “Non-
GAAP Financial Measures” section for a reconciliation of EBITDA to Net income. At December 31, 2024,
the Company was in compliance with the covenant and expects to remain in compliance. The Company’s
notes, debentures and revolving credit agreements contain various default and cross-default
provisions. In the event of default under any one of these arrangements, acceleration of the maturity
of any one or more of these borrowings may result. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Defined Contribution Savings Plan
Participants in the Company’s defined contribution savings plan are allowed to contribute up to the
lesser of fifty percent of their annual compensation or the maximum dollar amount allowed under the
Internal Revenue Code. The Company matches one hundred percent of all contributions up to six percent
of eligible employee contributions. The Company’s matching contributions to the defined contribution
savings plan charged to operations were $165.1 million in 2024 compared to $153.9 million in 2023. At
December 31, 2024, there were 16,771,640 shares of the Company’s common stock being held by the
defined contribution savings plan, representing 6.7% of the total number of voting shares
outstanding. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional
information concerning the Company’s defined contribution savings plan.
 33 
Management utilizes certain financial measures that are not in accordance with US GAAP to analyze and
manage the performance of the business. The required disclosures for these non-GAAP measures are
shown below. The Company provides such non-GAAP information in reporting its financial results to
give investors additional data to evaluate the Company’s operations. Management does not, nor does it
suggest investors should, consider such non-GAAP measures in isolation from, or in substitution for,
financial information prepared in accordance with US GAAP.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as Net income before income taxes, Interest expense,
depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as EBITDA that
excludes certain adjustments that management believes enhances investors’ understanding of the
Company’s operating performance. Management considers EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA useful in
understanding the operating performance of the Company. The reader is cautioned that the Company’s
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be compared to other entities unknowingly. Further, EBITDA and
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered alternatives to Net income or Net operating cash as an
indicator of operating performance or as a measure of liquidity. The reader should refer to the
determination of Net income and Net operating cash in accordance with US GAAP disclosed in the
Statements of Consolidated Income and Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows in Item 8.
The following table summarizes EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as calculated by management for the years
indicated below:
 Year Ended December 31, 
 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 2,681.4 $ 2,388.8 
 Interest expense 415.7 417.5 
 Income taxes 770.4 721.1 
 Depreciation 297.4 292.3 
 Amortization 326.6 330.2 
 EBITDA $ 4,491.5 $ 4,149.9 
 Restructuring expense — 9.6 
 Impairment related to Restructuring Plan — 34.0 
 Gain on divestiture of domestic aerosol — -20.1 
 business 
 Impairment related to trademarks — 23.9 
 Devaluation of the Argentine peso — 41.8 
 Adjusted EBITDA $ 4,491.5 $ 4,239.1 
Free Cash Flow After Dividends
Free cash flow after dividends is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as Net operating cash, as
shown in the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows, less the amount reinvested in the business for
capital expenditures and the return on investment to its shareholders by the payments of cash
dividends. Management considers Free cash flow after dividends to be a useful tool in its
determination of appropriate uses of the Company’s Net operating cash. The reader is cautioned that
the Free cash flow after dividends measure should not be compared to other entities unknowingly as it
may not be comparable and it does not consider certain non-discretionary cash flows, such as
mandatory debt and interest payments. The amount shown below should not be considered an alternative
to Net operating cash or other cash flow amounts provided in accordance with US GAAP as disclosed in
the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows in Item 8.
The following table summarizes Free cash flow after dividends as calculated by management for the
years indicated below:
 Year Ended December 31, 
 2024 2023 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net operating cash $ 3,153.2 $ 3,521.9 
 Capital expenditures -1,070.0 -888.4 
 Cash dividends -723.4 -623.7 
 Free cash flow after dividends $ 1,359.8 $ 2,009.8 
 34 
Adjusted Diluted Net Income Per Share
Management believes investors’ understanding of the Company’s operating performance is enhanced by
the disclosure of diluted net income per share excluding Valspar acquisition-related amortization
expense and certain other adjustments. Valspar acquisition-related amortization expense is excluded
from diluted net income per share due to its significance as a result of the purchase price assigned
to finite-lived intangible assets at the date of acquisition and the related impact on underlying
business performance and trends. While these intangible assets contribute to the Company’s revenue
generation, the related revenue is not excluded. This adjusted earnings per share measurement is not
in accordance with US GAAP. It should not be considered a substitute for earnings per share in
accordance with US GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other
companies. The following tables reconcile diluted net income per share computed in accordance with US
GAAP to adjusted diluted net income per share.
 Year Ended 
 December 31, 2024 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Pre-Tax TaxEffect(1) After-Tax 
 Diluted net income per share $ 10.55 
 Acquisition-related amortization $ 1.02 $ .24 .78 
 expense(2) 
 Adjusted diluted net income per share $ 11.33 
 Year Ended 
 December 31, 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Pre-Tax TaxEffect(1) After-Tax 
 Diluted net income per share $ 9.25 
 Items related to Restructuring Plan: 
 Severance and other $ .06 $ .02 .04 
 Impairment of assets related to China .13 .08 .05 
 divestiture 
 Gain on divestiture of domestic 
 aerosol -.08 -.02 -.06 
 business 
 Discrete income tax expense related to — -.06 .06 
 China divestiture(1) 
 Total .11 .02 .09 
 Impairment related to trademarks .09 .02 .07 
 Devaluation of the Argentine peso .16 — .16 
 Acquisition-related amortization 1.03 .25 .78 
 expense(2) 
 Adjusted diluted net income per share $ 10.35 
(1) The tax effect is calculated based on the statutory rate and the nature of the item, unless
otherwise noted.
(2) Acquisition-related amortization expense, which is included within Selling, general and
administrative expenses, consists of the amortization of intangible assets related to the Valspar
acquisition. These intangible assets are primarily customer relationships and intellectual property
and are being amortized over their remaining useful lives.
 35 
Adjusted Segment Profit
Management believes investors’ understanding of the Company’s operating performance is enhanced by
the disclosure of Segment profit excluding Valspar acquisition-related amortization expense and
certain other adjustments. Valspar acquisition-related amortization expense is excluded from Segment
profit due to its significance as a result of the purchase price assigned to finite-lived intangible
assets at the date of acquisition and the related impact on underlying business performance and
trends. While these intangible assets contribute to the Company’s revenue generation, the related
revenue is not excluded. This Adjusted segment profit measurement is not in accordance with US GAAP.
It should not be considered a substitute for Segment profit in accordance with US GAAP and may not be
comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. The following tables reconcile
Segment profit computed in accordance with US GAAP to Adjusted segment profit.
 Year 
 Ended 
 December 
 31, 
 2024 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Adminis… Total 
 Group Group Group 
 Net $ 13,188.0 $ 3,108.0 $ 6,797.3 $ 5.2 $ 23,098… 
 sales 
 Income 
 before $ 2,902.6 $ 589.9 $ 1,027.9 $ -1,068.6 $ 3,451.8 
 income 
 taxes 
 as a 
 percent 22.0 % 19.0 % 15.1 % nm 14.9 % 
 of Net 
 sales 
 Acquis… 
 amorti… 63.8 196.3 260.1 
 expens… 
 Adjust… 
 segment $ 2,902.6 $ 653.7 $ 1,224.2 $ -1,068.6 $ 3,711.9 
 profit 
 as a 
 percent 22.0 % 21.0 % 18.0 % nm 16.1 % 
 of Net 
 sales 
 Year 
 Ended 
 December 
 31, 
 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Adminis… Total 
 Group Group Group 
 Net $ 12,839.5 $ 3,365.6 $ 6,843.1 $ 3.7 $ 23,051… 
 sales 
 Income 
 before $ 2,860.8 $ 309.3 $ 991.6 $ -1,051.8 $ 3,109.9 
 income 
 taxes 
 as a 
 percent 22.3 % 9.2 % 14.5 % nm 13.5 % 
 of Net 
 sales 
 Items 
 related 
 to 
 Restru… 
 Plan: 
 Severa… 
 and 14.2 -0.2 1.3 15.3 
 other 
 Impair… 
 of 
 assets 
 related 6.9 27.1 34.0 
 to 
 China 
 divest… 
 Gain on 
 divest… 
 of -20.1 -20.1 
 domest… 
 aerosol 
 busine… 
 Total — 21.1 -0.2 8.3 29.2 
 Impair… 
 related 23.9 23.9 
 to 
 tradem… 
 Devalu… 
 of the 30.8 11.0 41.8 
 Argent… 
 peso 
 Acquis… 
 amorti… 69.3 196.8 266.1 
 expens… 
 Adjust… 
 segment $ 2,860.8 $ 454.4 $ 1,199.2 $ -1,043.5 $ 3,470.9 
 profit 
 as a 
 percent 22.3 % 13.5 % 17.5 % nm 15.1 % 
 of Net 
 sales 
nm -not meaningful
(1) Acquisition-related amortization expense, which is included within Selling, general and
administrative expenses, consists of the amortization of intangible assets related to the Valspar
acquisition. These intangible assets are primarily customer relationships and intellectual property
and are being amortized over their remaining useful lives.
 36 
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the accompanying consolidated financial
statements. These determinations were made based upon management’s best estimates, judgments and
assumptions that were believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, giving due consideration to
materiality. We do not believe there is a great likelihood that materially different amounts would be
reported under different conditions or using different assumptions related to the critical accounting
policies and estimates described below. However, application of these critical accounting policies
and estimates involves the exercise of judgment and use of assumptions as to future uncertainties and
as a result, actual results could differ from these estimates.
All of the significant accounting policies that were followed in the preparation of the consolidated
financial statements are disclosed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Management believes that the following critical accounting policies and estimates have a significant
impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market with cost determined principally on the last-
in, first-out (LIFO) method based on inventory quantities and costs determined during the fourth
quarter and market representing current replacement cost, which is the cost to purchase or reproduce
the inventory. Market shall not exceed net realizable value and shall not be less than net realizable
value reduced by an allowance for an approximately normal profit margin. Inventory quantities are
adjusted throughout the year as formal cycle counts are completed, or during the fourth quarter as a
result of annual physical inventory counts. If inventories accounted for on the LIFO method are
reduced on a year-over-year basis, then liquidation of certain quantities carried at costs prevailing
in prior years occurs. Management records an estimate of the lower of cost or market whenever the
utility of inventory is impaired by damage, deterioration, obsolescence, changes in price levels, or
other causes based on historical experience and current trends through reductions to inventory cost
by recording a provision included in Cost of goods sold. If management estimates that the reasonable
market value is below cost or determines that future demand was lower than current inventory levels,
based on historical experience, current and projected market demand, current and projected volume
trends and other relevant current and projected factors associated with the current economic
conditions, a reduction in inventory cost to current market price is provided for in the reserve for
obsolescence. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for more information
regarding the impact of the LIFO inventory valuation and the reserve for obsolescence.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
In accordance with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC, management performs
impairment tests of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets on an annual basis, as well as
whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that indicate impairment has occurred on a more
likely than not basis. An optional qualitative assessment allows companies to forego the annual
quantitative test if it is not more likely than not that impairment has occurred based on monitoring
key Company financial performance metrics and macroeconomic conditions. The qualitative assessment is
performed when deemed appropriate.
Management tests goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level. Per the Segment Reporting Topic
of the ASC, a reporting unit is an operating segment or one level below the operating segment
(component level) as determined by the availability of discrete financial information that is
regularly reviewed by operating segment management or an aggregate of component levels of an
operating segment having similar economic characteristics. At the time of goodwill impairment testing
(if performing a quantitative assessment), management determines fair value through the use of a
discounted cash flow valuation model incorporating discount rates commensurate with the risks
involved for each reporting unit. If the calculated fair value is less than the current carrying
value, the difference represents the amount of impairment attributable to the reporting unit. The use
of a discounted cash flow valuation model to determine estimated fair value is common practice in
impairment testing. The key assumptions used in the discounted cash flow valuation model for
impairment testing include a discount rate, growth rates, cash flow projections and a terminal value
rate. Discount rates are set by using the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) methodology. The
WACC methodology considers market and industry data as well as Company-specific risk factors for each
reporting unit in determining the appropriate discount rate to be used. The discount rate utilized
for each reporting unit is indicative of the return an investor would expect to receive for investing
in such a business. Management, considering industry and Company-specific historical and projected
data, develops growth rates, sales projections and cash flow projections for each reporting unit.
Terminal value rate determination follows common methodology of capturing the present value of
perpetual cash flow estimates beyond the last projected period assuming a constant WACC and a long-
term growth rate. As an indicator that each reporting unit has been valued appropriately through the
use of the discounted cash flow valuation model, the aggregate of all reporting units’ fair value is
reconciled to the total market capitalization of the Company within a reasonable and supportable
control premium.
 37 
The Company had seven components, some of which are aggregated due to similar economic
characteristics, to form three reporting units (also the reportable operating segments) with goodwill
as of October 1, 2024, the date of the annual impairment test. The Company performed the optional
qualitative impairment test as of October 1, 2024, and determined that there was no indication of
impairment on a more likely than not basis in the Company’s reporting units.
Management tests indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment at the asset level, as determined
by appropriate asset valuations at acquisition. Management utilizes the royalty savings method to
determine the estimated fair value for each indefinite-lived intangible asset or trademark. In this
method, management estimates the royalty savings arising from the ownership of the intangible asset.
The key assumptions used in estimating the royalty savings for impairment testing include a discount
rate, a royalty rate, growth rates, sales projections, a terminal value rate and to a lesser extent,
a tax rate. The discount rate used is similar to the rate developed by the WACC methodology
considering any differences in Company-specific risk factors between reporting units and trademarks.
The royalty rate is established by management and valuation experts and periodically substantiated by
valuation experts. Management, considering industry and Company-specific historical and projected
data, develops growth rates and sales projections for each significant trademark. Terminal value rate
determination follows common methodology of capturing the present value of perpetual sales estimates
beyond the last projected period assuming a constant WACC and a low long-term growth rate. The
royalty savings valuation methodology and calculations used in 2024 impairment testing are consistent
with prior years. The Company performed the optional qualitative impairment test as of October 1,
2024, and determined that there was indication of impairment on a more likely than not basis in
certain of the Company’s trademarks. The resulting quantitative impairment test performed as of
October 1, 2024 did not result in any trademark impairment.
The discounted cash flow and royalty savings valuation methodologies require management to make
certain assumptions based upon information available at the time the valuations are performed from
the perspective of a market participant. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Item
8 for a discussion of goodwill and intangible assets and the impairment tests performed in accordance
with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC, if events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying value of long-lived assets, including operating and finance
lease right-of-use assets, may not be recoverable or the useful life has changed, impairment tests
are performed or the useful life is adjusted. Undiscounted cash flows are used to calculate the
recoverable value of long-lived assets to determine if such assets are recoverable. If the carrying
value of the assets is deemed to not be recoverable, the impairment to be recognized is the amount by
which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the estimated fair value of the assets as determined
in accordance with the Fair Value Topic of the ASC. If the usefulness of an asset is determined to be
impaired, an updated useful life is assessed based on the period of time for projected use of the
asset. Fair value approaches and changes in useful life are based on certain assumptions and
information available at the time the valuation or determination is performed. Management believes
the assumptions used are reflective of what a market participant would have used in calculating fair
value or useful life considering the current economic conditions. As of October 1, 2024, the Company
performed an analysis and determined that there were no events or changes in circumstances to suggest
the carrying value of each long-lived asset group is not recoverable and therefore, no further
impairment tests were performed. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for a
discussion of the reductions in carrying value or useful life of long-lived assets in accordance with
the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC.
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
To determine the Company’s ultimate obligation under its defined benefit pension and other
postretirement benefit plans, management estimates the future cost of benefits and attributes that
cost to the time period during which each covered employee works. To determine the obligations of the
benefit plans, management uses actuaries to calculate such amounts using key assumptions which
include discount rates, inflation rates, long-term investment returns, mortality, employee turnover,
rate of compensation increases and medical and prescription drug costs. Management reviews all of
these assumptions on an ongoing basis to ensure that the most current information available is
considered. An increase or decrease in the assumptions or economic events outside management’s
control could have a direct impact on the Company’s results of operations or financial condition.
In accordance with the Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC, the Company recognizes each plan’s
funded status as an asset for overfunded plans and as a liability for unfunded or underfunded plans.
Actuarial gains and losses and prior service costs are recognized and recorded in Accumulated other
comprehensive income (AOCI). The amounts recorded in AOCI will continue to be modified as actuarial
assumptions and service costs change, and all such amounts will be amortized to expense over a period
of years through the net pension and net periodic benefit costs. Based on facts and circumstances,
the expense amounts recorded in AOCI can also have accelerated amortization due to certain plan
changes, including those that result in a
 38 
curtailment. See Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for information concerning
the Company’s defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans.
Environmental Matters
The Company is involved with environmental investigation and remediation activities at some of its
currently and formerly owned sites (including sites which were previously owned and/or operated by
businesses acquired by the Company). The Company initially provides for estimated costs of
environmental-related activities relating to its past operations and third-party sites for which
commitments or clean-up plans have been developed and when such costs can be reasonably estimated
based on industry standards and professional judgment. These estimated costs, which are mostly
undiscounted, are determined based on currently available facts regarding each site. If the
reasonably estimable costs can only be identified as a range and no specific amount within that range
can be determined more likely than any other amount within the range, the minimum of the range is
provided.
The Company routinely assesses its potential liability for investigation and remediation-related
activities and adjusts its environmental-related accruals as information becomes available upon which
more accurate costs can be reasonably estimated and as additional accounting guidelines are issued.
Actual costs incurred may vary from the accrued estimates due to the inherent uncertainties involved.
See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for information concerning the accrual
for extended environmental-related activities and a discussion concerning unaccrued future loss
contingencies.
Litigation and Other Contingent Liabilities
In the course of its business, the Company is subject to a variety of claims and lawsuits, including,
but not limited to, litigation relating to product liability and warranty, personal injury,
environmental, intellectual property, commercial, contractual and antitrust claims. Management
accrues for all known liabilities that existed and those where a loss was deemed probable for which a
fair value was available or an amount could be reasonably estimated in accordance with US GAAP.
However, because litigation is inherently subject to many uncertainties and the ultimate result of
any present or future litigation is unpredictable, the Company’s ultimate liability may result in
costs that are significantly higher than currently accrued. In the event that the Company’s loss
contingency is ultimately determined to be significantly higher than currently accrued, the recording
of the liability may result in a material impact on Net income for the annual or interim period
during which such liability is accrued. Additionally, due to the uncertainties involved, any
potential liability determined to be attributable to the Company arising out of such litigation may
have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity or financial
condition. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for information concerning
litigation.
Income Taxes
The Company estimates income taxes for each jurisdiction in which it conducts operations. This
involves estimating taxable earnings, specific taxable and deductible items, the likelihood of
generating sufficient future taxable income to utilize deferred tax assets and possible exposures
related to future tax audits. To the extent these estimates change, adjustments to deferred and
accrued income taxes will be made in the period in which the changes occur.
The Company recognizes a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than
not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the
technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial
statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50%
likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. These assessments of uncertain tax positions
contain judgments related to the interpretation of tax regulations in the jurisdictions in which we
transact business. The judgments and estimates made at a point in time may change based on the
outcome of tax audits, expiration of statutes of limitations, as well as changes to, or further
interpretations of, tax laws and regulations. Income tax expense is adjusted in our Statements of
Consolidated Income in the period in which these events occur. See Note 20 to the consolidated
financial statements in Item 8 for information concerning income taxes.
 39 
We are exposed to market risk associated with interest rates, foreign currency and commodity
fluctuations. We occasionally utilize derivative instruments as part of our overall financial risk
management policy, but do not use derivative instruments for speculative or trading purposes. In
2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company utilized U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap contracts to hedge
the Company’s net investment in its European operations. The contracts have been designated as net
investment hedges and have various maturity dates. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8. The Company entered into forward foreign currency exchange contracts during
2024, 2023 and 2022 primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. There were no
material contracts outstanding at December 31, 2024. Forward foreign currency exchange contracts are
described in Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8. We believe we may experience
continuing losses from foreign currency fluctuations. However, we do not expect currency translation,
transaction or hedging contract losses to have a material adverse effect on our financial condition,
results of operations or cash flows.
 40 
Shareholders of The ABC corp. Company
We are responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial
reporting as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended. We recognize that internal control over financial reporting cannot provide absolute
assurance of achieving financial reporting objectives because of its inherent limitations. Internal
control over financial reporting is a process that involves human diligence and is subject to the
possibility of human error or the circumvention or the overriding of internal control. Therefore,
there is a risk that material misstatements may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis by
internal control over financial reporting. However, we believe we have designed into the process
safeguards to reduce, though not eliminate, this risk. Projections of any evaluation of effectiveness
to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in
conditions, or that the degree of compliance with policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In order to ensure that the Company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective as of
December 31, 2024, we conducted an assessment of its effectiveness under the supervision and with the
participation of our management group, including our principal executive officer and principal
financial officer. This assessment was based on the criteria established in the 2013 Internal Control
– Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission.
Based on our assessment of internal control over financial reporting under the criteria established
in Internal Control – Integrated Framework, we have concluded that, as of December 31, 2024, the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Our internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2024 has been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, an
independent registered public accounting firm, and their report on the effectiveness of our internal
control over financial reporting is included on page 43 of this report.
Heidi G. Petz
Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer
Allen J. Mistysyn
Senior Vice President - Finance and Chief Financial Officer
J. Paul Lang
Senior Vice President - Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer
 42 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of The ABC corp. Company
 Opinion on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting 
We have audited The ABC corp. Company and subsidiaries internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated
Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013
framework) (the COSO criteria). In our opinion, The ABC corp. Company and subsidiaries (the
Company) maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as
of December 31, 2024, based on the COSO criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated balance sheets of the Company as of December 31,
2024, 2023 and 2022, the related statements of consolidated income, comprehensive income, cash flows
and shareholders’ equity for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2024, and the
related notes and financial statement schedule listed in the 
February 20, 2025 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial
reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
included in the accompanying Report of Management On Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting
based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be
independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the
applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing
the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as
we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis
for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1)
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3)
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition,
use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial
statements.
 43 
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Ernst & Young, LLP
Cleveland, Ohio
February 20, 2025
 44 
Shareholders of The ABC corp. Company
We are responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial
statements, accompanying notes and related financial information included in this report of The
ABC corp. Company and its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the Company) as of December
31, 2024, 2023 and 2022 and for the years then ended in accordance with U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles. The consolidated financial information included in this report contains
certain amounts that were based upon our best estimates, judgments and assumptions that we believe
were reasonable under the circumstances.
We have conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. As discussed in the Report of Management on
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting on page 42 of this report, we concluded that the Company’s
internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2024.
The Board of Directors fulfills its responsibility for the oversight of the Company’s accounting
policies and procedures, financial statement preparation and internal control over financial
reporting through the Audit Committee, comprised exclusively of independent directors. The Audit
Committee is responsible for the appointment and compensation of the independent registered public
accounting firm. The Audit Committee meets at least quarterly with financial management, internal
auditors and the independent registered public accounting firm to review the adequacy of financial
controls, the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting and the
nature, extent and results of the audit effort. Both the internal auditors and the independent
registered public accounting firm have private and confidential access to the Audit Committee at all
times.
We believe that the consolidated financial statements, accompanying notes and related financial
information included in this report fairly reflect the form and substance of all material financial
transactions and fairly present, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position,
results of operations and cash flows as of and for the periods presented.
Heidi G. Petz
Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer
Allen J. Mistysyn
Senior Vice President - Finance and Chief Financial Officer
J. Paul Lang
Senior Vice President - Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer
 45 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of The ABC corp. Company
 Opinion on the Financial Statements 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of The ABC corp. Company and
subsidiaries (the Company) as of December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the related statements of
consolidated income, comprehensive income, cash flows and shareholders’ equity for each of the three
years in the period ended December 31, 2024, and the related notes and the financial statement
schedule listed in the 
statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the Company at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, and the results
of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
2024, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December
31, 2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report
dated February 20, 2025 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is
to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public
accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the
Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations
of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements
are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing
procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included
examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial
statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 Critical Audit Matter 
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the
financial statements that was communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and
that: (1) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2)
involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of the
critical audit matter does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements,
taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a
separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
 46 
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 1908.
Cleveland, Ohio
February 20, 2025
 47 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 48 
of $ 53.6million, $( 24.9) million and $ 34.1million, respectively, related to net investment hedges.
See Note 16.
(2) Net of taxes of $( 6.6) million, $( 2.8) million and $( 33.8) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
(3) Net of taxes of $ 4.6million, $ 5.9million and $( 1.2) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
(4) Net of taxes of $ 1.2million in 2024 and 2023 and $ 1.1million in 2022.
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 49 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 50 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 51 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 52 
Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements included in this report have been prepared by management of The
ABC corp. Company (herein referred to as the Company). These statements include the accounts
of the Company and all consolidated subsidiaries. Intercompany accounts and transactions have been
eliminated. The Company’s share of earnings or losses from nonconsolidated affiliates is included in
the consolidated financial statements using the equity method of accounting when the Company is able
to exercise significant influence over the operating and financial decisions of the affiliate.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles (US GAAP) requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that
affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual
results could differ from those amounts.
Nature of Operations
The Company is engaged in the development, manufacture, distribution and sale of paint, coatings and
related products to professional, industrial, commercial and retail customers primarily in North and
South America, with additional operations in the Caribbean region, Europe, Asia and Australia.
Cash Equivalents
Management considers all highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less when
purchased to be cash equivalents.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Current Expected Credit Losses
Accounts receivable are recorded at the time of credit sales, net of an allowance for current
expected credit losses. The Company records an allowance for current expected credit losses to reduce
Accounts receivable to the net amount expected to be collected.
Under Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 326, the Company reviews the collectibility of the
Accounts receivable balance each reporting period and estimates the allowance for current expected
credit losses based on historical bad debt experience, aging of accounts receivable, current
creditworthiness of customers, current economic factors, as well as reasonable and supportable
forward-looking information. Accounts receivable balances are written-off against the allowance for
current expected credit losses if a final determination of uncollectibility is made. All provisions
for the allowance for current expected credit losses are included in Selling, general and
administrative expenses. See Note 18 for further details.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market with cost determined principally on the last-
in, first-out (LIFO) method. Market represents current replacement cost, which is the cost to
purchase or reproduce the inventory. If inventories accounted for on the LIFO method are reduced on a
year-over-year basis, then liquidation of certain quantities carried at costs prevailing in prior
years occurs. Management records an estimate of the lower of cost or market whenever the utility of
inventory is impaired by damage, deterioration, obsolescence, changes in price levels, or other
causes based on historical experience and current trends through reductions to inventory cost by
recording a provision included in Cost of goods sold. If management estimates that the reasonable
market value is below cost or determines that future demand was lower than current inventory levels,
based on historical experience, current and projected market demand, current and projected volume
trends and other relevant current and projected factors associated with the current economic
conditions, a reduction in inventory cost to current market price is provided for in the reserve for
obsolescence. See Note 4 for further details.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment (including leasehold improvements) is stated on the basis of cost.
Depreciation is charged to expense using the straight-line method over the assets’ estimated useful
lives which range from 5to 25years for buildings and 3to 15years for machinery and equipment.
Depreciation and amortization are included in the appropriate Cost of goods sold or Selling, general
and administrative expenses caption on the Statements of Consolidated Income. See Note 5 for further
details.
 53 
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the cost in excess of fair value of net assets acquired in business combinations.
Intangible assets include software, customer relationships, intellectual property and trademarks. In
accordance with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC, goodwill and indefinite-lived
trademarks are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment on an annual basis, as well as
whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that indicate impairment has occurred on a more
likely than not basis. Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over the
expected period of benefit, which ranges primarily from 3to 29years. See Note 6 for further details.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC, management evaluates the
recoverability and remaining lives of long-lived assets, including right-of-use assets, whenever
events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable or the
useful life has changed.See Note 5 for further details.
Derivative Instruments
The Company utilizes derivative instruments to mitigate certain risk exposures as part of its overall
financial risk management policy and accounts for these instruments in accordance with the
Derivatives and Hedging Topic of the ASC. Derivatives are recorded as assets or liabilities in the
Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. Changes in fair value of the derivative instruments are
recognized immediately in earnings unless the derivative instrument qualifies for and is designated
in an effective hedging relationship.
The Company entered into foreign currency forward contracts with maturity dates of less than twelve
months in 2024, 2023 and 2022, primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. There
were nomaterial foreign currency option and forward contracts outstanding at December 31, 2024, 2023
and 2022. See Note 19 for further details.
The Company also entered into cross currency swap contracts to hedge its net investment in European
operations in 2024, 2023 and 2022. These contracts qualified for and were designated as net
investment hedges under US GAAP. The changes in fair value for the cross currency swaps are
recognized in the Foreign currency translation adjustments component of AOCI. The cash flow impact of
these instruments is classified as an investing activity in the Statements of Consolidated Cash
Flows. See Note 16 for further details.
Non-Traded Investments
The Company has invested in U.S. affordable housing, historic renovation and other real estate
investments (Non-Traded Investments) that have been identified as variable interest entities which
qualify for certain tax credits and other tax benefits. Since the Company does not have the power to
direct the day-to-day operations of the Non-Traded Investments and the risk of loss is limited to the
amount of contributed capital, the Company is not considered the primary beneficiary. Therefore, in
accordance with the Consolidation Topic of the ASC, the Non-Traded Investments are not consolidated.
Under the Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures Topic of the ASC, the Company uses the
proportional amortization method, whereby the initial cost and any subsequent changes in the level of
investment of Non-Traded Investments are amortized in proportion to the receipt of related tax
credits. The Company reasonably expects amortization based on the receipt of tax credits would
produce a measurement substantially similar to amortization based on the receipt of tax credits and
other tax benefits. Both the amortization and related tax credits and other tax benefits are
recognized in Income tax expense on the Statements of Consolidated Income.
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Amortization of Non-Traded Investments $ 75.0 $ 65.4 $ 38.5 
 Tax credits and other tax benefits 104.9 94.8 67.2 
 received 
 54 
The carrying value of Non-Traded Investments is recorded in Other assets. The liabilities for
estimated future capital contributions are recorded in Other accruals and Other long-term
liabilities. In addition, the associated impact of related tax credits and other tax benefits are
recorded as a reduction of Accrued taxes and a net deferred income tax asset within Deferred income
taxes. On the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows, the tax credits and other tax benefits are
presented as a change in Accrued taxes and in Deferred income taxes within Operating activities. Tax
credits and other tax benefits reduced Accrued taxes by $ 104.9million, $ 94.8million and $
67.2million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The following table summarizes the
balances related to Non-Traded Investments and related tax credits and other tax benefits on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Other assets $ 744.0 $ 675.0 $ 587.0 
 Other accruals 101.4 80.9 89.8 
 Other long-term liabilities 600.3 568.2 476.5 
 Net deferred income tax asset 7.6 19.4 23.4 
Standby Letters of Credit
The Company occasionally enters into standby letter of credit agreements to guarantee various
operating activities. These agreements provide credit availability to the various beneficiaries if
certain contractual events occur.Amounts outstanding under these agreements totaled $ 125.5million, $
146.2million and $ 149.8million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Product Warranties
The Company offers assurance-type product warranties for certain products. The specific terms and
conditions of such warranties vary depending on the product or customer contract requirements.
Management estimated the costs of unsettled product warranty claims based on historical results and
experience and included an amount in Other accruals. Management periodically assesses the adequacy of
the accrual for product warranty claims and adjusts the accrual as necessary. Changes in the
Company’s accrual for product warranty claims during 2024, 2023 and 2022, including customer
satisfaction settlements during the year, were as follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1 $ 40.4 $ 36.2 $ 35.2 
 Charges to expense 34.2 37.0 30.1 
 Settlements -28.2 -32.8 -29.1 
 Balance at December 31 $ 46.4 $ 40.4 $ 36.2 
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
The Company accounts for its defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans in
accordance with the Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC, which requires the Company to recognize an
asset for overfunded defined benefit pension or other postretirement benefit plans and a liability
for unfunded or underfunded plans. In addition, actuarial gains and losses and prior service costs of
such plans are recorded in AOCI. The amounts recorded in AOCI will continue to be modified as
actuarial assumptions and service costs change, and all such amounts will be amortized to expense
over a period of years through the net pension cost (credit) and net periodic benefit cost
(credit).See Note 8 for further details.
Defined Contribution Savings Plan
The Company accounts for its defined contribution savings plan in accordance with the Defined
Contribution Plans Subtopic of the Compensation – Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC. The Company
recognized compensation expense for amounts contributed to the defined contribution savings plan.See
Note 13 for further details.
Environmental Matters
Capital expenditures for ongoing environmental compliance measures are recorded in Property, plant
and equipment, net, and related expenses are included in the normal operating expenses of conducting
business. The Company accrued for environmental-related activities for which commitments or clean-up
plans have been developed and when such costs could be reasonably estimated based on industry
standards and professional judgment. Accrued amounts are primarily recorded on an undiscounted basis
and have not been recorded net of insurance proceeds in accordance with the Offsetting Subtopic of
the Balance Sheet Topic of the ASC. Environmental-related expenses include direct costs of
investigation and remediation and
 55 
indirect costs such as compensation and benefits for employees directly involved in the investigation
and remediation activities and fees paid to outside engineering, consulting and law firms.See Notes
10 and 19 for further details.
Stock-Based Compensation
The cost of the Company’s stock-based compensation is recorded in accordance with the Stock
Compensation Topic of the ASC.See Note 14 for further details.
Other Liabilities
The Company retains risk for certain liabilities, primarily workers’ compensation claims, employee
medical and disability benefits and automobile, property, general and product liability claims.
Estimated amounts are accrued for certain workers’ compensation, employee medical and disability
benefits, automobile and property claims filed but unsettled and estimated claims incurred but not
reported. Estimates are based upon management’s estimated aggregate liability for claims incurred
using historical experience, actuarial assumptions followed in the insurance industry and
actuarially-developed models for estimating certain liabilities. Certain estimated general and
product liability claims filed but unsettled are accrued based on management’s best estimate of
ultimate settlement or actuarial calculations of potential liability using industry experience and
actuarial assumptions developed for similar types of claims.
Foreign Currency Translation
All consolidated non-highly inflationary foreign operations use the local currency of the country of
operation as the functional currency. Local currency asset and liability accounts are translated at
year-end exchange rates while income and expense accounts are translated at average exchange rates.
The resulting translation adjustments are included in AOCI.
Economies with a three-year cumulative inflation rate of more than 100% are considered highly
inflationary. For subsidiaries operating in highly inflationary economies, the parent’s reporting
currency is the functional currency. Monetary assets and liabilities are translated into U.S. dollars
using rates of exchange at the balance sheet date and non-monetary assets and liabilities are
translated into U.S. dollars at their historical rates of exchange, with remeasurement adjustments
and other transaction gains and losses recognized in Net income. See Note 19 for further details.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when performance obligations under the terms of the contract are
satisfied. This generally occurs with the transfer of control of our products to the customer.
Collectibility of amounts recorded as revenue is probable at the time of recognition.See Note 18 for
further details.
Customer and Vendor Consideration
The Company offers certain customers rebate and sales incentive programs which are classified as
reductions in sales. Such programs are in the form of volume rebates, rebates that constituted a
percentage of sales or rebates for attaining certain sales goals. The Company receives consideration
from certain suppliers of raw materials in the form of volume rebates or rebates that constitute a
percentage of purchases. These rebates are recognized on an accrual basis by the Company as a
reduction of the purchase price of the raw materials and a subsequent reduction of Cost of goods sold
when the related product was sold.
Cost of Goods Sold
Included in Cost of goods sold are costs for materials, manufacturing, distribution and related
support. Distribution costs include expenses related to the distribution of products including
inbound freight charges, purchase and receiving costs, warehousing costs, internal transfer costs and
other costs incurred to ship products. Also included in Cost of goods sold are research and
development costs, quality control, product formulation expenditures and other similar items.Research
and development costs were $ 217.3million, $ 196.6million and $ 119.3million during 2024, 2023 and
2022, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling costs include advertising expenses, marketing costs, employee and store costs and sales
commissions. The cost of advertising is expensed as incurred. The Company incurred $ 386.9million, $
394.0million and $ 314.4million in advertising costs during 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
General and administrative expenses include human resources, legal, finance and other support and
administrative functions.
Government Incentives
The Company receives incentives from various government entities in the form of tax rebates or
credits, grants and loans. These incentives typically require that the Company maintain specified
spending levels and other operational metrics and may be subject to reimbursement if conditions are
not met or maintained. Government incentives are recorded in the Company’s consolidated financial
statements in accordance with their purpose as a reduction of expense, a reduction of the cost of the
 56 
capital investment or other income. The benefit of these incentives is recorded when received and all
conditions as specified in the agreement are fulfilled.
There were $ 86.6million of government incentives received as cash payments related to the
construction of the Company’s new global headquarters and research and development center in 2022.
These government incentives were recorded as a reduction in the carrying amount of the respective
assets under construction within Property, plant and equipment, net on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets and within Other as an investing activity on the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows. There
were nomaterial government incentives received in 2024 or 2023.
Supply Chain Financing
As part of our strategy to manage working capital, we have entered into agreements with various
financial institutions that act as intermediaries between the Company and certain suppliers. The
Company is not a party to agreements between the suppliers and the financial institutions. These
arrangements provide participating suppliers the option to settle outstanding accounts payable
incurred by the Company in the normal course of business early at a discount and do not impact our
rights and obligations with suppliers, including amounts due and scheduled payment terms. Under the
terms of our agreements, the Company confirms the validity of each supplier invoice to the respective
financial institution upon receipt. On the invoice due date, the Company settles the outstanding
amount with the respective financial institution. Liabilities associated with these arrangements are
recorded in Accounts payableon the Consolidated Balance Sheets and amounted to $ 215.7million, $
213.1million and $ 258.1million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The following table presents a rollforward of the Company’s outstanding obligations under its
supplier finance programs for year ended December 31, 2024.
 2024 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1 $ 213.1 
 Invoices confirmed during the year 988.8 
 Confirmed invoices paid during the year -986.2 
 Balance at December 31 $ 215.7 
Earnings Per Share
Common stock held in a revocable trust (see Note 12) is not included in outstanding shares for basic
or diluted income per share calculations. Basic and diluted net income per share are calculated using
the treasury stock method in accordance with the Earnings Per Share Topic of the ASC. Basic net
income per share amounts are computed based on the weighted-average number of shares outstanding
during the year. Diluted net income per share amounts are computed based on the weighted-average
number of shares outstanding plus all dilutive securities potentially outstanding during the year.See
Note 21 for further details.
NOTE 2 – RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Adopted
Effective January 1, 2024, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2023-02,
“Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323): Accounting for investments in tax credit
structures using the proportional amortization method.” This ASU allows entities to apply the
proportional amortization method to all tax equity investments if certain conditions are met. In
addition, the ASU requires certain disclosures about the nature and financial implications of tax
equity investments on an entity’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows, including
the impact of transition on the periods presented, if any. The adoption of the ASU did not materially
affect the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows since the Company has
historically applied the proportional amortization method to its Non-Traded Investments, however,
certain disclosures have been added based on the requirements of the ASU. See Note 1 for further
details.
Effective December 31, 2024, the Company adopted ASU 2023-07, “Segment Reporting (Topic 280):
Improvements to Reportable Segment Disclosures.” This ASU enhances reportable segment disclosures on
both an annual and interim basis primarily in regards to the disclosure of significant segment
expenses that are regularly provided to the chief operating decision maker (CODM) and included within
the reported measure(s) of segment profit or loss. In addition, the ASU requires disclosure, by
segment, of other items included in the reported measure(s) of segment profit or loss, including
qualitative information describing the composition, nature and type of each item. The ASU also
expands disclosure requirements related to the CODM, including how the reported measure(s) of segment
profit or loss are used to assess segment performance and allocate resources, the method used to
allocate overhead for significant segment expenses and others. Lastly, all current required annual
segment
 57 
reporting disclosures under Topic 280 are now effective for interim periods. The adoption of the ASU
has only impacted the Company’s segment disclosures with no impact to the consolidated financial
statements. See Note 22 for further details.
Effective January 1, 2023, the Company adopted ASU 2022-04, “Liabilities - Supplier Finance Programs
(Subtopic 405-50): Disclosure of Supplier Finance Program Obligations.” This ASU includes a
requirement to present a rollforward of supply chain financing activity prospectively, beginning with
the annual period ending December 31, 2024. The adoption of ASU 2022-04 did not affect the Company’s
financial position, results of operations or cash flows as the standard only impacts financial
statement footnote disclosures. See Note 1 for additional information.
Not Yet Adopted
In December 2023, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued ASU 2023-09, “Income Taxes
(Topic 740): Improvements to Income Tax Disclosures.” This ASU enhances income tax disclosures by
providing information to better assess how an entity’s operations, related tax risks, tax planning
and operational opportunities affect its tax rate and prospects for future cash flows. This ASU
requires additional disclosures to the annual effective tax rate reconciliation including specific
categories and further disaggregated reconciling items that meet the quantitative threshold.
Additionally, the ASU requires disclosures relating to income tax expense and payments made to
federal, state, local and foreign jurisdictions. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning
after December 15, 2024. The Company is evaluating the impact of adopting this ASU.
In November 2024, the FASB issued ASU 2024-03, “Income Statement - Reporting Comprehensive Income -
Expense Disaggregation Disclosures (Subtopic 220-40): Disaggregation of Income Statement Expenses.”
This ASU enhances expense disclosures on both an annual and interim basis by requiring public
business entities to disclose additional information about specific expense categories in the notes
to the consolidated financial statements. This ASU requires public entities to disclose, in a tabular
format, purchases of inventory, employee compensation, depreciation, intangible asset amortization
and depletion, as applicable, for each income statement line item that contains those expenses.
Specific expenses, gains and losses that are already disclosed under existing US GAAP are also
required to be included in the disaggregated income statement expense line-item disclosures, and any
remaining amounts will need to be described qualitatively. Additionally, the ASU requires disclosure
of the total amount of selling expenses and the entity’s definition of selling expenses. This ASU is
effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2026 and for interim periods within fiscal
years beginning after December 15, 2027. The Company is evaluating the impact of adopting this ASU.
 NOTE 3 – ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES 
Acquisitions
Subsequent Event
In February 2025, the Company signed an agreement to acquire the Brazilian decorative paints business
of BASF SE (BASF), which is a leading provider of architectural paints in Brazil with annual sales of
approximately $ 525.0million. The business develops, manufactures and sells a comprehensive portfolio
of innovative products under the Suvinil and Glasu! brand names to professional painters, designers,
architects, general contractors and consumers across the country. The business also operates two
production facilities located in the Northeast and Southeast regions of Brazil.
The closing of the transaction is subject to receipt of Brazilian antitrust approval, satisfaction or
waiver of certain other customary closing conditions, as well as BASF’s completion of its carve-out
of all relevant assets, properties, contracts, permits, rights and employees of the decorative paints
business into a separate entity. The Company will acquire all issued and outstanding equity interests
in this separate entity for an agreed-upon cash purchase price of $ 1.15billion, subject to customary
post-closing adjustments. The Company intends to finance the transaction through a combination of
cash on hand, liquidity available under existing facilities and new debt. The acquired business is
expected to be reported within the Company’s Consumer Brands Group.
Pending
In December 2024, the Company signed an agreement to acquire a European coil and industrial coatings
company. The transaction is subject to customary closing conditions and is expected to close in 2025.
The acquired business will be reported within the Company’s Performance Coatings Group.
Closed in Current Year
In October 2024, the Company completed the acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business for
approximately $ 80million. The acquired business develops, manufactures and sells coatings for the
food and household product markets and is reported within the Company’s Performance Coatings Group.
As of December 31, 2024, $ 33.0million of Property, plant and equipment, net, $ 27.9million of
finite-lived intangibles and $ 21.1million of Goodwill were recognized from this transaction.
 58 
The Company expects to finalize the purchase price allocation for the acquisition within the
allowable measurement period. Pro forma results of operations have not been presented as the impact
on the Company’s consolidated financial results is not material.
Closed in 2023
In October 2023, the Company completed the acquisition of German-based SIC Holding GmbH, a Peter
Möhrle Holding venture comprised of Oskar Nolte GmbH and Klumpp Coatings GmbH (SIC Holding). The
acquired business specializes in foil coatings as well as radiation-cured and waterbased industrial
wood coatings for the board, furniture and flooring industry. The total purchase price for the
acquisition was approximately $ 290million, including an immaterial amount paid in 2024 to finalize
certain representations, warranties and closing conditions. The Company finalized the purchase price
allocation within the allowable measurement period, and $ 110.8million of finite-lived intangible
assets, $ 181.3million of goodwill, $ 46.0million of other assets, net of cash and $ 47.5million of
liabilities were recognized from this transaction.
Closed in 2022
In April 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of the European industrial coatings business of
Sika AG. In July 2022, the Company completed the acquisitions of Gross & Perthun GmbH, Dur-A-Flex,
Inc. and Powdertech Oy Ltd. In December 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of Industria
Chimica Adriatica S.p.A. (ICA). The aggregate purchase price for the acquisitions completed in 2022
was approximately $ 1.024billion, including amounts withheld as security for certain representations,
warranties and obligations of the sellers. Based on the preliminary purchase price allocations for
these transactions, as of December 31, 2022, the Company recognized intangible assets and goodwill of
$ 282.8million and $ 565.8million, respectively, with the remaining purchase price for each
transaction allocated to various other assets acquired and liabilities assumed. In June 2023,
purchase price allocation adjustments were made to ICA which decreased goodwill by $ 145.9million,
increased finite-lived intangible assets by $ 195.9million and increased deferred tax liabilities by
$ 57.4million. There were no material adjustments related to the other acquisitions that closed in
2022 and the Company finalized the purchase price allocations for these transactions in the allowable
measurement period. In accordance with certain purchase agreements, the Company paid $ 29.2million in
2023 related to holdbacks for acquisitions completed in prior years.
Divestitures
Closed in 2023
The Company completed the divestiture of a non-core domestic aerosol business within the Consumer
Brands Group in April 2023. This transaction resulted in the recognition of a $ 20.1million gain in
2023 within the Administrative function. This gain was recorded within Other general (income) expense
- net (see Note 19).
During the third quarter of 2023, the Company completed the divestiture of the China architectural
business within the Consumer Brands Group. An immaterial working capital adjustment was finalized
during the first quarter of 2024. The associated net assets were classified as held for sale at June
30, 2023 in accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC. Following the
prescribed order of impairment testing, the Company first reviewed individual tangible and intangible
assets under their applicable Topic of the ASC to determine if their carrying value was higher than
their respective fair value. As a result, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $ 6.9million
within the Consumer Brands Group related to China architectural trademarks during 2023. The Company
then compared the updated carrying value of the assets and liabilities comprising the disposal group
as a whole to its respective fair value which was determined to be equal to the selling price, less
costs to sell. As a result of this comparison, the Company recorded an additional impairment charge
of $ 27.1million within the Administrative function in the second quarter of 2023. The fair value of
the disposal group was classified as level 2 in the fair value hierarchy as it was based on a
specific price and other observable inputs for similar items with no active market.
These divestitures did not meet the criteria to be reported as discontinued operations in the
consolidated financial statements as the Company’s decision to divest these businesses did not
represent a strategic shift that will have a major effect on the Company’s operations and financial
results.
 59 
Included in Inventories were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Finished goods $ 1,751.9 $ 1,810.9 $ 1,957.7 
 Work in process and raw materials 536.2 518.9 668.8 
 Inventories $ 2,288.1 $ 2,329.8 $ 2,626.5 
Inventories were stated at the lower of cost or market, with cost primarily determined on the LIFO
method. Management believes that the use of LIFO results in a better matching of costs and revenues.
The following table summarizes the extent to which the Company’s Inventories use the LIFO cost
method, and presents the effect on Inventories had the Company used the first-in, first-out (FIFO)
inventory valuation method.
 2024 2023 2022 
 Percentage of total inventories on LIFO 74 % 74 % 74 % 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Excess of FIFO over LIFO $ 630.2 $ 668.0 $ 792.7 
During 2024 and 2023, certain inventories accounted for on the LIFO method were reduced, resulting in
the liquidation of certain quantities carried at costs prevailing in prior years. The 2024 and 2023
liquidations increased Net income by $ 4.8million and $ 1.2million, respectively. There were
noliquidations in 2022.
The Company recorded a reserve for obsolescence of $ 137.7million, $ 170.8million and $ 139.0million
at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, to reduce Inventories to their estimated current
market price.
 NOTE 5 – PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 
Included in Property, plant and equipment, net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Land $ 259.9 $ 257.5 $ 263.0 
 Buildings 1,175.9 1,048.7 1,199.3 
 Machinery and equipment 3,689.5 3,459.8 3,230.2 
 Construction in progress 1,598.1 1,111.0 496.1 
 Property, plant and equipment, gross 6,723.4 5,877.0 5,188.6 
 Less allowances for depreciation 3,190.2 3,040.2 2,981.6 
 Property, plant and equipment, net $ 3,533.2 $ 2,836.8 $ 2,207.0 
The Company capitalizes interest costs incurred in the construction of certain property, plant and
equipment. In 2024 and 2023, the Company capitalized interest of $ 59.6million and $ 30.7million,
respectively. There was nointerest capitalized in 2022.
In accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC, whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying value of long-lived assets may not be recoverable or the
useful life may have changed, an impairment test is to be performed. Undiscounted cash flows are used
to calculate the recoverable value of long-lived assets to determine if such assets are not
recoverable. If the carrying value of the assets is deemed to not be recoverable, the impairment to
be recognized is the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the estimated fair
value of the assets as determined in accordance with the Fair Value Topic of the ASC. See Note 3 for
information on the impairment tests performed in 2023 for the assets held for sale prior to the
divestiture of the China architectural business. No other material impairments of Property, plant and
equipment were recorded in 2024, 2023 or 2022.
 60 
In 2024, the Company completed the acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business, which resulted
in the recognition of goodwill of $ 21.1million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 27.9million. The
acquired intangibles are being amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately
15years.
During 2023, the Company completed the acquisition of SIC Holding, which resulted in the recognition
of goodwill of $ 181.3million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 110.8million. The acquired
intangibles are being amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately 15years.
During 2022, the Company acquired fivecompanies which resulted in the recognition of goodwill of $
419.9million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 478.6million. The acquired intangibles are being
amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately 14years.
See Note 3 for additional information related to the acquisitions and divestitures.
In accordance with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC, goodwill at the reporting
unit level and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually. In addition,
interim impairment tests are performed whenever required as a result of a specific event or
circumstances which indicate potential impairment on a more likely than not basis. October 1 has been
established for the annual impairment review. An optional qualitative assessment may alleviate the
need to perform quantitative goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment tests when
there is no indication of impairment on a more likely than not basis. Should a quantitative
impairment test be performed, values are estimated separately for goodwill and indefinite-lived
intangible assets using applicable valuation models, incorporating discount rates commensurate with
the risks involved for each group of assets.
The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2024 did not result in any trademark or
goodwill impairment.
As a result of the Latin America architectural paint business moving to the Consumer Brands Group
reportable segment effective January 1, 2023, the Company performed a quantitative impairment
analysis for the impacted reporting units and determined both before and after the change, there was
no indication of impairment. The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2023 resulted in
no goodwill impairment and trademark impairment of $ 23.9million in the Consumer Brands Group
primarily related to a trademark in Europe.
The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2022 resulted in trademark impairments
totaling $ 15.5million in the Consumer Brands Group related to the discontinuation of an
architectural paint brand and lower than anticipated sales of an acquired brand and no goodwill
impairment.
A summary of changes in the Company’s carrying value of Goodwill by Reportable Segment is as follows:
 Performance 
 Paint Stores Consumer Brands Coatings Consolidated 
 Goodwill Group Group Group Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at 
 January 1, $ 2,182.1 $ 1,783.4 $ 3,169.1 $ 7,134.6 
 2022(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 49.7 21.3 422.5 493.5 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -2.8 -42.1 -44.9 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, 2,231.8 1,801.9 3,549.5 7,583.2 
 2022(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 8.3 8.3 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -9.1 43.6 34.5 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, 2,231.8 1,792.8 3,601.4 7,626.0 
 2023(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 48.2 48.2 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -0.3 -93.8 -94.1 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, $ 2,231.8 $ 1,792.5 $ 3,555.8 $ 7,580.1 
 2024(1) 
(1) Net of accumulated impairment losses of $ 19.4million ($ 10.2million in Paint Stores Group, $
8.4million in Consumer Brands Group and $ 0.8million in Performance Coatings Group).
 61 
A summary of the Company’s carrying value of Intangible assets is as follows:
 Finit… Trade… 
 Dece… Intan… With Total 
 31, Assets Custo… Intel… All Indef… Intang… 
 2024 Softw… Relat… Prope… Other Subto… Lives… Assets 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gross $ 185.0 $ 3,187… $ 1,973… $ 225.8 $ 5,571… 
 Accu… -154.3 -1,48… -747.7 -154.7 -2,54… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 30.7 $ 1,698… $ 1,225… $ 71.1 $ 3,025… $ 507.9 $ 3,533.2 
 value 
 Dece… 
 31, 
 2023 
 Gross $ 158.2 $ 3,263… $ 1,968… $ 232.6 $ 5,622… 
 Accu… -152.8 -1,31… -644.4 -152.9 -2,26… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 5.4 $ 1,952… $ 1,324… $ 79.7 $ 3,362… $ 518.5 $ 3,880.5 
 value 
 Dece… 
 31, 
 2022 
 Gross $ 180.2 $ 3,121… $ 1,732… $ 427.5 $ 5,461… 
 Accu… -148.1 -1,13… -477.4 -258.0 -2,01… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 32.1 $ 1,989… $ 1,255… $ 169.5 $ 3,445… $ 556.2 $ 4,002.0 
 value 
(1) Trademarks are net of accumulated impairment losses of $ 163.8millionas of December 31, 2024 and
2023 and $ 139.9million as of December 31, 2022.
Amortization of finite-lived intangible assets is estimated as follows for the next five years: $
317.2million in 2025, $ 315.3million in 2026, $ 310.5million in 2027, $ 307.5million in 2028 and $
305.9million in 2029.
Although the Company believes its estimates of fair value related to reporting units and indefinite-
lived intangible assets are reasonable, actual financial results could differ from these estimates
due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making such estimates. Changes in assumptions concerning
future financial results or other underlying assumptions could have a significant impact and future
impairment charges may be required.
 62 
Long-Term Debt
The table below summarizes the carrying value of the Company’s outstanding debt, net of capitalized
debt issuance costs, discounts and premiums:
 Due Date 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 3.45% Senior Notes 2027 $ 1,495.7 $ 1,493.9 $ 1,492.1 
 4.50% Senior Notes 2047 1,233.7 1,233.0 1,232.3 
 2.95% Senior Notes 2029 795.5 794.6 793.6 
 3.80% Senior Notes 2049 543.7 543.6 543.2 
 2.30% Senior Notes 2030 497.6 497.1 496.7 
 2.20% Senior Notes 2032 495.5 494.8 494.2 
 3.30% Senior Notes 2050 494.6 494.3 494.1 
 2.90% Senior Notes 2052 492.1 491.9 491.5 
 4.80% Senior Notes 2031 445.0 — — 
 3.45% Senior Notes 2025 399.8 399.4 399.1 
 4.25% Senior Notes 2025 399.5 398.6 397.7 
 4.55% Senior Notes 2045 395.4 395.2 395.0 
 4.55% Senior Notes 2028 397.6 — — 
 3.95% Senior Notes 2026 351.6 353.1 354.7 
 4.00% Senior Notes 2042 297.2 297.0 296.9 
 3.30% Senior Notes 2025 250.0 249.9 249.8 
 4.40% Senior Notes 2045 241.3 240.9 240.5 
 0.53% to8.00% Promissory Notes Through 2026 0.2 0.9 1.6 
 4.05% Senior Notes 2024 — 598.8 596.9 
 3.125% Senior Notes 2024 — 499.7 499.0 
 7.375% Debentures 2027 — — 119.2 
 7.45% Debentures 2097 — — 3.5 
 Total(1) 9,226.0 9,476.7 9,591.6 
 Less amounts due within one year 1,049.2 1,098.8 0.6 
 Long-term debt $ 8,176.8 $ 8,377.9 $ 9,591.0 
(1) Net of capitalized debt issuance costs of $ 48.6million, $ 49.3million and $ 57.3million and net
of discounts and premiums of $ 26.0million, $ 25.2million and $ 25.7million at December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022, respectively.
Maturities of long-term debt are as follows for the next five years: $ 1.050billion in 2025; $
350.2million in 2026; $ 1.500billion in 2027; $ 400.0million in 2028 and $ 800.0million in 2029.
Interest expense on long-term debt was $ 354.7million, $ 374.6million and $ 348.4million for 2024,
2023 and 2022, respectively.
In August 2024, the Company repaid principal of $ 600.0million related to the Company’s 4.05% senior
notes due August 8, 2024 using commercial paper and subsequently issued $ 400.0million of 4.55%
senior notes due 2028 and $ 450.0million of 4.80% senior notes due 2031 in a public offering. The net
proceeds from the issuance of these notes were used to repay outstanding borrowings under the
Company’s domestic commercial paper program and for general corporate purposes. The newly issued
senior notes contain customary qualitative covenants as defined in their respective agreements.
During the second quarter of 2024, the Company repaid the principal of $ 500.0million related to its
3.125% senior notes due June 1, 2024 using commercial paper.
In December 2023, the Company exercised its call provision to make-whole the entire outstanding $
119.4million aggregate principal amount of its 7.38% Debentures due 2027 and the entire outstanding $
3.5million aggregate principal amount of its 7.45% Debentures due 2097. The retirement of the
Debentures resulted in a loss of $ 12.8million recorded in Other general (income) expense - net. See
Note 19.
In August 2022, the Company issued $ 600.0million of 4.05% Senior Notes due August 2024 and $
400.0million of 4.25% Senior Notes due August 2025 in a public offering. The net proceeds from the
issuance of these notes were used to repay
 63 
borrowings outstanding under the Company’s credit agreement dated May 9, 2016, as amended, and the
domestic commercial paper program.
Short-Term Borrowings
In November 2024, the Company amended its credit agreement dated May 9, 2016, as amended, to extend
the maturity of $ 75.0million of the commitments available for borrowing and obtaining the issuance,
renewal, extension and increase of a letter of credit under the credit agreement from June 20, 2025
to December 20, 2029.
In July 2024, the Company entered into a new $ 2.500billion revolving credit agreement maturing on
July 31, 2029 (2024 Credit Agreement), which replaced the the 2022 Credit Agreement. Under the terms
of the 2024 Credit Agreement, the Company may request to extend the maturity date for twoadditional
one-yearperiods, request an uncommitted increase up to $ 750.0million and issue letters of credit
under a $ 250.0million subfacility.
In August 2022, the Company entered into a five-yearcredit agreement (2022 Credit Agreement), which
replaced the $ 2.000billion credit agreement dated June 29, 2021. The 2022 Credit Agreement gave the
Company the right to borrow $ 2.250billion and to obtain letters of credit in an amount of up to $
250.0million.
In August 2021, the Company entered into an amended and restated $ 625.0million credit agreement
(2021 Credit Agreement), which amends and restates the five-yearcredit agreement entered into in
September 2017. The 2021 Credit Agreement was subsequently amended on multiple dates to extend the
maturity of commitments available for borrowing or letters of credit under the agreement.
In May 2016, the Company entered into a five-yearcredit agreement (2016 Credit Agreement),
subsequently amended on multiple dates to extend the maturity of commitments available for borrowing
or letters of credit under the agreement. The 2016 credit agreement gives the Company the right to
borrow and obtain letters of credit up to an aggregate availability of $ 875.0million. These credit
agreements are/were used for general corporate purposes, including the financing of working capital
requirements.
At December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, there were noborrowings outstanding under these credit
agreements.
The Company’s available capacity under its committed credit agreements is reduced for amounts
outstanding under its domestic commercial paper program and letters of credit. At December 31, 2024,
the Company had unused capacity under its various credit agreements of $ 3.274billion. The table
below summarizes the Company’s Short-term borrowings:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Domestic commercial paper $ 655.6 $ 347.7 $ 938.5 
 Foreign facilities 6.8 26.5 39.6 
 Total $ 662.4 $ 374.2 $ 978.1 
 Weighted average interest rate: 
 Domestic 4.7% 5.5% 4.6% 
 Foreign 3.1% 3.6% 6.7% 
Interest expense on Short-term borrowings was $ 61.0million, $ 42.9million and $ 42.4million for
2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Among other restrictions, the Company’s notes, debentures and revolving credit agreement contain
certain covenants relating to liens, ratings changes, merger and sale of assets, consolidated
leverage and change of control, as defined in the agreements. In the event of default under any one
of these arrangements, acceleration of the maturity of any one or more of these borrowings may
result. The Company was in compliance with all covenants for all years presented.
 64 
NOTE 8 – PENSION, HEALTH CARE AND OTHER POSTRETIREMENT BENEFITS
The Company provides pension benefits to substantially all full-time employees through primarily
noncontributory defined contribution or defined benefit pension plans and certain health care and
life insurance benefits to domestic active employees and eligible retirees.
Health Care Plans
The Company provides certain domestic health care plans that are contributory and contain cost-
sharing features such as deductibles and coinsurance. There were 32,283, 31,327and 30,009active
employees covered by the benefits under these plans at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively. The cost of these benefits for active employees, which includes claims incurred but not
reported, amounted to $ 382.6million, $ 363.2million and $ 347.4million for 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
Defined Contribution Pension Plans
The Company’s annual contribution for its domestic defined contribution pension plan was $
103.5million, $ 97.8million and $ 88.9million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The contribution
percentage ranges from twopercent to sevenpercent of compensation for covered employees based on an
age and service formula. Assets in employee accounts of the domestic defined contribution pension
plan are invested in various investment funds as directed by the participants. These investment funds
did not own a significant number of shares of the Company’s common stock for any year presented.
The Company’s annual contributions for its foreign defined contribution pension plans, which are
based on various percentages of compensation for covered employees up to certain limits, were $
20.6million, $ 19.5million and $ 19.4million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Assets in
employee accounts of the foreign defined contribution pension plans are invested in various
investment funds. These investment funds did not own a significant number of shares of the Company’s
common stock for any year presented.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
At December 31, 2024, the domestic defined benefit pension plan was overfunded, with a projected
benefit obligation of $ 95.3million, fair value of plan assets of $ 148.7million and excess plan
assets of $ 53.4million. The plan was funded in accordance with all applicable regulations at
December 31, 2024.
The Company has thirty-sixforeign defined benefit pension plans. At December 31, 2024, twenty-nineof
the Company’s foreign defined benefit pension plans were unfunded or underfunded, with combined
accumulated benefit obligations, projected benefit obligations, fair values of net assets and
deficiencies of plan assets of $ 73.9million, $ 88.3million, $ 20.5million and $ 67.8million,
respectively.
The Company expects to make the following benefit payments for all domestic and foreign defined
benefit pension plans: $ 19.2million in 2025; $ 18.9million in 2026; $ 20.6million in 2027; $
22.2million in 2028; $ 22.7million in 2029; and $ 139.2million in 2030 through 2034. The Company
expects to contribute $ 5.8million to the foreign defined benefit pension plans in 2025.
The estimated net actuarial gains and prior service costs for the defined benefit pension plans that
are expected to be amortized from AOCI into net pension costs in 2025 are $ 3.2million and $
2.0million, respectively.
 65 
The following table summarizes the components of the net pension costs and AOCI related to the
defined benefit pension plans:
 Domestic Foreign 
 Defined Defined 
 Benefit Benefit 
 Net pension Pension Plan Pension Plans 
 cost: 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service cost $ 2.9 $ 3.0 $ 4.6 $ 4.6 $ 4.4 $ 6.3 
 Interest 4.9 4.6 3.2 11.8 11.8 7.3 
 cost 
 Expected 
 return on -8.3 -7.3 -7.6 -11.1 -12.3 -9.4 
 plan assets 
 Amortization 
 of prior 1.9 1.3 1.0 -0.1 -0.2 -0.2 
 service cost 
 (credit) 
 Amortization 
 of actuarial -0.5 -1.3 -1.5 0.2 
 (gains) 
 losses 
 Ongoing 0.9 1.6 1.2 3.9 2.2 4.2 
 pension cost 
 Settlement -1.1 -0.3 
 credits 
 Curtailment 7.1 
 cost 
 Net pension 0.9 1.6 1.2 11.0 1.1 3.9 
 cost 
 Other 
 changes in 
 plan assets 
 and 
 projected 
 benefit 
 obligation 
 recognized 
 in AOCI 
 (before 
 taxes): 
 Net 
 actuarial 
 (gains) 
 losses -20.9 -8.6 5.0 -8.0 5.8 -29.6 
 arising 
 during the 
 year 
 Prior 
 service cost 
 (credit) 1.0 3.0 1.6 6.9 1.1 -0.3 
 arising 
 during the 
 year 
 Amortization 
 of actuarial 0.5 1.3 1.5 -0.2 
 gains 
 (losses) 
 Amortization 
 of prior 
 service -1.9 -1.3 -1.0 -7.0 0.2 0.2 
 (cost) 
 credit 
 Loss 
 recognized 1.1 0.3 
 for 
 settlement 
 Exchange 
 rate loss 
 (gain) 1.6 -1.5 -0.4 
 recognized 
 during the 
 year 
 Total 
 recognized -21.3 -6.9 5.6 -5.2 8.2 -30.0 
 in AOCI 
 Total 
 recognized 
 in net $ -20.4 $ -5.3 $ 6.8 $ 5.8 $ 9.3 $ -26.1 
 pension cost 
 and 
 AOCI 
Service cost is recorded in Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative expenses. All
other components of Net pension costs are recorded in Other (income) expense - net.
In December 2024, the Company amended one of its foreign defined benefit plans to freeze future
benefit accruals as of December 31, 2024. As a result of the amendment, the Company recognized a non-
cash pre-tax curtailment charge of $ 7.1million primarily related to the acceleration of amounts
previously recorded within AOCI in the Statements of Consolidated Comprehensive Income.
The Company employs a total return investment approach for the domestic and foreign defined benefit
pension plan assets. A mix of equities and fixed income investments are used to maximize the long-
term return of assets for a prudent level of risk. In determining the expected long-term rate of
return on defined benefit pension plan assets, management considers the historical rates of return,
the nature of investments and an expectation of future investment strategies. The target allocations
for the domestic defined benefit pension plan assets are 35% – 65% equity securities, 35% – 65% fixed
income securities and 0% – 5% other (including alternative investments and cash). The target
allocations for the foreign defined benefit pension plan assets vary by plan, but are generally
within the following ranges: 0% – 20% equity securities, 75% – 100% fixed income securities and 0% –
10% other (including alternative investments and cash).
 66 
The following tables summarize the fair value of the defined benefit pension plan assets at December
31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. The presentation is in accordance with the Fair Value Topic of the ASC.
 Quoted Prices 
 in Active Significant 
 Markets for Other Significant 
 Fair Value at Identical Observable Unobservable 
 December 31, Assets Inputs Inputs 
 2024 (Level 1) (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Cash and cash $ 8.7 $ 8.7 $ — 
 equivalents 
 Equity investments(1) 95.3 86.6 8.7 
 Fixed income 226.5 36.8 189.7 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 24.2 24.2 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 354.7 $ 132.1 $ 222.6 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 25.3 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 380.0 
 Quoted Prices Significant 
 Fair Value at in Active Other Significant 
 December 31, Markets for Observable Unobservable 
 2023 Identical Inputs Inputs 
 Assets (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 (Level 1) 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Equity investments(1) $ 133.0 $ 72.9 $ 60.1 
 Fixed income 188.9 36.8 152.1 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 34.6 34.6 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 356.5 $ 109.7 $ 246.8 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 25.3 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 381.8 
 Quoted Prices Significant 
 Fair Value at in Active Other Significant 
 December 31, Markets for Observable Unobservable 
 2022 Identical Inputs Inputs 
 Assets (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 (Level 1) 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Equity investments(1) $ 80.1 $ 8.5 $ 71.6 
 Fixed income 117.6 117.6 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 34.4 34.4 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 232.1 $ 8.5 $ 223.6 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 110.9 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 343.0 
(1) This category includes actively managed equity assets that track primarily to the S&P 500 or an
international equity 
international bond 
or its equivalent using the practical expedient. Therefore, these investments are not classified in
the fair value hierarchy.
 67 
The following table summarizes the obligations, plan assets and assumptions used for the defined
benefit pension plans, which are all measured as of December 31:
 Domes… Forei… 
 Defin… Defin… 
 Benef… Benef… 
 Pensi… Pensi… 
 Plan Plans 
 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Accu… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 at $ 94.2 $ 100.5 $ 90.3 $ 221.7 $ 236.4 $ 209.3 
 end 
 of 
 year 
 Proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Bala… 
 at 
 begi… $ 102.1 $ 91.7 $ 120.8 $ 257.8 $ 230.4 $ 362.7 
 of 
 year 
 Serv… 2.9 3.0 4.6 4.6 4.4 6.3 
 cost 
 Inte… 4.9 4.6 3.2 11.8 11.8 7.3 
 cost 
 Actu… 
 (gai… -11.1 2.8 -32.6 -19.8 8.8 -112… 
 loss… 
 Plan 
 amen… 1.0 3.0 1.6 13.5 2.0 3.2 
 and 
 other 
 Sett… -2.2 -3.7 -2.4 
 Effe… 
 of -12.2 14.1 -28.8 
 fore… 
 exch… 
 Bene… -4.5 -3.0 -5.9 -10.5 -10.0 -5.5 
 paid 
 Bala… 
 at 
 end 95.3 102.1 91.7 243.0 257.8 230.4 
 of 
 year 
 Plan 
 asse… 
 Bala… 
 at 
 begi… 135.1 119.4 155.2 246.7 223.6 328.4 
 of 
 year 
 Actu… 
 retu… 
 on 18.1 18.7 -29.9 -2.6 15.4 -73.4 
 plan 
 asse… 
 Cont… 
 and 5.7 8.6 5.8 
 other 
 Sett… -2.2 -3.7 -2.4 
 Effe… 
 of -7.1 12.8 -29.3 
 fore… 
 exch… 
 Bene… -4.5 -3.0 -5.9 -10.5 -10.0 -5.5 
 paid 
 Bala… 
 at 
 end 148.7 135.1 119.4 231.3 246.7 223.6 
 of 
 year 
 Exce… 
 (def… 
 plan 
 asse… $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ -11.7 $ -11.1 $ -6.8 
 over 
 proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Asse… 
 and 
 liab… 
 reco… 
 in 
 the 
 Cons… 
 Bala… 
 Shee… 
 Defe… 
 pens… $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ 56.1 $ 57.9 $ 51.7 
 asse… 
 Other -6.0 -3.4 -3.0 
 accr… 
 Other 
 long… -61.8 -65.6 -55.5 
 liab… 
 $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ -11.7 $ -11.1 $ -6.8 
 Amou… 
 reco… 
 in 
 AOCI: 
 Net 
 actu… $ 36.9 $ 16.6 $ 8.0 $ 29.9 $ 24.8 $ 31.7 
 gains 
 Prior 
 serv… -7.8 -8.8 -7.1 0.4 0.3 1.6 
 (cos… 
 cred… 
 $ 29.1 $ 7.8 $ 0.9 $ 30.3 $ 25.1 $ 33.3 
 Weig… 
 assu… 
 used 
 to 
 dete… 
 proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Disc… 5.78 % 5.09 % 5.27 % 5.49 % 4.81 % 5.06 % 
 rate 
 Rate 
 of 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.29 % 3.33 % 3.39 % 
 comp… 
 incr… 
 Weig… 
 assu… 
 used 
 to 
 dete… 
 net 
 pens… 
 cost: 
 Disc… 5.09 % 5.27 % 3.12 % 4.81 % 5.06 % 2.26 % 
 rate 
 Expe… 
 long… 
 rate 
 of 6.25 % 6.25 % 5.00 % 4.78 % 5.48 % 3.19 % 
 retu… 
 on 
 asse… 
 Rate 
 of 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.33 % 3.39 % 3.25 % 
 comp… 
 incr… 
 68 
Other Postretirement Benefits
Employees of the Company hired in the United States prior to January 1, 1993 who are not members of a
collective bargaining unit, and certain groups of employees added through acquisitions, are eligible
for health care and life insurance benefits upon retirement, subject to the terms of the unfunded
plans. There were 3,354, 3,367and 3,409retired employees covered by these postretirement benefits at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The following table summarizes the obligation and the assumptions used for other postretirement
benefits:
 Other Postretirement 
 Benefits 
 Benefit obligation: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at beginning of $ 147.2 $ 153.8 $ 276.4 
 year - unfunded 
 Service cost 0.5 0.6 1.2 
 Interest cost 6.8 7.4 6.0 
 Actuarial gain -8.6 -8.0 -54.5 
 Plan amendments -62.8 
 Benefits paid -10.8 -6.6 -12.5 
 Balance at end of year - $ 135.1 $ 147.2 $ 153.8 
 unfunded 
 Liabilities recognized in 
 the 
 Consolidated Balance 
 Sheets: 
 Other accruals $ -14.4 $ -14.0 $ -14.5 
 Postretirement benefits 
 other than -120.7 -133.2 -139.3 
 pensions 
 $ -135.1 $ -147.2 $ -153.8 
 Amounts recognized in AOCI: 
 Net actuarial gains $ 21.0 $ 12.9 $ 4.7 
 Prior service credits 16.2 40.0 64.0 
 $ 37.2 $ 52.9 $ 68.7 
 Weighted-average 
 assumptions used to 
 determine benefit 
 obligation: 
 Discount rate 5.61 % 4.97 % 5.16 % 
 Health care cost trend rate 7.50 % 7.00 % 6.25 % 
 - pre-65 
 Health care cost trend rate 6.50 % 6.00 % 5.50 % 
 - post-65 
 Prescription drug cost 11.75 % 9.00 % 8.25 % 
 increases 
 Weighted-average 
 assumptions used to 
 determine net periodic 
 benefit cost: 
 Discount rate 4.97 % 5.16 % 2.83 % 
 Health care cost trend rate 7.00 % 6.25 % 6.38 % 
 - pre-65 
 Health care cost trend rate 6.00 % 5.50 % 5.13 % 
 - post-65 
 Prescription drug cost 9.00 % 8.25 % 8.25 % 
 increases 
 69 
The following table summarizes the components of the net periodic benefit cost and AOCI related to
other postretirement benefits:
 Other Postretirement Benefits 
 Net periodic benefit (credit) cost: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service cost $ 0.5 $ 0.6 $ 1.2 
 Interest cost 6.8 7.4 6.0 
 Amortization of actuarial (gains) -0.4 0.1 4.2 
 losses 
 Amortization of prior service credit -23.9 -23.9 -0.4 
 Net periodic benefit (credit) cost -17.0 -15.8 11.0 
 Other changes in projected benefit 
 obligation recognized in 
 AOCI (before taxes): 
 Net actuarial gain arising during 
 the -8.6 -8.0 -54.5 
 year 
 Prior service credit arising during 
 the -62.8 
 year 
 Amortization of actuarial gains 0.4 -0.1 -4.2 
 (losses) 
 Amortization of prior service credit 23.9 23.9 0.4 
 Total recognized in AOCI 15.7 15.8 -121.1 
 Total recognized in net periodic 
 benefit $ -1.3 $ — $ -110.1 
 cost and AOCI 
The estimated net actuarial gains and prior service credits for other postretirement benefits that
are expected to be amortized from AOCI into net periodic benefit cost in 2025 are $ 2.4million and $
14.2million, respectively.
The assumed health care cost trend rate and prescription drug cost increases used to determine the
net periodic benefit cost for postretirement health care benefits for 2025 both decrease in each
successive year until reaching 4.5% in 2034.
The Company expects to make retiree health care benefit cash payments as follows:
 2025 $ 14.4 
 2026 14.9 
 2027 14.9 
 2028 14.3 
 2029 13.2 
 2030 through 2034 48.2 
 Total expected benefit cash payments $ 119.9 
 70 
The Company leases retail stores, manufacturing and distribution facilities, office space and
equipment under operating and finance lease agreements. Operating leases are included in Operating
lease right-of-use (ROU) assets, Current portion of operating lease liabilities and Long-term
operating lease liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Finance leases are included in Other
assets, Other accruals and Other long-term liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The
finance lease related asset and liability as of December 31, 2024 was $ 187.5million and $
189.3million, respectively.
Operating and finance lease ROU assets and lease liabilities are recognized based on the present
value of lease payments over the lease term. The majority of the operating lease ROU asset and lease
liability balances are related to the retail operations of the Paint Stores Group. The majority of
the finance lease ROU asset and lease liability balances are related to a distribution facility
within the Consumer Brands Group. Most leases include oneor more options to renew. The exercise of
lease renewal options is at the Company’s discretion and is not reasonably certain at lease
commencement.
The Company does not account for lease and non-lease components of contracts separately for any
underlying asset class. Some leases have variable payments, however, because they are not based on an
estate leases relate primarily to common area maintenance, insurance, taxes and utilities associated
with the properties. Variable payments for equipment leases relate primarily to hours, miles or other
quantifiable usage factors which are not determinable at the time the lease agreement is entered into
by the Company. The Company has made an accounting policy election by underlying asset class to not
apply the recognition requirements of ASC 842 to short-term leases. As a result, certain leases with
a term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and expense is
recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Most leases do not contain an incremental borrowing rate which is readily determinable from their
associated contract. Therefore, the Company uses its estimated incremental borrowing rate on a
collateralized basis which is derived from information available at the lease commencement date,
giving consideration to publicly available credit rating data, other risk characteristics and the
term of the lease in determining the present value of lease payments.
Additional lease information is summarized below:
 Components of Lease Expense 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating lease cost $ 562.4 $ 528.5 $ 498.0 
 Finance lease cost: 
 Amortization of right-of-use assets $ 0.7 
 Interest on lease liabilities 1.5 
 Total $ 2.2 $ — $ — 
 Short-term lease cost $ 69.6 $ 58.5 $ 47.1 
 Variable lease cost $ 132.1 $ 104.1 $ 89.9 
 Supplemental Cash Flow Information 
 Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease 
 liabilities: 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating cash outflows from operating $ 545.5 $ 513.8 $ 480.1 
 leases 
 Operating cash outflows from finance 0.2 
 leases 
 Financing cash outflows from finance 0.2 
 leases 
 Leased assets obtained in exchange for 
 new lease liabilities: 
 Operating leases $ 526.9 $ 473.3 $ 463.1 
 Finance leases 188.2 
 71 
The following table reconciles the undiscounted cash flows for each of the next five years and
thereafter to the operating and finance lease liabilities recognized on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets as of December 31, 2024. The reconciliation excludes short-term leases that are not recorded
on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 Year Ending December 31, Operating Leases Finance Leases 
 2025 540.4 9.1 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2026 466.9 8.2 
 2027 378.7 8.4 
 2028 289.3 8.6 
 2029 200.5 8.8 
 Thereafter 413.3 586.6 
 Total lease payments 2,289.1 629.7 
 Amount representing interest -264.2 -440.4 
 Present value of lease liabilities $ 2,024.9 $ 189.3 
 72 
Environmental Matters
The operations of the Company, like those of other companies in its industry, are subject to various
domestic and foreign environmental laws and regulations. These laws and regulations not only govern
current operations and products, but also impose potential liability on the Company for past
operations. Management expects environmental laws and regulations to impose increasingly stringent
requirements upon the Company and the industry in the future. Management believes that the Company
conducts its operations in compliance with applicable environmental laws, regulations and
requirements and has implemented various programs designed to protect the environment and promote
continued compliance.
The Company is involved with environmental investigation and remediation activities at some of its
currently and formerly owned sites (including sites which were previously owned and/or operated by
businesses acquired by the Company). In addition, the Company, together with other parties, has been
designated a potentially responsible party under federal and state environmental protection laws for
the investigation and remediation of environmental contamination and hazardous waste at a number of
third-party sites, primarily Superfund sites. In general, these laws provide that potentially
responsible parties may be held jointly and severally liable for investigation and remediation costs
regardless of fault. The Company may be similarly designated with respect to additional third-party
sites in the future.
The Company initially provides for estimated costs of environmental-related activities relating to
its past operations and third-party sites for which commitments or clean-up plans have been developed
and when such costs can be reasonably estimated based on industry standards and professional
judgment. These estimated costs, which are mostly undiscounted, are determined based on currently
available facts regarding each site. If the reasonably estimable costs can only be identified as a
range and no specific amount within that range can be determined more likely than any other amount
within the range, the minimum of the range is provided.
The Company routinely assesses its potential liability for investigation and remediation-related
activities and adjusts its environmental-related accruals as information becomes available, including
as a result of sites progressing through investigation and remediation-related activities, upon which
more accurate costs can be reasonably estimated and as additional accounting guidelines are issued.
At December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company had accruals reported on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets as Other long-term liabilitiesof $ 230.3million, $ 230.8million and $ 240.2million,
respectively. Estimated costs of current investigation and remediation activities of $ 66.4million, $
88.1million and $ 50.2million are included in Other accrualson the Consolidated Balance Sheets at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Actual costs incurred may vary from the accrued estimates due to the inherent uncertainties involved
including, among others, the number and financial condition of parties involved with respect to any
given site, the volumetric contribution which may be attributed to the Company relative to that
attributed to other parties, the nature and magnitude of the wastes involved, the various
technologies that can be used for remediation and the determination of acceptable remediation with
respect to a particular site. If the Company’s future loss contingency is ultimately determined to be
at the unaccrued maximum of the estimated range of possible outcomes for every site for which costs
can be reasonably estimated, the Company’s accrual for environmental-related activities would be $
93.4million higher than the minimum accruals at December 31, 2024. Additionally, costs for
environmental-related activities may not be reasonably estimable at early stages of investigation and
therefore would not be included in the unaccrued maximum amount.
Fourof the Company’s currently and formerly owned manufacturing sites (Major Sites) account for the
majority of the accrual for environmental-related activities and the unaccrued maximum of the
estimated range of possible outcomes at December 31, 2024. At December 31, 2024, $ 250.3million, or
84.3% of the total accrual, related directly to the Major Sites. In the aggregate unaccrued maximum
of $ 93.4million at December 31, 2024, $ 70.6million, or 75.6%, related to the Major Sites. The
significant cost components of this liability continue to be related to remedy implementation,
regulatory agency interaction and project management and other costs. While different for each
specific environmental situation, these components generally each account for approximately 85%, 10%
and 5%, respectively, of the accrued amount and those percentages are subject to change over time.
While environmental investigations and remedial actions are in different stages at these sites,
additional investigations, remedial actions and monitoring will likely be required at each site.
The largest and most complex of the Major Sites is the Gibbsboro, New Jersey site (Gibbsboro) which
comprises the substantial majority of the environmental-related accrual. Gibbsboro, a former
manufacturing plant, and related areas, which ceased operations in 1978, has had various areas
included on the National Priorities List since 1999. This location has soil, sediment, surface water
and groundwater contamination related to the historic operations of the facility. Gibbsboro has been
divided by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) into sixoperable units (OUs) based on location
and characteristics, whose investigation and remediation efforts are likely to occur over an extended
period of time. To date, the Company has completed remedy construction on threeof the sixoperable
units. While there are administrative tasks to be completed before final agency
 73 
approval, the remediation phase of the work for these three OUs is effectively complete and future
work for these OUs is anticipated to be limited. OUs are in various phases of investigation and
remediation with the EPA that provide enough information to reasonably estimate cost ranges and
record environmental-related accruals. The most significant assumptions underlying the reliability
and precision of remediation cost estimates for the Gibbsboro site are the type and extent of future
remedies to be selected by the EPA and the costs of implementing those remedies.
The remaining threeMajor Sites comprising the majority of the accrual include: (1) a multi-party
Superfund site that (a) has received a record of decision from the federal EPA and is currently in
the remedial design phase for one OU, (b) has received a record of decision from the federal EPA for
an interim remedy for another OU and (c) has a remedial investigation ongoing for another OU, (2) a
closed paint manufacturing facility that is in the operation and maintenance phase of remediation
under both federal and state EPA programs and (3) a formerly-owned site containing warehouse and
office space that is in the remedial/design investigation phase under a state EPA program. Each of
these threeMajor Sites are in phases of investigation and remediation that provide sufficient
information to reasonably estimate cost ranges and record environmental-related accruals.
Excluding the Major Sites discussed above, no sites are individually material to the total accrual
balance. There are multiple, future events yet to occur, including further remedy selection and
design, remedy implementation and execution and securing applicable governmental agency approvals,
all of which have the potential to contribute to the uncertainty surrounding these future events. As
these events occur and to the extent that the cost estimates of the environmental remediation change,
the existing reserve will be adjusted.
Management cannot presently estimate the ultimate potential loss contingencies related to these sites
or other less significant sites until such time as a substantial portion of the investigation at the
sites is completed and remedial action plans are developed. Unasserted claims could have a material
effect on the Company’s loss contingency as more information becomes available over time. At December
31, 2024 , the Company did not have material loss contingency accruals related to unasserted claims.
Management does not expect that a material portion of unrecognized loss contingencies will be
recoverable through insurance, indemnification agreements or other sources. In the event any future
loss contingency significantly exceeds the current amount accrued, the recording of the ultimate
liability may result in a material impact on net income for the annual or interim period during which
the additional costs are accrued. Moreover, management does not believe that any potential liability
ultimately attributed to the Company for its environmental-related matters will have a material
adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity or cash flow due to the extended
length of time during which environmental investigation and remediation takes place. An estimate of
the potential impact on the Company’s operations cannot be made due to the aforementioned
uncertainties.
Management expects these contingent environmental-related liabilities to be resolved over an extended
period of time. Management is unable to provide a more specific time frame due to the indeterminate
amount of time to conduct investigation activities at any site, the indeterminate amount of time to
obtain environmental agency approval, as necessary, with respect to investigation and remediation
activities and the indeterminate amount of time necessary to conduct remediation activities.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations Topic of the ASC requires a liability to be
recognized for the fair value of a conditional asset retirement obligation if a settlement date and
fair value can be reasonably estimated. The Company recognizes a liability for any conditional asset
retirement obligation when sufficient information is available to reasonably estimate a settlement
date to determine the fair value of such a liability. The Company has identified certain conditional
asset retirement obligations at various current and closed manufacturing, distribution and store
facilities. These obligations relate primarily to asbestos abatement, hazardous waste Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) closures, well abandonment, transformers and used oil disposals
and underground storage tank closures. Using investigative, remediation and disposal methods that are
currently available to the Company, the estimated costs of these obligations were accrued and are not
significant. The recording of additional liabilities for future conditional asset retirement
obligations may result in a material impact on Net income for the annual or interim period during
which the costs are accrued. Management does not believe that any potential liability ultimately
attributed to the Company for its conditional asset retirement obligations will have a material
adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity or cash flow due to the extended
period of time over which sufficient information may become available regarding the closure or
modification of any one or group of the Company’s facilities. An estimate of the potential impact on
the Company’s operations cannot be made due to the aforementioned uncertainties.
 74 
Real Estate Financing
In December 2022, the Company closed a transaction to sell and subsequently lease back its partially-
constructed new global headquarters. As a result of this transaction, the Company has entered into
certain sale-leaseback agreements that do not qualify as asset sales and were accounted for as real
estate financing transactions. Net proceeds are recognized within the Financing Activities section in
the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows. The Company expects to receive total proceeds
approximating $ 800million to $ 850million on an incremental basis until the completion of
construction of the new global headquarters. The Company expects to receive the final proceeds for
the new global headquarters in the first quarter of 2025, at which point the Company will calculate
the remaining obligation under the terms of the lease. The following table summarizes the activity
related to this transaction and the corresponding balances recognized in the Consolidated Balance
Sheets.
 Activity: 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Proceeds received $ 244.2 $ 305.0 $ 210.0 
 Capitalized interest(1) 45.2 23.8 
 Balances: 
 Short-term liability(2) $ 49.7 $ 39.9 $ 20.0 
 Long-term liability(3) 715.9 475.9 187.0 
 Total liability $ 765.6 $ 515.8 $ 207.0 
(1) Interest is capitalized within construction in progress in Property, plant and equipment, net.
(2) The short-term portion of the liability is recorded in Other accruals.
(3) The long-term portion of the liability is recorded in Other long-term liabilities.
 NOTE 11 – LITIGATION 
In the course of its business, the Company is subject to a variety of claims and lawsuits, including,
but not limited to, litigation relating to product liability and warranty, personal injury,
environmental, intellectual property, commercial, contractual and antitrust claims, that are
inherently subject to many uncertainties regarding the possibility of a loss to the Company.
Uncertainties to which litigation is inherently subject include, among other things, costs,
unpredictable court or jury decisions that could affect other litigation against the Company and
encourage an increase in the number and nature of future claims and proceedings and differing laws
and regulations in jurisdictions where the Company operates. These uncertainties will ultimately be
resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur confirming the incurrence of a
liability or the reduction of a liability. In accordance with the Contingencies Topic of the ASC, the
Company accrues for these contingencies by a charge to income when it is both probable that one or
more future events will occur confirming the fact of a loss and the amount of the loss can be
reasonably estimated. In the event that the Company’s loss contingency is ultimately determined to be
significantly higher than currently accrued, the recording of the additional liability may result in
a material impact on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for the
annual or interim period during which such additional liability is accrued. In those cases where no
accrual is recorded because it is not probable that a liability has been incurred or the amount of
any such loss cannot be reasonably estimated, any potential liability ultimately determined to be
attributable to the Company may result in a material impact on the Company’s results of operations,
liquidity or financial condition for the annual or interim period during which such liability is
accrued. In those cases where no accrual is recorded or exposure to loss exists in excess of the
amount accrued, the Contingencies Topic of the ASC requires disclosure of the contingency when there
is a reasonable possibility that a loss or additional loss may have been incurred.
Due to the uncertainties involved in litigation, management is unable to predict the outcome of the
litigation identified below, the number or nature of possible future claims and proceedings or the
effect that any legislation and/or administrative regulations may have on the litigation or against
the Company. In addition, management cannot reasonably determine the scope or amount of the potential
costs and liabilities related to such litigation, or resulting from any such legislation and
regulations. With respect to the litigation identified below, the Company has only accrued for the
court-approved agreement related to the California Proceedings, identified in the Public Nuisance
Claim Litigation section. For the remaining litigation identified below, the Company does not believe
it is probable that a loss has occurred, or the Company believes it is not possible to estimate the
range of potential losses. In addition, any potential liability that may result from any changes to
legislation and regulations cannot reasonably be estimated. Due to the uncertainties associated with
the amount of any such liability and/or the nature of any other remedy which may be imposed in
litigation, any potential liability determined to be attributable to the Company arising out of such
litigation may have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity, or
financial condition. An estimate of the potential impact on the Company’s results of operations, cash
flow, liquidity or financial condition cannot be made due to the aforementioned uncertainties.
 75 
Lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation. The Company’s past operations included the manufacture
and sale of lead pigments and lead-based paints. The Company, along with other companies, is and has
been a defendant in a number of legal proceedings arising from the manufacture and sale of lead
pigments and lead-based paints. The plaintiffs’ claims have been based upon various legal theories,
including negligence, strict liability, breach of warranty, negligent misrepresentations and
omissions, fraudulent misrepresentations and omissions, concert of action, civil conspiracy,
violations of unfair trade practice and consumer protection laws, enterprise liability, market share
liability, public nuisance, unjust enrichment and other theories. The Company has also been a
defendant in legal proceedings arising from the manufacture and sale of non-lead-based paints that
seek recovery based upon various legal theories, including the failure to adequately warn of
potential exposure to lead during surface preparation when using non-lead-based paint on surfaces
previously painted with lead-based paint. Other than the California Proceedings and currently pending
cases, all of these legal proceedings have been concluded in favor of the Company and other
defendants at various stages in the proceedings.
In addition, from time to time, various legislation and administrative regulations have been enacted,
promulgated or proposed to impose obligations on present and former manufacturers of lead pigments
and lead-based paints respecting asserted health concerns associated with such products or to
overturn the effect of court decisions in which the Company and other manufacturers have been
successful. The Company is vigorously defending all lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation. The
Company expects that additional lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation may be filed against the
Company in the future asserting similar or different legal theories and seeking similar or different
types of damages and relief. The Company will continue to vigorously defend against any additional
litigation that may be filed, including utilizing all avenues of appeal, if necessary.
Public Nuisance Claim Litigation . The Company and other companies have been defendants in legal
proceedings seeking recovery based on public nuisance liability theories, among other theories,
brought by various states, cities and counties, including by the State of Rhode Island; the City of
St. Louis, Missouri; various cities and counties in the State of New Jersey; various cities in the
State of Ohio and the State of Ohio; the City of Chicago, Illinois; the City of Milwaukee, Wisconsin;
the County of Santa Clara, California and other public entities in the State of California (the
California Proceedings); and Lehigh and Montgomery Counties in Pennsylvania. Except for the
California Proceedings in which the Company reached a court-approved agreement in 2019 after nearly
twenty years of litigation, all of those legal proceedings have been concluded in favor of the
Company and other defendants at various stages in the proceedings. Most recently, on May 7, 2024, as
further described below in Wisconsin Litigation, threeplaintiffs filed amended complaints alleging,
in part, public nuisance claims.
Wisconsin Litigation . The Company and other companies are or have been defendants in a number of
legal proceedings seeking monetary damages and other relief from alleged personal injuries. The
current proceedings consist of twofederal court cases pending in the United States District Court for
the Eastern District of Wisconsin (Ernest Gibson v. American Cyanamid, et al. and Deziree and
Detareion Valoe v. American Cyanamid, et. al.) and onecase pending in Milwaukee County Circuit Court
in Wisconsin (Arrieona Beal v. Hattie and Jerry Mitchell, et al.). Those matters include claims by
fourindividuals allegedly injured from ingestion of lead pigment or lead-containing paint while they
were minors. The plaintiffs generally seek compensatory damages and have invoked Wisconsin’s risk
contribution theory (which is similar to market share liability, except that liability can be joint
and several) due to the plaintiff’s inability to identify the manufacturer of any product that
allegedly injured the plaintiff.
On May 20, 2021, as a result of a decision in favor of the Company by United States Court of Appeals
for the Seventh Circuit in the Ravon Owens v. American Cyanamid, et al., Cesar Sifuentes v. American
Cyanamid, et al. and Glenn Burton, Jr. v. American Cyanamid, et al. cases, the Company and the
threeother defendants filed motions for summary judgment to dismiss all claims of the approximately
150plaintiffs then pending in the Eastern District of Wisconsin, including the claims of Gibson and
the Valoes. On March 3, 2022, the district court granted summary judgment in favor of the Company and
the other defendants. On September 15, 2022, the plaintiffs filed notices of appeal with the Seventh
Circuit, seeking to appeal the district court’s summary judgment in favor of the Company and the
other defendants. On February 9, 2024, the Seventh Circuit affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment in favor of the Company and the other defendants in all cases except those filed by Gibson
and the Valoes, which cases were remanded to the district court for further proceedings. Following
remand of the Gibson and Valoe cases, the threeremaining plaintiffs filed amended complaints on May
7, 2024, alleging strict liability, negligence and public nuisance claims. The defendants filed
motions to dismiss the plaintiffs’ amended complaints on June 20, 2024. On November 8, 2024, the
district court granted in part and denied in part defendants’ motions to dismiss the amended
complaints, dismissing the second cause of action for general negligence and plaintiffs’ abatement
allegations, but otherwise permitting the case to proceed. On December 6, 2024, the Company and some
of the other defendants filed a third-party complaint against NL Industries, Inc. (NL) and the owners
and landlords of the properties where plaintiffs resided. Some of the owners and landlords filed a
motion to dismiss the third-party complaints; that motion remains pending. On January 30, 2025, the
district court entered a stipulated order dismissing NL pursuant to the execution of a Pierringer
release between plaintiffs and NL.
 76 
In the separate state court proceeding, on August 24, 2021, Arrieona Beal filed an amended complaint
in Milwaukee County Circuit Court, naming the Company and other alleged former lead pigment
manufacturers as defendants pursuant to the risk contribution liability theory. The plaintiff
previously had sued her landlords. On January 3, 2024, the Company and some of the other
manufacturing defendants filed a third-party complaint against NL and cross-claims against the
landlord defendants. On January 10, 2024, one of the landlord defendants filed a counterclaim and
cross-claim against all parties. On May 15, 2024, the plaintiff filed a motion for partial judgment
on the pleadings to strike the Company and other manufacturing defendants’ affirmative defenses, and
on August 6, 2024, the circuit court granted defendants’ motion to strike the plaintiff’s motion. On
December 6, 2024, plaintiff filed a notice of voluntary dismissal as to landlords Hattie and Jerry
Mitchell pursuant to the execution of a Pierringer release.
Insurance Coverage Litigation. The Company and its liability insurers, including certain underwriters
at Lloyd’s of London, initiated legal proceedings against each other to determine, among other
things, whether the costs and liabilities associated with the abatement of lead pigment are covered
under certain insurance policies issued to the Company. The insurers’ action, which was filed on
February 23, 2006, in the Supreme Court of the State of New York, County of New York, was dismissed.
The Company’s action, filed on March 3, 2006, in the Common Pleas Court, Cuyahoga County, Ohio,
previously was stayed and inactive.
On January 9, 2019, the Company filed an unopposed motion to lift the stay with the trial court,
which was granted, allowing the case to proceed to determine whether the insurers were required to
indemnify the Company following the California Proceedings. On June 28, 2019, the Company and its
liability insurers each filed separate motions for summary judgment seeking various forms of relief.
The trial court entered an order on December 4, 2020, granting the insurers’ motion for summary
judgment, denying the Company’s motion and entering final judgment in favor of the insurers. The
trial court sided with the Company on all of the issues presented, except one.
On December 21, 2020, the Company filed a notice of appeal to the Court of Appeals of Cuyahoga
County, Ohio, Eighth Appellate District, and the insurers filed cross-appeals. On September 1, 2022,
the appellate court reversed the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, finding in favor of the
Company on its appeal and against the insurers on their cross-appeal, and remanded the case to the
trial court. On September 12, 2022, the insurers applied to the appellate court for reconsideration
of its decision, en banc review, or certification of an appeal to the Ohio Supreme Court, which the
appellate court denied.
The insurers subsequently filed a notice of appeal to the Ohio Supreme Court, to which the Company
filed its response. On May 9, 2023, the Ohio Supreme Court accepted the insurers’ appeal. Oral
argument was held on October 24, 2023. On December 10, 2024, the Ohio Supreme Court reversed the
Court of Appeals and mandated judgment in favor of the insurers, holding that because the abatement-
fund payment was made to prevent future harm rather than compensate for past harm, payment was not
“damages” covered under the insurance policies.
This decision means that insurance proceeds could be unavailable under the policies at issue to
mitigate past or future abatement related liabilities. The Company has not recorded a receivable
related to these insurance policies or otherwise assumed that proceeds from these insurance policies
would be received in estimating any contingent liability accrual within the consolidated financial
statements. Therefore, this decision, without a determination of liability against the Company in the
lead pigment or lead-based paint litigation will have no impact on the Company’s results of
operation, liquidity or financial condition. As previously stated, except with respect to the
litigation in the California Proceedings, the Company has not accrued any amounts for the lead
pigment or lead-based paint litigation and any significant liability ultimately determined to be
attributable to the Company relating to such litigation may result in a material impact on the
Company’s results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for the annual or interim period
during which such liability is accrued.
 77 
Other matters. On December 18, 2019, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the
Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the Administrator of the
New Jersey Spill Compensation Fund (collectively, the NJ DEP) filed a lawsuit against the Company in
the Superior Court of New Jersey Law Division in Camden County, New Jersey. The NJ DEP seeks to
recover natural resource damages, punitive damages and litigation fees and costs, as well as other
costs, damages, declaratory relief and penalties pursuant to New Jersey state statutes and common law
theories in connection with the alleged discharge of hazardous substances and pollutants at the
Company’s Gibbsboro, New Jersey site, a former manufacturing plant and related facilities. Following
expert discovery, on November 20, 2024, the Company filed a motion in the United States District
Court for the District of New Jersey seeking to enforce the terms of an April 2019 Remedial
Design/Remedial Action Consent Decree between the Company and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (the Consent Decree) that is being attacked by the NJ DEP’s state court lawsuit. On
December 21, 2024, the United States filed a brief in opposition to the Company’s motion, to which
the Company filed a reply brief. The Company’s motion regarding the Consent Decree remains pending in
federal court. Meanwhile, on November 20, 2024, the Company filed a motion to stay the state court
proceedings pending resolution of the Company’s motion regarding the Consent Decree. On December 19,
2024, the state court denied the Company’s stay motion, but suspended all then-pending dates in the
court’s schedule, including the previous trial date of March 10, 2025, until an ongoing discovery
dispute between the Company and the NJ DEP is resolved. On December 20, 2024, the NJ DEP filed a
motion for partial summary judgment seeking to find the Company liable under the Spill Act and Solid
Waste Management Act. On January 31, 2025, the state court denied the NJ DEP’s motion for partial
summary judgment. On February 6, 2025, the state court sent an automated notice re-setting the trial
for March 10, 2025. Upon the parties’ request seeking clarification regarding the schedule, there is
a status conference with the state court set for February 18, 2025.
In July 2024, a third-party assurance, testing, inspection and certification provider changed its
listing for one of the Company’s protective coatings products, an intumescent coating used for fire
protection of steel beam assemblies. The Company has received claims regarding this matter and is
working with its customers and end users to assist in understanding the potential impacts of the
listing change, including the extent of potential remedial action that may involve the application of
additional product. The Company’s review of this matter is ongoing. Except for an immaterial product
warranty liability which remains recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2024,
any additional amount or range of potential loss cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
 NOTE 12 – SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY 
Capital Stock
At December 31, 2024, there were 900,000,000shares of common stock and 30,000,000shares of serial
preferred stock authorized for issuance. Of the authorized serial preferred stock, 3,000,000shares
are designated as cumulative redeemable serial preferred stock. There we no shares of serial
preferred stock issued during 2024, 2023 or 2022.
Under the 2006 Equity and Performance Incentive Plan (2006 Employee Plan), 71,100,000shares may be
issued or transferred. An aggregate of 13,603,814, 15,830,386and 17,939,143shares of common stock at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, were reserved for the exercise and future grants of
option rights and future grants of restricted stock and restricted stock units. See Note 14 for
additional information related to stock-based compensation.
Shares outstanding shown in the following table included 1,426,883shares of common stock held in a
revocable trust at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. The revocable trust is used to accumulate assets
for the purpose of funding the ultimate obligation of certain non-qualified benefit plans.
Transactions between the Company and the trust are accounted for in accordance with the Deferred
Compensation – Rabbi Trusts Subtopic of the Compensation Topic of the ASC, which requires the assets
held by the trust be consolidated with the Company’s accounts.
 78 
contributions to the domestic defined contribution plan. The related proceeds were $ 22.0million.
Dividends
The following table summarizes the dividends declared and paid on common stock:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash dividend per share $ 2.86 $ 2.42 $ 2.40 
 Total dividends (in millions) 723.4 623.7 618.5 
Treasury Stock
The Company acquires its common stock for general corporate purposes through its publicly announced
share repurchase program. As of December 31, 2024, the Company had remaining authorization from its
Board of Directors to purchase 34.4million shares of its common stock. The table below summarizes the
Company’s share repurchase activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Treasury stock purchases (in millions) $ 1,738.8 $ 1,432.0 $ 883.2 
 Treasury stock purchases (shares) 5,200,000 5,600,000 3,350,000 
 Average price per share $ 334.38 $ 255.72 $ 263.64 
 NOTE 13 – DEFINED CONTRIBUTION SAVINGS PLAN 
As of December 31, 2024, 44,917employees contributed to the Company’s defined contribution savings
plan, voluntary to all eligible salaried employees and any employee in a group of employees to which
coverage has been extended on a non-discriminatory basis by the plan’s Administration Committee.
Participants are allowed to contribute, on a pretax or after-tax basis, up to the lesser of
fiftypercent of their annual compensation or the maximum dollar amount allowed under the Internal
Revenue Code. The Company matches one hundredpercent of all contributions up to sixpercent of
eligible employee contributions. Such participant contributions may be invested in a variety of
investment funds or a Company common stock
 79 
fund and may be exchanged between investments as directed by the participant. Participants are
permitted to diversify both future and prior Company matching contributions previously allocated to
the Company common stock fund into a variety of investment funds.
The Company made contributions to the defined contribution savings plan on behalf of participating
employees, representing amounts authorized by employees to be withheld from their earnings, of $
279.6million, $ 260.5million and $ 240.1million in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The Company’s
matching contributions to the defined contribution savings plan charged to operations were $
165.1million, $ 153.9million and $ 140.0million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
At December 31, 2024, there were 16,771,640shares of the Company’s common stock being held by the
defined contribution savings plan, representing 6.7% of the total number of voting shares
outstanding. Shares of Company common stock credited to each member’s account under the defined
contribution savings plan are voted by the trustee under instructions from each individual plan
member. Shares for which no instructions are received are voted by the trustee in the same proportion
as those for which instructions are received.
 NOTE 14 – STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION 
The 2006 Employee Plan authorizes the Board of Directors, or a committee of the Board of Directors,
to issue or transfer up to an aggregate of 71,100,000shares of common stock, plus any shares relating
to awards that expire, are forfeited or canceled. The Company issues new shares upon exercise of
option rights (options) and vesting of restricted stock units (RSUs). The 2006 Employee Plan permits
the granting of options, appreciation rights, restricted stock, RSUs, performance shares and
performance units to eligible employees. At December 31, 2024, noappreciation rights, performance
shares or performance units had been granted under the 2006 Employee Plan. Shares available for
future grants under the 2006 Employee Plan were 5,458,273at December 31, 2024.
The 2006 Stock Plan for Nonemployee Directors (Nonemployee Director Plan) authorizes the Board of
Directors, or a committee of the Board of Directors, to issue or transfer up to an aggregate of
600,000shares of common stock, plus any shares relating to awards that expire, are forfeited or
canceled. The Nonemployee Director Plan permits the granting of options, appreciation rights,
restricted stock and RSUs to members of the Board of Directors who are not employees of the Company.
At December 31, 2024, nooptions or appreciation rights had been granted under the Nonemployee
Director Plan. Shares available for future grants under the Nonemployee Director Plan were 210,675at
December 31, 2024.
At December 31, 2024, the Company had total unrecognized stock-based compensation expense of $
192.7million that is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.08years.
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Stock-based compensation expense $ 138.1 $ 115.9 $ 99.7 
 Income tax benefit recognized 34.1 28.6 24.6 
Excess tax benefits from share-based payments are recognized as an income tax benefit in the
Statements of Consolidated Income when options are exercised and RSUs vest. For the years ended
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company’s excess tax benefit from options exercised and RSUs
vested reduced the income tax provision by $ 73.0million, $ 35.7million and $ 35.4million,
respectively.
Options
The fair value of the Company’s options was estimated at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes-
Merton option-pricing model with the following weighted-average assumptions for all options granted:
 2024 2023 2022 
 Risk-free interest rate 3.93 % 4.57 % 4.00 % 
 Expected life of options 5.02 years 5.02 years 5.05 years 
 Expected dividend yield of stock .83 % .94 % .92 % 
 Expected volatility of stock 27.5 % 29.3 % 31.6 % 
 80 
The risk-free interest rate is based upon the U.S. Treasury yield curve at the time of grant. The
expected life of options was calculated using a scenario analysis model. Historical data was used to
aggregate the holding period from actual exercises, post-vesting cancellations and hypothetical
assumed exercises on all outstanding options. The expected dividend yield of stock is the Company’s
best estimate of the expected future dividend yield. Expected volatility of stock was calculated
using historical and implied volatilities.
Grants of non-qualified and incentive stock options have been awarded to certain officers and key
employees under the 2006 Employee Plan. The options generally become exercisable to the extent of
one-third of the optioned shares for each full year following the date of grant and generally expire
ten yearsafter the date of grant. Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to options granted
to eligible employees amounted to $ 116.4million at December 31, 2024. The unrecognized compensation
expense is being amortized on a straight-line basis over the three-yearvesting period, net of
estimated forfeitures based on historical activity, and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-
average period of 1.14years.
The following table summarizes the Company’s option activity:
 Weighted 
 Average 
 Exercise Aggregate Weighted Average 
 Optioned Price Intrinsic Remaining Term 
 Shares Per Share Value (in Years) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstanding at 8,925,011 $ 175.70 $ 1,215.6 5.64 
 January 1, 2024 
 Granted 939,699 376.90 
 Exercised -1,871,201 131.48 
 Forfeited -53,373 254.48 
 Expired -5,270 202.79 
 Outstanding at 7,934,866 209.39 $ 1,074.4 5.69 
 December 31, 2024 
 Exercisable at 6,054,247 $ 178.95 $ 974.6 4.64 
 December 31, 2024 
The following table summarizes fair value and intrinsic value information for option activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted average grant date fair value $ 109.05 $ 77.08 $ 69.82 
 per share 
 Total fair value of options vested 66.8 61.3 57.9 
 Total intrinsic value of options 402.7 170.6 125.4 
 exercised 
RSUs
The fair value of each RSU is equal to the market value of a share of the Company’s stock on the
grant date. Grants of time-based RSUs, which generally require three yearsof continuous employment
from the date of grant before vesting and receiving the stock without restriction, have been awarded
to certain officers and key employees under the 2006 Employee Plan. The February 2024, 2023 and 2022
grants of performance-based RSUs vest at the end of a three-yearperiod based on the Company’s
achievement of specified financial and operating performance goals relating to earnings per share and
return on net assets employed.
Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to grants of RSUs to eligible employees amounted to $
74.4million at December 31, 2024. The unrecognized compensation expense is being amortized on a
straight-line basis over the vesting period and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average
period of 0.82years.
Grants of RSUs have been awarded to nonemployee directors under the Nonemployee Director Plan. These
grants generally vest and stock is received without restriction to the extent of one-third of the
RSUs for each year following the date of grant. Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to
grants of RSUs to nonemployee directors amounted to $ 1.9million at December 31, 2024. The
unrecognized compensation expense is being amortized on a straight-line basis over the three-
yearvesting period and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 0.90years.
 81 
The following table summarizes the Company’s RSU activity:
 Weighted 
 Average Grant Aggregate Weighted Average 
 Date Fair Intrinsic Remaining Term 
 Number of RSUs Value Per Share Value (in Years) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstanding at 434,874 $ 244.21 $ 135.6 1.26 
 January 1, 2024 
 Granted 124,667 305.50 
 Vested -122,276 239.14 
 Forfeited -4,251 251.80 
 Outstanding at 
 December 31, 433,014 $ 265.03 $ 147.2 1.18 
 2024 
The following table summarizes the fair value and intrinsic value information for RSU activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted average grant date fair value $ 305.50 $ 232.22 $ 271.75 
 per share 
 Intrinsic value of RSUs vested during 38.4 68.5 97.5 
 year 
NOTE 15 – ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
The components of AOCI, including the reclassification adjustments for items that were reclassified
from AOCI to Net income, are shown below.
 Pension and 
 Other Unrealized Net 
 Foreign Currency Postretirement Gains on 
 Translation Benefits Cash Flow 
 Adjustments(1) Adjustments(2) Hedges(3) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at $ -702.1 $ -32.2 $ 35.9 $ -698.4 
 January 1, 2022 
 Amounts 
 recognized in -108.7 106.8 -1.9 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified 3.7 -4.0 -0.3 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, -810.8 78.3 31.9 -700.6 
 2022 
 Amounts 
 recognized in 93.9 3.9 97.8 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified -17.9 -3.6 -21.5 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, -716.9 64.3 28.3 -624.3 
 2023 
 Amounts 
 recognized in -256.0 23.0 -233.0 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified -14.2 -3.7 -17.9 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, $ -972.9 $ 73.1 $ 24.6 $ -875.2 
 2024 
(1) Includes changes in the fair value of cross currency swap contracts of $ 53.6million, $( 24.9)
million and $ 34.1million in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. See Note 16.
(2) Net of taxes of $( 2.0) million, $ 3.1million and $( 35.0) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively. See Note 8.
(3) Net of taxes of $ 1.2million in 2024 and 2023 and $ 1.1million in 2022. See Statements of
Consolidated Comprehensive Income.
 82 
Net Investment Hedges
The Company has entered into U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap contracts with various
counterparties to hedge the Company’s net investment in its European operations. During the term of
the contracts, the Company will pay fixed-rate interest in euros and receive fixed-rate interest in
U.S. dollars, thereby effectively converting a portion of the Company's U.S. dollar denominated
fixed-rate debt to euro denominated fixed-rate debt. The outstanding contracts as of December 31,
2024 are summarized by maturity date in the table below.
 Notional Value Maturity Date 
 200.0 August 8, 2025 
 687.7 June 1, 2027 
 100.0 March 1, 2028 
 ──────────────────────────────────────── 
 525.0 August 15, 2029 
 100.0 September 1, 2031 
 $ 1,612.7 
In August 2024, the Company settled its $ 150.0million U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap
contract entered into on March 28, 2023. In May 2024, the Company settled its $ 500.0million U.S.
dollar to euro cross currency swap contract entered into on February 13, 2020. At the time of both of
these settlements, an immaterial unrealized loss was recognized in AOCI.
In December 2023, the Company settled its $ 100.0million U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap
contract entered into on August 1, 2023. At the time of settlement, an immaterial unrealized gain was
recognized in AOCI.
The following table summarizes the balance sheet location of the cross currency swap contracts. See
Note 17 for additional information on the fair value of these contracts.
 December 31, December 31, December 31, 
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Other current assets $ 9.4 $ — $ — 
 Other assets 39.5 — 9.1 
 Other accruals — 12.0 — 
 Other long-term liabilities — 12.4 — 
The changes in fair value of the cross currency swap contracts are recognized in the foreign currency
translation adjustments component of AOCI. See Note 15. The following table summarizes the unrealized
gains (losses) for the years ended December 31:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gains (losses) $ 71.2 $ -33.1 $ 45.2 
 Tax effect -17.6 8.2 -11.1 
 Gains (losses), net of taxes $ 53.6 $ -24.9 $ 34.1 
Derivatives Not Designated as Hedging Instruments
The Company enters into foreign currency option and forward contracts with maturity dates less than
twelve months primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. The related gains and
losses are recorded in Other (income) expense - net. See Note 19 for further details.
 83 
The Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures Topic of the ASC applies to the Company’s financial and
non-financial assets and liabilities. The guidance applies when other standards require or permit the
fair value measurement of assets and liabilities. Under the guidance, assets and liabilities measured
at fair value are categorized as follows:
Level 1: Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets
Level 2: Significant other observable inputs
Level 3: Significant unobservable inputs
There were no assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis classified as Level
3 at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. Except for the acquisition-related fair value measurements and
assets held for sale prior to divestiture of the China architectural business described in Note 3 and
the reporting unit impairment analysis and trademark quantitative impairment test described in Note
6, there were no assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis. The following
table summarizes the Company’s assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis,
categorized using the fair value hierarchy.
 Dec… De… Dec… 
 31, 31, 31, 
 2024 20… 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Tot… Le… Lev… To… Lev… Le… Tot… Le… Lev… 
 1 2 1 2 1 2 
 A… 
 D… 
 c… $ 98.6 $ 98… $ — $ 84… $ 84.7 $ 74.1 $ 43… $ 30.4 
 p… 
 Q… 
 r… — — 29.8 29… 
 p… 
 N… 
 i… 48.9 48.9 — 9.1 9.1 
 h… 
 $ 147… $ 98… $ 48.9 $ 84… $ 84.7 $ — $ 113… $ 73… $ 39.5 
 L… 
 N… 
 i… $ — $ 24… $ 24… $ — 
 h… 
The deferred compensation plan assets consist of the investment funds maintained for future payments
under the Company’s executive deferred compensation plans, which are structured as rabbi trusts. The
investments are marketable securities accounted for under the Debt and Equity Securities Topic of the
ASC. The level 1 investments are valued using quoted market prices multiplied by the number of
shares. The level 2 investments are valued based on vendor or broker models. There was $ 7.0million
and $ 6.4million of deferred compensation plan assets held in partnership funds measured using NAV
(or its equivalent) as a practical expedient as of December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. These
investments are not classified in the fair value hierarchy. The cost basis of all investments within
the deferred compensation plan and qualified replacement plan was $ 82.7million, $ 76.3million and $
67.2million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The qualified replacement plan assets consisted of investment funds maintained for future
contributions to the Company’s domestic defined contribution pension plan. See Note 8. During 2023,
the remaining balance was fully utilized to fund the Company’s domestic defined contribution pension
plan. The cost basis of the investment funds was $ 29.8million at December 31, 2022.
The net investment hedge asset and liability represent the fair value of the cross currency swaps.
See Note 16. The fair value is based on a valuation model that uses observable inputs, including
interest rate curves and the euro foreign currency rate.
The carrying amounts reported for Cash and cash equivalents and Short-term borrowings approximate
fair value.
The fair value of the Company’s publicly traded debt is based on quoted market prices. The fair value
of the Company’s non-publicly traded debt is estimated using discounted cash flow analyses, based on
the Company’s current incremental borrowing rates for similar types of borrowing arrangements. The
Company’s publicly traded debt and non-traded debt are classified as level 1 and level 2,
respectively, in the fair value hierarchy. The following table summarizes the carrying amounts and
fair values of the Company’s publicly traded debt and non-traded debt.
 84 
The Company manufactures and sells paint, stains, supplies, equipment and floor covering through
company-operated stores, branded and private label products through retailers and a broad range of
industrial coatings directly to global manufacturing customers through company-operated branches. A
large portion of the Company’s revenue is recognized at a point in time and made to customers who are
not engaged in a long-term supply agreement or any form of contract with the Company. These sales are
paid for at the time of sale in cash, credit card or on account with the vast majority of customers
having terms between 30 and 60 days, not to exceed one year. Many customers who purchase on account
take advantage of early payment discounts offered by paying within 30 days of being invoiced. The
Company estimates variable consideration for these sales on the basis of both historical information
and current trends to estimate the expected amount of discounts to which customers are likely to be
entitled.
The remaining revenue is governed by long-term supply agreements and related purchase orders
(contracts) that specify shipping terms and aspects of the transaction price including rebates,
discounts and other sales incentives, such as advertising support. Contracts are at standalone
pricing. The performance obligation in these contracts is determined by each of the individual
purchase orders and the respective stated quantities, with revenue being recognized at a point in
time when obligations under the terms of the agreement are satisfied. This generally occurs with the
transfer of control of our products to the customer. Sales, value add and other taxes we collect
concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue.
See Note 22 for the Company’s disaggregation of Net sales by Reportable Segment. As the Reportable
Segments are aligned by similar economic factors, trends and customers, this disaggregation best
depicts how the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows are affected by
economic factors. Approximately 80% of the Company’s net external sales are in the Company’s North
America region (which is comprised of the United States, Canada and the Caribbean region), slightly
less than 10% in the EMEAI region (Europe, Middle East, Africa and India), with the remaining global
regions accounting for the residual balance. No individual country outside of the United States is
individually significant.
The Company has made payments or given credits for various incentives at the beginning of a long-term
contract where future revenue is expected and before satisfaction of performance obligations. Under
these circumstances, the Company recognizes a contract asset and amortizes these prepayments over the
expected benefit life of the long-term contract, typically on a straight-line basis.
The majority of variable consideration in the Company’s contracts include volume rebates, discounts
and other incentives, where the customer receives a retrospective percentage rebate based on the
amount of their purchases. In these situations, the rebates are accrued as a fixed percentage of
sales and recorded as a reduction of Net sales until paid to the customer per the terms of the
contract. Forms of variable consideration such as tiered rebates, whereby a customer receives a
retrospective price decrease dependent on the volume of their purchases, are calculated using a
forecasted percentage to determine the most likely amount to accrue. Management creates a baseline
calculation using historical sales and then utilizing forecast information, estimates the anticipated
sales volume each quarter to calculate the expected reduction to Net sales. The remainder of the
transaction price is fixed as agreed upon with the customer, limiting estimation of revenues,
including constraints.
The Company’s Accounts receivable and current and long-term contract assets and liabilities are
summarized in the following table.
 85 
The difference between the opening and closing balances of the Company’s contract assets and contract
liabilities primarily results from the timing difference between the contractual performance
obligation and the associated payment.
Provisions for estimated returns are established and the expected costs continue to be recognized as
contra-revenue per ASC 606 when the products are sold. The Company only offers an assurance type
warranty on products sold, and there is no material service to the customer beyond fixing defects
that existed at the time of sale and no warranties are sold separately.
Warranty liabilities are excluded from the table above. Amounts recognized during the year from
deferred revenue were not material. The Company records a right of return liability within each of
its operations to accrue for expected customer returns. Historical actual returns are used to
estimate future returns as a percentage of current sales. Obligations for returns and refunds were
not material individually or in the aggregate.
Allowance for Current Expected Credit Losses
The following table summarizes the movement in the Company’s allowance for current expected credit
losses:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Beginning balance $ 59.6 $ 56.6 $ 48.9 
 Bad debt expense 69.5 67.9 65.3 
 Uncollectible accounts written off, net -68.7 -64.9 -57.6 
 of recoveries 
 Ending balance $ 60.4 $ 59.6 $ 56.6 
 NOTE 19 – OTHER (INCOME) EXPENSE 
Other General (Income) Expense - Net
Included in Other general (income) expense - net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Provisions for environmental matters - $ -1.3 $ 80.7 $ -7.1 
 net 
 Gain on divestiture of business (see — -20.1 — 
 Note 3) 
 (Gain) loss on sale or disposition of -49.9 0.9 -17.8 
 assets 
 Other 12.4 5.6 — 
 Total $ -38.8 $ 67.1 $ -24.9 
Provisions for environmental matters – net represent initial provisions for site-specific estimated
costs of environmental investigation or remediation and increases or decreases to environmental-
related accruals as information becomes available upon which more accurate costs can be reasonably
estimated and as additional accounting guidelines are issued. Provisions for environmental matters -
net for the year ended December 31, 2024 included an immaterial amount of insurance proceeds related
to environmental cleanup at a current manufacturing site. See Note 10 for further details on the
Company’s environmental-related activities.
The (gain) loss on sale or disposition of assets represents the net realized (gain) loss associated
with the sale or disposal of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets previously used in
the conduct of the primary business of the Company. (Gain) loss on sale or disposition of assets for
the year ended December 31, 2024 included an immaterial amount of insurance proceeds related to a
current manufacturing site.
 86 
Other (Income) Expense - Net
Included in Other (income) expense - net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investment (gains) losses $ -16.9 $ -22.9 $ 9.7 
 Loss on extinguishment of debt (see Note — 12.8 — 
 7) 
 Net expense from banking activities 15.7 15.0 12.2 
 Foreign currency transaction related 3.9 80.5 33.6 
 losses - net 
 Miscellaneous pension and benefit -13.1 -21.1 4.0 
 (income) expense 
 Other income -69.8 -48.5 -39.6 
 Other expense 35.5 49.7 27.1 
 Total $ -44.7 $ 65.5 $ 47.0 
Investment (gains) losses primarily relate to the change in market value of the investments held in
the deferred compensation plan. See Note 17 for additional information on the fair value of these
investments.
Foreign currency transaction related losses - net include the impact from foreign currency
transactions, including from highly inflationary economies such as Argentina, and net realized losses
from foreign currency option and forward contracts. See Note 16 for further details regarding these
foreign currency contracts.
Miscellaneous pension and benefit (income) expense consists of the non-service components of net
periodic pension and benefit cost (credit). See Note 8.
Other income and other expense included items of revenue, gains, expenses and losses that were
unrelated to the primary business purpose of the Company. There were no items within other income or
other expense that were individually significant at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022.
 NOTE 20 – INCOME TAXES 
Significant components of the provisions for income taxes were as follows:
 Current: 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Federal $ 558.0 $ 553.4 $ 505.5 
 Foreign 155.1 147.6 90.3 
 State and local 132.2 109.0 102.0 
 Total current 845.3 810.0 697.8 
 Deferred: 
 Federal -54.8 -39.9 -81.7 
 Foreign -15.8 -51.5 -47.3 
 State and local -4.3 2.5 -15.8 
 Total deferred -74.9 -88.9 -144.8 
 Total provisions for income taxes $ 770.4 $ 721.1 $ 553.0 
 87 
A reconciliation of the statutory federal income tax rate to the effective tax rate follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 Statutory federal income tax rate 21.0 % 21.0 % 21.0 % 
 Effect of: 
 State and local income taxes 3.2 3.0 2.8 
 Investment vehicles -0.5 -0.5 -0.4 
 Employee share-based payments -2.1 -1.1 -1.4 
 Research and development credits -0.3 -0.4 -0.6 
 Amended returns and refunds -0.2 0.2 0.4 
 Taxes on non-U.S. earnings 1.1 0.8 0.2 
 Other - net 0.1 0.2 -0.5 
 Reported effective tax rate 22.3 % 23.2 % 21.5 % 
The decrease in the effective tax rate for 2024 compared to 2023 was primarily related to a more
favorable impact from tax benefits related to employee share-based payments. The other significant
components of the Company’s effective tax rate were consistent year-over-year.
Significant components of income before income taxes as used for income tax purposes, were as
follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Domestic $ 3,046.6 $ 2,817.0 $ 2,427.6 
 Foreign 405.2 292.9 145.5 
 $ 3,451.8 $ 3,109.9 $ 2,573.1 
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying
amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income
tax purposes using the enacted tax rates and laws that are currently in effect.
Significant components of the Company’s deferred tax assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022 were as follows:
 Deferred tax assets: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Environmental and other similar items $ 66.8 $ 72.0 $ 66.4 
 Employee related and benefit items 175.2 162.1 157.1 
 Operating lease liabilities 499.6 483.2 478.1 
 Research and development capitalization 103.9 81.5 52.6 
 Other items 206.5 205.6 204.1 
 Total deferred tax assets 1,052.0 1,004.4 958.3 
 Deferred tax liabilities: 
 Intangible assets and Property, plant 948.7 1,001.1 973.4 
 and equipment 
 LIFO inventories 120.5 115.2 97.3 
 Operating lease right-of-use assets 482.1 465.6 460.5 
 Other items 40.7 28.6 31.7 
 Total deferred tax liabilities 1,592.0 1,610.5 1,562.9 
 Net deferred tax liabilities $ 540.0 $ 606.1 $ 604.6 
Netted against the Company’s other deferred tax assets were valuation allowances of $ 124.5million, $
106.6million and $ 97.5million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The Company has $
13.5million of domestic net operating loss carryforwards acquired through acquisitions that have
expiration dates through tax year 2037, foreign tax credits of $ 34.9million that expire in calendar
years 2028 through 2034 and foreign net operating losses of $ 339.1million. The foreign net
 88 
operating losses are related to various jurisdictions that provide for both indefinite carryforward
periods and others with carryforward periods that expire between tax years 2024 to 2034.
The Company and its subsidiaries file income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and various
state and foreign jurisdictions. The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2013 through 2016 income
tax returns in 2023 and paid the related assessments in the fourth quarter of 2023 and first quarter
of 2024. The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2011 income tax return in 2023 and paid the tax
assessment in the second quarter of 2024 and the interest assessment in the third quarter of 2024.
The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2017 through 2019 income tax returns in the fourth
quarter of 2024 and expects to pay the tax and interest assessment in the first quarter of 2025. The
IRS plans to start its next audit cycle of the Company’s 2020 through 2022 income tax returns in
2025. As of December 31, 2024, the federal statute of limitations has not expired for the 2017
through 2024 tax years.
As of December 31, 2024, the Company is subject to non-U.S. income tax examinations for the tax years
of 2015 through 2024. In addition, the Company is subject to state and local income tax examinations
for the tax years 2017 through 2024.
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at beginning of year $ 121.8 $ 242.4 $ 228.5 
 Additions based on tax positions related 16.0 14.2 18.7 
 to the current year 
 Additions for tax positions of prior 12.8 12.6 10.6 
 years 
 Reductions for tax positions of prior -8.6 -16.9 -6.0 
 years 
 Settlements -31.7 -123.2 -1.7 
 Lapses of statutes of limitations -11.0 -7.3 -7.7 
 Balance at end of year $ 99.3 $ 121.8 $ 242.4 
The decrease in unrecognized tax benefits was primarily related to settlements of federal adjustments
with the IRS in the tax years 2017 through 2019. There were also additions in unrecognized tax
benefits related to the reversal of benefits recognized from certain positions taken on current and
prior year income tax returns filed in U.S. federal and various state jurisdictions. These additions
were partially offset by various positions taken on prior year income tax returns filed in U.S. and
various foreign jurisdictions that were no longer deemed to be at risk. At December 31, 2024, 2023
and 2022, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the
effective tax rate was $ 84.0million, $ 109.4million and $ 230.3million, respectively.
Included in the balance of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2024 is $ 7.9million related to
tax positions for which it is reasonably possible that the total amounts could significantly change
during the next twelve months. This amount represents a decrease in unrecognized tax benefits
comprised primarily of items related to federal audits of partnership investments and expiring
statutes in federal, foreign and state jurisdictions.
The Company classifies all income tax related interest and penalties as income tax expense. During
the year ended December 31, 2024, there was an increase in income tax interest and penalties of $
7.8million. During the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022, there was an increase in income tax
interest and penalties of $ 5.9million and $ 10.3million, respectively. The Company accrued $
18.8million, $ 20.4million and $ 36.6million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, for
the potential payment of interest and penalties.
 89 
Basic and diluted net income per share are calculated using the treasury stock method.
 Basic 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 2,681.4 $ 2,388.8 $ 2,020.1 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 251.0 255.4 258.0 
 Basic net income per share $ 10.68 $ 9.35 $ 7.83 
 Diluted 
 Net income $ 2,681.4 $ 2,388.8 $ 2,020.1 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 
 assuming dilution: 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 251.0 255.4 258.0 
 Stock options and other contingently 3.1 2.9 3.8 
 issuable shares(1) 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 254.1 258.3 261.8 
 assuming dilution 
 Diluted net income per share $ 10.55 $ 9.25 $ 7.72 
(1) Stock options and other contingently issuable shares excludes 0.9million, 2.8million and
1.9million shares at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, due to their anti-dilutive
effect.
 NOTE 22 – REPORTABLE SEGMENT INFORMATION 
The Company reports its segment information in the same way that management internally organizes its
business for assessing performance and making decisions regarding the allocation of resources in
accordance with the Segment Reporting Topic of the ASC. The Company has threereportable operating
segments: Paint Stores Group, Consumer Brands Group and Performance Coatings Group (individually, a
Reportable Segment and collectively, the Reportable Segments). Factors considered in determining the
threeReportable Segments of the Company include the nature of business activities, the management
structure directly accountable to the Company’s Chief Operating Decision Maker (CODM) for operating
and administrative activities, availability of discrete financial information and information
presented to the Board of Directors. The Company reports all other business activities within the
Administrative function.
The Company’s CODM has been identified as the Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer because
she has the final authority over performance assessment and resource allocation decisions. Because of
the diverse operations of the Company, the CODM regularly receives and uses discrete financial
information about each Reportable Segment as well as select supplemental financial information about
certain divisions, business units or subsidiaries of the Company. The CODM uses all such financial
information for performance assessments and resource allocation decisions. The CODM evaluates the
performance of and allocates resources to the Reportable Segments based on Segment profit or loss,
which represents the segments’ Income before income taxes. The accounting policies of the Reportable
Segments are the same as those described in Note 1.
The Paint Stores Group consisted of 4,773company-operated specialty paint stores in the United
States, Canada and the Caribbean region at December 31, 2024. Each store in this segment is engaged
in servicing the needs of architectural and industrial paint contractors and do-it-yourself
homeowners. These stores market and sell ABC corp. ® and other controlled brand architectural
paint and coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and related products. The
majority of these products are produced by manufacturing facilities in the Consumer Brands Group. In
addition, each store sells select purchased associated products. The loss of any single customer
would not have a material adverse effect on the business of this segment. During 2024, this segment
opened 79net new stores, consisting of 84new stores opened and 5stores closed. In 2023 and 2022, this
segment opened 70and 75net new stores, respectively. In accordance with ASC 280-10-50-9, the Paint
Stores Group as a whole is considered the operating segment, and because it meets the criteria in ASC
280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Consumer Brands Group manufactures and supplies a broad portfolio of branded and private-label
architectural paint, stains, varnishes, industrial products, wood finishes products, wood
preservatives, applicators, corrosion inhibitors, aerosols, caulks and adhesives to retailers,
including home centers and hardware stores, dedicated dealers and distributors throughout North
America, Latin America and Europe. Sales and marketing of certain controlled brand and private-label
products is performed by a direct sales staff. The products distributed through third-party customers
are intended for resale to the ultimate
 90 
end-user of the product. The Consumer Brands Group also consisted of 334company-operated specialty
paint stores in Latin America at December 31, 2024. Each store in this segment is engaged in
servicing the needs of home, commercial and industrial projects to contractors and do-it-yourself
customers in Latin America. These stores market and sell ABC corp. ® and other controlled
brand architectural paint and coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and
related products which are branded for the Latin America market. In addition, each store sells select
purchased associated products. The Consumer Brands Group had sales to certain customers that,
individually, may be a significant portion of the sales and related profitability of the segment.
During 2024, the segment opened 16net new stores, consisting of 18stores opened and 2stores closed.
In 2023 and 2022, this segment opened (closed) 11and ( 3) net new stores, respectively.
The Consumer Brands Group also supports the Company’s other businesses around the world with new
product research and development, manufacturing, distribution and logistics. Approximately 63% of the
total sales of the Consumer Brands Group in 2024 were intersegment transfers of products primarily
sold through the Paint Stores Group. This segment incurred most of the Company’s capital expenditures
related to ongoing environmental compliance measures, manufacturing capacity expansion, operational
efficiencies and maintenance projects at sites currently in operation. In accordance with ASC
280-10-50-9, the Consumer Brands Group as a whole is considered the operating segment, and because it
meets the criteria in ASC 280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Performance Coatings Group develops and sells industrial coatings for wood finishing and general
industrial (metal and plastic) applications, automotive refinish, protective and marine coatings,
coil coatings, packaging coatings and performance-based resins and colorants worldwide. This segment
licenses certain technology and trade names worldwide, including ABC corp. ® and other
controlled brand products which are distributed through the Paint Stores Group, this segment’s
324company-operated branches and by a direct sales staff and outside sales representatives to
retailers, dealers, jobbers, licensees and other third-party distributors. The Performance Coatings
Group had sales to certain customers that, individually, may be a significant portion of the sales of
the segment. However, the loss of any single customer would not have a material adverse effect on the
overall profitability of the segment. During 2024, the segment added 2new branches ( nobranches were
closed). In 2023 and 2022, this segment added 5and 35net new branches, respectively. In accordance
with ASC 280-10-50-9, the Performance Coatings Group as a whole is considered the operating segment,
and because it meets the criteria in ASC 280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Administrative function includes the administrative expenses and assets of the Company’s new
global headquarters and research and development center, both currently under construction. In
addition, it includes the operations of a real estate management unit that is responsible for the
ownership, management and leasing of non-retail properties held primarily for use by the Company,
including the Company’s current global headquarters and research and development center and disposal
of idle facilities. The Administrative function’s remaining assets consist primarily of cash and cash
equivalents, investments and deferred pension assets. Also included in the Administrative function
was interest expense, interest and investment income, certain expenses related to closed facilities
and environmental-related matters and other expenses that were not directly associated with the
Reportable Segments. Sales of this function represented external leasing revenue. The Administrative
function did not include any significant foreign operations. Gains and losses from the sale of
property were not a significant operating factor in determining the performance of the Administrative
function.
Net external sales of all consolidated foreign subsidiaries were $ 4.426billion, $ 4.428billion and $
4.294billion for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Long-lived assets consisted of Property, plant and equipment, net, Goodwill, Intangible assets, net,
Operating lease right-of-use assets, deferred pension assets and Other assets. The aggregate total of
long-lived assets for the Company was $ 18.231billion, $ 17.441billion and $ 16.686billion at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Long-lived assets of consolidated foreign
subsidiaries totaled $ 3.405billion, $ 3.586billion and $ 3.369billion at December 31, 2024, 2023 and
2022, respectively.
Total Assets of the Company were $ 23.633billion, $ 22.954billion and $ 22.594billion at December 31,
2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Total assets of consolidated foreign subsidiaries were $
5.208billion, $ 5.718billion and $ 5.337billion, which represented 22.0%, 24.9% and 23.6% of the
Company’s total assets at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
No single geographic area outside the United States was significant relative to consolidated Net
sales or consolidated long-lived assets. Export sales and sales to any individual customer were each
less than 10 percent of consolidated sales to unaffiliated customers during all years presented.
In the reportable segment financial information that follows, Segment profit represents each
segment’s Income before income taxes. Domestic intersegment transfers are primarily accounted for at
the approximate fully absorbed manufactured cost, based on normal capacity volumes, plus customary
distribution costs for paint products. Non-paint domestic and all international intersegment
transfers are primarily accounted for at values comparable to normal unaffiliated customer sales. All
intersegment
 91 
transfers are eliminated within the Administrative function. In 2023, the absorbed manufactured cost
standards utilized for domestic intersegment transfers were established inclusive of forecasted cost
reductions from planned initiatives. Deviations from the forecasted cost reductions were recognized
within the Consumer Brands Group. Due to the nature of the Company’s integrated manufacturing
operations and centralized administrative and information technology support, a substantial amount of
allocations are made to determine segment financial information. Expenses that are specifically
identifiable to a certain Reportable Segment are allocated accordingly. For expenses that are not
specifically identifiable to a certain Reportable Segment, an appropriate allocation base is
identified, and expenses are allocated based on each segment’s respective share of the allocation
base. The significant expense categories and amounts align with the segment-level information that is
regularly provided to the CODM and include intersegment expenses within the amounts shown.
Identifiable assets were those directly identified with each Reportable Segment.
 2024 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Consol… 
 Group Group Group Adminis… Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net $ 13,188.0 $ 3,108.0 $ 6,797.3 $ 5.2 $ 23,098… 
 sales 
 Inters… — 5,304.3 56.8 -5,361.1 — 
 transf… 
 Total 
 net 
 sales $ 13,188.0 $ 8,412.3 $ 6,854.1 $ -5,355.9 $ 23,098… 
 and 
 inters… 
 transf… 
 Cost of 
 goods $ 5,900.8 $ 6,943.5 $ 4,406.5 $ -5,347.4 $ 11,903… 
 sold 
 Sellin… 
 general 
 and 4,405.6 863.1 1,443.0 710.4 7,422.1 
 admini… 
 expens… 
 Intere… — 1.4 — 414.3 415.7 
 expense 
 Other 
 segment -21.0 14.4 -23.3 -64.6 -94.5 
 items(… 
 Income 
 before $ 2,902.6 $ 589.9 $ 1,027.9 $ -1,068.6 $ 3,451.8 
 income 
 taxes 
 % to 
 Net 22.0 % 19.0 % 15.1 % nm 14.9 % 
 sales 
 Supple… 
 Inform… 
 Identi… $ 5,878.0 $ 6,854.7 $ 7,847.4 $ 3,052.5 $ 23,632… 
 assets 
 Capital 141.3 290.3 15.2 623.2 1,070.0 
 expend… 
 Deprec… 89.9 162.7 18.0 26.8 297.4 
 Amorti… 1.7 66.4 256.7 1.8 326.6 
 nm - 
 not 
 meanin… 
(1) Other segment items includes Other general (income) expense - net, Interest income and Other
(income) expense - net. See Note 19.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 92 
and Other (income) expense - net. See Notes 3 and 6 for information on Impairment and Note 19 for
information on Other general (income) expense - net and Other (income) expense - net.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 2022 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Consol… 
 Group Group Group Adminis… Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net $ 11,963.3 $ 3,388.4 $ 6,793.5 $ 3.7 $ 22,148… 
 sales 
 Inters… — 5,214.8 203.7 -5,418.5 — 
 transf… 
 Total 
 net 
 sales $ 11,963.3 $ 8,603.2 $ 6,997.2 $ -5,414.8 $ 22,148… 
 and 
 inters… 
 transf… 
 Cost of 
 goods $ 5,826.8 $ 7,454.8 $ 4,965.4 $ -5,423.2 $ 12,823… 
 sold 
 Sellin… 
 general 
 and 3,810.1 817.8 1,275.6 428.1 6,331.6 
 admini… 
 expens… 
 Intere… — — — 390.8 390.8 
 expense 
 Other 
 segment -21.7 16.4 21.3 13.6 29.6 
 items(… 
 Income 
 before $ 2,348.1 $ 314.2 $ 734.9 $ -824.1 $ 2,573.1 
 income 
 taxes 
 % to 
 Net 19.6 % 9.3 % 10.8 % nm 11.6 % 
 sales 
 Supple… 
 Inform… 
 Identi… $ 5,873.6 $ 6,749.6 $ 8,296.8 $ 1,674.0 $ 22,594… 
 assets 
 Capital 87.3 295.0 38.7 223.5 644.5 
 expend… 
 Deprec… 73.9 126.2 29.1 34.8 264.0 
 Amorti… 3.3 79.8 232.0 2.0 317.1 
 nm - 
 not 
 meanin… 
(1) Other segment items includes Other general (income) expense - net, Impairment, Interest income
and Other (income) expense - net. See Note 6 for information on Impairment and Note 19 for
information on Other general (income) expense - net and Other (income) expense - net.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 93 
None.
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
As of the end of the period covered by this report, we carried out an evaluation, under the
supervision and with the participation of our Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer and our
Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure
controls and procedures pursuant to Rule 13a-15 and Rule 15d-15 of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended (Exchange Act). Based upon that evaluation, our Chair, President and Chief Executive
Officer and our Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer concluded that as of the
end of the period covered by this report, our disclosure controls and procedures were effective to
ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in reports we file or submit under the
Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in
Securities and Exchange Commission rules and forms, and accumulated and communicated to our
management, including our Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer and our Senior Vice President
– Finance and Chief Financial Officer, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
The “Report of Management on Internal Control over Financial Reporting” and the “Report of the
Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Internal Control over Financial Reporting” are set
forth in Item 8.
There have been no changes in our internal control over financial reporting identified in connection
with the evaluation that occurred during the period covered by this report that have materially
affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial
reporting.
Trading Arrangements
During the quarter ended December 31, 2024, none of the Company’s directors or “officers,” as defined
in Rule 16a-1(f) of the Exchange Act, adopted, modified, or terminateda “Rule 10b5-1 trading
arrangement” or a “non-Rule 10b5-1 trading arrangement,” as each term is defined in Item 408 of
Regulation S-K.
Not applicable.
 94 
Directors
The information regarding our directors and director nominees is set forth in our Proxy Statement
under the caption “Proposal 1 – Election of 9 Directors” and is incorporated herein by reference.
There have been no material changes to the procedures by which security holders may recommend
nominees to our Board of Directors. Please refer to the information set forth in our Proxy Statement
under the caption “Board Committees,” which is incorporated herein by reference.
Executive Officers
The information regarding our executive officers is set forth under the caption “Information About
Our Executive Officers” in Part I of this report, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
To the extent disclosure of any delinquent form under Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 is made by the Company, such disclosure will be set forth in our Proxy Statement under the
caption “Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports” and is incorporated herein by reference.
Audit Committee
The information regarding the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors and audit committee financial
experts is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Board Committees” and is incorporated
herein by reference.
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a Code of Conduct, which applies to all directors, officers and employees, including
our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or
controller and persons performing similar functions, of ABC corp. and our subsidiaries
wherever located. Our Code of Conduct contains the general guidelines and principles for conducting
ABC corp.’ business consistent with the highest standards of business ethics.
We have also adopted a Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management, pursuant to which our chief
executive officer, chief financial officer and senior financial management are responsible for
creating and maintaining a culture of high ethical standards and of commitment to compliance
throughout our Company to ensure the fair and timely reporting of ABC corp.’ financial results
and condition. Senior financial management includes the controller, the treasurer, the principal
financial/accounting personnel in our operating groups and divisions and all other
financial/accounting personnel within our corporate departments and operating groups and divisions
with staff supervision responsibilities.
Our Code of Conduct and Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management are available on our Investor
Relations website, investors.sherwin.com.
We intend to disclose on our Investor Relations website, investors.sherwin.com, any amendment to, or
waiver from, a provision of our Code of Conduct or Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management
that applies to our directors and executive officers, including our principal executive officer,
principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller or any persons performing
similar functions, and that is required to be publicly disclosed pursuant to the rules of the SEC.
Insider Trading Policy
The information regarding our Insider Trading Policy is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the
caption “Insider Trading Policy” and is incorporated herein by reference. A copy of our Insider
Trading Policy is filed with this Annual Report on Form 10-K as Exhibit 19.
 95 
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the captions “2024
Director Compensation Table,” “Director Compensation Program,” “Executive Compensation,” “Executive
Compensation Tables” and “2024 CEO Pay Ratio” and is incorporatedherein by reference (other than the
Compensation Committee Report, which will be deemed furnished).
The information regarding security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management is set forth
in our Proxy Statement under the captions “Security Ownership of Management, Directors and Director
Nominees” and “Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners” and is incorporated herein by
reference.
The information regarding securities authorized for issuance under the Company’s equity compensation
plans is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Equity Compensation Plan Information”
and is incorporated herein by reference.
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the captions “Certain
Relationships and Transactions with Related Persons” and “Director Independence” and is incorporated
herein by reference.
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Matters
Relating to the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm” and is incorporated herein by
reference.
 96 
Schedule II — Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves for the years ended December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022 is set forth below. All other schedules for which provision is made in the applicable
SEC accounting regulations are not required under the related instructions or are inapplicable and
therefore have been omitted.
Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves
(Schedule II)
Changes in deferred tax asset valuation allowances were as follows:
 (millions of dollars) 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Beginning balance $ 106.6 $ 97.5 $ 97.2 
 Additions (deductions)(1) 17.9 9.1 0.3 
 Ending balance $ 124.5 $ 106.6 $ 97.5 
(1) Additions (deductions) did not have a material impact on the Income Statement in 2024, 2023 or
2022.
 97 
(3) Exhibits
 Amended and Restated Articles of 
 Incorporation of the Company, as 
 amended through February 18, 2015, 
 filed as Exhibit 3 to the Company’s 
 Current Report on Form 8-K dated 
 February 18, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Amendment to the Amended and Restated 
 Articles of Incorporation of the 
 Company, as amended through February 
 18, 2015, filed as Exhibit 3.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 3.1 dated March 3, 2021, and incorporated 
 3.2 herein by reference. 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Regulations of the Company (As Amended 
 and Restated July 19, 2023), filed as 
 3.3 Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s Current 
 Report on Form 8-K dated July 18, 2023, 
 and incorporated herein by reference. 
 Description of Securities Registered 
 under Section 12 of the Securities 
 Exchange Act of 1934 filed as Exhibit 
 4.1 4(a) to the Company’s Annual Report on 
 Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended 
 December 31, 2021, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Indenture between the Company and The 
 Bank of New York Mellon (as successor 
 to Chemical Bank), as trustee, dated as 
 4.2 of February 1, 1996, filed as Exhibit  
 4(a) to Form S-3 Registration Statement 
 Number 333-01093 dated February 20, 
 1996, and incorporated herein by 
 reference. 
 Third Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and The Bank of New 
 York Mellon, as trustee (including Form 
 4.2.1 of Note), dated as of December 7, 2012, 
 filed as Exhibit 4.2 to the Company’s 
 Current Report on Form 8-K dated 
 December 4, 2012, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Indenture by and between the Company 
 and Wells Fargo Bank, National 
 Association, as trustee, dated July 31, 
 4.3 2015, filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 First Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.1 dated July 31, 2015, (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.2 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Second Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.2 dated July 31, 2015, (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.3 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Sixth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.3 dated May 16, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.4 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated May 16, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Seventh Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.4 dated May 16, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.5 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated May 16, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Eleventh Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.5 dated June 2, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.4 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated June 2, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Twelfth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.6 dated June 2, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.5 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated June 2, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Thirteenth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.7 dated August 26, 2019 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated August 26, 2019, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 98 
None.
 104 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the
Company has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized, on February 20, 2025.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated on
February 20, 2025.
 THE ABC corp. COMPANY 
 By: /S/ MARY L. GARCEAU 
 Mary L. Garceau, Secretary 
 * HEIDI G. PETZ Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer, Director 
 (Principal Executive Officer) 
 Heidi G. Petz 
 * ALLEN J. MISTYSYN Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer (Principal 
 Financial Officer) 
 Allen J. Mistysyn 
 * J. PAUL LANG Senior Vice President – Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer 
 (Principal Accounting Officer) 
 J. Paul Lang 
 * KERRII B. ANDERSON Director 
 Kerrii B. Anderson 
 * ARTHUR F. ANTON Director 
 Arthur F. Anton 
 * JEFF M. FETTIG Director 
 Jeff M. Fettig 
 * JOHN G. MORIKIS Director 
 John G. Morikis 
 * CHRISTINE A. POON Director 
 Christine A. Poon 
 * AARON M. POWELL Director 
 Aaron M. Powell 
 * MARTA R. STEWART Director 
 Marta R. Stewart 
 * MICHAEL H. THAMAN Director 
 Michael H. Thaman 
 * MATTHEW THORNTON III Director 
 Matthew Thornton III 
 * THOMAS L. WILLIAMS Director 
 Thomas L. Williams 
 The undersigned, by signing her name hereto, does sign this report on behalf of the 
 * designated officers and directors of the Company pursuant to powers of attorney executed on 
 behalf of each such officer and director and filed as an exhibit to this report. 
 February 20, 
 By: /S/ MARY L. GARCEAU 2025 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Mary L. Garceau, Attorney-in-fact 
 105


ITEM 1A: RISK FACTORS
=====================

ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS │
The risks described below and in other documents we file from time to time with the SEC could
materially and adversely affect our business, results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or
financial condition. Although the risks are organized by headings, and each risk is discussed
separately, many are interrelated. While we believe we have identified and discussed below the key
risks affecting our business, there may be additional risks and uncertainties that are not presently
known or that are not currently believed to be significant that may adversely affect our business,
results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition in the future. Readers should not
interpret the disclosure of any risk factor to imply that the risk has not already materialized.
 ECONOMIC AND STRATEGIC RISKS 
Adverse changes in general business and economic conditions in the United States and worldwide have
in the past adversely affected and may in the future adversely affect our results of operations, cash
flow, liquidity or financial condition.
We operate all over the world serving customers in more than 120 countries. Our business, operations
and business plans and strategies are sensitive to global and regional business and economic
conditions. Adverse changes in such conditions in the United States and worldwide have in the past
impacted and may in the future reduce the demand for some of our products, adversely impact our
ability to predict and meet any future changes in the demand for our products and impair the ability
of those with whom we do business to satisfy their obligations to us, each of which could adversely
affect our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition. Changes in inflation
rates, interest rates, tax rates, unemployment rates, labor costs, healthcare costs, recessionary
conditions, geopolitical conditions, governmental policies, laws and regulations (including import
and export requirements such as new or increased tariffs, sanctions, quotas or trade barriers),
business disruptions due to cybersecurity incidents, terrorist activity, armed conflicts and wars
(including the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine and Israel and Hamas), public health
crises, pandemics, outbreaks of disease, catastrophic events, adverse weather conditions or natural
disasters (including those that may be related to climate change or otherwise), supply chain
disruptions (including those caused by industry capacity constraints, labor shortages, raw material
availability and transportation and logistics delays and constraints) and other economic factors have
in the past and could in the future adversely affect demand for some of our products, our ability to
predict and meet any future changes in the demand for our products, the availability, delivery or
cost of raw materials, our ability to adequately staff and maintain operations at affected facilities
and our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition and that of our customers,
vendors and suppliers.
In particular, high levels of ongoing global inflation have impacted consumer and manufacturing
behavior in recent years. We expect inflationary pressure to continue to impact consumer and
manufacturing customer behavior during 2025, including in the United States housing market as a
result of elevated mortgage rates and in global industrial markets as a result of softer demand. Such
impacts could adversely affect the demand for some of our products and our results of operations,
cash flow, liquidity or financial condition. In addition, market uncertainty and volatility in
various geographies have been magnified as a result of potential shifts in U.S. and foreign trade,
economic and other policies following the 2024 U.S. presidential and congressional elections, and any
such actual shifts, including price increases on certain raw materials, or changes in the
availability of, or tariffs on certain imported raw materials, could adversely impact our results of
operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
Protracted duration of economic downturns in cyclical segments of the economy may depress the demand
for some of our products and adversely affect our sales, earnings, cash flow or financial condition.
Portions of our business involve the sale of paint, coatings and related products to segments of the
economy that are cyclical in nature, particularly segments relating to construction, housing,
manufacturing and oil production, refining, storage and transportation. Our sales to these segments
are affected by the levels of discretionary consumer and business spending in these segments. During
economic downturns in these segments, the levels of consumer and business discretionary spending have
in the past decreased. A decrease in consumer and business discretionary spending has in the past and
could in the future reduce the demand for some of our products and has in the past and could in the
future adversely affect our sales, earnings, cash flow or financial condition.
Interest rates, in particular, drive shifts in consumer behavior with respect to the housing market,
and have in the past adversely affected and may in the future adversely affect demand for new
residential homes, existing home turnover and new non-residential construction. These shifts in
consumer behavior have in the past adversely impacted and may in the future adversely
 6 
impact demand for some of our products, and our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or
financial condition. Although the Federal Reserve cut interest rates in 2024, mortgage rates have
remained high and we have not experienced meaningful positive impacts on demand for our products that
serve these segments of the economy to date. Although changes in inflation, the interest rate
environment and the mortgage market are difficult to predict, we expect the recent and continued
combination of high interest rates and high inflation to continue to impact consumer and
manufacturing customer behavior in 2025. Any worsening in these segments will reduce the demand for
some of our products and may adversely impact sales, earnings and cash flow.
In the U.S. construction and housing segments, labor markets are impacted by a number of factors,
including high employment levels, unemployment programs and subsidies, immigration laws and
volatility in general macroeconomic factors. We continue to see project backlogs in these segments
due to contractors experiencing a shortage of skilled workers, resulting in an adverse effect on the
growth rate of demand for our products. While we would typically expect to see higher demand for our
products as project backlogs are reduced in the future, inflation and other economic conditions may
delay a recovery in demand, which may result in the labor shortage and such other conditions
adversely impacting our sales, earnings, cash flow or financial condition.
 OPERATIONAL RISKS 
Unexpected shortages and increases in the cost of raw materials and energy may adversely affect our
earnings or cash flow.
We purchase raw materials (including petrochemical-derived resins, latex and solvents, titanium
dioxide and various additives) and energy for use in the manufacturing, distribution and sale of our
products. Factors such as political instability, higher tariffs, import/export restrictions, supply
chain disruptions, adverse weather conditions and natural disasters (including those that may be
related to climate change or otherwise), armed conflicts and wars, or public health crises have
impacted and may in the future adversely impact the availability and cost of raw materials and fuel
supplies, our ability to meet customer demands for some of our products, adequately staff and
maintain operations at affected facilities and our costs generally. In addition, environmental and
social regulations, including regulations related to climate change or otherwise, have in the past
and may in the future negatively impact us or our suppliers in terms of availability and cost of raw
materials, as well as sources and supply of energy.
Although raw materials and energy supplies (including oil and natural gas) are generally available
from various sources in sufficient quantities, unexpected shortages and increases in the cost of raw
materials and energy, supplier capacity constraints, or any deterioration in our relationships with
or the financial viability of our suppliers, may have an adverse effect on our earnings or cash flow.
Although we generally have a number of suppliers, in some cases we have limited or single-sources of
supply. We purchase raw materials globally from sources around the world, including in the Middle
East, Central and South America and other areas that may be less politically stable than other areas.
Wars, armed conflicts, political instability, civil disturbances and unrest, terrorist attacks and
actions by governments in these areas (such as the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine and
Israel and Hamas and any expansion or increase in the severity and intensity of such) may decrease
the supply and increase the price of raw materials that we use for our business, which could have a
material adverse effect on our sales, earnings, cash flow or results of operations. For example,
although we do not have significant operations in the region, the conflict between Israel and Hamas
has caused disruption, instability and volatility in supply chains and logistics, including shipping
disruptions in the Red Sea and surrounding waterways.
In the event we experience supply chain disruptions from our suppliers, we may not be able to timely
shift to internal production or secure alternate sources in order to prevent significant impacts to
our business, or we may experience quality issues with raw materials and energy sourced from
alternate sources. If we are unable to offset such disruptions through internal production or
alternate sources, we may experience adverse impacts to our business, including adverse effects to
our earnings and cash flow.
If the cost of raw materials and energy increases, we may not be able to offset higher costs in a
timely manner by sufficiently decreasing our operating costs or raising the prices of our products.
Following two years of historic inflation, certain raw material and energy prices decreased in 2023
and 2024, particularly resins and solvents derived from petrochemical feedstock sources such as
propylene and ethylene. Ongoing global supply and demand dynamics drive the cost of raw materials and
energy, which could continue to experience periods of volatility in the future and may adversely
affect our earnings and cash flow.
Catastrophic events, adverse weather conditions and natural disasters (including those that may be
related to climate change or otherwise) may temporarily reduce the demand for some of our products,
impact our ability to meet the demand for our products or cause supply chain disruptions and
increased costs, and could have a negative effect on our sales, earnings or cash flow.
Our business is seasonal in nature, with the second and third quarters typically generating a higher
proportion of sales and earnings than other quarters. From time to time, catastrophic events, adverse
weather conditions and natural disasters (including
 7 
those that may be related to climate change or otherwise) have caused business disruptions and have
had an adverse effect on our sales, manufacture and distribution of paint, coatings and related
products. Our facilities and systems are not fully redundant and our disaster recovery planning may
not be sufficient to meet business needs in the event of disruptions. In the event of catastrophic
events, adverse weather conditions or a natural disaster causing significant damage to any one or
more of our principal manufacturing or distribution facilities, we may not be able to manufacture the
products needed to meet customer demand, which could have an adverse effect on our sales of certain
paint, coatings and related products.
Also from time to time, the impact of these risks to our suppliers has had or may have an adverse
effect on our sales, manufacture and distribution of certain of our products. Catastrophic events,
adverse weather conditions or natural disasters and their impacts have in the past resulted, and may
in the future result, in industry-wide supply chain disruptions, increased raw material and other
costs and our hindered ability to manufacture the products needed to fully meet customer demand.
In any of these instances, an adverse effect on sales may cause a reduction in our earnings or cash
flow.
Although we have an extensive customer base, the loss of any of our largest customers could adversely
affect our sales, earnings or cash flow.
We have a large and varied customer base due to our extensive distribution platform. During 2024, no
individual customer accounted for sales totaling more than ten percent of our sales. However, we have
some customers that, individually, purchase a large amount of products from us. Although our broad
distribution channels help to minimize the impact of the loss of any one customer or the loss of a
significant amount of sales to any one customer, the loss of any of these large customers, or the
loss of significant amount of sales to any of these large customers, could have an adverse effect on
our sales, earnings or cash flow.
Increased competition or failure to keep pace with developments in key competitive areas of our
business may reduce our sales, earnings or cash flow performance.
We face substantial competition from many international, national, regional and local competitors of
various sizes in the manufacture, distribution and sale of our paint, coatings and related products.
Some of our competitors operate more extensively in certain regions around the world and have greater
financial or operational resources to compete internationally. They may secure better terms from
certain vendors, adopt more aggressive pricing and devote more resources to certain product lines or
parts of their business. Other competitors are smaller and may be able to offer more specialized
products. Technology, product quality, product composition, raw material sourcing, product innovation
and development (including relating to increased customer interest in the sustainability attributes
of products and our related key strategies and initiatives for expanding our product offerings),
breadth of product line, technical expertise, distribution, service and price are key competitive
factors for our business. Competition in any of these areas, or failure to keep pace with
developments in any of these areas, may reduce our sales and adversely affect our earnings or cash
flow by resulting in decreased sales volumes, reduced prices and increased costs of manufacturing,
distributing and selling our products.
Disruptions to our information technology systems, including due to digitization efforts or
cybersecurity incidents, may interfere with our operating and financial processes, result in the
compromise or loss of critical and confidential information and severely harm our business.
We rely on information technology systems to conduct our business. Information technology systems are
important to many of our business-critical operating and financial processes, including production
planning, manufacturing, distribution, communication with our employees, customers and suppliers,
sales and customer service, research and development, recording and processing transactions and the
production of accurate and timely reports on our financial and operating results. In connection with
our digitization initiative, we have begun a multi-year phased process to upgrade and harmonize
certain components of our information technology systems, including our financial processing systems.
We are making significant investments in this complex, enterprise-wide initiative. Planned
implementations will lead to changes in our operating and financial processes as well as our internal
control over financial reporting. Disruptions to our information technology systems could occur if we
do not effectively design or implement these systems solutions, or otherwise fail to manage resulting
changes in processes and controls. This could adversely affect our operations, negatively impact our
financial reporting and the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting and have a
material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Some of the information technology systems we rely on are maintained or operated by third-party
providers, including cloud-based systems. Cybersecurity incidents, attacks and cybersecurity threats
are increasingly sophisticated, constantly evolving and originate from many sources globally and
often cannot be recognized or understood until the target has already been attacked. Despite our
efforts to prevent these threats and disruptions to our information technology systems, these systems
and those of our third-party providers may be affected by damage or interruption resulting from,
among other causes, cybersecurity incidents, attacks, security breaches, power outages, system or
operational failures or malware (including ransomware and other programs that operate with malicious
intent). These risks are expected to continue to be magnified due to the increased reliance on
information technology systems to conduct our business, including those used in furtherance of
supporting remote and
 8 
hybrid in-office work environments and managing our global operating and financial processes.
Disruptions to these systems may impair our ability to conduct business and threaten the
availability, confidentiality and integrity of our systems and information and have a material
adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
As part of our business, we collect and handle information about our business, customers, employees
and suppliers. Despite the security measures we have in place, our facilities and systems and those
of third parties we rely on or do business with, may be vulnerable to cybersecurity incidents,
attacks, security breaches, malware (including ransomware and other programs that operate with
malicious intent), power outages, system failures, acts of vandalism, human or technical errors,
fraud (including through phishing or other social engineering attempts) or other similar events or
disruptions.
Our information, facilities and systems and those hosted or supported by third parties on our behalf
could also be impacted by the intentional or unintentional improper conduct of our employees, vendors
or others who have access to and may mishandle or misappropriate information or access systems or
facilities. Any such event involving the misappropriation, loss or other unauthorized disclosure of
information or disruption of our systems, whether impacting us or third parties we rely on or do
business with, could result in losses, damage our reputation or relationships with customers and
suppliers, expose us to the risks of litigation, regulatory action and liability, including
individual claims or consumer class actions, commercial litigation, administrative and civil or
criminal investigations or actions, regulatory intervention and sanctions or fines, investigation and
remediation costs, loss of intellectual property, release of confidential information, alteration or
corruption of data or systems, costs related to remediation or the payment of ransom, and litigation
and possible prolonged negative publicity, and disrupt our operations and have a material adverse
effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
We and third parties we rely on or do business with have experienced cybersecurity attacks and
incidents in the past, some of which have resulted in unauthorized access to our information and
systems and other disruptions to our business operations, and we could in the future experience
similar incidents. Although we implement various controls to try to mitigate risks to our systems,
information and other property, there can be no guarantee that the actions and controls we have
implemented, or which we have caused third-party service providers to implement, will be sufficient
to protect and mitigate risks to our systems, information or other property.
The domestic and international regulatory environment related to information security, data
collection and transfer, digital marketing or telemarketing and privacy is increasingly rigorous and
complex, with new and rapidly changing requirements applicable to our business, which often require
changes to our business practices. Compliance with these requirements, including the European Union’s
General Data Protection Regulation, China’s Personal Information Protection, Data Security and Cyber
Security Laws, the California Consumer Privacy Act as amended by the California Privacy Rights Act,
other U.S. state privacy laws and a growing number of other international and domestic regulations,
are costly and will result in additional costs in our efforts to continue to comply. These laws and
regulations can provide for significant penalties for non-compliance, which could result in
additional costs of compliance, enforcement actions, regulatory investigations and fines, individual
or class action litigation, commercial litigation or reputational harm. Ongoing efforts to comply
with these laws also may divert management and employee attention from other business and growth
initiatives.
Our ability to attract, retain, develop and progress a qualified global workforce could adversely
impact our business and impair our ability to meet our strategic objectives and the needs of our
customers.
Our continued success depends in part on our ability to identify, attract and onboard qualified
candidates with the requisite education, background, skills and experience and our ability to retain,
develop, progress and engage qualified employees across our business, including our stores, fleet,
manufacturing, research and development, information technology, corporate and other operations and
functions. To the extent we are unable to remain competitive with our total rewards programs (which
include compensation and benefits programs and practices), talent management strategy, workplace
culture and strategies, initiatives, programs and practices that drive belonging and a positive
employee experience, or if qualified candidates or employees become more difficult to attract or
retain under reasonable terms, we may experience higher labor-related costs and may be unable to
attract, retain, develop and progress a qualified global workforce, which could adversely affect our
business and future success and impair our ability to meet our strategic objectives and the needs of
our customers .
A number of factors may adversely affect the labor force available to us or increase labor costs
generally, including high employment levels, population migration, unemployment programs and
subsidies, immigration laws and volatility in general macroeconomic factors impacting the labor
market. Although we have not experienced any material labor shortage to date, over the past few
years, we have experienced an increasingly competitive labor market. A sustained labor shortage or
increased turnover rates within our employee base (or within the employee base of key suppliers or
third-party manufacturers), could negatively affect our supply chain or our ability to efficiently
operate our manufacturing and distribution facilities and overall business.
 9 
Our results of operations, cash flow or financial condition may be negatively impacted if we do not
successfully integrate past and future acquisitions into our existing operations and if the
performance of the businesses we acquire do not meet our expectations.
We have historically made strategic acquisitions of businesses in the paint and coatings industry and
likely will acquire additional businesses in the future as part of our long-term growth strategy and
initiatives. The success of past and future acquisitions depends in large part on our ability to
integrate the operations and personnel of the acquired companies and manage challenges that may arise
as a result of the acquisitions, particularly when the acquired businesses operate in new or foreign
markets. In the event we do not successfully integrate such past and future acquisitions into our
existing operations so as to realize the expected return on our investment, our results of
operations, cash flow or financial condition could be adversely affected.
Risks and uncertainties associated with our expansion into and our operations in South America, Asia,
Europe and other foreign markets have in the past and could in the future adversely affect our
results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
Net sales of our consolidated foreign subsidiaries totaled approximately 19.2%, 19.2% and 19.4% of
our total consolidated Net sales in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Sales outside of the United
States make up a significant part of our current business and future strategic plans. Our results of
operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition have in the past and could in the future be
adversely affected by a variety of domestic and international factors, including general economic
conditions, political instability, inflation rates, recessions, sanctions, tariffs, foreign currency
exchange rates, foreign currency exchange controls, interest rates, foreign investment and
repatriation restrictions, legal and regulatory constraints, civil unrest, armed conflicts and wars
(including the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine and Israel and Hamas), difficulties in
staffing and managing foreign operations and other economic and political factors. In addition,
public health crises in foreign jurisdictions may temporarily reduce the demand for some of our
products and adversely affect the availability and cost of raw materials. Our inability to
successfully manage the risks and uncertainties relating to any of these factors could adversely
affect our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
In many foreign countries, it is not uncommon for others to engage in certain business practices we
are prohibited from engaging in because of regulations applicable to us, such as the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act and the UK Bribery Act. Recent years have seen a substantial increase in anti-bribery
law enforcement activity, with more frequent and aggressive investigations and enforcement
proceedings by both U.S. and non-U.S. regulators, and an increase in criminal and civil proceedings
brought against companies and individuals. Although we have internal control policies and procedures
designed to promote compliance with these regulations, there can be no assurance our policies and
procedures will prevent a violation of these regulations. Any violation could cause an adverse effect
on our results of operations, cash flow or financial condition.
Policy changes affecting international trade could adversely impact the demand for our products and
our competitive position.
International, national and regional laws, regulations and policies that have the effect of
restricting global trade and markets and restricting the import and export of products, services and
technology, or those of our customers, or for the benefit of favored industries or sectors, could
interfere with our operations, supply chain, manufacturing costs and customer relationships and harm
our business. Due to the global scope of our operations, changes in government policies on foreign
trade and investment may affect the demand for our products and services, impact the competitive
position of our products or prevent us from being able to sell products in certain countries.
Expanding export controls or limits on foreign investment, for example, has in the past and could in
the future impact the global supply of raw materials. Government actions taken in connection with the
United States-China trade conflict has in the past and could in the future impact business, including
sales, imports and exports. Our business benefits from free trade agreements, which may include the
United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement and EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement, and efforts to
withdraw from, or substantially modify such agreements, in addition to trends such as protectionism
or nationalism and the implementation of more restrictive trade policies, such as more detailed
inspections, higher tariffs, import or export licensing requirements, exchange controls or new
barriers to entry, could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial
condition or cash flow and that of our customers, vendors and suppliers.
We may not achieve our strategies or expectations relating to sustainability considerations, which
could expose us to potential liabilities, increased costs, reputational harm and other adverse
effects on our business.
We have established strategies and expectations for our business relating to certain sustainability
considerations, including regarding reducing greenhouse gas emissions, increasing energy efficiency,
increasing use of electricity from renewable energy sources, reducing waste and improving safety
performance. These strategies and expectations reflect our current business plans and aspirations,
and there is no guarantee that they will be achieved. Our ability to achieve any such strategies or
expectations is subject to numerous factors and conditions, many of which are outside of our control.
Examples of such factors include, but are not limited to, evolving legal, regulatory and other
standards, processes and assumptions; the pace of scientific and
 10 
technological developments; increased costs; the availability of requisite suppliers, energy sources,
or financing; and changes in carbon markets. Failures or delays (whether actual or perceived) in
achieving our strategies or expectations related to these matters could expose us to potential
liabilities, increased costs, reputational harm and other adverse effects on our business.
Furthermore, many governments, regulators, investors, employees, customers, media outlets and other
stakeholders are focused on sustainability considerations relating to businesses, including climate
change and greenhouse gas emissions, natural capital circularity, human capital and belonging,
culture and employee experience. Our business may face scrutiny from such stakeholders and if our
strategies relating to sustainability considerations do not meet stakeholder expectations and
standards (including with respect to establishing science-based targets), which continue to evolve
and may differ across jurisdictions in which we operate, our business, financial condition, results
of operations and reputation could be adversely impacted. Similarly, our failure or perceived failure
to pursue or fulfill our strategies and expectations; comply with federal, state, or international
ethical, environmental, or other standards, regulations, or expectations; adhere to public
statements; satisfy new and emerging reporting standards; or meet evolving and varied stakeholder
expectations within the timelines we announce, or at all, could have adverse operational,
reputational, financial and legal impacts.
Our business, reputation, image and brands could be damaged by negative publicity.
Our reputation, image and recognized brands significantly contribute to our business and success, as
they are critical to retaining and growing our customer base and our relationships with other
stakeholders. Specifically, our ability to maintain a positive perception of us and our business,
including through our guiding values. Significant negative claims or publicity involving us, our
business or our products, services, culture, values, strategies and practices, including postings,
articles, or comments on social media and the internet, undermine confidence in our Company, and
could materially damage our reputation and image, even if such claims or publicity are inaccurate.
Damage to our reputation and image could adversely impact our ability to attract new and retain
existing customers, employees and other business and stakeholder relationships, and could adversely
affect the demand for some of our products and adversely affect our sales, earnings, cash flow or
financial condition.
Our business could be adversely affected by the infringement or loss of our intellectual property
rights or by the theft or unauthorized use of our trade secrets or other confidential business
information.
Our competitive position and the value of our products and brands could be reduced and our business
adversely affected if we are unable to maintain or adequately protect our intellectual property. We
have numerous patents, trade secrets, trademarks, trade names copyrights and know-how that are
valuable to our business. Despite our efforts to protect such intellectual property and other
proprietary information from unauthorized use or disclosure, third parties may attempt to disclose,
obtain or use our trademarks or such other intellectual property and information without our
authorization. We also face attempts, including through cybersecurity attacks and social engineering
tactics, to gain unauthorized access to our systems for the purpose of improperly acquiring our trade
secrets or confidential business information. In addition, advances in artificial intelligence
technology and increasingly widespread use of generative artificial intelligence tools may increase
the risk of unauthorized access to intellectual property, may increase the risk that existing
intellectual property law may not provide adequate protection and may introduce potential liability
from the use of artificial intelligence tools. The theft or unauthorized use or publication of our
trade secrets and other co nfidential business information as a result of such incidents could
adversely affect the value of our investment in research and development and our business. Although
we rely on the patent, trademark, trade secret and copyright laws of the United States and other
countries to protect our intellectual property rights, the laws of some countries may not protect
such rights to the same extent as the laws of the United States. Unauthorized use of our intellectual
property by third parties, the failure of foreign countries to have laws to protect our intellectual
property rights, or an inability to effectively enforce such rights in foreign countries could have
an adverse effect on our business.
 FINANCIAL RISKS 
A weakening of global credit markets or changes to our credit ratings may adversely affect our
results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
A weakening of global credit markets has in the past and could in the future adversely impact our net
sales, the collection of accounts receivable, funding for working capital needs, expected cash flow
generation from current and acquired businesses, access to capital and our investments, which has in
the past and could in the future adversely impact our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or
financial condition.
We finance a portion of our sales through trade credit. Credit markets remain tight, and some
customers who require financing for their businesses have not been able to obtain, and may in the
future have difficulty obtaining, necessary financing. A continuation or worsening of these
conditions could limit our ability to collect our accounts receivable, which could adversely affect
our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
We generally fund a portion of our seasonal working capital needs and obtain funding for other
general corporate purposes through short-term borrowings backed by our revolving credit facility and
other financing facilities. If any of the banks in these
 11 
credit and financing facilities are unable to perform on their commitments, such inability could
adversely impact our cash flow, liquidity or financial condition, including our ability to obtain
funding for working capital needs and other general corporate purposes.
Although we have available credit facilities to fund our current operating needs, we cannot be
certain we will be able to replace our existing credit facilities or refinance our existing or future
debt when necessary. Our cost of borrowing and ability to access the capital markets are affected not
only by market conditions, but also by our debt and credit ratings assigned by the major credit
rating agencies. Rating agencies regularly evaluate our business and could downgrade our credit
rating based on a number of factors, including factors beyond our control, such as general business
or economic conditions. Downgrades in these ratings likely would increase our cost of borrowing and
could have an adverse effect on our access to the capital markets, including our access to the
commercial paper market. An inability to access the capital markets with the same flexibility we have
now and on terms commercially acceptable to us, or at all, could have a material adverse effect on
our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
We have goodwill and intangible assets recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We periodically
evaluate the recoverability of the carrying value of our goodwill and intangible assets whenever
events or changes in circumstances indicate such value may not be recoverable. An impairment
assessment involves judgment as to assumptions regarding future sales and cash flow and the impact of
market conditions on those assumptions. Future events, such as the integration or rebranding of
trademarks acquired in acquisitions and changing market conditions may impact our assumptions and
change our estimates of future sales and cash flow, including our ability to track trademark specific
sales and cash flow, resulting in us incurring substantial impairment charges, which could adversely
affect our results of operations or financial condition.
We hold investments in equity and debt securities in some of our defined benefit pension plans. A
decrease in the value of plan assets resulting from a general financial downturn may cause a negative
pension plan investment performance, which may adversely affect our results of operations, cash flow,
liquidity or financial condition.
We require a significant amount of cash to service the substantial amount of debt we have
outstanding. Our ability to generate cash depends on many factors beyond our control. We also depend
on the business of our subsidiaries to satisfy our cash needs. If we cannot generate the required
cash, we may not be able to make the necessary payments required under our indebtedness.
At December 31, 2024, we had total debt of approximately $9.888 billion, which is an increase of
$37.5 million since December 31, 2023. We have the ability under our existing credit facilities and
otherwise to incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future. Our ability to make payments on
our debt, fund other liquidity needs and make planned capital expenditures will depend on our ability
to generate cash in the future. Our historical financial results have been, and we anticipate our
future financial results will be, subject to fluctuations. Our ability to generate cash, to a certain
extent, is subject to general business, economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and
other factors beyond our control, including supply chain disruptions, adverse weather conditions or
natural disasters, armed conflicts and wars, changes in raw material and energy supplies, public
health crises and pricing and related impacts. We cannot guarantee our business will generate
sufficient cash flow from our operations or future borrowings will be available to us in an amount
sufficient to enable us to make payments of our debt, fund other liquidity needs and make planned
capital expenditures.
The degree to which we are leveraged could have important consequences for shareholders. For example,
it could:
• require us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to the payment of
debt service, reducing the availability of our cash flow to fund working capital, capital
expenditures, acquisitions and other long-term growth initiatives and general corporate purposes;
• increase our vulnerability to adverse business, economic or industry conditions;
• limit our ability to obtain additional financing in the future to enable us to react to changes in
our business or general business, economic or industry conditions; or
• place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to businesses in our industry that have less debt.
Additionally, any failure to comply with covenants in the instruments governing our debt could result
in an event of default which, if not cured or waived, would have a material adverse effect on us.
A significant portion of our operations are conducted through our subsidiaries. As a result, our
ability to generate sufficient cash flow for our needs is dependent to some extent on the earnings of
our subsidiaries and the payment of those earnings to us in the form of dividends, loans or advances
and through repayment of loans or advances from us. Our subsidiaries are separate and distinct legal
entities. Our subsidiaries have no obligation to pay any amounts due on our debt or to provide us
with funds to meet our cash flow needs, whether in the form of dividends, distributions, loans or
other payments. Further, any payment of dividends, loans or advances by our subsidiaries could be
subject to statutory or contractual restrictions. Payments to us by our
 12 
subsidiaries will also be contingent upon our subsidiaries’ earnings and business considerations. Our
right to receive any assets of any of our subsidiaries upon their liquidation or reorganization will
be effectively subordinated to the claims of that subsidiary’s creditors, including trade creditors.
Even if we are a creditor of any of our subsidiaries, our rights as a creditor would be subordinate
to any security interest in the assets of our subsidiaries and any indebtedness of our subsidiaries
senior to that held by us. Finally, changes in the laws of foreign jurisdictions in which we operate
have in the past and may in the future adversely affect the ability of some of our foreign
subsidiaries to repatriate funds to us.
Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and changing monetary policies could adversely affect
our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition.
Because of our international operations, we are exposed to risk associated with interest rates and
value changes in foreign currencies, including as a result of inflation, central bank monetary
policies, currency controls and other exchange restrictions, which may adversely affect our business.
Historically, our reported net sales, earnings, cash flow and financial condition have been subjected
to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates. Our primary exchange rate exposure is with the euro, the
Mexican peso, the Brazilian real, the Canadian dollar, the British pound, the Chinese yuan, the
Chilean peso and the Argentine peso, each against the U.S. dollar. While we actively manage the
exposure of our foreign currency risk as part of our overall financial risk management policy, we
have in the past and may in the future experience losses from foreign currency exchange rate
fluctuations and currency controls and restrictions, and such losses could adversely affect our
sales, earnings, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition. Currency controls or restrictions may
limit our ability to convert foreign currencies into U.S. dollars, or to remit dividends and other
payments from our subsidiaries or businesses located in or conducted within a country imposing such
controls or restrictions. For example, we experienced a loss of $41.8 million in 2023 as a result of
the significant devaluation of the Argentine peso in December 2023 as part of economic reforms
implemented by the government of Argentina, and we may experience similar losses in the future.
 LEGAL AND REGULATORY RISKS 
We are subject to a wide variety of complex U.S. and non-U.S. laws, rules and regulations, as well as
compliance risks related to new and existing laws and regulations, compliance with which could
increase our costs and could adversely affect our results of operations, cash flow or financial
condition.
We maintain significant operations in the U.S. and outside of the U.S. We are subject to a wide
variety of complex U.S. and non-U.S. federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations and legal
compliance risks, including laws, rules and regulations involving securities, tax, employment and
pensions, competition, environmental, export and trade, intellectual property, data privacy and
cybersecurity and improper business practices, such as anti-bribery and corruption. We are affected
by new laws and regulations and changes to existing laws and regulations, including interpretations
by courts and regulators. We are also subject to compliance risks related to contract requirements
and risks that any third-party we engage to do work on our behalf might conduct business in a manner
that is inconsistent with our Code of Conduct or with legal requirements. Compliance with
continuously evolving U.S. and non-U.S. federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and related
interpretations applicable to our business, may increase our costs or require significant capital
investment, and our results of operations could be adversely impacted if these costs are greater than
we have projected. If we are unable to comply with all of the laws, rules, regulations and
interpretations applicable to us, we could become the subject of inquiries, reviews or investigations
by regulators and related adverse outcomes of which could lead to enforcement actions, the imposition
of fines or costs, requirements to suspend operations at certain facilities, the assertion of private
litigation claims and damages or damage to our reputation.
The domestic and international regulatory environment related to information security, data
collection and transfer, digital marketing or telemarketing, and privacy is increasingly rigorous and
complex, with new and rapidly changing requirements applicable to our business, which often require
changes to our business practices. Compliance with these requirements, including the European Union’s
General Data Protection Regulation, China’s Personal Information Protection, Data Security, and Cyber
Security Laws, the California Consumer Privacy Act as amended by the California Privacy Rights Act,
other U.S. state privacy laws, and a growing number of other international and domestic regulations,
are costly and will result in additional costs in our efforts to continue to comply. These laws and
regulations can provide for significant penalties for non-compliance, which could result in
additional costs of compliance, enforcement actions, regulatory investigations, and fines, individual
or class action litigation, commercial litigation, or reputational harm. Ongoing efforts to comply
with these laws also may divert management and employee attention from other business and growth
initiatives.
Although we believe we have adopted appropriate risk management and compliance programs to mitigate
these risks, the global and diverse nature of our operations means compliance risks will continue to
exist. We face liability and reputational risks even if we comply with all laws and regulations.
Investigations, examinations and other proceedings, the nature and outcome of which cannot be
predicted, likely will arise from time to time. These investigations, examinations and other
proceedings could subject us to significant liability and require us to take significant accruals or
pay significant settlements, fines and penalties, which could have a material adverse effect on our
results of operations, cash flow or financial condition.
 13 
Increases in tax rates, or changes in tax laws or regulations, could increase our costs and could
adversely affect our results of operations, cash flow or financial condition.
We are subject to tax laws and regulations in the U.S. and multiple jurisdictions outside of the U.S.
We are affected by changes in tax laws and regulations, as well as changes in related interpretations
and other tax guidance. Economic and political conditions in the countries where we are subject to
taxes, including in the U.S., have in the past and may in the future result in significant changes to
tax laws or regulations. Our effective tax rates are affected by changes in our mix of earnings in
countries with different tax rates, and changes in laws, regulations and interpretations regarding
deferred tax assets and liabilities, among other things. If our effective tax rate were to increase,
that could have an adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flow or financial condition. In
addition, the increasingly complex global tax environment has in the past and may in the future
result in higher compliance costs. In the ordinary course of our business, we are subject to
examinations and investigations by various tax authorities and other regulators. In addition to
existing examinations and investigations, there could be additional examinations and investigations
in the future, and existing examinations and investigations could be expanded.
For non-income tax risks, we estimate material loss contingencies and accrue for such loss
contingencies as required by U.S. generally accepted accounting principles based on our assessment of
contingencies where liability is deemed probable and reasonably estimable in light of the facts and
circumstances known to us at a particular point in time. Subsequent developments may affect our
assessment and estimates of the loss contingency. In the event the loss contingency is ultimately
determined to be significantly higher than currently accrued, the recording of the additional
liability may result in a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition
for the annual or interim period during which such additional liability is accrued. In those cases
where no accrual is recorded because it is not probable a liability has been incurred and cannot be
reasonably estimated, any potential liability ultimately determined to be attributable to us may
result in a material adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flow or financial condition
for the annual or interim period during which such liability is accrued or paid. For income tax
risks, we recognize tax benefits based on our assessment that a tax benefit has a greater than 50%
likelihood of being sustained upon ultimate settlement with the applicable taxing authority that has
full knowledge of all relevant facts. For those income tax positions where we determine there is not
a greater than 50% likelihood such tax benefits will be sustained, we do not recognize a tax benefit
in our financial statements. Subsequent events may cause us to change our assessment of the
likelihood of sustaining a previously-recognized benefit which could result in a material adverse
effect on our results of operations, cash flow or financial position for the annual or interim period
during which such liability is accrued or paid.
We discuss risks and uncertainties with regard to income taxes in more detail in Note 20 to the
consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
We are required to comply with, and may become subject to additional, numerous complex and
increasingly stringent domestic and foreign health, safety and environmental laws, regulations and
requirements, the cost of which is likely to increase and may adversely affect our results of
operations, cash flow or financial condition.
Our operations are subject to various domestic and foreign health, safety and environmental laws,
regulations and requirements, including those related to climate change, producer responsibility and
chemicals registration and management. These laws, regulations and requirements not only govern our
current operations and products, but also may impose potential liability on us for our past
operations.
Global focus on climate change and chemical use and management may result in the imposition of new or
additional regulations or requirements applicable to, and new or additional financial and transition
risks for, our business and industry. A number of government authorities and agencies have
introduced, or are contemplating, regulatory changes to address climate change, including the
regulation and disclosure of greenhouse gas emissions and the management and use of chemicals in
operations and products. For example, the European Union Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive
requires that we make expansive disclosures on various environmental- and social-related topics.
Similarly, California has enacted legislation that will require broad disclosures, including of
greenhouse gas emissions. Chemicals we use in our products, packaging and operations may be
restricted or prohibited by initiatives to address new and existing chemicals under current laws and
regulations or by emerging laws and regulations in domestic and foreign jurisdictions. The outcome of
new and emerging legislation or regulation in the U.S., European Union and other jurisdictions in
which we operate may result in fees or restrictions on certain activities or materials (including
changes to our products or product packaging) and new or additional requirements, including to fund
energy efficiency activities or renewable energy use and to disclose information regarding our
greenhouse gas emissions performance, renewable energy usage and efficiency, waste generation and
recycling rates, climate-related risks, opportunities and oversight and related strategies and
initiatives across our global operations. Compliance with these climate change, chemical management
and other initiatives has in the past and may in the future result in additional costs to us,
including, among other things, increased production costs, additional taxes, additional investments
in renewable energy use and other initiatives, reduced emission allowances, additional restrictions
on production or operations and increased costs associated with reporting and data assurance. They
may also require us to alter the 
alter the performance and profitability of such products and packaging. We may not be able to timely
recover the cost of compliance with such new or more stringent laws and regulations, which could
adversely affect our results of operations, cash flow or financial condition. Despite our efforts to
timely comply with such initiatives, implement measures to improve our operations and execute on our
related strategies and initiatives, any actual or perceived failure to comply with new or additional
requirements or meet stakeholder expectations with respect to the impacts of our operations on the
environment or on our customers or employees and related strategies and initiatives may result in
adverse publicity, increased litigation risk and adversely affect our business and reputation, which
could adversely impact our results of operations, cash flow and financial condition.
We expect health, safety and additional environmental laws, regulations and requirements to continue
to evolve and to be applied with increasing stringency on our industry. Our costs to comply with
these laws, regulations and requirements may increase as they become more stringent in the future,
and these increased costs may adversely affect our results of operations, cash flow or financial
condition.
We are involved with environmental investigation and remediation activities at some of our currently-
and formerly-owned sites, as well as a number of third-party sites, for which our ultimate liability
may exceed the current amount we have accrued.
We are involved with environmental investigation and remediation activities at some of our currently-
and formerly-owned sites and a number of third-party sites. We accrue for estimated costs of
investigation and remediation activities at these sites for which commitments or clean-up plans have
been developed and when such costs can be reasonably estimated based on industry standards and
professional judgment. These estimated costs are based on currently available facts regarding each
site. We routinely assess our potential liability for investigation and remediation activities and
adjust our environmental-related accruals as information becomes available, including as a result of
sites progressing through investigation and remediation-related activities, upon which more accurate
costs can be reasonably estimated. Due to the uncertainties surrounding environmental investigation
and remediation activities, our liability may result in costs that are significantly higher than
currently accrued and may have an adverse effect on our earnings. We discuss these risks and
uncertainties in more detail in the “Environmental-Related Liabilities” and “Environmental Matters”
sections in Item 7 and in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
The nature, cost, quantity and outcome of pending and future litigation could have a material adverse
effect on our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity and financial condition.
In the course of our business, we are subject to a variety of claims and lawsuits, including, but not
limited to, litigation relating to product liability and warranty, raw materials used in our
products, personal injury, environmental (including natural resource damages), intellectual property,
commercial, contractual and antitrust claims that are inherently subject to many uncertainties
regarding the possibility of a loss to us. These uncertainties will ultimately be resolved when one
or more future events occur or fail to occur confirming the incurrence of a liability or the
reduction of a liability. In accordance with the Contingencies Topic of the Accounting Standards
Codification (ASC), we accrue for these contingencies by a charge to income when it is both probable
that one or more future events will occur confirming the fact of a loss and the amount of the loss
can be reasonably estimated. In the event a loss contingency is ultimately determined to be
significantly higher than currently accrued, the recording of the additional liability may result in
a material impact on our results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for the annual or
interim period during which such additional liability is accrued. In those cases where no accrual is
recorded because it is not probable that a liability has been incurred or the amount of any such loss
cannot be reasonably estimated, any potential liability ultimately determined to be attributable to
us may result in a material impact on our results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for
the annual or interim period during which such liability is accrued.
For example, our past operations included the manufacture and sale of lead pigments and lead-based
paints. Along with other companies, we are and have been a defendant in a number of legal
proceedings, including individual personal injury actions, purported class actions and actions
brought by various counties, cities, school districts and other government-related entities, arising
from the manufacture and sale of lead pigments and lead-based paints. The plaintiffs’ claims have
been based upon various legal theories, including negligence, strict liability, breach of warranty,
negligent misrepresentations and omissions, fraudulent misrepresentations and omissions, concert of
action, civil conspiracy, violations of unfair trade practice and consumer protection laws,
enterprise liability, market share liability, public nuisance, unjust enrichment and other theories.
The plaintiffs seek various damages and relief, including personal injury and property damage, costs
relating to the detection and abatement of lead-based paint from buildings, costs associated with a
public education campaign, medical monitoring costs and others. We have also been a defendant in
legal proceedings arising from the manufacture and sale of non-lead-based paints that seek recovery
based upon various legal theories, including the failure to adequately warn of potential exposure to
lead during surface preparation when using non-lead-based paint on surfaces previously painted with
lead-based paint. We are vigorously defending such litigation. We expect additional lead pigment and
lead-based paint litigation may be filed against us in the future asserting similar or different
legal theories and seeking similar or different types of damages and relief. The Company will
 15 
continue to vigorously defend against any additional lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation
that may be filed, including utilizing all avenues of appeal, if necessary.
Litigation is inherently subject to many uncertainties, and we ultimately may not prevail. Adverse
court rulings, determinations of liability, or third-party funding of litigation, among other
factors, could affect litigation against us, including the lead pigment and lead-based paint
litigation, and encourage an increase in the number and nature of future claims and proceedings. In
addition, from time to time, various legislation and administrative regulations have been enacted,
promulgated or proposed to impose obligations on present and former manufacturers of lead pigments
and lead-based paints respecting asserted health concerns associated with such products or to
overturn the effect of court decisions in which we and other manufacturers have been successful.
Legislation and administrative regulations also may be enacted, promulgated, or proposed to impose
obligations for the manufacture or sale of other raw materials that are or were used in paints and
coatings.
Due to the uncertainties involved, management is unable to predict the outcome of the litigation
against us, the number or nature of possible future claims and proceedings, or the effect of any
legislation and/or administrative regulations. Further, management cannot reasonably determine the
scope or amount of the potential costs and liabilities related to such litigation, or resulting from
any such legislation and regulations. Except with respect to the California public nuisance
litigation, we have not accrued any amounts for such litigation because we do not believe it is
probable that a loss has occurred, and we believe it is not possible to estimate the range of
potential losses as there is no substantive information upon which an estimate could be based. In
addition, any potential liability that may result from any changes to legislation and regulations
cannot reasonably be estimated. Due to the uncertainties associated with the amount of any such
liability and/or the nature of any other remedy which may be imposed in such litigation, any
potential liability determined to be attributable to us arising out of such litigation may have a
material adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flow, liquidity or financial condition. We
discuss the risks and uncertainties related to litigation, including the lead pigment and lead-based
paint litigation, in more detail in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
None.
We maintain a cybersecurity program that is aligned with our business and focused on managing risks
to our Company. As described below, we have established policies, standards, processes and practices
for assessing, identifying and managing material risks from cybersecurity threats, which are
integrated into our overall risk management program and governance structure.
We use various controls, technologies and other processes designed to identify, protect against,
detect, respond to and mitigate cybersecurity risks, in alignment with the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity Framework 2.0 . These include, but are not limited to,
internal reporting, monitoring and detection tools, threat intelligence and general and role-based
training. We also maintain third-party management processes to identify and manage the cybersecurity
risks associated with third-party service providers. We periodically evaluate and improve the
effectiveness of our cybersecurity program internally and by engaging with consultants and other
third-party advisors to conduct reviews and assessments of our program.These periodic assessments and
reviews may include penetration and vulnerability testing, simulations, table-tops and other
exercises.
Overseeing the assessment and management of our exposure to various risks, including cybersecurity,
is a key oversight responsibility for the Board of Directors. We have an enterprise risk management
(ERM) program that includes the processes used to identify, assess and manage our most significant
enterprise risks and uncertainties that could materially impact the long-term health of the Company
or prevent the achievement of strategic objectives. These risks are identified, measured, monitored
and managed across key risk categories, which include the consideration of cybersecurity risks. Our
chief financial officer (CFO) facilitates the Company’s ERM program, which includes a formal
assessment of the Company’s risk environment at least once per year. The ERM program also facilitates
the incorporation of risk assessment and evaluation into the strategic planning process and the
provision of regular reports to senior management, including our CEO. The Audit Committee assists the
Board with its oversight of both the ERM program and cybersecurity risk, providing regular reports to
the Board. Our CFO reviews the ERM program with the Audit Committee at least once per year, including
reviewing existing risks and significant emerging risks across the Company’s key risk categories. In
reviewing specific threats and risks with the Board, senior management may incorporate reports from
consultants and other third-party advisors.
Our Chief Information Security Officer(CISO) leads our global cybersecurity program and is
responsible for management of our cybersecurity risks. Our CISO reports to our CFO. Our CISO has
served in that position since 2022 and has relevant
 16 
experience in cybersecurity leadership positions, including prior experience as CISO of a public
company. The Audit Committee regularly reviews our risk exposures relating to cybersecurity with our
CISO and CFO, including review of the state of the Company’s cybersecurity and emerging cybersecurity
developments and threats and the steps management has taken to monitor and mitigate such exposures.
Our CISO manages a team of cybersecurity professionals with expertise and experience in information
security.
Our CISO is informed of cybersecurity incidents by the cybersecurity team’s security operations
center, which is generally responsible for monitoring the prevention, detection, mitigation and
remediation of cybersecurity incidents. We have an established process governing our assessment,
response and notifications internally and externally upon the occurrence of a cybersecurity incident,
including for our evaluation of materiality. Depending on the nature and severity of an incident,
this process provides for escalating notification to our CEO and Board of Directors.
Despite our efforts to prevent cybersecurity threats and incidents, our systems may be affected by
damage or interruption resulting from, among other causes, cyber attacks, security breaches, power
outages, system failures or malware (including ransomware and other programs that operate with
malicious intent). Disruptions to these systems may impair our ability to conduct business and have a
material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. Despite the
security measures we have in place, our facilities and systems and those of third parties we rely on
or do business with, may be vulnerable to cyber attacks, security breaches, malware (including
ransomware and other programs that operate with malicious intent), power outages, system failures,
acts of vandalism, human or technical errors, or other similar events or disruptions. Any such event
involving the misappropriation, loss or other unauthorized disclosure of information, whether
impacting us or third parties we rely on or do business with, could result in losses, damage our
reputation or relationships with customers and suppliers, expose us to the risks of litigation,
regulatory action and liability, disrupt our operations and have a material adverse effect on our
business, results of operations and financial condition.
To date, we have not experienced a cybersecurity threat or incident that has had a material adverse
affect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. We, and third parties we do
business with, have experienced cybersecurity attacks and incidents in the past, some of which have
resulted in unauthorized access to our information and systems, and other disruptions to our business
operations, and we could in the future experience similar incidents. See Risk Factors in Item 1A for
additional information on cybersecurity risks.
 17 
The Company’s global headquarters, which includes the global headquarters for the Paint Stores,
Consumer Brands and Performance Coatings Groups and the Administrative function, is located in
Cleveland, Ohio. During 2023, the Company closed on a transaction to sell and subsequently lease back
its current global headquarters and research and development center. Construction of the Company’s
new global headquarters and research and development center is expected to be completed in 2025.
Refer to Item 7 for further information on the construction of our new global headquarters and
research and development center.
Our principal manufacturing and distribution facilities are located as set forth below. We believe
our manufacturing and distribution facilities are well-maintained, suitable and adequate, with
sufficient productive capacity, to meet our current needs.
 Manufacturing(1) Distribution(1) 
 Leased Owned Total Leased Owned Total 
 Consumer Brands Group 
 Africa 1 1 1 1 
 Asia 3 6 9 3 4 7 
 Canada 3 3 1 1 
 Europe 2 16 18 3 13 16 
 Jamaica 1 1 1 1 
 Latin America 12 12 5 10 15 
 United States 6 42 48 14 12 26 
 Total 11 81 92 26 41 67 
 Performance Coatings 
 Group 
 Europe 1 8 9 4 4 8 
 Latin America 1 1 
 United States 1 1 2 2 
 Total 2 9 11 6 4 10 
(1) Certain locations may contain both manufacturing and distribution facilities.
The operations of the Paint Stores Group included 4,773 company-operated specialty paint stores, of
which 206 were owned, in the United States, Canada, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Grenada, Trinidad
and Tobago, St. Maarten, Jamaica, Curaçao, Aruba, St. Lucia and Barbados at December 31, 2024. These
paint stores are divided into five separate operating divisions based on their geographical region
and are responsible for the sale of predominantly ABC corp. ® and other controlled brand
architectural paint and coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and related
products. At the end of 2024:
• the Mid Western Division operated 1,204 paint stores primarily located in the mid west and upper
west coast states;
• the Eastern Division operated 921 paint stores along the upper east coast and New England states;
• the Canada Division operated 259 paint stores throughout Canada;
• the Southeastern Division operated 1,210 paint stores principally covering the lower east and gulf
coast states, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Grenada, Trinidad and Tobago, St. Maarten, Jamaica,
Curaçao, Aruba, St. Lucia and Barbados; and
• the Southwestern Division operated 1,179 paint stores in the central plains and lower west coast
states.
During 2024, the Paint Stores Group opened 79 net new stores, consisting of 84 new stores opened and
5 stores closed.
The Consumer Brands Group operated 334 specialty paint stores in Latin America at December 31, 2024.
These stores market and sell ABC corp. ® and other controlled brand architectural paint and
coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and related products which are branded
for the Latin America market. These paint stores are located in Mexico (180), Chile (57), Brazil
(49), Ecuador (37) and Uruguay (11). During 2024, the Consumer Brands Group opened 16 net new stores,
consisting of 18 new stores opened and 2 stores closed.
 18 
The Performance Coatings Group operated 225 branches in the United States and 99 branches
internationally at December 31, 2024. International locations consisted of branches in Europe (47),
Canada (22), Chile (11), Mexico (5), Peru (3), Ecuador (2), Brazil (2), Thailand (2), Indonesia (2),
Vietnam (1), Singapore (1) and China (1). During 2024, this segment added 2 new branches.
All real property within the Administrative function is owned with the exception of the current
global headquarters, current research and development center and new global headquarters currently
under construction. For additional information regarding real property within the Administrative
function, refer to Item 1 and Item 7 of this report, which are incorporated herein by reference.
For additional information regarding real property leases, see Note 9 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8.
SEC regulations require disclosure of certain environmental matters when a governmental authority is
a party to the proceedings and such proceedings involve potential monetary sanctions that the Company
reasonably believes will exceed a specified threshold. Pursuant to these regulations, the Company
uses a threshold of $1 million for purposes of determining whether disclosure of any such proceedings
is required.
For information regarding certain environmental matters and other legal proceedings, see the
information included under the captions titled “Other Long-Term Liabilities” and “Litigation and
Other Contingent Liabilities” of “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations” and Notes 1, 10, 11 and 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
The information contained in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements is incorporated herein
by reference.
Not applicable.
 19 
The following is the name, age and position of each of our executive officers and a brief description
of their business experience. Executive officers are generally elected annually by the Board of
Directors and hold office until their successors are elected and qualified or until their earlier
death, resignation or removal.
 Name Age Position 
 Heidi G. Petz 50 Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer 
 Allen J. Mistysyn 56 Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer 
 Marlena K. Boyce 46 Senior Vice President – Human Resources 
 Mary L. Garceau 52 Senior Vice President – Chief Legal Officer and Secretary 
 James R. Jaye 58 Senior Vice President – Investor Relations and Corporate 
 Communications 
 J. Paul Lang 48 Senior Vice President – Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting 
 Officer 
 Bryan J. Young 49 Senior Vice President – Corporate Strategy and Development 
 Justin T. Binns 49 President, Global Architectural 
 Karl J. Jorgenrud 48 President, Global Industrial 
 Todd D. Rea 50 President, Consumer Brands Group 
 Colin M. Davie 56 President & General Manager, Global Supply Chain Division, Consumer 
 Brands Group 
Ms. Petz has served as Chair of the Board of Directors since January 2025, and as President and Chief
Executive Officer since January 2024. Prior to her current role, Ms. Petz served as President and
Chief Operating Officer from March 2022 to January 2024, and President, The Americas Group (now known
as the Paint Stores Group) from March 2021 to March 2022, Senior Vice President, Marketing, The
Americas Group from November 2020 to March 2021 and President, Consumer Brands Group from September
2020 to November 2020. Also within the Consumer Brands Group, Ms. Petz served as President & General
Manager, Retail North America from March 2019 to September 2020 and Senior Vice President, Marketing
from June 2017 to March 2019. Ms. Petz has served as a Director since October 2023 and joined the
Company in June 2017 in connection with the Valspar acquisition.
Mr. Mistysyn has served as Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer since January
2017. Mr. Mistysyn has been employed with the Company since June 1990.
Ms. Boyce has served as Senior Vice President – Human Resources since January 2025. Ms. Boyce served
within the Performance Coatings Group as Senior Vice President, Human Resources from May 2022 to
December 2024, within the Consumer Brands Group as Senior Vice President, Human Resources from
January 2021 to May 2022 and as Vice President, Human Resources, Industrial Wood Division,
Performance Coatings Group from March 2019 to January 2021. Ms. Boyce has been employed with the
Company since October 2008.
Ms. Garceau has served as Senior Vice President – Chief Legal Officer and Secretary since February
2024. Ms. Garceau served as Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary from August 2017 to
February 2024. Ms. Garceau has been employed with the Company since February 2014.
Mr. Jaye has served as Senior Vice President – Investor Relations and Corporate Communications since
June 2019. Mr. Jaye served as Vice President – Investor Relations from October 2017 to June 2019. Mr.
Jaye has been employed with the Company since October 2017.
Mr. Lang has served as Senior Vice President – Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer since
January 2025. Mr. Lang served as Vice President – Enterprise Finance, Reporting & Controls from May
2022 to January 2025. Mr. Lang served as Vice President – Assistant Corporate Controller from August
2019 to May 2022 and Director – External Financial Reporting from February 2018 until August 2019.
Mr. Lang has been employed with the Company since February 2018.
Mr. Young has served as Senior Vice President – Corporate Strategy and Development since March 2021.
Mr. Young served as Vice President – Corporate Strategy and Development from June 2017 to March 2021.
Mr. Young joined the Company in June 2017 in connection with the Valspar acquisition.
Mr. Binns has served as President, Global Architectural since January 2024. Mr. Binns served as
President, Paint Stores Group from January 2023 to January 2024, President, The Americas Group from
March 2022 to January 2023, President, Performance Coatings Group from November 2020 to March 2022
and President & General Manager, Automotive Finishes Division,
 20 
Performance Coatings Group from July 2018 to November 2020. Mr. Binns has been employed with the
Company since August 1997.
Mr. Jorgenrud has served as President, Global Industrial since January 2024. Mr. Jorgenrud served as
President, Performance Coatings Group from March 2022 to January 2024, President & General Manager,
General Industrial Division, Performance Coatings Group from January 2020 to March 2022 and President
& General Manager, Protective & Marine Division, Performance Coatings Group from June 2017 to January
2020. Mr. Jorgenrud joined the Company in June 2017 in connection with the Valspar acquisition.
Mr. Rea has served as President, Consumer Brands Group since November 2021. Mr. Rea served within the
Consumer Brands Group as President of North America Sales from November 2020 to November 2021, Senior
Vice President of Sales, Retail and National Accounts from November 2019 to November 2020 and Senior
Vice President of Sales, Lowe’s Business Unit from March 2018 to November 2019. Mr. Rea has been
employed with the Company since April 1993.
Mr. Davie has served as President & General Manager, Global Supply Chain Division, Consumer Brands
Group since January 2024. Mr. Davie served as Senior Vice President and Chief Procurement Officer
from March 2022 to January 2024, Senior Vice President – Purchasing from October 2021 to March 2022,
President & General Manager, Industrial Wood Division, Performance Coatings Group from March 2019 to
October 2021 and President & General Manager, Engineered Polymer Solutions, Performance Coatings
Group from June 2017 to March 2019. Mr. Davie joined the Company in June 2017 in connection with the
Valspar acquisition.
 21 
Our common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange and traded under the symbol SHW. The number
of shareholders of record at January 31, 2025 was 4,864. The information regarding securities
authorized for issuance under the Company’s equity compensation plans is set forth in our Proxy
Statement under the caption “Equity Compensation Plan Information” and is incorporated by reference
into Part III of this report.
 Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities 
The following table sets forth a summary of the Company’s purchases of common stock during the fourth
quarter of 2024.
 Total Number Maximum Number 
 of Shares of Shares 
 Total Purchased as that May 
 Number of Average Price Part of a Yet Be 
 Period Shares Paid per Publicly Purchased Under 
 October 1 – October 31 Purchased Share Announced Plan the Plan 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Share repurchase 850,000 $ 364.96 850,000 34,425,000 
 program(1) 
 Employee 532 $ 389.91 N/A 
 transactions(2) 
 November 1 – November  
 30 
 Share repurchase 34,425,000 
 program(1) 
 Employee 1,156 $ 384.70 N/A 
 transactions(2) 
 December 1 – December  
 31 
 Share repurchase 34,425,000 
 program(1) 
 Employee 870 $ 358.75 N/A 
 transactions(2) 
 Total 
 Share repurchase 850,000 $ 364.96 850,000 34,425,000 
 program(1) 
 Employee 2,558 $ 376.96 — N/A 
 transactions(2) 
(1) Shares were purchased through the Company’s publicly announced share repurchase program. The
Company had remaining authorization at December 31, 2024 to purchase 34,425,000 shares. There is no
expiration date specified for the program.
(2) All shares were delivered to satisfy the exercise price and/or tax withholding obligations by
employees who exercised stock options or had restricted stock units vest.
 22 
The following graph compares the cumulative total shareholder return on the Company’s common stock
(NYSE: SHW) with the cumulative five-year total return of the companies listed on the Standard &
Poor’s 500 Stock 
cumulative five-year total return assumes $100 was invested on December 31, 2019 in ABC corp.
common stock, the S&P 500 and the peer group. The cumulative five-year total return, including
reinvestment of dividends, represents the cumulative value through December 31, 2024.
Peer group of companies is comprised of the following: Akzo Nobel N.V., Axalta Coating Systems Ltd.,
BASF SE, Genuine Parts Company, H.B. Fuller Company, The Home Depot, Inc., Lowe’s Companies, Inc.,
Masco Corporation, Newell Brands Inc., PPG Industries, Inc., RPM International Inc. and Stanley Black
& Decker, Inc.
 23 
Company Background
The ABC corp. Company, founded in 1866, is engaged in the development, manufacture,
distribution and sale of paint, coatings and related products to professional, industrial, commercial
and retail customers primarily in North and South America with additional operations in the Caribbean
region and throughout Europe, Asia and Australia.
The Company is structured into three reportable segments – Paint Stores Group, Consumer Brands Group
and Performance Coatings Group (collectively, the Reportable Segments) – and an Administrative
function in the same way it is internally organized for assessing performance and making decisions
regarding the allocation of resources. See Note 22 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8
for additional information on the Company’s Reportable Segments.
Summary
• Consolidated Net sales increased in the year to a record $23.099 billion
◦ Net sales from stores in the Paint Stores Group open more than twelve calendar months increased
1.7% in the year
• Diluted net income per share increased 14.1% to $10.55 per share in the year compared to $9.25 per
share in the full year 2023
◦ Adjusted diluted net income per share increased 9.5% to $11.33 per share in the year compared to
$10.35 per share in the full year 2023
• Generated Net operating cash of $3.153 billion, or 13.7% of Net sales, in the year
• Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (Adjusted EBITDA) increased
6.0% in the year to $4.492 billion or 19.4% of Net sales
Outlook
ABC corp. delivered strong 2024 results despite continued choppy macroeconomic conditions.
Full year Net sales grew to a record level, gross margin expanded and Diluted net income per share
increased by a double-digit percentage. We continued to generate strong cash flow from operations
which was used for investment, an acquisition and returning cash to shareholders through dividends
and repurchases of our common stock. We enter 2025 with confidence in our differentiated strategy,
Success by Design, that continues to deliver innovative and productive solutions for our customers.
Although we expect demand softness to persist in several end markets, we have significant above-
market growth opportunities in each business. We will continue to support our growth strategy by
executing initiatives within our enterprise priorities, including talent, simplification,
digitization, supply chain responsiveness and sustainability.
Within Paint Stores Group and Consumer Brands Group, we anticipate continued economic pressures to
impact consumer behavior in both North America and Europe in 2025. Our recent investments in sales
reps, training and digital tools, coupled with home builder relationships are expected to drive
above-market growth opportunities. The outlook for the Performance Coatings Group is varied by end
market and region with expected growth in Coil driven by significant new account wins and Packaging
as we support customer conversions to our ValPure® coating which complies with European regulations.
Demand softness is forecasted in General Industrial due to negative manufacturing trends in North
America and Europe and choppiness is expected in Automotive Refinish, Protective and Marine and
Industrial Wood. As it relates to consolidated expenses, we expect raw material and employee-related
costs to be up by a low-single digit percentage, offset by cost saving simplification efforts across
our supply chain such as capacity and productivity improvements.
Our capital deployment strategy remains balanced and consistent. We have a strong liquidity position,
with $210.4 million in cash and $3.274 billion of unused capacity under our credit facilities at
December 31, 2024 and expect to end 2025 within our target debt-to-EBITDA leverage ratio of 2 to 2.5
times. We are, and expect to remain, in compliance with all financing covenants. Long-term debt
maturities due in 2025 are $1.050 billion and are expected to be refinanced at higher interest rates.
Together with the long-term debt maturities refinanced during 2024, Interest expense is expected to
increase by approximately $40 million in 2025. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs
associated with the transition into our new global headquarters and research and development (R&D)
center in 2025 of approximately $100 million, which includes approximately $80 million of Selling,
general and administrative expenses and approximately $20 million of Interest expense. Lastly, we
plan to expand our footprint by opening 80 to 100 new stores in the United States and Canada in 2025,
continue to evaluate acquisitions that align with our long-term growth strategy and return value to
our shareholders through the payment of dividends and the reinvestment of excess cash for share
repurchases of Company stock.
 24 
See Item 1A Risk Factors for further information regarding the current and potential impact of
general business and macroeconomic conditions, including inflation rates and interest rates, supply
chain disruptions, raw material availability and fluctuations in foreign currency.
 RESULTS OF OPERATIONS 
The following discussion and analysis addresses comparisons of material changes in the consolidated
financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023. For comparisons of the years
ended December 31, 2023 and 2022, see Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations in Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2023 filed on February 20, 2024.
Net Sales
 Year 
 Ended Acquisi… 
 December and 
 31, Currency Divesti… 
 2024 2023 $ Change % Change Impact Impact 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Paint 
 Stores $ 13,188.0 $ 12,839.5 $ 348.5 2.7 % — % — % 
 Group 
 Consum… 
 Brands 3,108.0 3,365.6 -257.6 -7.7 % -2.9 % -1.4 % 
 Group 
 Perfor… 
 Coatin… 6,797.3 6,843.1 -45.8 -0.7 % -0.8 % 1.2 % 
 Group 
 Admini… 5.2 3.7 1.5 40.5 % 2.7 % — % 
 Total $ 23,098.5 $ 23,051.9 $ 46.6 0.2 % -0.7 % 0.1 % 
Consolidated Net sales for 2024 increased 0.2% primarily due to higher sales in the Paint Stores
Group. This increase was partially offset by lower sales in the Consumer Brands and Performance
Coatings Groups. Net sales of all consolidated foreign subsidiaries decreased to $4.426 billion in
2024 compared to $4.428 billion in 2023 primarily due to unfavorable currency translation impact in
Latin America and lower Net sales in Asia as a result of the divestiture of the China architectural
business, partially offset by higher Net sales in Europe as a result of acquisitions. Net sales of
all operations other than consolidated foreign subsidiaries increased to $18.673 billion for 2024
compared to $18.624 billion for 2023.
Net sales in the Paint Stores Group increased 2.7% primarily due to sales volume growth and selling
price increases, which both impacted Net sales by a low-single digit percentage. Net sales from
stores in the Paint Stores Group open for more than twelve calendar months increased 1.7% in the year
over the prior year comparable period. During 2024, the Paint Stores Group opened 84 new stores and
closed 5 locations for a net increase of 79 stores. The total number of stores in operation at
December 31, 2024 was 4,773 in the United States, Canada and the Caribbean region. The Paint Stores
Group’s objective is to expand its store base by an approximate average of 2% each year, primarily
through organic growth. Sales of products other than paint increased 0.6% over last year. A
discussion of changes in volume versus pricing for sales of products other than paint is not
pertinent due to the wide assortment of general merchandise sold.
Net sales in the Consumer Brands Group decreased 7.7% in 2024 primarily due to a low-single digit
percentage sales volume decline primarily due to soft DIY demand in North America, 2.9% unfavorable
foreign currency translation driven by Latin America and the impact from divestitures in the prior
year. In 2024, the Consumer Brands Group opened 18 new stores and closed 2 locations for a net
increase of 16 new stores. The total number of stores in operation at December 31, 2024 was 334 in
Latin America.
Net sales in the Performance Coatings Group decreased 0.7% in 2024 primarily due to selling price
decreases, largely attributable to product mix, which impacted Net sales by a low-single digit
percentage and unfavorable foreign currency translation. These decreases were partially offset by
low-single digit volume growth, inclusive of the acquisition of SIC Holding GmbH in 2023 and the
acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business in 2024. In 2024, the Performance Coatings Group
added 2 net new branches, increasing the total to 324 branches.
Net sales in the Administrative function, which primarily consists of external leasing revenue,
increased by an insignificant amount in 2024.
 25 
Income Before Income Taxes
The following table presents the components of Income before income taxes as a percent of Net sales:
 Year Ended 
 December 31, 2024 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 % of Net % of Net 
 Sales Sales 
 Net sales $ 23,098.5 100.0 % $ 23,051.9 100.0 % 
 Cost of 11,903.4 51.5 % 12,293.8 53.3 % 
 goods sold 
 Gross 11,195.1 48.5 % 10,758.1 46.7 % 
 profit 
 Selling, 
 general and 
 administra… 7,422.1 32.1 % 7,065.4 30.6 % 
 expenses 
 (SG&A) 
 Other 
 general 
 (income) -38.8 -0.1 % 67.1 0.3 % 
 expense - 
 net 
 Impairment — — % 57.9 0.3 % 
 Interest 415.7 1.8 % 417.5 1.8 % 
 expense 
 Interest -11.0 — % -25.2 -0.1 % 
 income 
 Other 
 (income) -44.7 -0.2 % 65.5 0.3 % 
 expense - 
 net 
 Income 
 before $ 3,451.8 14.9 % $ 3,109.9 13.5 % 
 income 
 taxes 
Consolidated Cost of goods sold decreased $390.4 million, or 3.2%, in 2024 compared to the same
period in 2023 primarily due to lower sales volume in the Consumer Brands Group and moderating raw
material costs, partially offset by higher sales volumes in the Paint Stores and Performance Coatings
Groups.
Consolidated Gross profit increased $437.0 million, or 4.1%, in 2024 compared to the same period in
2023 primarily due to higher sales volumes in the Paint Stores and Performance Coatings Groups and
moderating raw material costs, partially offset by lower sales volume in the Consumer Brands Group.
Consolidated Gross profit as a percent to consolidated Net sales increased to 48.5% in 2024 from
46.7% in 2023 for these same reasons.
The Paint Stores Group’s Gross profit for 2024 increased $242.1 million compared to the same period
in 2023 primarily due to higher Net sales driven by sales volume growth, selling price increases and
moderating raw material costs. The Paint Stores Group’s Gross profit as a percent of Net sales
increased for these same reasons. The Consumer Brands Group’s Gross profit increased $181.1 million
in 2024 compared to the same period in 2023 primarily due to higher fixed cost absorption in the
manufacturing and distribution operations within the segment and moderating raw material costs,
partially offset by lower Net sales. The Consumer Brands Group’s Gross profit as a percent of Net
sales increased for these same reasons. The Performance Coatings Group’s Gross profit increased $13.6
million compared to the same period in 2023 primarily due to moderating raw material costs, partially
offset by lower Net sales. The Performance Coatings Group’s Gross profit as a percent of Net sales
increased for these same reasons.
Consolidated SG&A increased by $356.7 million, or 5.0%, in 2024 compared to the same period in 2023
primarily due to investments in long-term growth strategies, including expenses to support net new
store openings and digital technologies and higher employee-related costs. As a percent of Net sales,
SG&A increased 150 basis points compared to the same period in 2023 for these same reasons.
The Paint Stores Group’s SG&A increased $194.1 million or 4.6% for the year primarily due to higher
employee-related costs and investments in long-term growth initiatives, including increased spending
from net new store openings and costs to support higher sales. The Consumer Brands Group’s SG&A
decreased $19.2 million or 2.2% for the year primarily due to effective cost control in managing the
operations of the business, partially offset by higher employee-related costs. The Performance
Coatings Group’s SG&A increased by $27.5 million or 1.9% for the year primarily due to investments in
long-term initiatives and higher employee-related costs. The Administrative function’s SG&A increased
$154.3 million or 27.7% primarily due to higher employee-related costs and increased expenses related
to digital technologies and systems.
Other general (income) expense - net changed by $105.9 million from expense of $67.1 million in 2023
to income of $38.8 million in 2024. The change was primarily attributable to a decrease in provisions
for environmental matters, net in the Administrative function and increased net gains on sale or
disposition of assets. This activity was partially offset by the non-recurring gain recognized in
2023 related to the divestiture of a non-core domestic aerosol business. See Note 19 to the
consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
 26 
There was no impairment in 2024. Asset impairment of $34.0 million related to the divestiture of the
China architectural business and impairment related to trademarks of $23.9 million primarily related
to a trademark in Europe were recorded in 2023. For information on impairment considerations, see
Notes 3 and 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Interest expense decreased $1.8 million in 2024 compared to 2023 primarily due to a decrease in long-
term debt, partially offset by higher interest expense as a result of an increase in short-term
borrowings. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information
on the Company’s outstanding debt.
Other (income) expense - net changed by $110.2 million from expense of $65.5 million in 2023 to
income of $44.7 million in 2024 primarily due to lower foreign currency transaction related losses in
2024 compared to 2023 and an increase in miscellaneous income. The foreign currency transaction
related losses in 2023 included a $41.8 million unfavorable impact from the significant devaluation
of the Argentine peso in December 2023 as part of economic reforms implemented by the government of
Argentina. In addition, a $12.8 million loss on extinguishment of debt was recognized in 2023. This
activity was partially offset by a decrease in miscellaneous pension income and investment gains. See
Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information related to
Other (income) expense - net.
The following table presents Income before income taxes by segment and as a percent of Net sales by
segment:
 Year Ended 
 December 
 31, 2024 2023 $ Change % Change 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Income 
 Before 
 Income 
 Taxes: 
 Paint 
 Stores $ 2,902.6 $ 2,860.8 $ 41.8 1.5 % 
 Group 
 Consumer 
 Brands 589.9 309.3 280.6 90.7 % 
 Group 
 Performan… 
 Coatings 1,027.9 991.6 36.3 3.7 % 
 Group 
 Administr… -1,068.6 -1,051.8 -16.8 -1.6 % 
 Total $ 3,451.8 $ 3,109.9 $ 341.9 11.0 % 
 Income 
 Before 
 Income 
 Taxes as a 
 percent 
 of Net 
 sales: 
 Paint 
 Stores 22.0 % 22.3 % 
 Group 
 Consumer 
 Brands 19.0 % 9.2 % 
 Group 
 Performan… 
 Coatings 15.1 % 14.5 % 
 Group 
 Administr… nm nm 
 Total 14.9 % 13.5 % 
 nm - not 
 meaningful 
Income Tax Expense
The effective income tax rate for 2024 was 22.3% compared to 23.2% in 2023. The decrease in the
effective rate was primarily due to a more favorable impact of tax benefits related to employee
share-based payments. The other significant components of the Company’s effective tax rate were
consistent year-over-year. See Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for
additional information.
Net Income Per Share
Diluted net income per share for 2024 increased to $10.55 per share from $9.25 per share in 2023.
Currency translation rate changes decreased diluted net income per share by $0.06 per share for 2024.
Diluted net income per share in 2024 included acquisition-related amortization expense of $0.78 per
share. Diluted net income per share for 2023 included acquisition-related amortization expense of
$0.78 per share, severance and other expense of $0.04 per share, expenses related to the divestiture
of the China architectural business of $0.11 per share, impairment related to trademarks of $0.07 per
share and expense related to the devaluation of the Argentine peso of $0.16 per share. These expenses
were partially offset by a gain on the divestiture of a non-core domestic aerosol business of $0.06
per share. See Notes 3, 6 and 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional
information.
 27 
Overview
The Company’s financial condition, liquidity and cash flow remained strong in 2024. The Company
generated $3.153 billion in Net operating cash and invested $1.014 billion in capital expenditures
and approximately $80 million in the acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business. The Company
also returned cash of $2.462 billion to shareholders in the form of cash dividends and share
repurchases during the year.
The Company’s EBITDA increased 8.2% to $4.492 billion. See the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section
for the definition and calculation of EBITDA. As of December 31, 2024, the Company had Cash and cash
equivalents of $210.4 million and total debt outstanding of $9.888 billion. Total debt, net of Cash
and cash equivalents, was $9.678 billion and was 2.2 times the Company’s EBITDA in 2024.
Net Working Capital
Net working capital, defined as Total current assets less Total current liabilities, decreased $293.9
million to a deficit of $1.408 billion at December 31, 2024 compared to a deficit of $1.114 billion
at December 31, 2023. The net working capital decrease is due to an increase in Short-term borrowings
and a decrease in current assets, particularly Accounts receivable, net and Cash and cash
equivalents, partially offset by an increase in Other current assets and a decrease in Accounts
payable.
Current asset balances decreased $112.1 million at December 31, 2024 compared to December 31, 2023
primarily due to a decrease in Accounts receivable, net of $79.1 million, a decrease in Cash and cash
equivalents of $66.4 million and a decrease in Inventories of $41.7 million. These decreases were
partially offset by an increase in Other current assets of $75.1 million, primarily related to
prepaid expenses.
Current liability balances increased $181.8 million at December 31, 2024 compared to December 31,
2023 primarily due to an increase in Short-term borrowings of $288.2 million and an increase in Other
accruals of $30.7 million primarily related to liabilities related to insurance, investments in U.S.
affordable housing and historic renovation real estate partnerships and contracts with customers,
partially offset by a decrease in short-term environmental liabilities. These increases were
partially offset by a decrease in Accounts payable of $61.8 million, a decrease in Current portion of
long-term debt of $49.6 million and a decrease in Accrued taxes of $23.1 million.
As a result of the net effect of these changes, the Company’s current ratio decreased to 0.79 at
December 31, 2024 from 0.83 at December 31, 2023. Accounts receivable as a percent of Net sales
decreased to 10.3% in 2024 from 10.7% in 2023. Accounts receivable days outstanding was 58 days in
2024 and 2023. In 2024, the allowance for current expected credit losses increased $0.8 million, or
1.3%. Inventories as a percent of Net sales decreased to 9.9% in 2024 from 10.1% in 2023. Inventory
days outstanding was 93 days in 2024 compared to 94 days in 2023. The Company has sufficient total
available borrowing capacity to fund its current operating needs.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment, net increased $696.4 million to $3.533 billion at December 31, 2024
primarily due to capital expenditures of $1.014 billion and assets acquired through a business
combination of $32.9 million, partially offset by depreciation expense of $297.4 million and foreign
currency translation and other adjustments of $52.6 million. During 2023, the Company closed on a
transaction to sell and subsequently lease back its current global headquarters and R&D center. In
connection with the sale, proceeds of $47.2 million were received and an immaterial gain was
recognized.
Capital expenditures during 2024 included expenditures related to construction activities associated
with the new global headquarters and R&D center in the Administrative function. Construction of the
new global headquarters and R&D center is expected to be complete in 2025. Also included in 2024
capital expenditures were expenditures related to manufacturing capacity expansion, operational
efficiencies and maintenance projects in the Consumer Brands and Performance Coatings Groups and the
opening of new paint stores and renovation and improvements in existing stores in the Paint Stores
Group.
In 2025, the Company expects to spend slightly less than 2024 for capital expenditures, which it will
fund primarily through the generation of operating cash. Core capital expenditures are expected to be
for investments in various productivity improvement and maintenance projects at existing
manufacturing, distribution and research and development facilities and new store openings.
Additionally, the Company expects to complete construction of its new global headquarters and R&D
center. Refer to the Real Estate Financing section herein for further information on the financing
transaction for the new global headquarters.
Real Estate Financing
In December 2022, the Company closed a transaction to sell and subsequently lease back its partially-
constructed new global headquarters. As part of the terms of the transaction, the Company is
contractually obligated for completing the
 28 
construction of the building and related improvements at the new global headquarters. Construction is
expected to complete in 2025. This transaction did not meet the criteria for recognition as an asset
sale under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (US GAAP) and as such, was accounted for as
a real estate financing transaction. The Company expects to receive total proceeds approximating $800
million to $850 million, with final proceeds expected in the first quarter of 2025. The initial lease
term includes the construction period and extends for 30 years thereafter, and the Company has the
right and option to extend the lease term. The lease payment amounts during the construction period
are dependent upon the timing and amount of total reimbursement of construction and other costs
received by the Company. Lease payments over the next twelve months are expected to be approximately
$50 million. The amount of the lease payments during the initial 30 year lease term will be
calculated upon completion of the construction period and receipt of total reimbursement of
construction and other costs. Once determinable, this is expected to result in a significant increase
in the Company’s long-term contractual obligations.
The following table summarizes the activity related to this transaction and the corresponding
balances recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 Activity: 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Proceeds received $ 244.2 $ 305.0 $ 210.0 
 Capitalized interest 45.2 23.8 
 Balances: 
 Short-term liability $ 49.7 $ 39.9 $ 20.0 
 Long-term liability 715.9 475.9 187.0 
 Total liability $ 765.6 $ 515.8 $ 207.0 
The net proceeds from this transaction and other real estate financing transactions are recognized as
proceeds from real estate financing transactions within the Financing Activities section of the
Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows. The Company will continue to recognize the related assets
within Property, plant and equipment, net on the Consolidated Balance Sheets under US GAAP. These
assets will be subject to depreciation over their useful lives in accordance with the Company’s
accounting policies. The Company will also allocate payments between interest and repayment of the
financing liability over the life of the agreement. See Note 10 to the consolidated financial
statements within Item 8 for further information.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill, which represents the excess of cost over the fair value of net assets acquired in business
combinations, decreased $45.9 million to $7.580 billion at December 31, 2024, due to foreign currency
translation rate fluctuations of $94.1 million, partially offset by purchase accounting allocations
of $48.2 million.
Intangible assets decreased $347.3 million to $3.533 billion at December 31, 2024 due to amortization
of finite-lived intangible assets of $326.7 million and foreign currency translation rate
fluctuations and other adjustments of $75.9 million, partially offset by purchase accounting
allocations of $28.0 million and capitalization of software of $27.3 million.
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information related to
acquisitions. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for a description of
goodwill, intangible assets, historical impairments and summaries of the remaining carrying values of
goodwill and intangible assets.
Other Assets
Other assets increased $420.7 million to $1.632 billion at December 31, 2024. The increase was
primarily due to an increase in finance lease right-of-use (ROU) assets of $187.5 million, largely
related to a new finance lease which commenced during 2024, an increase in assets related to
contracts with customers and investments in U.S. affordable housing and historic renovation real
estate partnerships. See Notes 1, 9 and 18 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for
additional information.
 29 
Debt (including Short-term borrowings)
 December 31, December 31, 
 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Long-term debt $ 9,226.0 $ 9,476.7 
 Short-term borrowings 662.4 374.2 
 Total debt outstanding $ 9,888.4 $ 9,850.9 
Total debt outstanding, including Short-term borrowings, increased by $37.5 million to $9.888 billion
in 2024. Short-term borrowings are primarily comprised of amounts outstanding under the Company’s
domestic commercial paper program and various foreign credit facilities. The Company’s Long-term debt
primarily consists of senior notes. The Company targets Net debt, which is total debt outstanding,
net of Cash and cash equivalents, to be 2.0 to 2.5 times EBITDA. At December 31, 2024, Net debt was
$9.678 billion and was 2.2 times the Company’s EBITDA in 2024. See the Non-GAAP Financial Measures
section for the definition and calculation of EBITDA.
In August 2024, the Company repaid principal of $600.0 million related to the Company’s 4.05% senior
notes due August 8, 2024 using commercial paper and subsequently issued $400.0 million of 4.55%
senior notes due 2028 and $450.0 million of 4.80% senior notes due 2031 in a public offering. The net
proceeds from the issuance of these notes were used to repay outstanding borrowings under the
Company’s domestic commercial paper program and for general corporate purposes. The newly issued
senior notes contain customary qualitative covenants as defined in their respective agreements.
During the second quarter of 2024, the Company repaid the principal of $500.0 million related to its
3.125% senior notes due June 1, 2024 using commercial paper.
In December 2023, the Company exercised its call provision to make-whole the entire outstanding
$119.4 million aggregate principal amount of its 7.38% Debentures due 2027 and the entire outstanding
$3.5 million aggregate principal amount of its 7.45% Debentures due 2097. The retirement of the
Debentures resulted in a loss of $12.8 million recorded in Other general (income) expense - net. See
Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
The Company’s available capacity under its committed credit agreements is reduced for amounts
outstanding under its domestic commercial paper program and letters of credit. At December 31, 2024,
the Company had unused capacity under its various credit agreements of $3.274 billion.
See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for a detailed description and summary
of the Company’s outstanding debt, short-term borrowings and other available financing programs.
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
In accordance with the accounting prescribed by the Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC, the
Company’s total liability for unfunded or underfunded defined benefit pension plans decreased $1.2
million to $67.8 million primarily due to changes in actuarial assumptions. The Company’s liability
for other postretirement benefits decreased $12.1 million to $135.1 million at December 31, 2024
primarily due to benefits paid and changes in actuarial assumptions.
The assumed discount rate used to determine the projected benefit obligation for the domestic defined
benefit pension plan increased to 5.8% at December 31, 2024 from 5.1% at December 31, 2023. The
assumed discount rate used to determine the projected benefit obligation for foreign defined benefit
pension plans increased to 5.5% at December 31, 2024 from 4.8% at December 31, 2023. The assumed
discount rate used to determine the projected benefit obligation for other postretirement benefit
obligations increased to 5.6% at December 31, 2024 from 5.0% at December 31, 2023. The increase in
the discount rates was primarily due to higher interest rates.
In determining the rates of compensation increases, management considered historical Company
increases as well as expectations for future increases. The rate of compensation increases used to
determine the projected benefit obligation at December 31, 2024 was 3.0% for the domestic pension
plan and 3.3% for foreign pension plans, which was comparable to the rates used in the prior year.
In establishing the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, management considered the
historical rates of return, the nature of investments and an expectation for future investment
strategies. The expected long-term rate of return on assets for the domestic defined benefit pension
plan was 6.5% and 6.3% at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. The expected long-term rate of
return on assets for the foreign defined benefit pension plans was 4.8% at December 31, 2024 and
2023.
In developing the assumed health care cost trend rates, management considered industry data,
historical Company experience and expectations for future health care costs. The assumed health care
cost trend rates used to determine the projected benefit
 30 
obligation for other postretirement benefit obligations at December 31, 2024 were 6.5% and 11.8% for
medical and prescription drug cost increases, respectively, both decreasing gradually to 4.5% in
2034. The assumed health care cost trend rates for medical and prescription costs used to determine
the projected benefit obligation for other postretirement benefit obligations at December 31, 2023
were 6.0% and 9.0%, respectively.
The respective year-end assumptions described above for the Company’s defined benefit plans are also
used to determine expense for the next year. Net pension (credit) cost in 2025 for the domestic
pension plan and foreign pension plans is expected to be approximately $(1.6) million and $5.3
million, respectively. Net periodic benefit credit for other postretirement benefits in 2025 is
expected to be approximately $9.7 million. This credit is primarily due to the remaining amortization
of the impact of a plan amendment executed in 2022. This impact will be fully amortized in 2025. See
Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information on the Company’s
obligations and funded status of its defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefits.
Deferred Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes at December 31, 2024 decreased $75.6 million to $607.5 million at December 31,
2024 primarily due to amortization of intangible assets in the current year. See Note 20 to the
consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information on deferred taxes.
Other Long-Term Liabilities
Other long-term liabilities increased $401.4 million to $2.309 billion at December 31, 2024 primarily
due to liabilities associated with real estate financing transactions, finance leases and commitments
related to investments in U.S. affordable housing and historic renovation real estate partnerships,
partially offset by the impact of expected settlements related to tax positions over the next twelve
months. See Notes 1, 9, 10 and 20 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Environmental Matters
The operations of the Company, like those of other companies in the same industry, are subject to
various federal, state and local environmental laws and regulations. These laws and regulations not
only govern current operations and products, but also impose potential liability on the Company for
past operations. Management expects environmental laws and regulations to impose increasingly
stringent requirements upon the Company and the industry in the future. Management believes that the
Company conducts its operations in compliance with applicable environmental laws and regulations and
has implemented various programs designed to protect the environment and promote continued
compliance.
Depreciation of capital expenditures and other expenses related to ongoing environmental compliance
measures were included in the normal operating expenses of conducting business. The Company’s capital
expenditures, depreciation and other expenses related to ongoing environmental compliance measures
were not material to the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, cash flow or results of operations
during 2024. Management does not expect that such capital expenditures, depreciation and other
expenses will be material to the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, cash flow or results of
operations in 2025. See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for further
information on environmental-related liabilities.
Contractual and Other Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The Company has certain obligations and commitments to make future payments under contractual and
other obligations and commercial commitments. The Company believes that cash generated from operating
activities and borrowings available under long-term and short-term debt, including its committed
credit agreements and commercial paper program, will be sufficient for it to meet its contractual and
other obligations and commercial commitments. The following tables summarize such obligations and
commitments as of December 31, 2024.
 31 
(2) Relates to open purchase orders for raw materials at December 31, 2024.
(3) Relates primarily to estimated future capital contributions for investments in the U.S.
affordable housing and historic renovation real estate partnerships and various other contractual
obligations.
Additionally, the Company has an obligation with respect to an agreement signed in February 2025 to
acquire the Brazilian decorative paints business of BASF SE, which is excluded from the preceding
table. The timing and amount of this obligation is uncertain as the transaction is expected to close
in the second half of 2025 and is subject to customary closing conditions, including Brazilian
regulatory approval and post-closing adjustments. Refer to Note 3 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8 for further information.
 Amount of 
 Commitment 
 Expiration Per 
 Commercial Period Less Than More Than 
 Commitments Total 1 Year 1–3 Years 3–5 Years 5 Years 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Standby 
 letters of $ 125.5 $ 125.5 
 credit 
 Surety bonds 216.1 216.1 
 Total 
 commercial $ 341.6 $ 341.6 $ — $ — $ — 
 commitments 
Warranties
The Company offers product warranties for certain products. The specific terms and conditions of such
warranties vary depending on the product or customer contract requirements. Management estimated the
costs of unsettled product warranty claims based on historical results and experience and included an
amount in Other accruals. Management periodically assesses the adequacy of the accrual for product
warranty claims and adjusts the accrual as necessary. Changes in the Company’s accrual for product
warranty claims during 2024 and 2023, including customer satisfaction settlements during the year,
were as follows:
 2024 2023 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1 $ 40.4 $ 36.2 
 Charges to expense 34.2 37.0 
 Settlements -28.2 -32.8 
 Balance at December 31 $ 46.4 $ 40.4 
Shareholders’ Equity
Shareholders’ equity increased $335.4 million to $4.051 billion at December 31, 2024 from $3.716
billion last year. The increase was primarily attributable to the generation of $2.681 billion of Net
income and benefits from stock option exercises and the recognition of stock-based compensation
expense of $367.5 million. This was partially offset by the repurchase of $1.739 billion in Treasury
stock, the payment of $723.4 million in cash dividends and a decrease in AOCI of $250.9 million
mainly due to foreign currency translation adjustments. See the Statements of Consolidated
Shareholders’ Equity and Statements of Consolidated Comprehensive Income in Item 8 for additional
information.
The Company purchased 5.2 million shares of its common stock for treasury purposes through open
market purchases during 2024. The Company acquires its common stock for general corporate purposes,
and depending on its cash position and market
 32 
conditions, it may acquire shares in the future. The Company had remaining authorization from its
Board of Directors at December 31, 2024 to purchase 34.4 million shares of its common stock.
The Company’s 2024 annual cash dividend of $2.86 per share represented 31% of 2023 diluted net income
per share. The 2024 annual dividend represented the 46 th consecutive year of increased dividend
payments. On February 19, 2025, the Board of Directors increased the quarterly cash dividend to $0.79
per share. This quarterly dividend, if approved in each of the remaining quarters of 2025, would
result in an annual dividend for 2025 of $3.16 per share, or a 30% payout of 2024 diluted net income
per share.
Cash Flow
Net operating cash decreased $368.7 million in 2024 to a cash source of $3.153 billion from a cash
source of $3.522 billion in 2023 primarily due to higher cash requirements for working capital
partially offset by higher Net income. Net operating cash decreased as a percent of Net sales to
13.7% in 2024 compared to 15.3% in 2023.
Net investing cash usage increased $157.0 million to a usage of $1.196 billion in 2024 from a usage
of $1.039 billion in 2023 primarily due to an increase in cash used for capital expenditures,
proceeds from the divestiture of a business in 2023 and reduced proceeds from the sale of assets,
partially offset by lower cash used for acquisitions. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8 for additional information on acquisitions and divestitures.
Net financing cash usage decreased $407.5 million to a usage of $2.017 billion in 2024 from a usage
of $2.425 billion in 2023. This decrease was primarily due to a net increase in short-term
borrowings, proceeds from long-term debt in 2024 and higher proceeds from stock options exercised,
partially offset by an increase in payments of long-term debt, treasury stock purchases and payment
of cash dividends.
Market Risk
The Company is exposed to market risk associated with interest rate, foreign currency and commodity
fluctuations. The Company occasionally utilizes derivative instruments as part of its overall
financial risk management policy, but does not use derivative instruments for speculative or trading
purposes. In 2024 and 2023, the Company entered into foreign currency forward contracts with maturity
dates of less than twelve months primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency and
cross currency swap contracts to hedge its net investment in European operations. See Notes 1, 16 and
19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information related to the
Company’s use of derivative instruments.
The Company believes it may be exposed to continuing market risk from foreign currency exchange rate
and commodity price fluctuations. However, the Company does not expect that foreign currency exchange
rate and commodity price fluctuations or hedging contract losses will have a material adverse effect
on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. See Notes 1 and 19 to the
consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information related to foreign currency
translation.
Financial Covenant
Certain borrowings contain a consolidated leverage covenant. The covenant states the Company’s
consolidated leverage ratio is not to exceed 3.75 to 1.00; however, the Company may elect to
temporarily increase the leverage ratio to 4.25 to 1.00 for a period of four consecutive fiscal
quarters immediately following the consummation of a qualifying acquisition, as defined in the credit
agreement dated July 31, 2024. The leverage ratio is defined as the ratio of total indebtedness (the
sum of Short-term borrowings, Current portion of long-term debt and Long-term debt) at the reporting
date to consolidated “Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization” (EBITDA), as
defined in the credit agreement, for the 12-month period ended on the same date. Refer to the “Non-
GAAP Financial Measures” section for a reconciliation of EBITDA to Net income. At December 31, 2024,
the Company was in compliance with the covenant and expects to remain in compliance. The Company’s
notes, debentures and revolving credit agreements contain various default and cross-default
provisions. In the event of default under any one of these arrangements, acceleration of the maturity
of any one or more of these borrowings may result. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Defined Contribution Savings Plan
Participants in the Company’s defined contribution savings plan are allowed to contribute up to the
lesser of fifty percent of their annual compensation or the maximum dollar amount allowed under the
Internal Revenue Code. The Company matches one hundred percent of all contributions up to six percent
of eligible employee contributions. The Company’s matching contributions to the defined contribution
savings plan charged to operations were $165.1 million in 2024 compared to $153.9 million in 2023. At
December 31, 2024, there were 16,771,640 shares of the Company’s common stock being held by the
defined contribution savings plan, representing 6.7% of the total number of voting shares
outstanding. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional
information concerning the Company’s defined contribution savings plan.
 33 
Management utilizes certain financial measures that are not in accordance with US GAAP to analyze and
manage the performance of the business. The required disclosures for these non-GAAP measures are
shown below. The Company provides such non-GAAP information in reporting its financial results to
give investors additional data to evaluate the Company’s operations. Management does not, nor does it
suggest investors should, consider such non-GAAP measures in isolation from, or in substitution for,
financial information prepared in accordance with US GAAP.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as Net income before income taxes, Interest expense,
depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as EBITDA that
excludes certain adjustments that management believes enhances investors’ understanding of the
Company’s operating performance. Management considers EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA useful in
understanding the operating performance of the Company. The reader is cautioned that the Company’s
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be compared to other entities unknowingly. Further, EBITDA and
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered alternatives to Net income or Net operating cash as an
indicator of operating performance or as a measure of liquidity. The reader should refer to the
determination of Net income and Net operating cash in accordance with US GAAP disclosed in the
Statements of Consolidated Income and Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows in Item 8.
The following table summarizes EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as calculated by management for the years
indicated below:
 Year Ended December 31, 
 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 2,681.4 $ 2,388.8 
 Interest expense 415.7 417.5 
 Income taxes 770.4 721.1 
 Depreciation 297.4 292.3 
 Amortization 326.6 330.2 
 EBITDA $ 4,491.5 $ 4,149.9 
 Restructuring expense — 9.6 
 Impairment related to Restructuring Plan — 34.0 
 Gain on divestiture of domestic aerosol — -20.1 
 business 
 Impairment related to trademarks — 23.9 
 Devaluation of the Argentine peso — 41.8 
 Adjusted EBITDA $ 4,491.5 $ 4,239.1 
Free Cash Flow After Dividends
Free cash flow after dividends is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as Net operating cash, as
shown in the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows, less the amount reinvested in the business for
capital expenditures and the return on investment to its shareholders by the payments of cash
dividends. Management considers Free cash flow after dividends to be a useful tool in its
determination of appropriate uses of the Company’s Net operating cash. The reader is cautioned that
the Free cash flow after dividends measure should not be compared to other entities unknowingly as it
may not be comparable and it does not consider certain non-discretionary cash flows, such as
mandatory debt and interest payments. The amount shown below should not be considered an alternative
to Net operating cash or other cash flow amounts provided in accordance with US GAAP as disclosed in
the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows in Item 8.
The following table summarizes Free cash flow after dividends as calculated by management for the
years indicated below:
 Year Ended December 31, 
 2024 2023 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net operating cash $ 3,153.2 $ 3,521.9 
 Capital expenditures -1,070.0 -888.4 
 Cash dividends -723.4 -623.7 
 Free cash flow after dividends $ 1,359.8 $ 2,009.8 
 34 
Adjusted Diluted Net Income Per Share
Management believes investors’ understanding of the Company’s operating performance is enhanced by
the disclosure of diluted net income per share excluding Valspar acquisition-related amortization
expense and certain other adjustments. Valspar acquisition-related amortization expense is excluded
from diluted net income per share due to its significance as a result of the purchase price assigned
to finite-lived intangible assets at the date of acquisition and the related impact on underlying
business performance and trends. While these intangible assets contribute to the Company’s revenue
generation, the related revenue is not excluded. This adjusted earnings per share measurement is not
in accordance with US GAAP. It should not be considered a substitute for earnings per share in
accordance with US GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other
companies. The following tables reconcile diluted net income per share computed in accordance with US
GAAP to adjusted diluted net income per share.
 Year Ended 
 December 31, 2024 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Pre-Tax TaxEffect(1) After-Tax 
 Diluted net income per share $ 10.55 
 Acquisition-related amortization $ 1.02 $ .24 .78 
 expense(2) 
 Adjusted diluted net income per share $ 11.33 
 Year Ended 
 December 31, 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Pre-Tax TaxEffect(1) After-Tax 
 Diluted net income per share $ 9.25 
 Items related to Restructuring Plan: 
 Severance and other $ .06 $ .02 .04 
 Impairment of assets related to China .13 .08 .05 
 divestiture 
 Gain on divestiture of domestic 
 aerosol -.08 -.02 -.06 
 business 
 Discrete income tax expense related to — -.06 .06 
 China divestiture(1) 
 Total .11 .02 .09 
 Impairment related to trademarks .09 .02 .07 
 Devaluation of the Argentine peso .16 — .16 
 Acquisition-related amortization 1.03 .25 .78 
 expense(2) 
 Adjusted diluted net income per share $ 10.35 
(1) The tax effect is calculated based on the statutory rate and the nature of the item, unless
otherwise noted.
(2) Acquisition-related amortization expense, which is included within Selling, general and
administrative expenses, consists of the amortization of intangible assets related to the Valspar
acquisition. These intangible assets are primarily customer relationships and intellectual property
and are being amortized over their remaining useful lives.
 35 
Adjusted Segment Profit
Management believes investors’ understanding of the Company’s operating performance is enhanced by
the disclosure of Segment profit excluding Valspar acquisition-related amortization expense and
certain other adjustments. Valspar acquisition-related amortization expense is excluded from Segment
profit due to its significance as a result of the purchase price assigned to finite-lived intangible
assets at the date of acquisition and the related impact on underlying business performance and
trends. While these intangible assets contribute to the Company’s revenue generation, the related
revenue is not excluded. This Adjusted segment profit measurement is not in accordance with US GAAP.
It should not be considered a substitute for Segment profit in accordance with US GAAP and may not be
comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. The following tables reconcile
Segment profit computed in accordance with US GAAP to Adjusted segment profit.
 Year 
 Ended 
 December 
 31, 
 2024 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Adminis… Total 
 Group Group Group 
 Net $ 13,188.0 $ 3,108.0 $ 6,797.3 $ 5.2 $ 23,098… 
 sales 
 Income 
 before $ 2,902.6 $ 589.9 $ 1,027.9 $ -1,068.6 $ 3,451.8 
 income 
 taxes 
 as a 
 percent 22.0 % 19.0 % 15.1 % nm 14.9 % 
 of Net 
 sales 
 Acquis… 
 amorti… 63.8 196.3 260.1 
 expens… 
 Adjust… 
 segment $ 2,902.6 $ 653.7 $ 1,224.2 $ -1,068.6 $ 3,711.9 
 profit 
 as a 
 percent 22.0 % 21.0 % 18.0 % nm 16.1 % 
 of Net 
 sales 
 Year 
 Ended 
 December 
 31, 
 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Adminis… Total 
 Group Group Group 
 Net $ 12,839.5 $ 3,365.6 $ 6,843.1 $ 3.7 $ 23,051… 
 sales 
 Income 
 before $ 2,860.8 $ 309.3 $ 991.6 $ -1,051.8 $ 3,109.9 
 income 
 taxes 
 as a 
 percent 22.3 % 9.2 % 14.5 % nm 13.5 % 
 of Net 
 sales 
 Items 
 related 
 to 
 Restru… 
 Plan: 
 Severa… 
 and 14.2 -0.2 1.3 15.3 
 other 
 Impair… 
 of 
 assets 
 related 6.9 27.1 34.0 
 to 
 China 
 divest… 
 Gain on 
 divest… 
 of -20.1 -20.1 
 domest… 
 aerosol 
 busine… 
 Total — 21.1 -0.2 8.3 29.2 
 Impair… 
 related 23.9 23.9 
 to 
 tradem… 
 Devalu… 
 of the 30.8 11.0 41.8 
 Argent… 
 peso 
 Acquis… 
 amorti… 69.3 196.8 266.1 
 expens… 
 Adjust… 
 segment $ 2,860.8 $ 454.4 $ 1,199.2 $ -1,043.5 $ 3,470.9 
 profit 
 as a 
 percent 22.3 % 13.5 % 17.5 % nm 15.1 % 
 of Net 
 sales 
nm -not meaningful
(1) Acquisition-related amortization expense, which is included within Selling, general and
administrative expenses, consists of the amortization of intangible assets related to the Valspar
acquisition. These intangible assets are primarily customer relationships and intellectual property
and are being amortized over their remaining useful lives.
 36 
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the accompanying consolidated financial
statements. These determinations were made based upon management’s best estimates, judgments and
assumptions that were believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, giving due consideration to
materiality. We do not believe there is a great likelihood that materially different amounts would be
reported under different conditions or using different assumptions related to the critical accounting
policies and estimates described below. However, application of these critical accounting policies
and estimates involves the exercise of judgment and use of assumptions as to future uncertainties and
as a result, actual results could differ from these estimates.
All of the significant accounting policies that were followed in the preparation of the consolidated
financial statements are disclosed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Management believes that the following critical accounting policies and estimates have a significant
impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market with cost determined principally on the last-
in, first-out (LIFO) method based on inventory quantities and costs determined during the fourth
quarter and market representing current replacement cost, which is the cost to purchase or reproduce
the inventory. Market shall not exceed net realizable value and shall not be less than net realizable
value reduced by an allowance for an approximately normal profit margin. Inventory quantities are
adjusted throughout the year as formal cycle counts are completed, or during the fourth quarter as a
result of annual physical inventory counts. If inventories accounted for on the LIFO method are
reduced on a year-over-year basis, then liquidation of certain quantities carried at costs prevailing
in prior years occurs. Management records an estimate of the lower of cost or market whenever the
utility of inventory is impaired by damage, deterioration, obsolescence, changes in price levels, or
other causes based on historical experience and current trends through reductions to inventory cost
by recording a provision included in Cost of goods sold. If management estimates that the reasonable
market value is below cost or determines that future demand was lower than current inventory levels,
based on historical experience, current and projected market demand, current and projected volume
trends and other relevant current and projected factors associated with the current economic
conditions, a reduction in inventory cost to current market price is provided for in the reserve for
obsolescence. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for more information
regarding the impact of the LIFO inventory valuation and the reserve for obsolescence.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
In accordance with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC, management performs
impairment tests of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets on an annual basis, as well as
whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that indicate impairment has occurred on a more
likely than not basis. An optional qualitative assessment allows companies to forego the annual
quantitative test if it is not more likely than not that impairment has occurred based on monitoring
key Company financial performance metrics and macroeconomic conditions. The qualitative assessment is
performed when deemed appropriate.
Management tests goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level. Per the Segment Reporting Topic
of the ASC, a reporting unit is an operating segment or one level below the operating segment
(component level) as determined by the availability of discrete financial information that is
regularly reviewed by operating segment management or an aggregate of component levels of an
operating segment having similar economic characteristics. At the time of goodwill impairment testing
(if performing a quantitative assessment), management determines fair value through the use of a
discounted cash flow valuation model incorporating discount rates commensurate with the risks
involved for each reporting unit. If the calculated fair value is less than the current carrying
value, the difference represents the amount of impairment attributable to the reporting unit. The use
of a discounted cash flow valuation model to determine estimated fair value is common practice in
impairment testing. The key assumptions used in the discounted cash flow valuation model for
impairment testing include a discount rate, growth rates, cash flow projections and a terminal value
rate. Discount rates are set by using the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) methodology. The
WACC methodology considers market and industry data as well as Company-specific risk factors for each
reporting unit in determining the appropriate discount rate to be used. The discount rate utilized
for each reporting unit is indicative of the return an investor would expect to receive for investing
in such a business. Management, considering industry and Company-specific historical and projected
data, develops growth rates, sales projections and cash flow projections for each reporting unit.
Terminal value rate determination follows common methodology of capturing the present value of
perpetual cash flow estimates beyond the last projected period assuming a constant WACC and a long-
term growth rate. As an indicator that each reporting unit has been valued appropriately through the
use of the discounted cash flow valuation model, the aggregate of all reporting units’ fair value is
reconciled to the total market capitalization of the Company within a reasonable and supportable
control premium.
 37 
The Company had seven components, some of which are aggregated due to similar economic
characteristics, to form three reporting units (also the reportable operating segments) with goodwill
as of October 1, 2024, the date of the annual impairment test. The Company performed the optional
qualitative impairment test as of October 1, 2024, and determined that there was no indication of
impairment on a more likely than not basis in the Company’s reporting units.
Management tests indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment at the asset level, as determined
by appropriate asset valuations at acquisition. Management utilizes the royalty savings method to
determine the estimated fair value for each indefinite-lived intangible asset or trademark. In this
method, management estimates the royalty savings arising from the ownership of the intangible asset.
The key assumptions used in estimating the royalty savings for impairment testing include a discount
rate, a royalty rate, growth rates, sales projections, a terminal value rate and to a lesser extent,
a tax rate. The discount rate used is similar to the rate developed by the WACC methodology
considering any differences in Company-specific risk factors between reporting units and trademarks.
The royalty rate is established by management and valuation experts and periodically substantiated by
valuation experts. Management, considering industry and Company-specific historical and projected
data, develops growth rates and sales projections for each significant trademark. Terminal value rate
determination follows common methodology of capturing the present value of perpetual sales estimates
beyond the last projected period assuming a constant WACC and a low long-term growth rate. The
royalty savings valuation methodology and calculations used in 2024 impairment testing are consistent
with prior years. The Company performed the optional qualitative impairment test as of October 1,
2024, and determined that there was indication of impairment on a more likely than not basis in
certain of the Company’s trademarks. The resulting quantitative impairment test performed as of
October 1, 2024 did not result in any trademark impairment.
The discounted cash flow and royalty savings valuation methodologies require management to make
certain assumptions based upon information available at the time the valuations are performed from
the perspective of a market participant. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Item
8 for a discussion of goodwill and intangible assets and the impairment tests performed in accordance
with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC, if events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying value of long-lived assets, including operating and finance
lease right-of-use assets, may not be recoverable or the useful life has changed, impairment tests
are performed or the useful life is adjusted. Undiscounted cash flows are used to calculate the
recoverable value of long-lived assets to determine if such assets are recoverable. If the carrying
value of the assets is deemed to not be recoverable, the impairment to be recognized is the amount by
which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the estimated fair value of the assets as determined
in accordance with the Fair Value Topic of the ASC. If the usefulness of an asset is determined to be
impaired, an updated useful life is assessed based on the period of time for projected use of the
asset. Fair value approaches and changes in useful life are based on certain assumptions and
information available at the time the valuation or determination is performed. Management believes
the assumptions used are reflective of what a market participant would have used in calculating fair
value or useful life considering the current economic conditions. As of October 1, 2024, the Company
performed an analysis and determined that there were no events or changes in circumstances to suggest
the carrying value of each long-lived asset group is not recoverable and therefore, no further
impairment tests were performed. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for a
discussion of the reductions in carrying value or useful life of long-lived assets in accordance with
the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC.
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
To determine the Company’s ultimate obligation under its defined benefit pension and other
postretirement benefit plans, management estimates the future cost of benefits and attributes that
cost to the time period during which each covered employee works. To determine the obligations of the
benefit plans, management uses actuaries to calculate such amounts using key assumptions which
include discount rates, inflation rates, long-term investment returns, mortality, employee turnover,
rate of compensation increases and medical and prescription drug costs. Management reviews all of
these assumptions on an ongoing basis to ensure that the most current information available is
considered. An increase or decrease in the assumptions or economic events outside management’s
control could have a direct impact on the Company’s results of operations or financial condition.
In accordance with the Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC, the Company recognizes each plan’s
funded status as an asset for overfunded plans and as a liability for unfunded or underfunded plans.
Actuarial gains and losses and prior service costs are recognized and recorded in Accumulated other
comprehensive income (AOCI). The amounts recorded in AOCI will continue to be modified as actuarial
assumptions and service costs change, and all such amounts will be amortized to expense over a period
of years through the net pension and net periodic benefit costs. Based on facts and circumstances,
the expense amounts recorded in AOCI can also have accelerated amortization due to certain plan
changes, including those that result in a
 38 
curtailment. See Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for information concerning
the Company’s defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans.
Environmental Matters
The Company is involved with environmental investigation and remediation activities at some of its
currently and formerly owned sites (including sites which were previously owned and/or operated by
businesses acquired by the Company). The Company initially provides for estimated costs of
environmental-related activities relating to its past operations and third-party sites for which
commitments or clean-up plans have been developed and when such costs can be reasonably estimated
based on industry standards and professional judgment. These estimated costs, which are mostly
undiscounted, are determined based on currently available facts regarding each site. If the
reasonably estimable costs can only be identified as a range and no specific amount within that range
can be determined more likely than any other amount within the range, the minimum of the range is
provided.
The Company routinely assesses its potential liability for investigation and remediation-related
activities and adjusts its environmental-related accruals as information becomes available upon which
more accurate costs can be reasonably estimated and as additional accounting guidelines are issued.
Actual costs incurred may vary from the accrued estimates due to the inherent uncertainties involved.
See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for information concerning the accrual
for extended environmental-related activities and a discussion concerning unaccrued future loss
contingencies.
Litigation and Other Contingent Liabilities
In the course of its business, the Company is subject to a variety of claims and lawsuits, including,
but not limited to, litigation relating to product liability and warranty, personal injury,
environmental, intellectual property, commercial, contractual and antitrust claims. Management
accrues for all known liabilities that existed and those where a loss was deemed probable for which a
fair value was available or an amount could be reasonably estimated in accordance with US GAAP.
However, because litigation is inherently subject to many uncertainties and the ultimate result of
any present or future litigation is unpredictable, the Company’s ultimate liability may result in
costs that are significantly higher than currently accrued. In the event that the Company’s loss
contingency is ultimately determined to be significantly higher than currently accrued, the recording
of the liability may result in a material impact on Net income for the annual or interim period
during which such liability is accrued. Additionally, due to the uncertainties involved, any
potential liability determined to be attributable to the Company arising out of such litigation may
have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity or financial
condition. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for information concerning
litigation.
Income Taxes
The Company estimates income taxes for each jurisdiction in which it conducts operations. This
involves estimating taxable earnings, specific taxable and deductible items, the likelihood of
generating sufficient future taxable income to utilize deferred tax assets and possible exposures
related to future tax audits. To the extent these estimates change, adjustments to deferred and
accrued income taxes will be made in the period in which the changes occur.
The Company recognizes a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than
not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the
technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial
statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50%
likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. These assessments of uncertain tax positions
contain judgments related to the interpretation of tax regulations in the jurisdictions in which we
transact business. The judgments and estimates made at a point in time may change based on the
outcome of tax audits, expiration of statutes of limitations, as well as changes to, or further
interpretations of, tax laws and regulations. Income tax expense is adjusted in our Statements of
Consolidated Income in the period in which these events occur. See Note 20 to the consolidated
financial statements in Item 8 for information concerning income taxes.
 39 
We are exposed to market risk associated with interest rates, foreign currency and commodity
fluctuations. We occasionally utilize derivative instruments as part of our overall financial risk
management policy, but do not use derivative instruments for speculative or trading purposes. In
2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company utilized U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap contracts to hedge
the Company’s net investment in its European operations. The contracts have been designated as net
investment hedges and have various maturity dates. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8. The Company entered into forward foreign currency exchange contracts during
2024, 2023 and 2022 primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. There were no
material contracts outstanding at December 31, 2024. Forward foreign currency exchange contracts are
described in Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8. We believe we may experience
continuing losses from foreign currency fluctuations. However, we do not expect currency translation,
transaction or hedging contract losses to have a material adverse effect on our financial condition,
results of operations or cash flows.
 40 
Shareholders of The ABC corp. Company
We are responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial
reporting as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended. We recognize that internal control over financial reporting cannot provide absolute
assurance of achieving financial reporting objectives because of its inherent limitations. Internal
control over financial reporting is a process that involves human diligence and is subject to the
possibility of human error or the circumvention or the overriding of internal control. Therefore,
there is a risk that material misstatements may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis by
internal control over financial reporting. However, we believe we have designed into the process
safeguards to reduce, though not eliminate, this risk. Projections of any evaluation of effectiveness
to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in
conditions, or that the degree of compliance with policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In order to ensure that the Company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective as of
December 31, 2024, we conducted an assessment of its effectiveness under the supervision and with the
participation of our management group, including our principal executive officer and principal
financial officer. This assessment was based on the criteria established in the 2013 Internal Control
– Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission.
Based on our assessment of internal control over financial reporting under the criteria established
in Internal Control – Integrated Framework, we have concluded that, as of December 31, 2024, the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Our internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2024 has been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, an
independent registered public accounting firm, and their report on the effectiveness of our internal
control over financial reporting is included on page 43 of this report.
Heidi G. Petz
Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer
Allen J. Mistysyn
Senior Vice President - Finance and Chief Financial Officer
J. Paul Lang
Senior Vice President - Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer
 42 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of The ABC corp. Company
 Opinion on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting 
We have audited The ABC corp. Company and subsidiaries internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated
Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013
framework) (the COSO criteria). In our opinion, The ABC corp. Company and subsidiaries (the
Company) maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as
of December 31, 2024, based on the COSO criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated balance sheets of the Company as of December 31,
2024, 2023 and 2022, the related statements of consolidated income, comprehensive income, cash flows
and shareholders’ equity for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2024, and the
related notes and financial statement schedule listed in the 
February 20, 2025 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial
reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
included in the accompanying Report of Management On Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting
based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be
independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the
applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing
the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as
we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis
for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1)
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3)
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition,
use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial
statements.
 43 
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Ernst & Young, LLP
Cleveland, Ohio
February 20, 2025
 44 
Shareholders of The ABC corp. Company
We are responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial
statements, accompanying notes and related financial information included in this report of The
ABC corp. Company and its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the Company) as of December
31, 2024, 2023 and 2022 and for the years then ended in accordance with U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles. The consolidated financial information included in this report contains
certain amounts that were based upon our best estimates, judgments and assumptions that we believe
were reasonable under the circumstances.
We have conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. As discussed in the Report of Management on
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting on page 42 of this report, we concluded that the Company’s
internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2024.
The Board of Directors fulfills its responsibility for the oversight of the Company’s accounting
policies and procedures, financial statement preparation and internal control over financial
reporting through the Audit Committee, comprised exclusively of independent directors. The Audit
Committee is responsible for the appointment and compensation of the independent registered public
accounting firm. The Audit Committee meets at least quarterly with financial management, internal
auditors and the independent registered public accounting firm to review the adequacy of financial
controls, the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting and the
nature, extent and results of the audit effort. Both the internal auditors and the independent
registered public accounting firm have private and confidential access to the Audit Committee at all
times.
We believe that the consolidated financial statements, accompanying notes and related financial
information included in this report fairly reflect the form and substance of all material financial
transactions and fairly present, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position,
results of operations and cash flows as of and for the periods presented.
Heidi G. Petz
Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer
Allen J. Mistysyn
Senior Vice President - Finance and Chief Financial Officer
J. Paul Lang
Senior Vice President - Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer
 45 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of The ABC corp. Company
 Opinion on the Financial Statements 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of The ABC corp. Company and
subsidiaries (the Company) as of December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the related statements of
consolidated income, comprehensive income, cash flows and shareholders’ equity for each of the three
years in the period ended December 31, 2024, and the related notes and the financial statement
schedule listed in the 
statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the Company at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, and the results
of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
2024, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December
31, 2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report
dated February 20, 2025 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is
to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public
accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the
Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations
of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements
are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing
procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included
examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial
statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 Critical Audit Matter 
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the
financial statements that was communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and
that: (1) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2)
involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of the
critical audit matter does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements,
taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a
separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
 46 
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 1908.
Cleveland, Ohio
February 20, 2025
 47 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 48 
of $ 53.6million, $( 24.9) million and $ 34.1million, respectively, related to net investment hedges.
See Note 16.
(2) Net of taxes of $( 6.6) million, $( 2.8) million and $( 33.8) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
(3) Net of taxes of $ 4.6million, $ 5.9million and $( 1.2) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
(4) Net of taxes of $ 1.2million in 2024 and 2023 and $ 1.1million in 2022.
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 49 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 50 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 51 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 52 
Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements included in this report have been prepared by management of The
ABC corp. Company (herein referred to as the Company). These statements include the accounts
of the Company and all consolidated subsidiaries. Intercompany accounts and transactions have been
eliminated. The Company’s share of earnings or losses from nonconsolidated affiliates is included in
the consolidated financial statements using the equity method of accounting when the Company is able
to exercise significant influence over the operating and financial decisions of the affiliate.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles (US GAAP) requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that
affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual
results could differ from those amounts.
Nature of Operations
The Company is engaged in the development, manufacture, distribution and sale of paint, coatings and
related products to professional, industrial, commercial and retail customers primarily in North and
South America, with additional operations in the Caribbean region, Europe, Asia and Australia.
Cash Equivalents
Management considers all highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less when
purchased to be cash equivalents.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Current Expected Credit Losses
Accounts receivable are recorded at the time of credit sales, net of an allowance for current
expected credit losses. The Company records an allowance for current expected credit losses to reduce
Accounts receivable to the net amount expected to be collected.
Under Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 326, the Company reviews the collectibility of the
Accounts receivable balance each reporting period and estimates the allowance for current expected
credit losses based on historical bad debt experience, aging of accounts receivable, current
creditworthiness of customers, current economic factors, as well as reasonable and supportable
forward-looking information. Accounts receivable balances are written-off against the allowance for
current expected credit losses if a final determination of uncollectibility is made. All provisions
for the allowance for current expected credit losses are included in Selling, general and
administrative expenses. See Note 18 for further details.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market with cost determined principally on the last-
in, first-out (LIFO) method. Market represents current replacement cost, which is the cost to
purchase or reproduce the inventory. If inventories accounted for on the LIFO method are reduced on a
year-over-year basis, then liquidation of certain quantities carried at costs prevailing in prior
years occurs. Management records an estimate of the lower of cost or market whenever the utility of
inventory is impaired by damage, deterioration, obsolescence, changes in price levels, or other
causes based on historical experience and current trends through reductions to inventory cost by
recording a provision included in Cost of goods sold. If management estimates that the reasonable
market value is below cost or determines that future demand was lower than current inventory levels,
based on historical experience, current and projected market demand, current and projected volume
trends and other relevant current and projected factors associated with the current economic
conditions, a reduction in inventory cost to current market price is provided for in the reserve for
obsolescence. See Note 4 for further details.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment (including leasehold improvements) is stated on the basis of cost.
Depreciation is charged to expense using the straight-line method over the assets’ estimated useful
lives which range from 5to 25years for buildings and 3to 15years for machinery and equipment.
Depreciation and amortization are included in the appropriate Cost of goods sold or Selling, general
and administrative expenses caption on the Statements of Consolidated Income. See Note 5 for further
details.
 53 
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the cost in excess of fair value of net assets acquired in business combinations.
Intangible assets include software, customer relationships, intellectual property and trademarks. In
accordance with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC, goodwill and indefinite-lived
trademarks are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment on an annual basis, as well as
whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that indicate impairment has occurred on a more
likely than not basis. Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over the
expected period of benefit, which ranges primarily from 3to 29years. See Note 6 for further details.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC, management evaluates the
recoverability and remaining lives of long-lived assets, including right-of-use assets, whenever
events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable or the
useful life has changed.See Note 5 for further details.
Derivative Instruments
The Company utilizes derivative instruments to mitigate certain risk exposures as part of its overall
financial risk management policy and accounts for these instruments in accordance with the
Derivatives and Hedging Topic of the ASC. Derivatives are recorded as assets or liabilities in the
Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. Changes in fair value of the derivative instruments are
recognized immediately in earnings unless the derivative instrument qualifies for and is designated
in an effective hedging relationship.
The Company entered into foreign currency forward contracts with maturity dates of less than twelve
months in 2024, 2023 and 2022, primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. There
were nomaterial foreign currency option and forward contracts outstanding at December 31, 2024, 2023
and 2022. See Note 19 for further details.
The Company also entered into cross currency swap contracts to hedge its net investment in European
operations in 2024, 2023 and 2022. These contracts qualified for and were designated as net
investment hedges under US GAAP. The changes in fair value for the cross currency swaps are
recognized in the Foreign currency translation adjustments component of AOCI. The cash flow impact of
these instruments is classified as an investing activity in the Statements of Consolidated Cash
Flows. See Note 16 for further details.
Non-Traded Investments
The Company has invested in U.S. affordable housing, historic renovation and other real estate
investments (Non-Traded Investments) that have been identified as variable interest entities which
qualify for certain tax credits and other tax benefits. Since the Company does not have the power to
direct the day-to-day operations of the Non-Traded Investments and the risk of loss is limited to the
amount of contributed capital, the Company is not considered the primary beneficiary. Therefore, in
accordance with the Consolidation Topic of the ASC, the Non-Traded Investments are not consolidated.
Under the Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures Topic of the ASC, the Company uses the
proportional amortization method, whereby the initial cost and any subsequent changes in the level of
investment of Non-Traded Investments are amortized in proportion to the receipt of related tax
credits. The Company reasonably expects amortization based on the receipt of tax credits would
produce a measurement substantially similar to amortization based on the receipt of tax credits and
other tax benefits. Both the amortization and related tax credits and other tax benefits are
recognized in Income tax expense on the Statements of Consolidated Income.
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Amortization of Non-Traded Investments $ 75.0 $ 65.4 $ 38.5 
 Tax credits and other tax benefits 104.9 94.8 67.2 
 received 
 54 
The carrying value of Non-Traded Investments is recorded in Other assets. The liabilities for
estimated future capital contributions are recorded in Other accruals and Other long-term
liabilities. In addition, the associated impact of related tax credits and other tax benefits are
recorded as a reduction of Accrued taxes and a net deferred income tax asset within Deferred income
taxes. On the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows, the tax credits and other tax benefits are
presented as a change in Accrued taxes and in Deferred income taxes within Operating activities. Tax
credits and other tax benefits reduced Accrued taxes by $ 104.9million, $ 94.8million and $
67.2million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The following table summarizes the
balances related to Non-Traded Investments and related tax credits and other tax benefits on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Other assets $ 744.0 $ 675.0 $ 587.0 
 Other accruals 101.4 80.9 89.8 
 Other long-term liabilities 600.3 568.2 476.5 
 Net deferred income tax asset 7.6 19.4 23.4 
Standby Letters of Credit
The Company occasionally enters into standby letter of credit agreements to guarantee various
operating activities. These agreements provide credit availability to the various beneficiaries if
certain contractual events occur.Amounts outstanding under these agreements totaled $ 125.5million, $
146.2million and $ 149.8million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Product Warranties
The Company offers assurance-type product warranties for certain products. The specific terms and
conditions of such warranties vary depending on the product or customer contract requirements.
Management estimated the costs of unsettled product warranty claims based on historical results and
experience and included an amount in Other accruals. Management periodically assesses the adequacy of
the accrual for product warranty claims and adjusts the accrual as necessary. Changes in the
Company’s accrual for product warranty claims during 2024, 2023 and 2022, including customer
satisfaction settlements during the year, were as follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1 $ 40.4 $ 36.2 $ 35.2 
 Charges to expense 34.2 37.0 30.1 
 Settlements -28.2 -32.8 -29.1 
 Balance at December 31 $ 46.4 $ 40.4 $ 36.2 
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
The Company accounts for its defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans in
accordance with the Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC, which requires the Company to recognize an
asset for overfunded defined benefit pension or other postretirement benefit plans and a liability
for unfunded or underfunded plans. In addition, actuarial gains and losses and prior service costs of
such plans are recorded in AOCI. The amounts recorded in AOCI will continue to be modified as
actuarial assumptions and service costs change, and all such amounts will be amortized to expense
over a period of years through the net pension cost (credit) and net periodic benefit cost
(credit).See Note 8 for further details.
Defined Contribution Savings Plan
The Company accounts for its defined contribution savings plan in accordance with the Defined
Contribution Plans Subtopic of the Compensation – Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC. The Company
recognized compensation expense for amounts contributed to the defined contribution savings plan.See
Note 13 for further details.
Environmental Matters
Capital expenditures for ongoing environmental compliance measures are recorded in Property, plant
and equipment, net, and related expenses are included in the normal operating expenses of conducting
business. The Company accrued for environmental-related activities for which commitments or clean-up
plans have been developed and when such costs could be reasonably estimated based on industry
standards and professional judgment. Accrued amounts are primarily recorded on an undiscounted basis
and have not been recorded net of insurance proceeds in accordance with the Offsetting Subtopic of
the Balance Sheet Topic of the ASC. Environmental-related expenses include direct costs of
investigation and remediation and
 55 
indirect costs such as compensation and benefits for employees directly involved in the investigation
and remediation activities and fees paid to outside engineering, consulting and law firms.See Notes
10 and 19 for further details.
Stock-Based Compensation
The cost of the Company’s stock-based compensation is recorded in accordance with the Stock
Compensation Topic of the ASC.See Note 14 for further details.
Other Liabilities
The Company retains risk for certain liabilities, primarily workers’ compensation claims, employee
medical and disability benefits and automobile, property, general and product liability claims.
Estimated amounts are accrued for certain workers’ compensation, employee medical and disability
benefits, automobile and property claims filed but unsettled and estimated claims incurred but not
reported. Estimates are based upon management’s estimated aggregate liability for claims incurred
using historical experience, actuarial assumptions followed in the insurance industry and
actuarially-developed models for estimating certain liabilities. Certain estimated general and
product liability claims filed but unsettled are accrued based on management’s best estimate of
ultimate settlement or actuarial calculations of potential liability using industry experience and
actuarial assumptions developed for similar types of claims.
Foreign Currency Translation
All consolidated non-highly inflationary foreign operations use the local currency of the country of
operation as the functional currency. Local currency asset and liability accounts are translated at
year-end exchange rates while income and expense accounts are translated at average exchange rates.
The resulting translation adjustments are included in AOCI.
Economies with a three-year cumulative inflation rate of more than 100% are considered highly
inflationary. For subsidiaries operating in highly inflationary economies, the parent’s reporting
currency is the functional currency. Monetary assets and liabilities are translated into U.S. dollars
using rates of exchange at the balance sheet date and non-monetary assets and liabilities are
translated into U.S. dollars at their historical rates of exchange, with remeasurement adjustments
and other transaction gains and losses recognized in Net income. See Note 19 for further details.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when performance obligations under the terms of the contract are
satisfied. This generally occurs with the transfer of control of our products to the customer.
Collectibility of amounts recorded as revenue is probable at the time of recognition.See Note 18 for
further details.
Customer and Vendor Consideration
The Company offers certain customers rebate and sales incentive programs which are classified as
reductions in sales. Such programs are in the form of volume rebates, rebates that constituted a
percentage of sales or rebates for attaining certain sales goals. The Company receives consideration
from certain suppliers of raw materials in the form of volume rebates or rebates that constitute a
percentage of purchases. These rebates are recognized on an accrual basis by the Company as a
reduction of the purchase price of the raw materials and a subsequent reduction of Cost of goods sold
when the related product was sold.
Cost of Goods Sold
Included in Cost of goods sold are costs for materials, manufacturing, distribution and related
support. Distribution costs include expenses related to the distribution of products including
inbound freight charges, purchase and receiving costs, warehousing costs, internal transfer costs and
other costs incurred to ship products. Also included in Cost of goods sold are research and
development costs, quality control, product formulation expenditures and other similar items.Research
and development costs were $ 217.3million, $ 196.6million and $ 119.3million during 2024, 2023 and
2022, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling costs include advertising expenses, marketing costs, employee and store costs and sales
commissions. The cost of advertising is expensed as incurred. The Company incurred $ 386.9million, $
394.0million and $ 314.4million in advertising costs during 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
General and administrative expenses include human resources, legal, finance and other support and
administrative functions.
Government Incentives
The Company receives incentives from various government entities in the form of tax rebates or
credits, grants and loans. These incentives typically require that the Company maintain specified
spending levels and other operational metrics and may be subject to reimbursement if conditions are
not met or maintained. Government incentives are recorded in the Company’s consolidated financial
statements in accordance with their purpose as a reduction of expense, a reduction of the cost of the
 56 
capital investment or other income. The benefit of these incentives is recorded when received and all
conditions as specified in the agreement are fulfilled.
There were $ 86.6million of government incentives received as cash payments related to the
construction of the Company’s new global headquarters and research and development center in 2022.
These government incentives were recorded as a reduction in the carrying amount of the respective
assets under construction within Property, plant and equipment, net on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets and within Other as an investing activity on the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows. There
were nomaterial government incentives received in 2024 or 2023.
Supply Chain Financing
As part of our strategy to manage working capital, we have entered into agreements with various
financial institutions that act as intermediaries between the Company and certain suppliers. The
Company is not a party to agreements between the suppliers and the financial institutions. These
arrangements provide participating suppliers the option to settle outstanding accounts payable
incurred by the Company in the normal course of business early at a discount and do not impact our
rights and obligations with suppliers, including amounts due and scheduled payment terms. Under the
terms of our agreements, the Company confirms the validity of each supplier invoice to the respective
financial institution upon receipt. On the invoice due date, the Company settles the outstanding
amount with the respective financial institution. Liabilities associated with these arrangements are
recorded in Accounts payableon the Consolidated Balance Sheets and amounted to $ 215.7million, $
213.1million and $ 258.1million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The following table presents a rollforward of the Company’s outstanding obligations under its
supplier finance programs for year ended December 31, 2024.
 2024 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1 $ 213.1 
 Invoices confirmed during the year 988.8 
 Confirmed invoices paid during the year -986.2 
 Balance at December 31 $ 215.7 
Earnings Per Share
Common stock held in a revocable trust (see Note 12) is not included in outstanding shares for basic
or diluted income per share calculations. Basic and diluted net income per share are calculated using
the treasury stock method in accordance with the Earnings Per Share Topic of the ASC. Basic net
income per share amounts are computed based on the weighted-average number of shares outstanding
during the year. Diluted net income per share amounts are computed based on the weighted-average
number of shares outstanding plus all dilutive securities potentially outstanding during the year.See
Note 21 for further details.
NOTE 2 – RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Adopted
Effective January 1, 2024, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2023-02,
“Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323): Accounting for investments in tax credit
structures using the proportional amortization method.” This ASU allows entities to apply the
proportional amortization method to all tax equity investments if certain conditions are met. In
addition, the ASU requires certain disclosures about the nature and financial implications of tax
equity investments on an entity’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows, including
the impact of transition on the periods presented, if any. The adoption of the ASU did not materially
affect the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows since the Company has
historically applied the proportional amortization method to its Non-Traded Investments, however,
certain disclosures have been added based on the requirements of the ASU. See Note 1 for further
details.
Effective December 31, 2024, the Company adopted ASU 2023-07, “Segment Reporting (Topic 280):
Improvements to Reportable Segment Disclosures.” This ASU enhances reportable segment disclosures on
both an annual and interim basis primarily in regards to the disclosure of significant segment
expenses that are regularly provided to the chief operating decision maker (CODM) and included within
the reported measure(s) of segment profit or loss. In addition, the ASU requires disclosure, by
segment, of other items included in the reported measure(s) of segment profit or loss, including
qualitative information describing the composition, nature and type of each item. The ASU also
expands disclosure requirements related to the CODM, including how the reported measure(s) of segment
profit or loss are used to assess segment performance and allocate resources, the method used to
allocate overhead for significant segment expenses and others. Lastly, all current required annual
segment
 57 
reporting disclosures under Topic 280 are now effective for interim periods. The adoption of the ASU
has only impacted the Company’s segment disclosures with no impact to the consolidated financial
statements. See Note 22 for further details.
Effective January 1, 2023, the Company adopted ASU 2022-04, “Liabilities - Supplier Finance Programs
(Subtopic 405-50): Disclosure of Supplier Finance Program Obligations.” This ASU includes a
requirement to present a rollforward of supply chain financing activity prospectively, beginning with
the annual period ending December 31, 2024. The adoption of ASU 2022-04 did not affect the Company’s
financial position, results of operations or cash flows as the standard only impacts financial
statement footnote disclosures. See Note 1 for additional information.
Not Yet Adopted
In December 2023, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued ASU 2023-09, “Income Taxes
(Topic 740): Improvements to Income Tax Disclosures.” This ASU enhances income tax disclosures by
providing information to better assess how an entity’s operations, related tax risks, tax planning
and operational opportunities affect its tax rate and prospects for future cash flows. This ASU
requires additional disclosures to the annual effective tax rate reconciliation including specific
categories and further disaggregated reconciling items that meet the quantitative threshold.
Additionally, the ASU requires disclosures relating to income tax expense and payments made to
federal, state, local and foreign jurisdictions. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning
after December 15, 2024. The Company is evaluating the impact of adopting this ASU.
In November 2024, the FASB issued ASU 2024-03, “Income Statement - Reporting Comprehensive Income -
Expense Disaggregation Disclosures (Subtopic 220-40): Disaggregation of Income Statement Expenses.”
This ASU enhances expense disclosures on both an annual and interim basis by requiring public
business entities to disclose additional information about specific expense categories in the notes
to the consolidated financial statements. This ASU requires public entities to disclose, in a tabular
format, purchases of inventory, employee compensation, depreciation, intangible asset amortization
and depletion, as applicable, for each income statement line item that contains those expenses.
Specific expenses, gains and losses that are already disclosed under existing US GAAP are also
required to be included in the disaggregated income statement expense line-item disclosures, and any
remaining amounts will need to be described qualitatively. Additionally, the ASU requires disclosure
of the total amount of selling expenses and the entity’s definition of selling expenses. This ASU is
effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2026 and for interim periods within fiscal
years beginning after December 15, 2027. The Company is evaluating the impact of adopting this ASU.
 NOTE 3 – ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES 
Acquisitions
Subsequent Event
In February 2025, the Company signed an agreement to acquire the Brazilian decorative paints business
of BASF SE (BASF), which is a leading provider of architectural paints in Brazil with annual sales of
approximately $ 525.0million. The business develops, manufactures and sells a comprehensive portfolio
of innovative products under the Suvinil and Glasu! brand names to professional painters, designers,
architects, general contractors and consumers across the country. The business also operates two
production facilities located in the Northeast and Southeast regions of Brazil.
The closing of the transaction is subject to receipt of Brazilian antitrust approval, satisfaction or
waiver of certain other customary closing conditions, as well as BASF’s completion of its carve-out
of all relevant assets, properties, contracts, permits, rights and employees of the decorative paints
business into a separate entity. The Company will acquire all issued and outstanding equity interests
in this separate entity for an agreed-upon cash purchase price of $ 1.15billion, subject to customary
post-closing adjustments. The Company intends to finance the transaction through a combination of
cash on hand, liquidity available under existing facilities and new debt. The acquired business is
expected to be reported within the Company’s Consumer Brands Group.
Pending
In December 2024, the Company signed an agreement to acquire a European coil and industrial coatings
company. The transaction is subject to customary closing conditions and is expected to close in 2025.
The acquired business will be reported within the Company’s Performance Coatings Group.
Closed in Current Year
In October 2024, the Company completed the acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business for
approximately $ 80million. The acquired business develops, manufactures and sells coatings for the
food and household product markets and is reported within the Company’s Performance Coatings Group.
As of December 31, 2024, $ 33.0million of Property, plant and equipment, net, $ 27.9million of
finite-lived intangibles and $ 21.1million of Goodwill were recognized from this transaction.
 58 
The Company expects to finalize the purchase price allocation for the acquisition within the
allowable measurement period. Pro forma results of operations have not been presented as the impact
on the Company’s consolidated financial results is not material.
Closed in 2023
In October 2023, the Company completed the acquisition of German-based SIC Holding GmbH, a Peter
Möhrle Holding venture comprised of Oskar Nolte GmbH and Klumpp Coatings GmbH (SIC Holding). The
acquired business specializes in foil coatings as well as radiation-cured and waterbased industrial
wood coatings for the board, furniture and flooring industry. The total purchase price for the
acquisition was approximately $ 290million, including an immaterial amount paid in 2024 to finalize
certain representations, warranties and closing conditions. The Company finalized the purchase price
allocation within the allowable measurement period, and $ 110.8million of finite-lived intangible
assets, $ 181.3million of goodwill, $ 46.0million of other assets, net of cash and $ 47.5million of
liabilities were recognized from this transaction.
Closed in 2022
In April 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of the European industrial coatings business of
Sika AG. In July 2022, the Company completed the acquisitions of Gross & Perthun GmbH, Dur-A-Flex,
Inc. and Powdertech Oy Ltd. In December 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of Industria
Chimica Adriatica S.p.A. (ICA). The aggregate purchase price for the acquisitions completed in 2022
was approximately $ 1.024billion, including amounts withheld as security for certain representations,
warranties and obligations of the sellers. Based on the preliminary purchase price allocations for
these transactions, as of December 31, 2022, the Company recognized intangible assets and goodwill of
$ 282.8million and $ 565.8million, respectively, with the remaining purchase price for each
transaction allocated to various other assets acquired and liabilities assumed. In June 2023,
purchase price allocation adjustments were made to ICA which decreased goodwill by $ 145.9million,
increased finite-lived intangible assets by $ 195.9million and increased deferred tax liabilities by
$ 57.4million. There were no material adjustments related to the other acquisitions that closed in
2022 and the Company finalized the purchase price allocations for these transactions in the allowable
measurement period. In accordance with certain purchase agreements, the Company paid $ 29.2million in
2023 related to holdbacks for acquisitions completed in prior years.
Divestitures
Closed in 2023
The Company completed the divestiture of a non-core domestic aerosol business within the Consumer
Brands Group in April 2023. This transaction resulted in the recognition of a $ 20.1million gain in
2023 within the Administrative function. This gain was recorded within Other general (income) expense
- net (see Note 19).
During the third quarter of 2023, the Company completed the divestiture of the China architectural
business within the Consumer Brands Group. An immaterial working capital adjustment was finalized
during the first quarter of 2024. The associated net assets were classified as held for sale at June
30, 2023 in accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC. Following the
prescribed order of impairment testing, the Company first reviewed individual tangible and intangible
assets under their applicable Topic of the ASC to determine if their carrying value was higher than
their respective fair value. As a result, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $ 6.9million
within the Consumer Brands Group related to China architectural trademarks during 2023. The Company
then compared the updated carrying value of the assets and liabilities comprising the disposal group
as a whole to its respective fair value which was determined to be equal to the selling price, less
costs to sell. As a result of this comparison, the Company recorded an additional impairment charge
of $ 27.1million within the Administrative function in the second quarter of 2023. The fair value of
the disposal group was classified as level 2 in the fair value hierarchy as it was based on a
specific price and other observable inputs for similar items with no active market.
These divestitures did not meet the criteria to be reported as discontinued operations in the
consolidated financial statements as the Company’s decision to divest these businesses did not
represent a strategic shift that will have a major effect on the Company’s operations and financial
results.
 59 
Included in Inventories were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Finished goods $ 1,751.9 $ 1,810.9 $ 1,957.7 
 Work in process and raw materials 536.2 518.9 668.8 
 Inventories $ 2,288.1 $ 2,329.8 $ 2,626.5 
Inventories were stated at the lower of cost or market, with cost primarily determined on the LIFO
method. Management believes that the use of LIFO results in a better matching of costs and revenues.
The following table summarizes the extent to which the Company’s Inventories use the LIFO cost
method, and presents the effect on Inventories had the Company used the first-in, first-out (FIFO)
inventory valuation method.
 2024 2023 2022 
 Percentage of total inventories on LIFO 74 % 74 % 74 % 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Excess of FIFO over LIFO $ 630.2 $ 668.0 $ 792.7 
During 2024 and 2023, certain inventories accounted for on the LIFO method were reduced, resulting in
the liquidation of certain quantities carried at costs prevailing in prior years. The 2024 and 2023
liquidations increased Net income by $ 4.8million and $ 1.2million, respectively. There were
noliquidations in 2022.
The Company recorded a reserve for obsolescence of $ 137.7million, $ 170.8million and $ 139.0million
at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, to reduce Inventories to their estimated current
market price.
 NOTE 5 – PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 
Included in Property, plant and equipment, net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Land $ 259.9 $ 257.5 $ 263.0 
 Buildings 1,175.9 1,048.7 1,199.3 
 Machinery and equipment 3,689.5 3,459.8 3,230.2 
 Construction in progress 1,598.1 1,111.0 496.1 
 Property, plant and equipment, gross 6,723.4 5,877.0 5,188.6 
 Less allowances for depreciation 3,190.2 3,040.2 2,981.6 
 Property, plant and equipment, net $ 3,533.2 $ 2,836.8 $ 2,207.0 
The Company capitalizes interest costs incurred in the construction of certain property, plant and
equipment. In 2024 and 2023, the Company capitalized interest of $ 59.6million and $ 30.7million,
respectively. There was nointerest capitalized in 2022.
In accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC, whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying value of long-lived assets may not be recoverable or the
useful life may have changed, an impairment test is to be performed. Undiscounted cash flows are used
to calculate the recoverable value of long-lived assets to determine if such assets are not
recoverable. If the carrying value of the assets is deemed to not be recoverable, the impairment to
be recognized is the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the estimated fair
value of the assets as determined in accordance with the Fair Value Topic of the ASC. See Note 3 for
information on the impairment tests performed in 2023 for the assets held for sale prior to the
divestiture of the China architectural business. No other material impairments of Property, plant and
equipment were recorded in 2024, 2023 or 2022.
 60 
In 2024, the Company completed the acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business, which resulted
in the recognition of goodwill of $ 21.1million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 27.9million. The
acquired intangibles are being amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately
15years.
During 2023, the Company completed the acquisition of SIC Holding, which resulted in the recognition
of goodwill of $ 181.3million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 110.8million. The acquired
intangibles are being amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately 15years.
During 2022, the Company acquired fivecompanies which resulted in the recognition of goodwill of $
419.9million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 478.6million. The acquired intangibles are being
amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately 14years.
See Note 3 for additional information related to the acquisitions and divestitures.
In accordance with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC, goodwill at the reporting
unit level and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually. In addition,
interim impairment tests are performed whenever required as a result of a specific event or
circumstances which indicate potential impairment on a more likely than not basis. October 1 has been
established for the annual impairment review. An optional qualitative assessment may alleviate the
need to perform quantitative goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment tests when
there is no indication of impairment on a more likely than not basis. Should a quantitative
impairment test be performed, values are estimated separately for goodwill and indefinite-lived
intangible assets using applicable valuation models, incorporating discount rates commensurate with
the risks involved for each group of assets.
The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2024 did not result in any trademark or
goodwill impairment.
As a result of the Latin America architectural paint business moving to the Consumer Brands Group
reportable segment effective January 1, 2023, the Company performed a quantitative impairment
analysis for the impacted reporting units and determined both before and after the change, there was
no indication of impairment. The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2023 resulted in
no goodwill impairment and trademark impairment of $ 23.9million in the Consumer Brands Group
primarily related to a trademark in Europe.
The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2022 resulted in trademark impairments
totaling $ 15.5million in the Consumer Brands Group related to the discontinuation of an
architectural paint brand and lower than anticipated sales of an acquired brand and no goodwill
impairment.
A summary of changes in the Company’s carrying value of Goodwill by Reportable Segment is as follows:
 Performance 
 Paint Stores Consumer Brands Coatings Consolidated 
 Goodwill Group Group Group Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at 
 January 1, $ 2,182.1 $ 1,783.4 $ 3,169.1 $ 7,134.6 
 2022(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 49.7 21.3 422.5 493.5 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -2.8 -42.1 -44.9 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, 2,231.8 1,801.9 3,549.5 7,583.2 
 2022(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 8.3 8.3 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -9.1 43.6 34.5 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, 2,231.8 1,792.8 3,601.4 7,626.0 
 2023(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 48.2 48.2 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -0.3 -93.8 -94.1 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, $ 2,231.8 $ 1,792.5 $ 3,555.8 $ 7,580.1 
 2024(1) 
(1) Net of accumulated impairment losses of $ 19.4million ($ 10.2million in Paint Stores Group, $
8.4million in Consumer Brands Group and $ 0.8million in Performance Coatings Group).
 61 
A summary of the Company’s carrying value of Intangible assets is as follows:
 Finit… Trade… 
 Dece… Intan… With Total 
 31, Assets Custo… Intel… All Indef… Intang… 
 2024 Softw… Relat… Prope… Other Subto… Lives… Assets 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gross $ 185.0 $ 3,187… $ 1,973… $ 225.8 $ 5,571… 
 Accu… -154.3 -1,48… -747.7 -154.7 -2,54… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 30.7 $ 1,698… $ 1,225… $ 71.1 $ 3,025… $ 507.9 $ 3,533.2 
 value 
 Dece… 
 31, 
 2023 
 Gross $ 158.2 $ 3,263… $ 1,968… $ 232.6 $ 5,622… 
 Accu… -152.8 -1,31… -644.4 -152.9 -2,26… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 5.4 $ 1,952… $ 1,324… $ 79.7 $ 3,362… $ 518.5 $ 3,880.5 
 value 
 Dece… 
 31, 
 2022 
 Gross $ 180.2 $ 3,121… $ 1,732… $ 427.5 $ 5,461… 
 Accu… -148.1 -1,13… -477.4 -258.0 -2,01… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 32.1 $ 1,989… $ 1,255… $ 169.5 $ 3,445… $ 556.2 $ 4,002.0 
 value 
(1) Trademarks are net of accumulated impairment losses of $ 163.8millionas of December 31, 2024 and
2023 and $ 139.9million as of December 31, 2022.
Amortization of finite-lived intangible assets is estimated as follows for the next five years: $
317.2million in 2025, $ 315.3million in 2026, $ 310.5million in 2027, $ 307.5million in 2028 and $
305.9million in 2029.
Although the Company believes its estimates of fair value related to reporting units and indefinite-
lived intangible assets are reasonable, actual financial results could differ from these estimates
due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making such estimates. Changes in assumptions concerning
future financial results or other underlying assumptions could have a significant impact and future
impairment charges may be required.
 62 
Long-Term Debt
The table below summarizes the carrying value of the Company’s outstanding debt, net of capitalized
debt issuance costs, discounts and premiums:
 Due Date 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 3.45% Senior Notes 2027 $ 1,495.7 $ 1,493.9 $ 1,492.1 
 4.50% Senior Notes 2047 1,233.7 1,233.0 1,232.3 
 2.95% Senior Notes 2029 795.5 794.6 793.6 
 3.80% Senior Notes 2049 543.7 543.6 543.2 
 2.30% Senior Notes 2030 497.6 497.1 496.7 
 2.20% Senior Notes 2032 495.5 494.8 494.2 
 3.30% Senior Notes 2050 494.6 494.3 494.1 
 2.90% Senior Notes 2052 492.1 491.9 491.5 
 4.80% Senior Notes 2031 445.0 — — 
 3.45% Senior Notes 2025 399.8 399.4 399.1 
 4.25% Senior Notes 2025 399.5 398.6 397.7 
 4.55% Senior Notes 2045 395.4 395.2 395.0 
 4.55% Senior Notes 2028 397.6 — — 
 3.95% Senior Notes 2026 351.6 353.1 354.7 
 4.00% Senior Notes 2042 297.2 297.0 296.9 
 3.30% Senior Notes 2025 250.0 249.9 249.8 
 4.40% Senior Notes 2045 241.3 240.9 240.5 
 0.53% to8.00% Promissory Notes Through 2026 0.2 0.9 1.6 
 4.05% Senior Notes 2024 — 598.8 596.9 
 3.125% Senior Notes 2024 — 499.7 499.0 
 7.375% Debentures 2027 — — 119.2 
 7.45% Debentures 2097 — — 3.5 
 Total(1) 9,226.0 9,476.7 9,591.6 
 Less amounts due within one year 1,049.2 1,098.8 0.6 
 Long-term debt $ 8,176.8 $ 8,377.9 $ 9,591.0 
(1) Net of capitalized debt issuance costs of $ 48.6million, $ 49.3million and $ 57.3million and net
of discounts and premiums of $ 26.0million, $ 25.2million and $ 25.7million at December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022, respectively.
Maturities of long-term debt are as follows for the next five years: $ 1.050billion in 2025; $
350.2million in 2026; $ 1.500billion in 2027; $ 400.0million in 2028 and $ 800.0million in 2029.
Interest expense on long-term debt was $ 354.7million, $ 374.6million and $ 348.4million for 2024,
2023 and 2022, respectively.
In August 2024, the Company repaid principal of $ 600.0million related to the Company’s 4.05% senior
notes due August 8, 2024 using commercial paper and subsequently issued $ 400.0million of 4.55%
senior notes due 2028 and $ 450.0million of 4.80% senior notes due 2031 in a public offering. The net
proceeds from the issuance of these notes were used to repay outstanding borrowings under the
Company’s domestic commercial paper program and for general corporate purposes. The newly issued
senior notes contain customary qualitative covenants as defined in their respective agreements.
During the second quarter of 2024, the Company repaid the principal of $ 500.0million related to its
3.125% senior notes due June 1, 2024 using commercial paper.
In December 2023, the Company exercised its call provision to make-whole the entire outstanding $
119.4million aggregate principal amount of its 7.38% Debentures due 2027 and the entire outstanding $
3.5million aggregate principal amount of its 7.45% Debentures due 2097. The retirement of the
Debentures resulted in a loss of $ 12.8million recorded in Other general (income) expense - net. See
Note 19.
In August 2022, the Company issued $ 600.0million of 4.05% Senior Notes due August 2024 and $
400.0million of 4.25% Senior Notes due August 2025 in a public offering. The net proceeds from the
issuance of these notes were used to repay
 63 
borrowings outstanding under the Company’s credit agreement dated May 9, 2016, as amended, and the
domestic commercial paper program.
Short-Term Borrowings
In November 2024, the Company amended its credit agreement dated May 9, 2016, as amended, to extend
the maturity of $ 75.0million of the commitments available for borrowing and obtaining the issuance,
renewal, extension and increase of a letter of credit under the credit agreement from June 20, 2025
to December 20, 2029.
In July 2024, the Company entered into a new $ 2.500billion revolving credit agreement maturing on
July 31, 2029 (2024 Credit Agreement), which replaced the the 2022 Credit Agreement. Under the terms
of the 2024 Credit Agreement, the Company may request to extend the maturity date for twoadditional
one-yearperiods, request an uncommitted increase up to $ 750.0million and issue letters of credit
under a $ 250.0million subfacility.
In August 2022, the Company entered into a five-yearcredit agreement (2022 Credit Agreement), which
replaced the $ 2.000billion credit agreement dated June 29, 2021. The 2022 Credit Agreement gave the
Company the right to borrow $ 2.250billion and to obtain letters of credit in an amount of up to $
250.0million.
In August 2021, the Company entered into an amended and restated $ 625.0million credit agreement
(2021 Credit Agreement), which amends and restates the five-yearcredit agreement entered into in
September 2017. The 2021 Credit Agreement was subsequently amended on multiple dates to extend the
maturity of commitments available for borrowing or letters of credit under the agreement.
In May 2016, the Company entered into a five-yearcredit agreement (2016 Credit Agreement),
subsequently amended on multiple dates to extend the maturity of commitments available for borrowing
or letters of credit under the agreement. The 2016 credit agreement gives the Company the right to
borrow and obtain letters of credit up to an aggregate availability of $ 875.0million. These credit
agreements are/were used for general corporate purposes, including the financing of working capital
requirements.
At December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, there were noborrowings outstanding under these credit
agreements.
The Company’s available capacity under its committed credit agreements is reduced for amounts
outstanding under its domestic commercial paper program and letters of credit. At December 31, 2024,
the Company had unused capacity under its various credit agreements of $ 3.274billion. The table
below summarizes the Company’s Short-term borrowings:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Domestic commercial paper $ 655.6 $ 347.7 $ 938.5 
 Foreign facilities 6.8 26.5 39.6 
 Total $ 662.4 $ 374.2 $ 978.1 
 Weighted average interest rate: 
 Domestic 4.7% 5.5% 4.6% 
 Foreign 3.1% 3.6% 6.7% 
Interest expense on Short-term borrowings was $ 61.0million, $ 42.9million and $ 42.4million for
2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Among other restrictions, the Company’s notes, debentures and revolving credit agreement contain
certain covenants relating to liens, ratings changes, merger and sale of assets, consolidated
leverage and change of control, as defined in the agreements. In the event of default under any one
of these arrangements, acceleration of the maturity of any one or more of these borrowings may
result. The Company was in compliance with all covenants for all years presented.
 64 
NOTE 8 – PENSION, HEALTH CARE AND OTHER POSTRETIREMENT BENEFITS
The Company provides pension benefits to substantially all full-time employees through primarily
noncontributory defined contribution or defined benefit pension plans and certain health care and
life insurance benefits to domestic active employees and eligible retirees.
Health Care Plans
The Company provides certain domestic health care plans that are contributory and contain cost-
sharing features such as deductibles and coinsurance. There were 32,283, 31,327and 30,009active
employees covered by the benefits under these plans at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively. The cost of these benefits for active employees, which includes claims incurred but not
reported, amounted to $ 382.6million, $ 363.2million and $ 347.4million for 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
Defined Contribution Pension Plans
The Company’s annual contribution for its domestic defined contribution pension plan was $
103.5million, $ 97.8million and $ 88.9million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The contribution
percentage ranges from twopercent to sevenpercent of compensation for covered employees based on an
age and service formula. Assets in employee accounts of the domestic defined contribution pension
plan are invested in various investment funds as directed by the participants. These investment funds
did not own a significant number of shares of the Company’s common stock for any year presented.
The Company’s annual contributions for its foreign defined contribution pension plans, which are
based on various percentages of compensation for covered employees up to certain limits, were $
20.6million, $ 19.5million and $ 19.4million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Assets in
employee accounts of the foreign defined contribution pension plans are invested in various
investment funds. These investment funds did not own a significant number of shares of the Company’s
common stock for any year presented.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
At December 31, 2024, the domestic defined benefit pension plan was overfunded, with a projected
benefit obligation of $ 95.3million, fair value of plan assets of $ 148.7million and excess plan
assets of $ 53.4million. The plan was funded in accordance with all applicable regulations at
December 31, 2024.
The Company has thirty-sixforeign defined benefit pension plans. At December 31, 2024, twenty-nineof
the Company’s foreign defined benefit pension plans were unfunded or underfunded, with combined
accumulated benefit obligations, projected benefit obligations, fair values of net assets and
deficiencies of plan assets of $ 73.9million, $ 88.3million, $ 20.5million and $ 67.8million,
respectively.
The Company expects to make the following benefit payments for all domestic and foreign defined
benefit pension plans: $ 19.2million in 2025; $ 18.9million in 2026; $ 20.6million in 2027; $
22.2million in 2028; $ 22.7million in 2029; and $ 139.2million in 2030 through 2034. The Company
expects to contribute $ 5.8million to the foreign defined benefit pension plans in 2025.
The estimated net actuarial gains and prior service costs for the defined benefit pension plans that
are expected to be amortized from AOCI into net pension costs in 2025 are $ 3.2million and $
2.0million, respectively.
 65 
The following table summarizes the components of the net pension costs and AOCI related to the
defined benefit pension plans:
 Domestic Foreign 
 Defined Defined 
 Benefit Benefit 
 Net pension Pension Plan Pension Plans 
 cost: 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service cost $ 2.9 $ 3.0 $ 4.6 $ 4.6 $ 4.4 $ 6.3 
 Interest 4.9 4.6 3.2 11.8 11.8 7.3 
 cost 
 Expected 
 return on -8.3 -7.3 -7.6 -11.1 -12.3 -9.4 
 plan assets 
 Amortization 
 of prior 1.9 1.3 1.0 -0.1 -0.2 -0.2 
 service cost 
 (credit) 
 Amortization 
 of actuarial -0.5 -1.3 -1.5 0.2 
 (gains) 
 losses 
 Ongoing 0.9 1.6 1.2 3.9 2.2 4.2 
 pension cost 
 Settlement -1.1 -0.3 
 credits 
 Curtailment 7.1 
 cost 
 Net pension 0.9 1.6 1.2 11.0 1.1 3.9 
 cost 
 Other 
 changes in 
 plan assets 
 and 
 projected 
 benefit 
 obligation 
 recognized 
 in AOCI 
 (before 
 taxes): 
 Net 
 actuarial 
 (gains) 
 losses -20.9 -8.6 5.0 -8.0 5.8 -29.6 
 arising 
 during the 
 year 
 Prior 
 service cost 
 (credit) 1.0 3.0 1.6 6.9 1.1 -0.3 
 arising 
 during the 
 year 
 Amortization 
 of actuarial 0.5 1.3 1.5 -0.2 
 gains 
 (losses) 
 Amortization 
 of prior 
 service -1.9 -1.3 -1.0 -7.0 0.2 0.2 
 (cost) 
 credit 
 Loss 
 recognized 1.1 0.3 
 for 
 settlement 
 Exchange 
 rate loss 
 (gain) 1.6 -1.5 -0.4 
 recognized 
 during the 
 year 
 Total 
 recognized -21.3 -6.9 5.6 -5.2 8.2 -30.0 
 in AOCI 
 Total 
 recognized 
 in net $ -20.4 $ -5.3 $ 6.8 $ 5.8 $ 9.3 $ -26.1 
 pension cost 
 and 
 AOCI 
Service cost is recorded in Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative expenses. All
other components of Net pension costs are recorded in Other (income) expense - net.
In December 2024, the Company amended one of its foreign defined benefit plans to freeze future
benefit accruals as of December 31, 2024. As a result of the amendment, the Company recognized a non-
cash pre-tax curtailment charge of $ 7.1million primarily related to the acceleration of amounts
previously recorded within AOCI in the Statements of Consolidated Comprehensive Income.
The Company employs a total return investment approach for the domestic and foreign defined benefit
pension plan assets. A mix of equities and fixed income investments are used to maximize the long-
term return of assets for a prudent level of risk. In determining the expected long-term rate of
return on defined benefit pension plan assets, management considers the historical rates of return,
the nature of investments and an expectation of future investment strategies. The target allocations
for the domestic defined benefit pension plan assets are 35% – 65% equity securities, 35% – 65% fixed
income securities and 0% – 5% other (including alternative investments and cash). The target
allocations for the foreign defined benefit pension plan assets vary by plan, but are generally
within the following ranges: 0% – 20% equity securities, 75% – 100% fixed income securities and 0% –
10% other (including alternative investments and cash).
 66 
The following tables summarize the fair value of the defined benefit pension plan assets at December
31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. The presentation is in accordance with the Fair Value Topic of the ASC.
 Quoted Prices 
 in Active Significant 
 Markets for Other Significant 
 Fair Value at Identical Observable Unobservable 
 December 31, Assets Inputs Inputs 
 2024 (Level 1) (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Cash and cash $ 8.7 $ 8.7 $ — 
 equivalents 
 Equity investments(1) 95.3 86.6 8.7 
 Fixed income 226.5 36.8 189.7 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 24.2 24.2 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 354.7 $ 132.1 $ 222.6 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 25.3 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 380.0 
 Quoted Prices Significant 
 Fair Value at in Active Other Significant 
 December 31, Markets for Observable Unobservable 
 2023 Identical Inputs Inputs 
 Assets (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 (Level 1) 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Equity investments(1) $ 133.0 $ 72.9 $ 60.1 
 Fixed income 188.9 36.8 152.1 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 34.6 34.6 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 356.5 $ 109.7 $ 246.8 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 25.3 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 381.8 
 Quoted Prices Significant 
 Fair Value at in Active Other Significant 
 December 31, Markets for Observable Unobservable 
 2022 Identical Inputs Inputs 
 Assets (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 (Level 1) 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Equity investments(1) $ 80.1 $ 8.5 $ 71.6 
 Fixed income 117.6 117.6 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 34.4 34.4 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 232.1 $ 8.5 $ 223.6 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 110.9 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 343.0 
(1) This category includes actively managed equity assets that track primarily to the S&P 500 or an
international equity 
international bond 
or its equivalent using the practical expedient. Therefore, these investments are not classified in
the fair value hierarchy.
 67 
The following table summarizes the obligations, plan assets and assumptions used for the defined
benefit pension plans, which are all measured as of December 31:
 Domes… Forei… 
 Defin… Defin… 
 Benef… Benef… 
 Pensi… Pensi… 
 Plan Plans 
 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Accu… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 at $ 94.2 $ 100.5 $ 90.3 $ 221.7 $ 236.4 $ 209.3 
 end 
 of 
 year 
 Proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Bala… 
 at 
 begi… $ 102.1 $ 91.7 $ 120.8 $ 257.8 $ 230.4 $ 362.7 
 of 
 year 
 Serv… 2.9 3.0 4.6 4.6 4.4 6.3 
 cost 
 Inte… 4.9 4.6 3.2 11.8 11.8 7.3 
 cost 
 Actu… 
 (gai… -11.1 2.8 -32.6 -19.8 8.8 -112… 
 loss… 
 Plan 
 amen… 1.0 3.0 1.6 13.5 2.0 3.2 
 and 
 other 
 Sett… -2.2 -3.7 -2.4 
 Effe… 
 of -12.2 14.1 -28.8 
 fore… 
 exch… 
 Bene… -4.5 -3.0 -5.9 -10.5 -10.0 -5.5 
 paid 
 Bala… 
 at 
 end 95.3 102.1 91.7 243.0 257.8 230.4 
 of 
 year 
 Plan 
 asse… 
 Bala… 
 at 
 begi… 135.1 119.4 155.2 246.7 223.6 328.4 
 of 
 year 
 Actu… 
 retu… 
 on 18.1 18.7 -29.9 -2.6 15.4 -73.4 
 plan 
 asse… 
 Cont… 
 and 5.7 8.6 5.8 
 other 
 Sett… -2.2 -3.7 -2.4 
 Effe… 
 of -7.1 12.8 -29.3 
 fore… 
 exch… 
 Bene… -4.5 -3.0 -5.9 -10.5 -10.0 -5.5 
 paid 
 Bala… 
 at 
 end 148.7 135.1 119.4 231.3 246.7 223.6 
 of 
 year 
 Exce… 
 (def… 
 plan 
 asse… $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ -11.7 $ -11.1 $ -6.8 
 over 
 proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Asse… 
 and 
 liab… 
 reco… 
 in 
 the 
 Cons… 
 Bala… 
 Shee… 
 Defe… 
 pens… $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ 56.1 $ 57.9 $ 51.7 
 asse… 
 Other -6.0 -3.4 -3.0 
 accr… 
 Other 
 long… -61.8 -65.6 -55.5 
 liab… 
 $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ -11.7 $ -11.1 $ -6.8 
 Amou… 
 reco… 
 in 
 AOCI: 
 Net 
 actu… $ 36.9 $ 16.6 $ 8.0 $ 29.9 $ 24.8 $ 31.7 
 gains 
 Prior 
 serv… -7.8 -8.8 -7.1 0.4 0.3 1.6 
 (cos… 
 cred… 
 $ 29.1 $ 7.8 $ 0.9 $ 30.3 $ 25.1 $ 33.3 
 Weig… 
 assu… 
 used 
 to 
 dete… 
 proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Disc… 5.78 % 5.09 % 5.27 % 5.49 % 4.81 % 5.06 % 
 rate 
 Rate 
 of 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.29 % 3.33 % 3.39 % 
 comp… 
 incr… 
 Weig… 
 assu… 
 used 
 to 
 dete… 
 net 
 pens… 
 cost: 
 Disc… 5.09 % 5.27 % 3.12 % 4.81 % 5.06 % 2.26 % 
 rate 
 Expe… 
 long… 
 rate 
 of 6.25 % 6.25 % 5.00 % 4.78 % 5.48 % 3.19 % 
 retu… 
 on 
 asse… 
 Rate 
 of 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.33 % 3.39 % 3.25 % 
 comp… 
 incr… 
 68 
Other Postretirement Benefits
Employees of the Company hired in the United States prior to January 1, 1993 who are not members of a
collective bargaining unit, and certain groups of employees added through acquisitions, are eligible
for health care and life insurance benefits upon retirement, subject to the terms of the unfunded
plans. There were 3,354, 3,367and 3,409retired employees covered by these postretirement benefits at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The following table summarizes the obligation and the assumptions used for other postretirement
benefits:
 Other Postretirement 
 Benefits 
 Benefit obligation: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at beginning of $ 147.2 $ 153.8 $ 276.4 
 year - unfunded 
 Service cost 0.5 0.6 1.2 
 Interest cost 6.8 7.4 6.0 
 Actuarial gain -8.6 -8.0 -54.5 
 Plan amendments -62.8 
 Benefits paid -10.8 -6.6 -12.5 
 Balance at end of year - $ 135.1 $ 147.2 $ 153.8 
 unfunded 
 Liabilities recognized in 
 the 
 Consolidated Balance 
 Sheets: 
 Other accruals $ -14.4 $ -14.0 $ -14.5 
 Postretirement benefits 
 other than -120.7 -133.2 -139.3 
 pensions 
 $ -135.1 $ -147.2 $ -153.8 
 Amounts recognized in AOCI: 
 Net actuarial gains $ 21.0 $ 12.9 $ 4.7 
 Prior service credits 16.2 40.0 64.0 
 $ 37.2 $ 52.9 $ 68.7 
 Weighted-average 
 assumptions used to 
 determine benefit 
 obligation: 
 Discount rate 5.61 % 4.97 % 5.16 % 
 Health care cost trend rate 7.50 % 7.00 % 6.25 % 
 - pre-65 
 Health care cost trend rate 6.50 % 6.00 % 5.50 % 
 - post-65 
 Prescription drug cost 11.75 % 9.00 % 8.25 % 
 increases 
 Weighted-average 
 assumptions used to 
 determine net periodic 
 benefit cost: 
 Discount rate 4.97 % 5.16 % 2.83 % 
 Health care cost trend rate 7.00 % 6.25 % 6.38 % 
 - pre-65 
 Health care cost trend rate 6.00 % 5.50 % 5.13 % 
 - post-65 
 Prescription drug cost 9.00 % 8.25 % 8.25 % 
 increases 
 69 
The following table summarizes the components of the net periodic benefit cost and AOCI related to
other postretirement benefits:
 Other Postretirement Benefits 
 Net periodic benefit (credit) cost: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service cost $ 0.5 $ 0.6 $ 1.2 
 Interest cost 6.8 7.4 6.0 
 Amortization of actuarial (gains) -0.4 0.1 4.2 
 losses 
 Amortization of prior service credit -23.9 -23.9 -0.4 
 Net periodic benefit (credit) cost -17.0 -15.8 11.0 
 Other changes in projected benefit 
 obligation recognized in 
 AOCI (before taxes): 
 Net actuarial gain arising during 
 the -8.6 -8.0 -54.5 
 year 
 Prior service credit arising during 
 the -62.8 
 year 
 Amortization of actuarial gains 0.4 -0.1 -4.2 
 (losses) 
 Amortization of prior service credit 23.9 23.9 0.4 
 Total recognized in AOCI 15.7 15.8 -121.1 
 Total recognized in net periodic 
 benefit $ -1.3 $ — $ -110.1 
 cost and AOCI 
The estimated net actuarial gains and prior service credits for other postretirement benefits that
are expected to be amortized from AOCI into net periodic benefit cost in 2025 are $ 2.4million and $
14.2million, respectively.
The assumed health care cost trend rate and prescription drug cost increases used to determine the
net periodic benefit cost for postretirement health care benefits for 2025 both decrease in each
successive year until reaching 4.5% in 2034.
The Company expects to make retiree health care benefit cash payments as follows:
 2025 $ 14.4 
 2026 14.9 
 2027 14.9 
 2028 14.3 
 2029 13.2 
 2030 through 2034 48.2 
 Total expected benefit cash payments $ 119.9 
 70 
The Company leases retail stores, manufacturing and distribution facilities, office space and
equipment under operating and finance lease agreements. Operating leases are included in Operating
lease right-of-use (ROU) assets, Current portion of operating lease liabilities and Long-term
operating lease liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Finance leases are included in Other
assets, Other accruals and Other long-term liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The
finance lease related asset and liability as of December 31, 2024 was $ 187.5million and $
189.3million, respectively.
Operating and finance lease ROU assets and lease liabilities are recognized based on the present
value of lease payments over the lease term. The majority of the operating lease ROU asset and lease
liability balances are related to the retail operations of the Paint Stores Group. The majority of
the finance lease ROU asset and lease liability balances are related to a distribution facility
within the Consumer Brands Group. Most leases include oneor more options to renew. The exercise of
lease renewal options is at the Company’s discretion and is not reasonably certain at lease
commencement.
The Company does not account for lease and non-lease components of contracts separately for any
underlying asset class. Some leases have variable payments, however, because they are not based on an
estate leases relate primarily to common area maintenance, insurance, taxes and utilities associated
with the properties. Variable payments for equipment leases relate primarily to hours, miles or other
quantifiable usage factors which are not determinable at the time the lease agreement is entered into
by the Company. The Company has made an accounting policy election by underlying asset class to not
apply the recognition requirements of ASC 842 to short-term leases. As a result, certain leases with
a term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and expense is
recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Most leases do not contain an incremental borrowing rate which is readily determinable from their
associated contract. Therefore, the Company uses its estimated incremental borrowing rate on a
collateralized basis which is derived from information available at the lease commencement date,
giving consideration to publicly available credit rating data, other risk characteristics and the
term of the lease in determining the present value of lease payments.
Additional lease information is summarized below:
 Components of Lease Expense 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating lease cost $ 562.4 $ 528.5 $ 498.0 
 Finance lease cost: 
 Amortization of right-of-use assets $ 0.7 
 Interest on lease liabilities 1.5 
 Total $ 2.2 $ — $ — 
 Short-term lease cost $ 69.6 $ 58.5 $ 47.1 
 Variable lease cost $ 132.1 $ 104.1 $ 89.9 
 Supplemental Cash Flow Information 
 Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease 
 liabilities: 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating cash outflows from operating $ 545.5 $ 513.8 $ 480.1 
 leases 
 Operating cash outflows from finance 0.2 
 leases 
 Financing cash outflows from finance 0.2 
 leases 
 Leased assets obtained in exchange for 
 new lease liabilities: 
 Operating leases $ 526.9 $ 473.3 $ 463.1 
 Finance leases 188.2 
 71 
The following table reconciles the undiscounted cash flows for each of the next five years and
thereafter to the operating and finance lease liabilities recognized on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets as of December 31, 2024. The reconciliation excludes short-term leases that are not recorded
on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 Year Ending December 31, Operating Leases Finance Leases 
 2025 540.4 9.1 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2026 466.9 8.2 
 2027 378.7 8.4 
 2028 289.3 8.6 
 2029 200.5 8.8 
 Thereafter 413.3 586.6 
 Total lease payments 2,289.1 629.7 
 Amount representing interest -264.2 -440.4 
 Present value of lease liabilities $ 2,024.9 $ 189.3 
 72 
Environmental Matters
The operations of the Company, like those of other companies in its industry, are subject to various
domestic and foreign environmental laws and regulations. These laws and regulations not only govern
current operations and products, but also impose potential liability on the Company for past
operations. Management expects environmental laws and regulations to impose increasingly stringent
requirements upon the Company and the industry in the future. Management believes that the Company
conducts its operations in compliance with applicable environmental laws, regulations and
requirements and has implemented various programs designed to protect the environment and promote
continued compliance.
The Company is involved with environmental investigation and remediation activities at some of its
currently and formerly owned sites (including sites which were previously owned and/or operated by
businesses acquired by the Company). In addition, the Company, together with other parties, has been
designated a potentially responsible party under federal and state environmental protection laws for
the investigation and remediation of environmental contamination and hazardous waste at a number of
third-party sites, primarily Superfund sites. In general, these laws provide that potentially
responsible parties may be held jointly and severally liable for investigation and remediation costs
regardless of fault. The Company may be similarly designated with respect to additional third-party
sites in the future.
The Company initially provides for estimated costs of environmental-related activities relating to
its past operations and third-party sites for which commitments or clean-up plans have been developed
and when such costs can be reasonably estimated based on industry standards and professional
judgment. These estimated costs, which are mostly undiscounted, are determined based on currently
available facts regarding each site. If the reasonably estimable costs can only be identified as a
range and no specific amount within that range can be determined more likely than any other amount
within the range, the minimum of the range is provided.
The Company routinely assesses its potential liability for investigation and remediation-related
activities and adjusts its environmental-related accruals as information becomes available, including
as a result of sites progressing through investigation and remediation-related activities, upon which
more accurate costs can be reasonably estimated and as additional accounting guidelines are issued.
At December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company had accruals reported on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets as Other long-term liabilitiesof $ 230.3million, $ 230.8million and $ 240.2million,
respectively. Estimated costs of current investigation and remediation activities of $ 66.4million, $
88.1million and $ 50.2million are included in Other accrualson the Consolidated Balance Sheets at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Actual costs incurred may vary from the accrued estimates due to the inherent uncertainties involved
including, among others, the number and financial condition of parties involved with respect to any
given site, the volumetric contribution which may be attributed to the Company relative to that
attributed to other parties, the nature and magnitude of the wastes involved, the various
technologies that can be used for remediation and the determination of acceptable remediation with
respect to a particular site. If the Company’s future loss contingency is ultimately determined to be
at the unaccrued maximum of the estimated range of possible outcomes for every site for which costs
can be reasonably estimated, the Company’s accrual for environmental-related activities would be $
93.4million higher than the minimum accruals at December 31, 2024. Additionally, costs for
environmental-related activities may not be reasonably estimable at early stages of investigation and
therefore would not be included in the unaccrued maximum amount.
Fourof the Company’s currently and formerly owned manufacturing sites (Major Sites) account for the
majority of the accrual for environmental-related activities and the unaccrued maximum of the
estimated range of possible outcomes at December 31, 2024. At December 31, 2024, $ 250.3million, or
84.3% of the total accrual, related directly to the Major Sites. In the aggregate unaccrued maximum
of $ 93.4million at December 31, 2024, $ 70.6million, or 75.6%, related to the Major Sites. The
significant cost components of this liability continue to be related to remedy implementation,
regulatory agency interaction and project management and other costs. While different for each
specific environmental situation, these components generally each account for approximately 85%, 10%
and 5%, respectively, of the accrued amount and those percentages are subject to change over time.
While environmental investigations and remedial actions are in different stages at these sites,
additional investigations, remedial actions and monitoring will likely be required at each site.
The largest and most complex of the Major Sites is the Gibbsboro, New Jersey site (Gibbsboro) which
comprises the substantial majority of the environmental-related accrual. Gibbsboro, a former
manufacturing plant, and related areas, which ceased operations in 1978, has had various areas
included on the National Priorities List since 1999. This location has soil, sediment, surface water
and groundwater contamination related to the historic operations of the facility. Gibbsboro has been
divided by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) into sixoperable units (OUs) based on location
and characteristics, whose investigation and remediation efforts are likely to occur over an extended
period of time. To date, the Company has completed remedy construction on threeof the sixoperable
units. While there are administrative tasks to be completed before final agency
 73 
approval, the remediation phase of the work for these three OUs is effectively complete and future
work for these OUs is anticipated to be limited. OUs are in various phases of investigation and
remediation with the EPA that provide enough information to reasonably estimate cost ranges and
record environmental-related accruals. The most significant assumptions underlying the reliability
and precision of remediation cost estimates for the Gibbsboro site are the type and extent of future
remedies to be selected by the EPA and the costs of implementing those remedies.
The remaining threeMajor Sites comprising the majority of the accrual include: (1) a multi-party
Superfund site that (a) has received a record of decision from the federal EPA and is currently in
the remedial design phase for one OU, (b) has received a record of decision from the federal EPA for
an interim remedy for another OU and (c) has a remedial investigation ongoing for another OU, (2) a
closed paint manufacturing facility that is in the operation and maintenance phase of remediation
under both federal and state EPA programs and (3) a formerly-owned site containing warehouse and
office space that is in the remedial/design investigation phase under a state EPA program. Each of
these threeMajor Sites are in phases of investigation and remediation that provide sufficient
information to reasonably estimate cost ranges and record environmental-related accruals.
Excluding the Major Sites discussed above, no sites are individually material to the total accrual
balance. There are multiple, future events yet to occur, including further remedy selection and
design, remedy implementation and execution and securing applicable governmental agency approvals,
all of which have the potential to contribute to the uncertainty surrounding these future events. As
these events occur and to the extent that the cost estimates of the environmental remediation change,
the existing reserve will be adjusted.
Management cannot presently estimate the ultimate potential loss contingencies related to these sites
or other less significant sites until such time as a substantial portion of the investigation at the
sites is completed and remedial action plans are developed. Unasserted claims could have a material
effect on the Company’s loss contingency as more information becomes available over time. At December
31, 2024 , the Company did not have material loss contingency accruals related to unasserted claims.
Management does not expect that a material portion of unrecognized loss contingencies will be
recoverable through insurance, indemnification agreements or other sources. In the event any future
loss contingency significantly exceeds the current amount accrued, the recording of the ultimate
liability may result in a material impact on net income for the annual or interim period during which
the additional costs are accrued. Moreover, management does not believe that any potential liability
ultimately attributed to the Company for its environmental-related matters will have a material
adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity or cash flow due to the extended
length of time during which environmental investigation and remediation takes place. An estimate of
the potential impact on the Company’s operations cannot be made due to the aforementioned
uncertainties.
Management expects these contingent environmental-related liabilities to be resolved over an extended
period of time. Management is unable to provide a more specific time frame due to the indeterminate
amount of time to conduct investigation activities at any site, the indeterminate amount of time to
obtain environmental agency approval, as necessary, with respect to investigation and remediation
activities and the indeterminate amount of time necessary to conduct remediation activities.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations Topic of the ASC requires a liability to be
recognized for the fair value of a conditional asset retirement obligation if a settlement date and
fair value can be reasonably estimated. The Company recognizes a liability for any conditional asset
retirement obligation when sufficient information is available to reasonably estimate a settlement
date to determine the fair value of such a liability. The Company has identified certain conditional
asset retirement obligations at various current and closed manufacturing, distribution and store
facilities. These obligations relate primarily to asbestos abatement, hazardous waste Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) closures, well abandonment, transformers and used oil disposals
and underground storage tank closures. Using investigative, remediation and disposal methods that are
currently available to the Company, the estimated costs of these obligations were accrued and are not
significant. The recording of additional liabilities for future conditional asset retirement
obligations may result in a material impact on Net income for the annual or interim period during
which the costs are accrued. Management does not believe that any potential liability ultimately
attributed to the Company for its conditional asset retirement obligations will have a material
adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity or cash flow due to the extended
period of time over which sufficient information may become available regarding the closure or
modification of any one or group of the Company’s facilities. An estimate of the potential impact on
the Company’s operations cannot be made due to the aforementioned uncertainties.
 74 
Real Estate Financing
In December 2022, the Company closed a transaction to sell and subsequently lease back its partially-
constructed new global headquarters. As a result of this transaction, the Company has entered into
certain sale-leaseback agreements that do not qualify as asset sales and were accounted for as real
estate financing transactions. Net proceeds are recognized within the Financing Activities section in
the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows. The Company expects to receive total proceeds
approximating $ 800million to $ 850million on an incremental basis until the completion of
construction of the new global headquarters. The Company expects to receive the final proceeds for
the new global headquarters in the first quarter of 2025, at which point the Company will calculate
the remaining obligation under the terms of the lease. The following table summarizes the activity
related to this transaction and the corresponding balances recognized in the Consolidated Balance
Sheets.
 Activity: 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Proceeds received $ 244.2 $ 305.0 $ 210.0 
 Capitalized interest(1) 45.2 23.8 
 Balances: 
 Short-term liability(2) $ 49.7 $ 39.9 $ 20.0 
 Long-term liability(3) 715.9 475.9 187.0 
 Total liability $ 765.6 $ 515.8 $ 207.0 
(1) Interest is capitalized within construction in progress in Property, plant and equipment, net.
(2) The short-term portion of the liability is recorded in Other accruals.
(3) The long-term portion of the liability is recorded in Other long-term liabilities.
 NOTE 11 – LITIGATION 
In the course of its business, the Company is subject to a variety of claims and lawsuits, including,
but not limited to, litigation relating to product liability and warranty, personal injury,
environmental, intellectual property, commercial, contractual and antitrust claims, that are
inherently subject to many uncertainties regarding the possibility of a loss to the Company.
Uncertainties to which litigation is inherently subject include, among other things, costs,
unpredictable court or jury decisions that could affect other litigation against the Company and
encourage an increase in the number and nature of future claims and proceedings and differing laws
and regulations in jurisdictions where the Company operates. These uncertainties will ultimately be
resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur confirming the incurrence of a
liability or the reduction of a liability. In accordance with the Contingencies Topic of the ASC, the
Company accrues for these contingencies by a charge to income when it is both probable that one or
more future events will occur confirming the fact of a loss and the amount of the loss can be
reasonably estimated. In the event that the Company’s loss contingency is ultimately determined to be
significantly higher than currently accrued, the recording of the additional liability may result in
a material impact on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for the
annual or interim period during which such additional liability is accrued. In those cases where no
accrual is recorded because it is not probable that a liability has been incurred or the amount of
any such loss cannot be reasonably estimated, any potential liability ultimately determined to be
attributable to the Company may result in a material impact on the Company’s results of operations,
liquidity or financial condition for the annual or interim period during which such liability is
accrued. In those cases where no accrual is recorded or exposure to loss exists in excess of the
amount accrued, the Contingencies Topic of the ASC requires disclosure of the contingency when there
is a reasonable possibility that a loss or additional loss may have been incurred.
Due to the uncertainties involved in litigation, management is unable to predict the outcome of the
litigation identified below, the number or nature of possible future claims and proceedings or the
effect that any legislation and/or administrative regulations may have on the litigation or against
the Company. In addition, management cannot reasonably determine the scope or amount of the potential
costs and liabilities related to such litigation, or resulting from any such legislation and
regulations. With respect to the litigation identified below, the Company has only accrued for the
court-approved agreement related to the California Proceedings, identified in the Public Nuisance
Claim Litigation section. For the remaining litigation identified below, the Company does not believe
it is probable that a loss has occurred, or the Company believes it is not possible to estimate the
range of potential losses. In addition, any potential liability that may result from any changes to
legislation and regulations cannot reasonably be estimated. Due to the uncertainties associated with
the amount of any such liability and/or the nature of any other remedy which may be imposed in
litigation, any potential liability determined to be attributable to the Company arising out of such
litigation may have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity, or
financial condition. An estimate of the potential impact on the Company’s results of operations, cash
flow, liquidity or financial condition cannot be made due to the aforementioned uncertainties.
 75 
Lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation. The Company’s past operations included the manufacture
and sale of lead pigments and lead-based paints. The Company, along with other companies, is and has
been a defendant in a number of legal proceedings arising from the manufacture and sale of lead
pigments and lead-based paints. The plaintiffs’ claims have been based upon various legal theories,
including negligence, strict liability, breach of warranty, negligent misrepresentations and
omissions, fraudulent misrepresentations and omissions, concert of action, civil conspiracy,
violations of unfair trade practice and consumer protection laws, enterprise liability, market share
liability, public nuisance, unjust enrichment and other theories. The Company has also been a
defendant in legal proceedings arising from the manufacture and sale of non-lead-based paints that
seek recovery based upon various legal theories, including the failure to adequately warn of
potential exposure to lead during surface preparation when using non-lead-based paint on surfaces
previously painted with lead-based paint. Other than the California Proceedings and currently pending
cases, all of these legal proceedings have been concluded in favor of the Company and other
defendants at various stages in the proceedings.
In addition, from time to time, various legislation and administrative regulations have been enacted,
promulgated or proposed to impose obligations on present and former manufacturers of lead pigments
and lead-based paints respecting asserted health concerns associated with such products or to
overturn the effect of court decisions in which the Company and other manufacturers have been
successful. The Company is vigorously defending all lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation. The
Company expects that additional lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation may be filed against the
Company in the future asserting similar or different legal theories and seeking similar or different
types of damages and relief. The Company will continue to vigorously defend against any additional
litigation that may be filed, including utilizing all avenues of appeal, if necessary.
Public Nuisance Claim Litigation . The Company and other companies have been defendants in legal
proceedings seeking recovery based on public nuisance liability theories, among other theories,
brought by various states, cities and counties, including by the State of Rhode Island; the City of
St. Louis, Missouri; various cities and counties in the State of New Jersey; various cities in the
State of Ohio and the State of Ohio; the City of Chicago, Illinois; the City of Milwaukee, Wisconsin;
the County of Santa Clara, California and other public entities in the State of California (the
California Proceedings); and Lehigh and Montgomery Counties in Pennsylvania. Except for the
California Proceedings in which the Company reached a court-approved agreement in 2019 after nearly
twenty years of litigation, all of those legal proceedings have been concluded in favor of the
Company and other defendants at various stages in the proceedings. Most recently, on May 7, 2024, as
further described below in Wisconsin Litigation, threeplaintiffs filed amended complaints alleging,
in part, public nuisance claims.
Wisconsin Litigation . The Company and other companies are or have been defendants in a number of
legal proceedings seeking monetary damages and other relief from alleged personal injuries. The
current proceedings consist of twofederal court cases pending in the United States District Court for
the Eastern District of Wisconsin (Ernest Gibson v. American Cyanamid, et al. and Deziree and
Detareion Valoe v. American Cyanamid, et. al.) and onecase pending in Milwaukee County Circuit Court
in Wisconsin (Arrieona Beal v. Hattie and Jerry Mitchell, et al.). Those matters include claims by
fourindividuals allegedly injured from ingestion of lead pigment or lead-containing paint while they
were minors. The plaintiffs generally seek compensatory damages and have invoked Wisconsin’s risk
contribution theory (which is similar to market share liability, except that liability can be joint
and several) due to the plaintiff’s inability to identify the manufacturer of any product that
allegedly injured the plaintiff.
On May 20, 2021, as a result of a decision in favor of the Company by United States Court of Appeals
for the Seventh Circuit in the Ravon Owens v. American Cyanamid, et al., Cesar Sifuentes v. American
Cyanamid, et al. and Glenn Burton, Jr. v. American Cyanamid, et al. cases, the Company and the
threeother defendants filed motions for summary judgment to dismiss all claims of the approximately
150plaintiffs then pending in the Eastern District of Wisconsin, including the claims of Gibson and
the Valoes. On March 3, 2022, the district court granted summary judgment in favor of the Company and
the other defendants. On September 15, 2022, the plaintiffs filed notices of appeal with the Seventh
Circuit, seeking to appeal the district court’s summary judgment in favor of the Company and the
other defendants. On February 9, 2024, the Seventh Circuit affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment in favor of the Company and the other defendants in all cases except those filed by Gibson
and the Valoes, which cases were remanded to the district court for further proceedings. Following
remand of the Gibson and Valoe cases, the threeremaining plaintiffs filed amended complaints on May
7, 2024, alleging strict liability, negligence and public nuisance claims. The defendants filed
motions to dismiss the plaintiffs’ amended complaints on June 20, 2024. On November 8, 2024, the
district court granted in part and denied in part defendants’ motions to dismiss the amended
complaints, dismissing the second cause of action for general negligence and plaintiffs’ abatement
allegations, but otherwise permitting the case to proceed. On December 6, 2024, the Company and some
of the other defendants filed a third-party complaint against NL Industries, Inc. (NL) and the owners
and landlords of the properties where plaintiffs resided. Some of the owners and landlords filed a
motion to dismiss the third-party complaints; that motion remains pending. On January 30, 2025, the
district court entered a stipulated order dismissing NL pursuant to the execution of a Pierringer
release between plaintiffs and NL.
 76 
In the separate state court proceeding, on August 24, 2021, Arrieona Beal filed an amended complaint
in Milwaukee County Circuit Court, naming the Company and other alleged former lead pigment
manufacturers as defendants pursuant to the risk contribution liability theory. The plaintiff
previously had sued her landlords. On January 3, 2024, the Company and some of the other
manufacturing defendants filed a third-party complaint against NL and cross-claims against the
landlord defendants. On January 10, 2024, one of the landlord defendants filed a counterclaim and
cross-claim against all parties. On May 15, 2024, the plaintiff filed a motion for partial judgment
on the pleadings to strike the Company and other manufacturing defendants’ affirmative defenses, and
on August 6, 2024, the circuit court granted defendants’ motion to strike the plaintiff’s motion. On
December 6, 2024, plaintiff filed a notice of voluntary dismissal as to landlords Hattie and Jerry
Mitchell pursuant to the execution of a Pierringer release.
Insurance Coverage Litigation. The Company and its liability insurers, including certain underwriters
at Lloyd’s of London, initiated legal proceedings against each other to determine, among other
things, whether the costs and liabilities associated with the abatement of lead pigment are covered
under certain insurance policies issued to the Company. The insurers’ action, which was filed on
February 23, 2006, in the Supreme Court of the State of New York, County of New York, was dismissed.
The Company’s action, filed on March 3, 2006, in the Common Pleas Court, Cuyahoga County, Ohio,
previously was stayed and inactive.
On January 9, 2019, the Company filed an unopposed motion to lift the stay with the trial court,
which was granted, allowing the case to proceed to determine whether the insurers were required to
indemnify the Company following the California Proceedings. On June 28, 2019, the Company and its
liability insurers each filed separate motions for summary judgment seeking various forms of relief.
The trial court entered an order on December 4, 2020, granting the insurers’ motion for summary
judgment, denying the Company’s motion and entering final judgment in favor of the insurers. The
trial court sided with the Company on all of the issues presented, except one.
On December 21, 2020, the Company filed a notice of appeal to the Court of Appeals of Cuyahoga
County, Ohio, Eighth Appellate District, and the insurers filed cross-appeals. On September 1, 2022,
the appellate court reversed the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, finding in favor of the
Company on its appeal and against the insurers on their cross-appeal, and remanded the case to the
trial court. On September 12, 2022, the insurers applied to the appellate court for reconsideration
of its decision, en banc review, or certification of an appeal to the Ohio Supreme Court, which the
appellate court denied.
The insurers subsequently filed a notice of appeal to the Ohio Supreme Court, to which the Company
filed its response. On May 9, 2023, the Ohio Supreme Court accepted the insurers’ appeal. Oral
argument was held on October 24, 2023. On December 10, 2024, the Ohio Supreme Court reversed the
Court of Appeals and mandated judgment in favor of the insurers, holding that because the abatement-
fund payment was made to prevent future harm rather than compensate for past harm, payment was not
“damages” covered under the insurance policies.
This decision means that insurance proceeds could be unavailable under the policies at issue to
mitigate past or future abatement related liabilities. The Company has not recorded a receivable
related to these insurance policies or otherwise assumed that proceeds from these insurance policies
would be received in estimating any contingent liability accrual within the consolidated financial
statements. Therefore, this decision, without a determination of liability against the Company in the
lead pigment or lead-based paint litigation will have no impact on the Company’s results of
operation, liquidity or financial condition. As previously stated, except with respect to the
litigation in the California Proceedings, the Company has not accrued any amounts for the lead
pigment or lead-based paint litigation and any significant liability ultimately determined to be
attributable to the Company relating to such litigation may result in a material impact on the
Company’s results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for the annual or interim period
during which such liability is accrued.
 77 
Other matters. On December 18, 2019, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the
Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the Administrator of the
New Jersey Spill Compensation Fund (collectively, the NJ DEP) filed a lawsuit against the Company in
the Superior Court of New Jersey Law Division in Camden County, New Jersey. The NJ DEP seeks to
recover natural resource damages, punitive damages and litigation fees and costs, as well as other
costs, damages, declaratory relief and penalties pursuant to New Jersey state statutes and common law
theories in connection with the alleged discharge of hazardous substances and pollutants at the
Company’s Gibbsboro, New Jersey site, a former manufacturing plant and related facilities. Following
expert discovery, on November 20, 2024, the Company filed a motion in the United States District
Court for the District of New Jersey seeking to enforce the terms of an April 2019 Remedial
Design/Remedial Action Consent Decree between the Company and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (the Consent Decree) that is being attacked by the NJ DEP’s state court lawsuit. On
December 21, 2024, the United States filed a brief in opposition to the Company’s motion, to which
the Company filed a reply brief. The Company’s motion regarding the Consent Decree remains pending in
federal court. Meanwhile, on November 20, 2024, the Company filed a motion to stay the state court
proceedings pending resolution of the Company’s motion regarding the Consent Decree. On December 19,
2024, the state court denied the Company’s stay motion, but suspended all then-pending dates in the
court’s schedule, including the previous trial date of March 10, 2025, until an ongoing discovery
dispute between the Company and the NJ DEP is resolved. On December 20, 2024, the NJ DEP filed a
motion for partial summary judgment seeking to find the Company liable under the Spill Act and Solid
Waste Management Act. On January 31, 2025, the state court denied the NJ DEP’s motion for partial
summary judgment. On February 6, 2025, the state court sent an automated notice re-setting the trial
for March 10, 2025. Upon the parties’ request seeking clarification regarding the schedule, there is
a status conference with the state court set for February 18, 2025.
In July 2024, a third-party assurance, testing, inspection and certification provider changed its
listing for one of the Company’s protective coatings products, an intumescent coating used for fire
protection of steel beam assemblies. The Company has received claims regarding this matter and is
working with its customers and end users to assist in understanding the potential impacts of the
listing change, including the extent of potential remedial action that may involve the application of
additional product. The Company’s review of this matter is ongoing. Except for an immaterial product
warranty liability which remains recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2024,
any additional amount or range of potential loss cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
 NOTE 12 – SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY 
Capital Stock
At December 31, 2024, there were 900,000,000shares of common stock and 30,000,000shares of serial
preferred stock authorized for issuance. Of the authorized serial preferred stock, 3,000,000shares
are designated as cumulative redeemable serial preferred stock. There we no shares of serial
preferred stock issued during 2024, 2023 or 2022.
Under the 2006 Equity and Performance Incentive Plan (2006 Employee Plan), 71,100,000shares may be
issued or transferred. An aggregate of 13,603,814, 15,830,386and 17,939,143shares of common stock at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, were reserved for the exercise and future grants of
option rights and future grants of restricted stock and restricted stock units. See Note 14 for
additional information related to stock-based compensation.
Shares outstanding shown in the following table included 1,426,883shares of common stock held in a
revocable trust at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. The revocable trust is used to accumulate assets
for the purpose of funding the ultimate obligation of certain non-qualified benefit plans.
Transactions between the Company and the trust are accounted for in accordance with the Deferred
Compensation – Rabbi Trusts Subtopic of the Compensation Topic of the ASC, which requires the assets
held by the trust be consolidated with the Company’s accounts.
 78 
contributions to the domestic defined contribution plan. The related proceeds were $ 22.0million.
Dividends
The following table summarizes the dividends declared and paid on common stock:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash dividend per share $ 2.86 $ 2.42 $ 2.40 
 Total dividends (in millions) 723.4 623.7 618.5 
Treasury Stock
The Company acquires its common stock for general corporate purposes through its publicly announced
share repurchase program. As of December 31, 2024, the Company had remaining authorization from its
Board of Directors to purchase 34.4million shares of its common stock. The table below summarizes the
Company’s share repurchase activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Treasury stock purchases (in millions) $ 1,738.8 $ 1,432.0 $ 883.2 
 Treasury stock purchases (shares) 5,200,000 5,600,000 3,350,000 
 Average price per share $ 334.38 $ 255.72 $ 263.64 
 NOTE 13 – DEFINED CONTRIBUTION SAVINGS PLAN 
As of December 31, 2024, 44,917employees contributed to the Company’s defined contribution savings
plan, voluntary to all eligible salaried employees and any employee in a group of employees to which
coverage has been extended on a non-discriminatory basis by the plan’s Administration Committee.
Participants are allowed to contribute, on a pretax or after-tax basis, up to the lesser of
fiftypercent of their annual compensation or the maximum dollar amount allowed under the Internal
Revenue Code. The Company matches one hundredpercent of all contributions up to sixpercent of
eligible employee contributions. Such participant contributions may be invested in a variety of
investment funds or a Company common stock
 79 
fund and may be exchanged between investments as directed by the participant. Participants are
permitted to diversify both future and prior Company matching contributions previously allocated to
the Company common stock fund into a variety of investment funds.
The Company made contributions to the defined contribution savings plan on behalf of participating
employees, representing amounts authorized by employees to be withheld from their earnings, of $
279.6million, $ 260.5million and $ 240.1million in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The Company’s
matching contributions to the defined contribution savings plan charged to operations were $
165.1million, $ 153.9million and $ 140.0million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
At December 31, 2024, there were 16,771,640shares of the Company’s common stock being held by the
defined contribution savings plan, representing 6.7% of the total number of voting shares
outstanding. Shares of Company common stock credited to each member’s account under the defined
contribution savings plan are voted by the trustee under instructions from each individual plan
member. Shares for which no instructions are received are voted by the trustee in the same proportion
as those for which instructions are received.
 NOTE 14 – STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION 
The 2006 Employee Plan authorizes the Board of Directors, or a committee of the Board of Directors,
to issue or transfer up to an aggregate of 71,100,000shares of common stock, plus any shares relating
to awards that expire, are forfeited or canceled. The Company issues new shares upon exercise of
option rights (options) and vesting of restricted stock units (RSUs). The 2006 Employee Plan permits
the granting of options, appreciation rights, restricted stock, RSUs, performance shares and
performance units to eligible employees. At December 31, 2024, noappreciation rights, performance
shares or performance units had been granted under the 2006 Employee Plan. Shares available for
future grants under the 2006 Employee Plan were 5,458,273at December 31, 2024.
The 2006 Stock Plan for Nonemployee Directors (Nonemployee Director Plan) authorizes the Board of
Directors, or a committee of the Board of Directors, to issue or transfer up to an aggregate of
600,000shares of common stock, plus any shares relating to awards that expire, are forfeited or
canceled. The Nonemployee Director Plan permits the granting of options, appreciation rights,
restricted stock and RSUs to members of the Board of Directors who are not employees of the Company.
At December 31, 2024, nooptions or appreciation rights had been granted under the Nonemployee
Director Plan. Shares available for future grants under the Nonemployee Director Plan were 210,675at
December 31, 2024.
At December 31, 2024, the Company had total unrecognized stock-based compensation expense of $
192.7million that is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.08years.
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Stock-based compensation expense $ 138.1 $ 115.9 $ 99.7 
 Income tax benefit recognized 34.1 28.6 24.6 
Excess tax benefits from share-based payments are recognized as an income tax benefit in the
Statements of Consolidated Income when options are exercised and RSUs vest. For the years ended
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company’s excess tax benefit from options exercised and RSUs
vested reduced the income tax provision by $ 73.0million, $ 35.7million and $ 35.4million,
respectively.
Options
The fair value of the Company’s options was estimated at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes-
Merton option-pricing model with the following weighted-average assumptions for all options granted:
 2024 2023 2022 
 Risk-free interest rate 3.93 % 4.57 % 4.00 % 
 Expected life of options 5.02 years 5.02 years 5.05 years 
 Expected dividend yield of stock .83 % .94 % .92 % 
 Expected volatility of stock 27.5 % 29.3 % 31.6 % 
 80 
The risk-free interest rate is based upon the U.S. Treasury yield curve at the time of grant. The
expected life of options was calculated using a scenario analysis model. Historical data was used to
aggregate the holding period from actual exercises, post-vesting cancellations and hypothetical
assumed exercises on all outstanding options. The expected dividend yield of stock is the Company’s
best estimate of the expected future dividend yield. Expected volatility of stock was calculated
using historical and implied volatilities.
Grants of non-qualified and incentive stock options have been awarded to certain officers and key
employees under the 2006 Employee Plan. The options generally become exercisable to the extent of
one-third of the optioned shares for each full year following the date of grant and generally expire
ten yearsafter the date of grant. Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to options granted
to eligible employees amounted to $ 116.4million at December 31, 2024. The unrecognized compensation
expense is being amortized on a straight-line basis over the three-yearvesting period, net of
estimated forfeitures based on historical activity, and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-
average period of 1.14years.
The following table summarizes the Company’s option activity:
 Weighted 
 Average 
 Exercise Aggregate Weighted Average 
 Optioned Price Intrinsic Remaining Term 
 Shares Per Share Value (in Years) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstanding at 8,925,011 $ 175.70 $ 1,215.6 5.64 
 January 1, 2024 
 Granted 939,699 376.90 
 Exercised -1,871,201 131.48 
 Forfeited -53,373 254.48 
 Expired -5,270 202.79 
 Outstanding at 7,934,866 209.39 $ 1,074.4 5.69 
 December 31, 2024 
 Exercisable at 6,054,247 $ 178.95 $ 974.6 4.64 
 December 31, 2024 
The following table summarizes fair value and intrinsic value information for option activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted average grant date fair value $ 109.05 $ 77.08 $ 69.82 
 per share 
 Total fair value of options vested 66.8 61.3 57.9 
 Total intrinsic value of options 402.7 170.6 125.4 
 exercised 
RSUs
The fair value of each RSU is equal to the market value of a share of the Company’s stock on the
grant date. Grants of time-based RSUs, which generally require three yearsof continuous employment
from the date of grant before vesting and receiving the stock without restriction, have been awarded
to certain officers and key employees under the 2006 Employee Plan. The February 2024, 2023 and 2022
grants of performance-based RSUs vest at the end of a three-yearperiod based on the Company’s
achievement of specified financial and operating performance goals relating to earnings per share and
return on net assets employed.
Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to grants of RSUs to eligible employees amounted to $
74.4million at December 31, 2024. The unrecognized compensation expense is being amortized on a
straight-line basis over the vesting period and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average
period of 0.82years.
Grants of RSUs have been awarded to nonemployee directors under the Nonemployee Director Plan. These
grants generally vest and stock is received without restriction to the extent of one-third of the
RSUs for each year following the date of grant. Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to
grants of RSUs to nonemployee directors amounted to $ 1.9million at December 31, 2024. The
unrecognized compensation expense is being amortized on a straight-line basis over the three-
yearvesting period and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 0.90years.
 81 
The following table summarizes the Company’s RSU activity:
 Weighted 
 Average Grant Aggregate Weighted Average 
 Date Fair Intrinsic Remaining Term 
 Number of RSUs Value Per Share Value (in Years) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstanding at 434,874 $ 244.21 $ 135.6 1.26 
 January 1, 2024 
 Granted 124,667 305.50 
 Vested -122,276 239.14 
 Forfeited -4,251 251.80 
 Outstanding at 
 December 31, 433,014 $ 265.03 $ 147.2 1.18 
 2024 
The following table summarizes the fair value and intrinsic value information for RSU activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted average grant date fair value $ 305.50 $ 232.22 $ 271.75 
 per share 
 Intrinsic value of RSUs vested during 38.4 68.5 97.5 
 year 
NOTE 15 – ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
The components of AOCI, including the reclassification adjustments for items that were reclassified
from AOCI to Net income, are shown below.
 Pension and 
 Other Unrealized Net 
 Foreign Currency Postretirement Gains on 
 Translation Benefits Cash Flow 
 Adjustments(1) Adjustments(2) Hedges(3) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at $ -702.1 $ -32.2 $ 35.9 $ -698.4 
 January 1, 2022 
 Amounts 
 recognized in -108.7 106.8 -1.9 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified 3.7 -4.0 -0.3 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, -810.8 78.3 31.9 -700.6 
 2022 
 Amounts 
 recognized in 93.9 3.9 97.8 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified -17.9 -3.6 -21.5 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, -716.9 64.3 28.3 -624.3 
 2023 
 Amounts 
 recognized in -256.0 23.0 -233.0 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified -14.2 -3.7 -17.9 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, $ -972.9 $ 73.1 $ 24.6 $ -875.2 
 2024 
(1) Includes changes in the fair value of cross currency swap contracts of $ 53.6million, $( 24.9)
million and $ 34.1million in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. See Note 16.
(2) Net of taxes of $( 2.0) million, $ 3.1million and $( 35.0) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively. See Note 8.
(3) Net of taxes of $ 1.2million in 2024 and 2023 and $ 1.1million in 2022. See Statements of
Consolidated Comprehensive Income.
 82 
Net Investment Hedges
The Company has entered into U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap contracts with various
counterparties to hedge the Company’s net investment in its European operations. During the term of
the contracts, the Company will pay fixed-rate interest in euros and receive fixed-rate interest in
U.S. dollars, thereby effectively converting a portion of the Company's U.S. dollar denominated
fixed-rate debt to euro denominated fixed-rate debt. The outstanding contracts as of December 31,
2024 are summarized by maturity date in the table below.
 Notional Value Maturity Date 
 200.0 August 8, 2025 
 687.7 June 1, 2027 
 100.0 March 1, 2028 
 ──────────────────────────────────────── 
 525.0 August 15, 2029 
 100.0 September 1, 2031 
 $ 1,612.7 
In August 2024, the Company settled its $ 150.0million U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap
contract entered into on March 28, 2023. In May 2024, the Company settled its $ 500.0million U.S.
dollar to euro cross currency swap contract entered into on February 13, 2020. At the time of both of
these settlements, an immaterial unrealized loss was recognized in AOCI.
In December 2023, the Company settled its $ 100.0million U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap
contract entered into on August 1, 2023. At the time of settlement, an immaterial unrealized gain was
recognized in AOCI.
The following table summarizes the balance sheet location of the cross currency swap contracts. See
Note 17 for additional information on the fair value of these contracts.
 December 31, December 31, December 31, 
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Other current assets $ 9.4 $ — $ — 
 Other assets 39.5 — 9.1 
 Other accruals — 12.0 — 
 Other long-term liabilities — 12.4 — 
The changes in fair value of the cross currency swap contracts are recognized in the foreign currency
translation adjustments component of AOCI. See Note 15. The following table summarizes the unrealized
gains (losses) for the years ended December 31:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gains (losses) $ 71.2 $ -33.1 $ 45.2 
 Tax effect -17.6 8.2 -11.1 
 Gains (losses), net of taxes $ 53.6 $ -24.9 $ 34.1 
Derivatives Not Designated as Hedging Instruments
The Company enters into foreign currency option and forward contracts with maturity dates less than
twelve months primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. The related gains and
losses are recorded in Other (income) expense - net. See Note 19 for further details.
 83 
The Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures Topic of the ASC applies to the Company’s financial and
non-financial assets and liabilities. The guidance applies when other standards require or permit the
fair value measurement of assets and liabilities. Under the guidance, assets and liabilities measured
at fair value are categorized as follows:
Level 1: Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets
Level 2: Significant other observable inputs
Level 3: Significant unobservable inputs
There were no assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis classified as Level
3 at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. Except for the acquisition-related fair value measurements and
assets held for sale prior to divestiture of the China architectural business described in Note 3 and
the reporting unit impairment analysis and trademark quantitative impairment test described in Note
6, there were no assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis. The following
table summarizes the Company’s assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis,
categorized using the fair value hierarchy.
 Dec… De… Dec… 
 31, 31, 31, 
 2024 20… 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Tot… Le… Lev… To… Lev… Le… Tot… Le… Lev… 
 1 2 1 2 1 2 
 A… 
 D… 
 c… $ 98.6 $ 98… $ — $ 84… $ 84.7 $ 74.1 $ 43… $ 30.4 
 p… 
 Q… 
 r… — — 29.8 29… 
 p… 
 N… 
 i… 48.9 48.9 — 9.1 9.1 
 h… 
 $ 147… $ 98… $ 48.9 $ 84… $ 84.7 $ — $ 113… $ 73… $ 39.5 
 L… 
 N… 
 i… $ — $ 24… $ 24… $ — 
 h… 
The deferred compensation plan assets consist of the investment funds maintained for future payments
under the Company’s executive deferred compensation plans, which are structured as rabbi trusts. The
investments are marketable securities accounted for under the Debt and Equity Securities Topic of the
ASC. The level 1 investments are valued using quoted market prices multiplied by the number of
shares. The level 2 investments are valued based on vendor or broker models. There was $ 7.0million
and $ 6.4million of deferred compensation plan assets held in partnership funds measured using NAV
(or its equivalent) as a practical expedient as of December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. These
investments are not classified in the fair value hierarchy. The cost basis of all investments within
the deferred compensation plan and qualified replacement plan was $ 82.7million, $ 76.3million and $
67.2million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The qualified replacement plan assets consisted of investment funds maintained for future
contributions to the Company’s domestic defined contribution pension plan. See Note 8. During 2023,
the remaining balance was fully utilized to fund the Company’s domestic defined contribution pension
plan. The cost basis of the investment funds was $ 29.8million at December 31, 2022.
The net investment hedge asset and liability represent the fair value of the cross currency swaps.
See Note 16. The fair value is based on a valuation model that uses observable inputs, including
interest rate curves and the euro foreign currency rate.
The carrying amounts reported for Cash and cash equivalents and Short-term borrowings approximate
fair value.
The fair value of the Company’s publicly traded debt is based on quoted market prices. The fair value
of the Company’s non-publicly traded debt is estimated using discounted cash flow analyses, based on
the Company’s current incremental borrowing rates for similar types of borrowing arrangements. The
Company’s publicly traded debt and non-traded debt are classified as level 1 and level 2,
respectively, in the fair value hierarchy. The following table summarizes the carrying amounts and
fair values of the Company’s publicly traded debt and non-traded debt.
 84 
The Company manufactures and sells paint, stains, supplies, equipment and floor covering through
company-operated stores, branded and private label products through retailers and a broad range of
industrial coatings directly to global manufacturing customers through company-operated branches. A
large portion of the Company’s revenue is recognized at a point in time and made to customers who are
not engaged in a long-term supply agreement or any form of contract with the Company. These sales are
paid for at the time of sale in cash, credit card or on account with the vast majority of customers
having terms between 30 and 60 days, not to exceed one year. Many customers who purchase on account
take advantage of early payment discounts offered by paying within 30 days of being invoiced. The
Company estimates variable consideration for these sales on the basis of both historical information
and current trends to estimate the expected amount of discounts to which customers are likely to be
entitled.
The remaining revenue is governed by long-term supply agreements and related purchase orders
(contracts) that specify shipping terms and aspects of the transaction price including rebates,
discounts and other sales incentives, such as advertising support. Contracts are at standalone
pricing. The performance obligation in these contracts is determined by each of the individual
purchase orders and the respective stated quantities, with revenue being recognized at a point in
time when obligations under the terms of the agreement are satisfied. This generally occurs with the
transfer of control of our products to the customer. Sales, value add and other taxes we collect
concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue.
See Note 22 for the Company’s disaggregation of Net sales by Reportable Segment. As the Reportable
Segments are aligned by similar economic factors, trends and customers, this disaggregation best
depicts how the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows are affected by
economic factors. Approximately 80% of the Company’s net external sales are in the Company’s North
America region (which is comprised of the United States, Canada and the Caribbean region), slightly
less than 10% in the EMEAI region (Europe, Middle East, Africa and India), with the remaining global
regions accounting for the residual balance. No individual country outside of the United States is
individually significant.
The Company has made payments or given credits for various incentives at the beginning of a long-term
contract where future revenue is expected and before satisfaction of performance obligations. Under
these circumstances, the Company recognizes a contract asset and amortizes these prepayments over the
expected benefit life of the long-term contract, typically on a straight-line basis.
The majority of variable consideration in the Company’s contracts include volume rebates, discounts
and other incentives, where the customer receives a retrospective percentage rebate based on the
amount of their purchases. In these situations, the rebates are accrued as a fixed percentage of
sales and recorded as a reduction of Net sales until paid to the customer per the terms of the
contract. Forms of variable consideration such as tiered rebates, whereby a customer receives a
retrospective price decrease dependent on the volume of their purchases, are calculated using a
forecasted percentage to determine the most likely amount to accrue. Management creates a baseline
calculation using historical sales and then utilizing forecast information, estimates the anticipated
sales volume each quarter to calculate the expected reduction to Net sales. The remainder of the
transaction price is fixed as agreed upon with the customer, limiting estimation of revenues,
including constraints.
The Company’s Accounts receivable and current and long-term contract assets and liabilities are
summarized in the following table.
 85 
The difference between the opening and closing balances of the Company’s contract assets and contract
liabilities primarily results from the timing difference between the contractual performance
obligation and the associated payment.
Provisions for estimated returns are established and the expected costs continue to be recognized as
contra-revenue per ASC 606 when the products are sold. The Company only offers an assurance type
warranty on products sold, and there is no material service to the customer beyond fixing defects
that existed at the time of sale and no warranties are sold separately.
Warranty liabilities are excluded from the table above. Amounts recognized during the year from
deferred revenue were not material. The Company records a right of return liability within each of
its operations to accrue for expected customer returns. Historical actual returns are used to
estimate future returns as a percentage of current sales. Obligations for returns and refunds were
not material individually or in the aggregate.
Allowance for Current Expected Credit Losses
The following table summarizes the movement in the Company’s allowance for current expected credit
losses:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Beginning balance $ 59.6 $ 56.6 $ 48.9 
 Bad debt expense 69.5 67.9 65.3 
 Uncollectible accounts written off, net -68.7 -64.9 -57.6 
 of recoveries 
 Ending balance $ 60.4 $ 59.6 $ 56.6 
 NOTE 19 – OTHER (INCOME) EXPENSE 
Other General (Income) Expense - Net
Included in Other general (income) expense - net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Provisions for environmental matters - $ -1.3 $ 80.7 $ -7.1 
 net 
 Gain on divestiture of business (see — -20.1 — 
 Note 3) 
 (Gain) loss on sale or disposition of -49.9 0.9 -17.8 
 assets 
 Other 12.4 5.6 — 
 Total $ -38.8 $ 67.1 $ -24.9 
Provisions for environmental matters – net represent initial provisions for site-specific estimated
costs of environmental investigation or remediation and increases or decreases to environmental-
related accruals as information becomes available upon which more accurate costs can be reasonably
estimated and as additional accounting guidelines are issued. Provisions for environmental matters -
net for the year ended December 31, 2024 included an immaterial amount of insurance proceeds related
to environmental cleanup at a current manufacturing site. See Note 10 for further details on the
Company’s environmental-related activities.
The (gain) loss on sale or disposition of assets represents the net realized (gain) loss associated
with the sale or disposal of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets previously used in
the conduct of the primary business of the Company. (Gain) loss on sale or disposition of assets for
the year ended December 31, 2024 included an immaterial amount of insurance proceeds related to a
current manufacturing site.
 86 
Other (Income) Expense - Net
Included in Other (income) expense - net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investment (gains) losses $ -16.9 $ -22.9 $ 9.7 
 Loss on extinguishment of debt (see Note — 12.8 — 
 7) 
 Net expense from banking activities 15.7 15.0 12.2 
 Foreign currency transaction related 3.9 80.5 33.6 
 losses - net 
 Miscellaneous pension and benefit -13.1 -21.1 4.0 
 (income) expense 
 Other income -69.8 -48.5 -39.6 
 Other expense 35.5 49.7 27.1 
 Total $ -44.7 $ 65.5 $ 47.0 
Investment (gains) losses primarily relate to the change in market value of the investments held in
the deferred compensation plan. See Note 17 for additional information on the fair value of these
investments.
Foreign currency transaction related losses - net include the impact from foreign currency
transactions, including from highly inflationary economies such as Argentina, and net realized losses
from foreign currency option and forward contracts. See Note 16 for further details regarding these
foreign currency contracts.
Miscellaneous pension and benefit (income) expense consists of the non-service components of net
periodic pension and benefit cost (credit). See Note 8.
Other income and other expense included items of revenue, gains, expenses and losses that were
unrelated to the primary business purpose of the Company. There were no items within other income or
other expense that were individually significant at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022.
 NOTE 20 – INCOME TAXES 
Significant components of the provisions for income taxes were as follows:
 Current: 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Federal $ 558.0 $ 553.4 $ 505.5 
 Foreign 155.1 147.6 90.3 
 State and local 132.2 109.0 102.0 
 Total current 845.3 810.0 697.8 
 Deferred: 
 Federal -54.8 -39.9 -81.7 
 Foreign -15.8 -51.5 -47.3 
 State and local -4.3 2.5 -15.8 
 Total deferred -74.9 -88.9 -144.8 
 Total provisions for income taxes $ 770.4 $ 721.1 $ 553.0 
 87 
A reconciliation of the statutory federal income tax rate to the effective tax rate follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 Statutory federal income tax rate 21.0 % 21.0 % 21.0 % 
 Effect of: 
 State and local income taxes 3.2 3.0 2.8 
 Investment vehicles -0.5 -0.5 -0.4 
 Employee share-based payments -2.1 -1.1 -1.4 
 Research and development credits -0.3 -0.4 -0.6 
 Amended returns and refunds -0.2 0.2 0.4 
 Taxes on non-U.S. earnings 1.1 0.8 0.2 
 Other - net 0.1 0.2 -0.5 
 Reported effective tax rate 22.3 % 23.2 % 21.5 % 
The decrease in the effective tax rate for 2024 compared to 2023 was primarily related to a more
favorable impact from tax benefits related to employee share-based payments. The other significant
components of the Company’s effective tax rate were consistent year-over-year.
Significant components of income before income taxes as used for income tax purposes, were as
follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Domestic $ 3,046.6 $ 2,817.0 $ 2,427.6 
 Foreign 405.2 292.9 145.5 
 $ 3,451.8 $ 3,109.9 $ 2,573.1 
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying
amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income
tax purposes using the enacted tax rates and laws that are currently in effect.
Significant components of the Company’s deferred tax assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022 were as follows:
 Deferred tax assets: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Environmental and other similar items $ 66.8 $ 72.0 $ 66.4 
 Employee related and benefit items 175.2 162.1 157.1 
 Operating lease liabilities 499.6 483.2 478.1 
 Research and development capitalization 103.9 81.5 52.6 
 Other items 206.5 205.6 204.1 
 Total deferred tax assets 1,052.0 1,004.4 958.3 
 Deferred tax liabilities: 
 Intangible assets and Property, plant 948.7 1,001.1 973.4 
 and equipment 
 LIFO inventories 120.5 115.2 97.3 
 Operating lease right-of-use assets 482.1 465.6 460.5 
 Other items 40.7 28.6 31.7 
 Total deferred tax liabilities 1,592.0 1,610.5 1,562.9 
 Net deferred tax liabilities $ 540.0 $ 606.1 $ 604.6 
Netted against the Company’s other deferred tax assets were valuation allowances of $ 124.5million, $
106.6million and $ 97.5million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The Company has $
13.5million of domestic net operating loss carryforwards acquired through acquisitions that have
expiration dates through tax year 2037, foreign tax credits of $ 34.9million that expire in calendar
years 2028 through 2034 and foreign net operating losses of $ 339.1million. The foreign net
 88 
operating losses are related to various jurisdictions that provide for both indefinite carryforward
periods and others with carryforward periods that expire between tax years 2024 to 2034.
The Company and its subsidiaries file income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and various
state and foreign jurisdictions. The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2013 through 2016 income
tax returns in 2023 and paid the related assessments in the fourth quarter of 2023 and first quarter
of 2024. The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2011 income tax return in 2023 and paid the tax
assessment in the second quarter of 2024 and the interest assessment in the third quarter of 2024.
The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2017 through 2019 income tax returns in the fourth
quarter of 2024 and expects to pay the tax and interest assessment in the first quarter of 2025. The
IRS plans to start its next audit cycle of the Company’s 2020 through 2022 income tax returns in
2025. As of December 31, 2024, the federal statute of limitations has not expired for the 2017
through 2024 tax years.
As of December 31, 2024, the Company is subject to non-U.S. income tax examinations for the tax years
of 2015 through 2024. In addition, the Company is subject to state and local income tax examinations
for the tax years 2017 through 2024.
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at beginning of year $ 121.8 $ 242.4 $ 228.5 
 Additions based on tax positions related 16.0 14.2 18.7 
 to the current year 
 Additions for tax positions of prior 12.8 12.6 10.6 
 years 
 Reductions for tax positions of prior -8.6 -16.9 -6.0 
 years 
 Settlements -31.7 -123.2 -1.7 
 Lapses of statutes of limitations -11.0 -7.3 -7.7 
 Balance at end of year $ 99.3 $ 121.8 $ 242.4 
The decrease in unrecognized tax benefits was primarily related to settlements of federal adjustments
with the IRS in the tax years 2017 through 2019. There were also additions in unrecognized tax
benefits related to the reversal of benefits recognized from certain positions taken on current and
prior year income tax returns filed in U.S. federal and various state jurisdictions. These additions
were partially offset by various positions taken on prior year income tax returns filed in U.S. and
various foreign jurisdictions that were no longer deemed to be at risk. At December 31, 2024, 2023
and 2022, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the
effective tax rate was $ 84.0million, $ 109.4million and $ 230.3million, respectively.
Included in the balance of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2024 is $ 7.9million related to
tax positions for which it is reasonably possible that the total amounts could significantly change
during the next twelve months. This amount represents a decrease in unrecognized tax benefits
comprised primarily of items related to federal audits of partnership investments and expiring
statutes in federal, foreign and state jurisdictions.
The Company classifies all income tax related interest and penalties as income tax expense. During
the year ended December 31, 2024, there was an increase in income tax interest and penalties of $
7.8million. During the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022, there was an increase in income tax
interest and penalties of $ 5.9million and $ 10.3million, respectively. The Company accrued $
18.8million, $ 20.4million and $ 36.6million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, for
the potential payment of interest and penalties.
 89 
Basic and diluted net income per share are calculated using the treasury stock method.
 Basic 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 2,681.4 $ 2,388.8 $ 2,020.1 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 251.0 255.4 258.0 
 Basic net income per share $ 10.68 $ 9.35 $ 7.83 
 Diluted 
 Net income $ 2,681.4 $ 2,388.8 $ 2,020.1 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 
 assuming dilution: 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 251.0 255.4 258.0 
 Stock options and other contingently 3.1 2.9 3.8 
 issuable shares(1) 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 254.1 258.3 261.8 
 assuming dilution 
 Diluted net income per share $ 10.55 $ 9.25 $ 7.72 
(1) Stock options and other contingently issuable shares excludes 0.9million, 2.8million and
1.9million shares at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, due to their anti-dilutive
effect.
 NOTE 22 – REPORTABLE SEGMENT INFORMATION 
The Company reports its segment information in the same way that management internally organizes its
business for assessing performance and making decisions regarding the allocation of resources in
accordance with the Segment Reporting Topic of the ASC. The Company has threereportable operating
segments: Paint Stores Group, Consumer Brands Group and Performance Coatings Group (individually, a
Reportable Segment and collectively, the Reportable Segments). Factors considered in determining the
threeReportable Segments of the Company include the nature of business activities, the management
structure directly accountable to the Company’s Chief Operating Decision Maker (CODM) for operating
and administrative activities, availability of discrete financial information and information
presented to the Board of Directors. The Company reports all other business activities within the
Administrative function.
The Company’s CODM has been identified as the Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer because
she has the final authority over performance assessment and resource allocation decisions. Because of
the diverse operations of the Company, the CODM regularly receives and uses discrete financial
information about each Reportable Segment as well as select supplemental financial information about
certain divisions, business units or subsidiaries of the Company. The CODM uses all such financial
information for performance assessments and resource allocation decisions. The CODM evaluates the
performance of and allocates resources to the Reportable Segments based on Segment profit or loss,
which represents the segments’ Income before income taxes. The accounting policies of the Reportable
Segments are the same as those described in Note 1.
The Paint Stores Group consisted of 4,773company-operated specialty paint stores in the United
States, Canada and the Caribbean region at December 31, 2024. Each store in this segment is engaged
in servicing the needs of architectural and industrial paint contractors and do-it-yourself
homeowners. These stores market and sell ABC corp. ® and other controlled brand architectural
paint and coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and related products. The
majority of these products are produced by manufacturing facilities in the Consumer Brands Group. In
addition, each store sells select purchased associated products. The loss of any single customer
would not have a material adverse effect on the business of this segment. During 2024, this segment
opened 79net new stores, consisting of 84new stores opened and 5stores closed. In 2023 and 2022, this
segment opened 70and 75net new stores, respectively. In accordance with ASC 280-10-50-9, the Paint
Stores Group as a whole is considered the operating segment, and because it meets the criteria in ASC
280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Consumer Brands Group manufactures and supplies a broad portfolio of branded and private-label
architectural paint, stains, varnishes, industrial products, wood finishes products, wood
preservatives, applicators, corrosion inhibitors, aerosols, caulks and adhesives to retailers,
including home centers and hardware stores, dedicated dealers and distributors throughout North
America, Latin America and Europe. Sales and marketing of certain controlled brand and private-label
products is performed by a direct sales staff. The products distributed through third-party customers
are intended for resale to the ultimate
 90 
end-user of the product. The Consumer Brands Group also consisted of 334company-operated specialty
paint stores in Latin America at December 31, 2024. Each store in this segment is engaged in
servicing the needs of home, commercial and industrial projects to contractors and do-it-yourself
customers in Latin America. These stores market and sell ABC corp. ® and other controlled
brand architectural paint and coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and
related products which are branded for the Latin America market. In addition, each store sells select
purchased associated products. The Consumer Brands Group had sales to certain customers that,
individually, may be a significant portion of the sales and related profitability of the segment.
During 2024, the segment opened 16net new stores, consisting of 18stores opened and 2stores closed.
In 2023 and 2022, this segment opened (closed) 11and ( 3) net new stores, respectively.
The Consumer Brands Group also supports the Company’s other businesses around the world with new
product research and development, manufacturing, distribution and logistics. Approximately 63% of the
total sales of the Consumer Brands Group in 2024 were intersegment transfers of products primarily
sold through the Paint Stores Group. This segment incurred most of the Company’s capital expenditures
related to ongoing environmental compliance measures, manufacturing capacity expansion, operational
efficiencies and maintenance projects at sites currently in operation. In accordance with ASC
280-10-50-9, the Consumer Brands Group as a whole is considered the operating segment, and because it
meets the criteria in ASC 280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Performance Coatings Group develops and sells industrial coatings for wood finishing and general
industrial (metal and plastic) applications, automotive refinish, protective and marine coatings,
coil coatings, packaging coatings and performance-based resins and colorants worldwide. This segment
licenses certain technology and trade names worldwide, including ABC corp. ® and other
controlled brand products which are distributed through the Paint Stores Group, this segment’s
324company-operated branches and by a direct sales staff and outside sales representatives to
retailers, dealers, jobbers, licensees and other third-party distributors. The Performance Coatings
Group had sales to certain customers that, individually, may be a significant portion of the sales of
the segment. However, the loss of any single customer would not have a material adverse effect on the
overall profitability of the segment. During 2024, the segment added 2new branches ( nobranches were
closed). In 2023 and 2022, this segment added 5and 35net new branches, respectively. In accordance
with ASC 280-10-50-9, the Performance Coatings Group as a whole is considered the operating segment,
and because it meets the criteria in ASC 280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Administrative function includes the administrative expenses and assets of the Company’s new
global headquarters and research and development center, both currently under construction. In
addition, it includes the operations of a real estate management unit that is responsible for the
ownership, management and leasing of non-retail properties held primarily for use by the Company,
including the Company’s current global headquarters and research and development center and disposal
of idle facilities. The Administrative function’s remaining assets consist primarily of cash and cash
equivalents, investments and deferred pension assets. Also included in the Administrative function
was interest expense, interest and investment income, certain expenses related to closed facilities
and environmental-related matters and other expenses that were not directly associated with the
Reportable Segments. Sales of this function represented external leasing revenue. The Administrative
function did not include any significant foreign operations. Gains and losses from the sale of
property were not a significant operating factor in determining the performance of the Administrative
function.
Net external sales of all consolidated foreign subsidiaries were $ 4.426billion, $ 4.428billion and $
4.294billion for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Long-lived assets consisted of Property, plant and equipment, net, Goodwill, Intangible assets, net,
Operating lease right-of-use assets, deferred pension assets and Other assets. The aggregate total of
long-lived assets for the Company was $ 18.231billion, $ 17.441billion and $ 16.686billion at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Long-lived assets of consolidated foreign
subsidiaries totaled $ 3.405billion, $ 3.586billion and $ 3.369billion at December 31, 2024, 2023 and
2022, respectively.
Total Assets of the Company were $ 23.633billion, $ 22.954billion and $ 22.594billion at December 31,
2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Total assets of consolidated foreign subsidiaries were $
5.208billion, $ 5.718billion and $ 5.337billion, which represented 22.0%, 24.9% and 23.6% of the
Company’s total assets at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
No single geographic area outside the United States was significant relative to consolidated Net
sales or consolidated long-lived assets. Export sales and sales to any individual customer were each
less than 10 percent of consolidated sales to unaffiliated customers during all years presented.
In the reportable segment financial information that follows, Segment profit represents each
segment’s Income before income taxes. Domestic intersegment transfers are primarily accounted for at
the approximate fully absorbed manufactured cost, based on normal capacity volumes, plus customary
distribution costs for paint products. Non-paint domestic and all international intersegment
transfers are primarily accounted for at values comparable to normal unaffiliated customer sales. All
intersegment
 91 
transfers are eliminated within the Administrative function. In 2023, the absorbed manufactured cost
standards utilized for domestic intersegment transfers were established inclusive of forecasted cost
reductions from planned initiatives. Deviations from the forecasted cost reductions were recognized
within the Consumer Brands Group. Due to the nature of the Company’s integrated manufacturing
operations and centralized administrative and information technology support, a substantial amount of
allocations are made to determine segment financial information. Expenses that are specifically
identifiable to a certain Reportable Segment are allocated accordingly. For expenses that are not
specifically identifiable to a certain Reportable Segment, an appropriate allocation base is
identified, and expenses are allocated based on each segment’s respective share of the allocation
base. The significant expense categories and amounts align with the segment-level information that is
regularly provided to the CODM and include intersegment expenses within the amounts shown.
Identifiable assets were those directly identified with each Reportable Segment.
 2024 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Consol… 
 Group Group Group Adminis… Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net $ 13,188.0 $ 3,108.0 $ 6,797.3 $ 5.2 $ 23,098… 
 sales 
 Inters… — 5,304.3 56.8 -5,361.1 — 
 transf… 
 Total 
 net 
 sales $ 13,188.0 $ 8,412.3 $ 6,854.1 $ -5,355.9 $ 23,098… 
 and 
 inters… 
 transf… 
 Cost of 
 goods $ 5,900.8 $ 6,943.5 $ 4,406.5 $ -5,347.4 $ 11,903… 
 sold 
 Sellin… 
 general 
 and 4,405.6 863.1 1,443.0 710.4 7,422.1 
 admini… 
 expens… 
 Intere… — 1.4 — 414.3 415.7 
 expense 
 Other 
 segment -21.0 14.4 -23.3 -64.6 -94.5 
 items(… 
 Income 
 before $ 2,902.6 $ 589.9 $ 1,027.9 $ -1,068.6 $ 3,451.8 
 income 
 taxes 
 % to 
 Net 22.0 % 19.0 % 15.1 % nm 14.9 % 
 sales 
 Supple… 
 Inform… 
 Identi… $ 5,878.0 $ 6,854.7 $ 7,847.4 $ 3,052.5 $ 23,632… 
 assets 
 Capital 141.3 290.3 15.2 623.2 1,070.0 
 expend… 
 Deprec… 89.9 162.7 18.0 26.8 297.4 
 Amorti… 1.7 66.4 256.7 1.8 326.6 
 nm - 
 not 
 meanin… 
(1) Other segment items includes Other general (income) expense - net, Interest income and Other
(income) expense - net. See Note 19.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 92 
and Other (income) expense - net. See Notes 3 and 6 for information on Impairment and Note 19 for
information on Other general (income) expense - net and Other (income) expense - net.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 2022 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Consol… 
 Group Group Group Adminis… Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net $ 11,963.3 $ 3,388.4 $ 6,793.5 $ 3.7 $ 22,148… 
 sales 
 Inters… — 5,214.8 203.7 -5,418.5 — 
 transf… 
 Total 
 net 
 sales $ 11,963.3 $ 8,603.2 $ 6,997.2 $ -5,414.8 $ 22,148… 
 and 
 inters… 
 transf… 
 Cost of 
 goods $ 5,826.8 $ 7,454.8 $ 4,965.4 $ -5,423.2 $ 12,823… 
 sold 
 Sellin… 
 general 
 and 3,810.1 817.8 1,275.6 428.1 6,331.6 
 admini… 
 expens… 
 Intere… — — — 390.8 390.8 
 expense 
 Other 
 segment -21.7 16.4 21.3 13.6 29.6 
 items(… 
 Income 
 before $ 2,348.1 $ 314.2 $ 734.9 $ -824.1 $ 2,573.1 
 income 
 taxes 
 % to 
 Net 19.6 % 9.3 % 10.8 % nm 11.6 % 
 sales 
 Supple… 
 Inform… 
 Identi… $ 5,873.6 $ 6,749.6 $ 8,296.8 $ 1,674.0 $ 22,594… 
 assets 
 Capital 87.3 295.0 38.7 223.5 644.5 
 expend… 
 Deprec… 73.9 126.2 29.1 34.8 264.0 
 Amorti… 3.3 79.8 232.0 2.0 317.1 
 nm - 
 not 
 meanin… 
(1) Other segment items includes Other general (income) expense - net, Impairment, Interest income
and Other (income) expense - net. See Note 6 for information on Impairment and Note 19 for
information on Other general (income) expense - net and Other (income) expense - net.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 93 
None.
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
As of the end of the period covered by this report, we carried out an evaluation, under the
supervision and with the participation of our Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer and our
Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure
controls and procedures pursuant to Rule 13a-15 and Rule 15d-15 of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended (Exchange Act). Based upon that evaluation, our Chair, President and Chief Executive
Officer and our Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer concluded that as of the
end of the period covered by this report, our disclosure controls and procedures were effective to
ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in reports we file or submit under the
Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in
Securities and Exchange Commission rules and forms, and accumulated and communicated to our
management, including our Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer and our Senior Vice President
– Finance and Chief Financial Officer, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
The “Report of Management on Internal Control over Financial Reporting” and the “Report of the
Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Internal Control over Financial Reporting” are set
forth in Item 8.
There have been no changes in our internal control over financial reporting identified in connection
with the evaluation that occurred during the period covered by this report that have materially
affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial
reporting.
Trading Arrangements
During the quarter ended December 31, 2024, none of the Company’s directors or “officers,” as defined
in Rule 16a-1(f) of the Exchange Act, adopted, modified, or terminateda “Rule 10b5-1 trading
arrangement” or a “non-Rule 10b5-1 trading arrangement,” as each term is defined in Item 408 of
Regulation S-K.
Not applicable.
 94 
Directors
The information regarding our directors and director nominees is set forth in our Proxy Statement
under the caption “Proposal 1 – Election of 9 Directors” and is incorporated herein by reference.
There have been no material changes to the procedures by which security holders may recommend
nominees to our Board of Directors. Please refer to the information set forth in our Proxy Statement
under the caption “Board Committees,” which is incorporated herein by reference.
Executive Officers
The information regarding our executive officers is set forth under the caption “Information About
Our Executive Officers” in Part I of this report, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
To the extent disclosure of any delinquent form under Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 is made by the Company, such disclosure will be set forth in our Proxy Statement under the
caption “Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports” and is incorporated herein by reference.
Audit Committee
The information regarding the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors and audit committee financial
experts is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Board Committees” and is incorporated
herein by reference.
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a Code of Conduct, which applies to all directors, officers and employees, including
our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or
controller and persons performing similar functions, of ABC corp. and our subsidiaries
wherever located. Our Code of Conduct contains the general guidelines and principles for conducting
ABC corp.’ business consistent with the highest standards of business ethics.
We have also adopted a Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management, pursuant to which our chief
executive officer, chief financial officer and senior financial management are responsible for
creating and maintaining a culture of high ethical standards and of commitment to compliance
throughout our Company to ensure the fair and timely reporting of ABC corp.’ financial results
and condition. Senior financial management includes the controller, the treasurer, the principal
financial/accounting personnel in our operating groups and divisions and all other
financial/accounting personnel within our corporate departments and operating groups and divisions
with staff supervision responsibilities.
Our Code of Conduct and Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management are available on our Investor
Relations website, investors.sherwin.com.
We intend to disclose on our Investor Relations website, investors.sherwin.com, any amendment to, or
waiver from, a provision of our Code of Conduct or Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management
that applies to our directors and executive officers, including our principal executive officer,
principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller or any persons performing
similar functions, and that is required to be publicly disclosed pursuant to the rules of the SEC.
Insider Trading Policy
The information regarding our Insider Trading Policy is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the
caption “Insider Trading Policy” and is incorporated herein by reference. A copy of our Insider
Trading Policy is filed with this Annual Report on Form 10-K as Exhibit 19.
 95 
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the captions “2024
Director Compensation Table,” “Director Compensation Program,” “Executive Compensation,” “Executive
Compensation Tables” and “2024 CEO Pay Ratio” and is incorporatedherein by reference (other than the
Compensation Committee Report, which will be deemed furnished).
The information regarding security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management is set forth
in our Proxy Statement under the captions “Security Ownership of Management, Directors and Director
Nominees” and “Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners” and is incorporated herein by
reference.
The information regarding securities authorized for issuance under the Company’s equity compensation
plans is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Equity Compensation Plan Information”
and is incorporated herein by reference.
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the captions “Certain
Relationships and Transactions with Related Persons” and “Director Independence” and is incorporated
herein by reference.
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Matters
Relating to the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm” and is incorporated herein by
reference.
 96 
Schedule II — Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves for the years ended December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022 is set forth below. All other schedules for which provision is made in the applicable
SEC accounting regulations are not required under the related instructions or are inapplicable and
therefore have been omitted.
Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves
(Schedule II)
Changes in deferred tax asset valuation allowances were as follows:
 (millions of dollars) 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Beginning balance $ 106.6 $ 97.5 $ 97.2 
 Additions (deductions)(1) 17.9 9.1 0.3 
 Ending balance $ 124.5 $ 106.6 $ 97.5 
(1) Additions (deductions) did not have a material impact on the Income Statement in 2024, 2023 or
2022.
 97 
(3) Exhibits
 Amended and Restated Articles of 
 Incorporation of the Company, as 
 amended through February 18, 2015, 
 filed as Exhibit 3 to the Company’s 
 Current Report on Form 8-K dated 
 February 18, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Amendment to the Amended and Restated 
 Articles of Incorporation of the 
 Company, as amended through February 
 18, 2015, filed as Exhibit 3.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 3.1 dated March 3, 2021, and incorporated 
 3.2 herein by reference. 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Regulations of the Company (As Amended 
 and Restated July 19, 2023), filed as 
 3.3 Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s Current 
 Report on Form 8-K dated July 18, 2023, 
 and incorporated herein by reference. 
 Description of Securities Registered 
 under Section 12 of the Securities 
 Exchange Act of 1934 filed as Exhibit 
 4.1 4(a) to the Company’s Annual Report on 
 Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended 
 December 31, 2021, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Indenture between the Company and The 
 Bank of New York Mellon (as successor 
 to Chemical Bank), as trustee, dated as 
 4.2 of February 1, 1996, filed as Exhibit  
 4(a) to Form S-3 Registration Statement 
 Number 333-01093 dated February 20, 
 1996, and incorporated herein by 
 reference. 
 Third Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and The Bank of New 
 York Mellon, as trustee (including Form 
 4.2.1 of Note), dated as of December 7, 2012, 
 filed as Exhibit 4.2 to the Company’s 
 Current Report on Form 8-K dated 
 December 4, 2012, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Indenture by and between the Company 
 and Wells Fargo Bank, National 
 Association, as trustee, dated July 31, 
 4.3 2015, filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 First Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.1 dated July 31, 2015, (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.2 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Second Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.2 dated July 31, 2015, (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.3 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Sixth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.3 dated May 16, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.4 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated May 16, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Seventh Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.4 dated May 16, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.5 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated May 16, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Eleventh Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.5 dated June 2, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.4 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated June 2, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Twelfth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.6 dated June 2, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.5 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated June 2, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Thirteenth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.7 dated August 26, 2019 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated August 26, 2019, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 98 
None.
 104 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the
Company has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized, on February 20, 2025.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated on
February 20, 2025.
 THE ABC corp. COMPANY 
 By: /S/ MARY L. GARCEAU 
 Mary L. Garceau, Secretary 
 * HEIDI G. PETZ Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer, Director 
 (Principal Executive Officer) 
 Heidi G. Petz 
 * ALLEN J. MISTYSYN Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer (Principal 
 Financial Officer) 
 Allen J. Mistysyn 
 * J. PAUL LANG Senior Vice President – Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer 
 (Principal Accounting Officer) 
 J. Paul Lang 
 * KERRII B. ANDERSON Director 
 Kerrii B. Anderson 
 * ARTHUR F. ANTON Director 
 Arthur F. Anton 
 * JEFF M. FETTIG Director 
 Jeff M. Fettig 
 * JOHN G. MORIKIS Director 
 John G. Morikis 
 * CHRISTINE A. POON Director 
 Christine A. Poon 
 * AARON M. POWELL Director 
 Aaron M. Powell 
 * MARTA R. STEWART Director 
 Marta R. Stewart 
 * MICHAEL H. THAMAN Director 
 Michael H. Thaman 
 * MATTHEW THORNTON III Director 
 Matthew Thornton III 
 * THOMAS L. WILLIAMS Director 
 Thomas L. Williams 
 The undersigned, by signing her name hereto, does sign this report on behalf of the 
 * designated officers and directors of the Company pursuant to powers of attorney executed on 
 behalf of each such officer and director and filed as an exhibit to this report. 
 February 20, 
 By: /S/ MARY L. GARCEAU 2025 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Mary L. Garceau, Attorney-in-fact 
 105


ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
============================================

ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS │
(dollars in millions, except as noted and per share data)
Company Background
The ABC corp. Company, founded in 1866, is engaged in the development, manufacture,
distribution and sale of paint, coatings and related products to professional, industrial, commercial
and retail customers primarily in North and South America with additional operations in the Caribbean
region and throughout Europe, Asia and Australia.
The Company is structured into three reportable segments – Paint Stores Group, Consumer Brands Group
and Performance Coatings Group (collectively, the Reportable Segments) – and an Administrative
function in the same way it is internally organized for assessing performance and making decisions
regarding the allocation of resources. See Note 22 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8
for additional information on the Company’s Reportable Segments.
Summary
• Consolidated Net sales increased in the year to a record $23.099 billion
◦ Net sales from stores in the Paint Stores Group open more than twelve calendar months increased
1.7% in the year
• Diluted net income per share increased 14.1% to $10.55 per share in the year compared to $9.25 per
share in the full year 2023
◦ Adjusted diluted net income per share increased 9.5% to $11.33 per share in the year compared to
$10.35 per share in the full year 2023
• Generated Net operating cash of $3.153 billion, or 13.7% of Net sales, in the year
• Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (Adjusted EBITDA) increased
6.0% in the year to $4.492 billion or 19.4% of Net sales
Outlook
ABC corp. delivered strong 2024 results despite continued choppy macroeconomic conditions.
Full year Net sales grew to a record level, gross margin expanded and Diluted net income per share
increased by a double-digit percentage. We continued to generate strong cash flow from operations
which was used for investment, an acquisition and returning cash to shareholders through dividends
and repurchases of our common stock. We enter 2025 with confidence in our differentiated strategy,
Success by Design, that continues to deliver innovative and productive solutions for our customers.
Although we expect demand softness to persist in several end markets, we have significant above-
market growth opportunities in each business. We will continue to support our growth strategy by
executing initiatives within our enterprise priorities, including talent, simplification,
digitization, supply chain responsiveness and sustainability.
Within Paint Stores Group and Consumer Brands Group, we anticipate continued economic pressures to
impact consumer behavior in both North America and Europe in 2025. Our recent investments in sales
reps, training and digital tools, coupled with home builder relationships are expected to drive
above-market growth opportunities. The outlook for the Performance Coatings Group is varied by end
market and region with expected growth in Coil driven by significant new account wins and Packaging
as we support customer conversions to our ValPure® coating which complies with European regulations.
Demand softness is forecasted in General Industrial due to negative manufacturing trends in North
America and Europe and choppiness is expected in Automotive Refinish, Protective and Marine and
Industrial Wood. As it relates to consolidated expenses, we expect raw material and employee-related
costs to be up by a low-single digit percentage, offset by cost saving simplification efforts across
our supply chain such as capacity and productivity improvements.
Our capital deployment strategy remains balanced and consistent. We have a strong liquidity position,
with $210.4 million in cash and $3.274 billion of unused capacity under our credit facilities at
December 31, 2024 and expect to end 2025 within our target debt-to-EBITDA leverage ratio of 2 to 2.5
times. We are, and expect to remain, in compliance with all financing covenants. Long-term debt
maturities due in 2025 are $1.050 billion and are expected to be refinanced at higher interest rates.
Together with the long-term debt maturities refinanced during 2024, Interest expense is expected to
increase by approximately $40 million in 2025. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs
associated with the transition into our new global headquarters and research and development (R&D)
center in 2025 of approximately $100 million, which includes approximately $80 million of Selling,
general and administrative expenses and approximately $20 million of Interest expense. Lastly, we
plan to expand our footprint by opening 80 to 100 new stores in the United States and Canada in 2025,
continue to evaluate acquisitions that align with our long-term growth strategy and return value to
our shareholders through the payment of dividends and the reinvestment of excess cash for share
repurchases of Company stock.
 24 
See Item 1A Risk Factors for further information regarding the current and potential impact of
general business and macroeconomic conditions, including inflation rates and interest rates, supply
chain disruptions, raw material availability and fluctuations in foreign currency.
 RESULTS OF OPERATIONS 
The following discussion and analysis addresses comparisons of material changes in the consolidated
financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023. For comparisons of the years
ended December 31, 2023 and 2022, see Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations in Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2023 filed on February 20, 2024.
Net Sales
 Year 
 Ended Acquisi… 
 December and 
 31, Currency Divesti… 
 2024 2023 $ Change % Change Impact Impact 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Paint 
 Stores $ 13,188.0 $ 12,839.5 $ 348.5 2.7 % — % — % 
 Group 
 Consum… 
 Brands 3,108.0 3,365.6 -257.6 -7.7 % -2.9 % -1.4 % 
 Group 
 Perfor… 
 Coatin… 6,797.3 6,843.1 -45.8 -0.7 % -0.8 % 1.2 % 
 Group 
 Admini… 5.2 3.7 1.5 40.5 % 2.7 % — % 
 Total $ 23,098.5 $ 23,051.9 $ 46.6 0.2 % -0.7 % 0.1 % 
Consolidated Net sales for 2024 increased 0.2% primarily due to higher sales in the Paint Stores
Group. This increase was partially offset by lower sales in the Consumer Brands and Performance
Coatings Groups. Net sales of all consolidated foreign subsidiaries decreased to $4.426 billion in
2024 compared to $4.428 billion in 2023 primarily due to unfavorable currency translation impact in
Latin America and lower Net sales in Asia as a result of the divestiture of the China architectural
business, partially offset by higher Net sales in Europe as a result of acquisitions. Net sales of
all operations other than consolidated foreign subsidiaries increased to $18.673 billion for 2024
compared to $18.624 billion for 2023.
Net sales in the Paint Stores Group increased 2.7% primarily due to sales volume growth and selling
price increases, which both impacted Net sales by a low-single digit percentage. Net sales from
stores in the Paint Stores Group open for more than twelve calendar months increased 1.7% in the year
over the prior year comparable period. During 2024, the Paint Stores Group opened 84 new stores and
closed 5 locations for a net increase of 79 stores. The total number of stores in operation at
December 31, 2024 was 4,773 in the United States, Canada and the Caribbean region. The Paint Stores
Group’s objective is to expand its store base by an approximate average of 2% each year, primarily
through organic growth. Sales of products other than paint increased 0.6% over last year. A
discussion of changes in volume versus pricing for sales of products other than paint is not
pertinent due to the wide assortment of general merchandise sold.
Net sales in the Consumer Brands Group decreased 7.7% in 2024 primarily due to a low-single digit
percentage sales volume decline primarily due to soft DIY demand in North America, 2.9% unfavorable
foreign currency translation driven by Latin America and the impact from divestitures in the prior
year. In 2024, the Consumer Brands Group opened 18 new stores and closed 2 locations for a net
increase of 16 new stores. The total number of stores in operation at December 31, 2024 was 334 in
Latin America.
Net sales in the Performance Coatings Group decreased 0.7% in 2024 primarily due to selling price
decreases, largely attributable to product mix, which impacted Net sales by a low-single digit
percentage and unfavorable foreign currency translation. These decreases were partially offset by
low-single digit volume growth, inclusive of the acquisition of SIC Holding GmbH in 2023 and the
acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business in 2024. In 2024, the Performance Coatings Group
added 2 net new branches, increasing the total to 324 branches.
Net sales in the Administrative function, which primarily consists of external leasing revenue,
increased by an insignificant amount in 2024.
 25 
Income Before Income Taxes
The following table presents the components of Income before income taxes as a percent of Net sales:
 Year Ended 
 December 31, 2024 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 % of Net % of Net 
 Sales Sales 
 Net sales $ 23,098.5 100.0 % $ 23,051.9 100.0 % 
 Cost of 11,903.4 51.5 % 12,293.8 53.3 % 
 goods sold 
 Gross 11,195.1 48.5 % 10,758.1 46.7 % 
 profit 
 Selling, 
 general and 
 administra… 7,422.1 32.1 % 7,065.4 30.6 % 
 expenses 
 (SG&A) 
 Other 
 general 
 (income) -38.8 -0.1 % 67.1 0.3 % 
 expense - 
 net 
 Impairment — — % 57.9 0.3 % 
 Interest 415.7 1.8 % 417.5 1.8 % 
 expense 
 Interest -11.0 — % -25.2 -0.1 % 
 income 
 Other 
 (income) -44.7 -0.2 % 65.5 0.3 % 
 expense - 
 net 
 Income 
 before $ 3,451.8 14.9 % $ 3,109.9 13.5 % 
 income 
 taxes 
Consolidated Cost of goods sold decreased $390.4 million, or 3.2%, in 2024 compared to the same
period in 2023 primarily due to lower sales volume in the Consumer Brands Group and moderating raw
material costs, partially offset by higher sales volumes in the Paint Stores and Performance Coatings
Groups.
Consolidated Gross profit increased $437.0 million, or 4.1%, in 2024 compared to the same period in
2023 primarily due to higher sales volumes in the Paint Stores and Performance Coatings Groups and
moderating raw material costs, partially offset by lower sales volume in the Consumer Brands Group.
Consolidated Gross profit as a percent to consolidated Net sales increased to 48.5% in 2024 from
46.7% in 2023 for these same reasons.
The Paint Stores Group’s Gross profit for 2024 increased $242.1 million compared to the same period
in 2023 primarily due to higher Net sales driven by sales volume growth, selling price increases and
moderating raw material costs. The Paint Stores Group’s Gross profit as a percent of Net sales
increased for these same reasons. The Consumer Brands Group’s Gross profit increased $181.1 million
in 2024 compared to the same period in 2023 primarily due to higher fixed cost absorption in the
manufacturing and distribution operations within the segment and moderating raw material costs,
partially offset by lower Net sales. The Consumer Brands Group’s Gross profit as a percent of Net
sales increased for these same reasons. The Performance Coatings Group’s Gross profit increased $13.6
million compared to the same period in 2023 primarily due to moderating raw material costs, partially
offset by lower Net sales. The Performance Coatings Group’s Gross profit as a percent of Net sales
increased for these same reasons.
Consolidated SG&A increased by $356.7 million, or 5.0%, in 2024 compared to the same period in 2023
primarily due to investments in long-term growth strategies, including expenses to support net new
store openings and digital technologies and higher employee-related costs. As a percent of Net sales,
SG&A increased 150 basis points compared to the same period in 2023 for these same reasons.
The Paint Stores Group’s SG&A increased $194.1 million or 4.6% for the year primarily due to higher
employee-related costs and investments in long-term growth initiatives, including increased spending
from net new store openings and costs to support higher sales. The Consumer Brands Group’s SG&A
decreased $19.2 million or 2.2% for the year primarily due to effective cost control in managing the
operations of the business, partially offset by higher employee-related costs. The Performance
Coatings Group’s SG&A increased by $27.5 million or 1.9% for the year primarily due to investments in
long-term initiatives and higher employee-related costs. The Administrative function’s SG&A increased
$154.3 million or 27.7% primarily due to higher employee-related costs and increased expenses related
to digital technologies and systems.
Other general (income) expense - net changed by $105.9 million from expense of $67.1 million in 2023
to income of $38.8 million in 2024. The change was primarily attributable to a decrease in provisions
for environmental matters, net in the Administrative function and increased net gains on sale or
disposition of assets. This activity was partially offset by the non-recurring gain recognized in
2023 related to the divestiture of a non-core domestic aerosol business. See Note 19 to the
consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
 26 
There was no impairment in 2024. Asset impairment of $34.0 million related to the divestiture of the
China architectural business and impairment related to trademarks of $23.9 million primarily related
to a trademark in Europe were recorded in 2023. For information on impairment considerations, see
Notes 3 and 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Interest expense decreased $1.8 million in 2024 compared to 2023 primarily due to a decrease in long-
term debt, partially offset by higher interest expense as a result of an increase in short-term
borrowings. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information
on the Company’s outstanding debt.
Other (income) expense - net changed by $110.2 million from expense of $65.5 million in 2023 to
income of $44.7 million in 2024 primarily due to lower foreign currency transaction related losses in
2024 compared to 2023 and an increase in miscellaneous income. The foreign currency transaction
related losses in 2023 included a $41.8 million unfavorable impact from the significant devaluation
of the Argentine peso in December 2023 as part of economic reforms implemented by the government of
Argentina. In addition, a $12.8 million loss on extinguishment of debt was recognized in 2023. This
activity was partially offset by a decrease in miscellaneous pension income and investment gains. See
Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information related to
Other (income) expense - net.
The following table presents Income before income taxes by segment and as a percent of Net sales by
segment:
 Year Ended 
 December 
 31, 2024 2023 $ Change % Change 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Income 
 Before 
 Income 
 Taxes: 
 Paint 
 Stores $ 2,902.6 $ 2,860.8 $ 41.8 1.5 % 
 Group 
 Consumer 
 Brands 589.9 309.3 280.6 90.7 % 
 Group 
 Performan… 
 Coatings 1,027.9 991.6 36.3 3.7 % 
 Group 
 Administr… -1,068.6 -1,051.8 -16.8 -1.6 % 
 Total $ 3,451.8 $ 3,109.9 $ 341.9 11.0 % 
 Income 
 Before 
 Income 
 Taxes as a 
 percent 
 of Net 
 sales: 
 Paint 
 Stores 22.0 % 22.3 % 
 Group 
 Consumer 
 Brands 19.0 % 9.2 % 
 Group 
 Performan… 
 Coatings 15.1 % 14.5 % 
 Group 
 Administr… nm nm 
 Total 14.9 % 13.5 % 
 nm - not 
 meaningful 
Income Tax Expense
The effective income tax rate for 2024 was 22.3% compared to 23.2% in 2023. The decrease in the
effective rate was primarily due to a more favorable impact of tax benefits related to employee
share-based payments. The other significant components of the Company’s effective tax rate were
consistent year-over-year. See Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for
additional information.
Net Income Per Share
Diluted net income per share for 2024 increased to $10.55 per share from $9.25 per share in 2023.
Currency translation rate changes decreased diluted net income per share by $0.06 per share for 2024.
Diluted net income per share in 2024 included acquisition-related amortization expense of $0.78 per
share. Diluted net income per share for 2023 included acquisition-related amortization expense of
$0.78 per share, severance and other expense of $0.04 per share, expenses related to the divestiture
of the China architectural business of $0.11 per share, impairment related to trademarks of $0.07 per
share and expense related to the devaluation of the Argentine peso of $0.16 per share. These expenses
were partially offset by a gain on the divestiture of a non-core domestic aerosol business of $0.06
per share. See Notes 3, 6 and 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional
information.
 27 
Overview
The Company’s financial condition, liquidity and cash flow remained strong in 2024. The Company
generated $3.153 billion in Net operating cash and invested $1.014 billion in capital expenditures
and approximately $80 million in the acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business. The Company
also returned cash of $2.462 billion to shareholders in the form of cash dividends and share
repurchases during the year.
The Company’s EBITDA increased 8.2% to $4.492 billion. See the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section
for the definition and calculation of EBITDA. As of December 31, 2024, the Company had Cash and cash
equivalents of $210.4 million and total debt outstanding of $9.888 billion. Total debt, net of Cash
and cash equivalents, was $9.678 billion and was 2.2 times the Company’s EBITDA in 2024.
Net Working Capital
Net working capital, defined as Total current assets less Total current liabilities, decreased $293.9
million to a deficit of $1.408 billion at December 31, 2024 compared to a deficit of $1.114 billion
at December 31, 2023. The net working capital decrease is due to an increase in Short-term borrowings
and a decrease in current assets, particularly Accounts receivable, net and Cash and cash
equivalents, partially offset by an increase in Other current assets and a decrease in Accounts
payable.
Current asset balances decreased $112.1 million at December 31, 2024 compared to December 31, 2023
primarily due to a decrease in Accounts receivable, net of $79.1 million, a decrease in Cash and cash
equivalents of $66.4 million and a decrease in Inventories of $41.7 million. These decreases were
partially offset by an increase in Other current assets of $75.1 million, primarily related to
prepaid expenses.
Current liability balances increased $181.8 million at December 31, 2024 compared to December 31,
2023 primarily due to an increase in Short-term borrowings of $288.2 million and an increase in Other
accruals of $30.7 million primarily related to liabilities related to insurance, investments in U.S.
affordable housing and historic renovation real estate partnerships and contracts with customers,
partially offset by a decrease in short-term environmental liabilities. These increases were
partially offset by a decrease in Accounts payable of $61.8 million, a decrease in Current portion of
long-term debt of $49.6 million and a decrease in Accrued taxes of $23.1 million.
As a result of the net effect of these changes, the Company’s current ratio decreased to 0.79 at
December 31, 2024 from 0.83 at December 31, 2023. Accounts receivable as a percent of Net sales
decreased to 10.3% in 2024 from 10.7% in 2023. Accounts receivable days outstanding was 58 days in
2024 and 2023. In 2024, the allowance for current expected credit losses increased $0.8 million, or
1.3%. Inventories as a percent of Net sales decreased to 9.9% in 2024 from 10.1% in 2023. Inventory
days outstanding was 93 days in 2024 compared to 94 days in 2023. The Company has sufficient total
available borrowing capacity to fund its current operating needs.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment, net increased $696.4 million to $3.533 billion at December 31, 2024
primarily due to capital expenditures of $1.014 billion and assets acquired through a business
combination of $32.9 million, partially offset by depreciation expense of $297.4 million and foreign
currency translation and other adjustments of $52.6 million. During 2023, the Company closed on a
transaction to sell and subsequently lease back its current global headquarters and R&D center. In
connection with the sale, proceeds of $47.2 million were received and an immaterial gain was
recognized.
Capital expenditures during 2024 included expenditures related to construction activities associated
with the new global headquarters and R&D center in the Administrative function. Construction of the
new global headquarters and R&D center is expected to be complete in 2025. Also included in 2024
capital expenditures were expenditures related to manufacturing capacity expansion, operational
efficiencies and maintenance projects in the Consumer Brands and Performance Coatings Groups and the
opening of new paint stores and renovation and improvements in existing stores in the Paint Stores
Group.
In 2025, the Company expects to spend slightly less than 2024 for capital expenditures, which it will
fund primarily through the generation of operating cash. Core capital expenditures are expected to be
for investments in various productivity improvement and maintenance projects at existing
manufacturing, distribution and research and development facilities and new store openings.
Additionally, the Company expects to complete construction of its new global headquarters and R&D
center. Refer to the Real Estate Financing section herein for further information on the financing
transaction for the new global headquarters.
Real Estate Financing
In December 2022, the Company closed a transaction to sell and subsequently lease back its partially-
constructed new global headquarters. As part of the terms of the transaction, the Company is
contractually obligated for completing the
 28 
construction of the building and related improvements at the new global headquarters. Construction is
expected to complete in 2025. This transaction did not meet the criteria for recognition as an asset
sale under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (US GAAP) and as such, was accounted for as
a real estate financing transaction. The Company expects to receive total proceeds approximating $800
million to $850 million, with final proceeds expected in the first quarter of 2025. The initial lease
term includes the construction period and extends for 30 years thereafter, and the Company has the
right and option to extend the lease term. The lease payment amounts during the construction period
are dependent upon the timing and amount of total reimbursement of construction and other costs
received by the Company. Lease payments over the next twelve months are expected to be approximately
$50 million. The amount of the lease payments during the initial 30 year lease term will be
calculated upon completion of the construction period and receipt of total reimbursement of
construction and other costs. Once determinable, this is expected to result in a significant increase
in the Company’s long-term contractual obligations.
The following table summarizes the activity related to this transaction and the corresponding
balances recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 Activity: 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Proceeds received $ 244.2 $ 305.0 $ 210.0 
 Capitalized interest 45.2 23.8 
 Balances: 
 Short-term liability $ 49.7 $ 39.9 $ 20.0 
 Long-term liability 715.9 475.9 187.0 
 Total liability $ 765.6 $ 515.8 $ 207.0 
The net proceeds from this transaction and other real estate financing transactions are recognized as
proceeds from real estate financing transactions within the Financing Activities section of the
Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows. The Company will continue to recognize the related assets
within Property, plant and equipment, net on the Consolidated Balance Sheets under US GAAP. These
assets will be subject to depreciation over their useful lives in accordance with the Company’s
accounting policies. The Company will also allocate payments between interest and repayment of the
financing liability over the life of the agreement. See Note 10 to the consolidated financial
statements within Item 8 for further information.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill, which represents the excess of cost over the fair value of net assets acquired in business
combinations, decreased $45.9 million to $7.580 billion at December 31, 2024, due to foreign currency
translation rate fluctuations of $94.1 million, partially offset by purchase accounting allocations
of $48.2 million.
Intangible assets decreased $347.3 million to $3.533 billion at December 31, 2024 due to amortization
of finite-lived intangible assets of $326.7 million and foreign currency translation rate
fluctuations and other adjustments of $75.9 million, partially offset by purchase accounting
allocations of $28.0 million and capitalization of software of $27.3 million.
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information related to
acquisitions. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for a description of
goodwill, intangible assets, historical impairments and summaries of the remaining carrying values of
goodwill and intangible assets.
Other Assets
Other assets increased $420.7 million to $1.632 billion at December 31, 2024. The increase was
primarily due to an increase in finance lease right-of-use (ROU) assets of $187.5 million, largely
related to a new finance lease which commenced during 2024, an increase in assets related to
contracts with customers and investments in U.S. affordable housing and historic renovation real
estate partnerships. See Notes 1, 9 and 18 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for
additional information.
 29 
Debt (including Short-term borrowings)
 December 31, December 31, 
 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Long-term debt $ 9,226.0 $ 9,476.7 
 Short-term borrowings 662.4 374.2 
 Total debt outstanding $ 9,888.4 $ 9,850.9 
Total debt outstanding, including Short-term borrowings, increased by $37.5 million to $9.888 billion
in 2024. Short-term borrowings are primarily comprised of amounts outstanding under the Company’s
domestic commercial paper program and various foreign credit facilities. The Company’s Long-term debt
primarily consists of senior notes. The Company targets Net debt, which is total debt outstanding,
net of Cash and cash equivalents, to be 2.0 to 2.5 times EBITDA. At December 31, 2024, Net debt was
$9.678 billion and was 2.2 times the Company’s EBITDA in 2024. See the Non-GAAP Financial Measures
section for the definition and calculation of EBITDA.
In August 2024, the Company repaid principal of $600.0 million related to the Company’s 4.05% senior
notes due August 8, 2024 using commercial paper and subsequently issued $400.0 million of 4.55%
senior notes due 2028 and $450.0 million of 4.80% senior notes due 2031 in a public offering. The net
proceeds from the issuance of these notes were used to repay outstanding borrowings under the
Company’s domestic commercial paper program and for general corporate purposes. The newly issued
senior notes contain customary qualitative covenants as defined in their respective agreements.
During the second quarter of 2024, the Company repaid the principal of $500.0 million related to its
3.125% senior notes due June 1, 2024 using commercial paper.
In December 2023, the Company exercised its call provision to make-whole the entire outstanding
$119.4 million aggregate principal amount of its 7.38% Debentures due 2027 and the entire outstanding
$3.5 million aggregate principal amount of its 7.45% Debentures due 2097. The retirement of the
Debentures resulted in a loss of $12.8 million recorded in Other general (income) expense - net. See
Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
The Company’s available capacity under its committed credit agreements is reduced for amounts
outstanding under its domestic commercial paper program and letters of credit. At December 31, 2024,
the Company had unused capacity under its various credit agreements of $3.274 billion.
See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for a detailed description and summary
of the Company’s outstanding debt, short-term borrowings and other available financing programs.
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
In accordance with the accounting prescribed by the Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC, the
Company’s total liability for unfunded or underfunded defined benefit pension plans decreased $1.2
million to $67.8 million primarily due to changes in actuarial assumptions. The Company’s liability
for other postretirement benefits decreased $12.1 million to $135.1 million at December 31, 2024
primarily due to benefits paid and changes in actuarial assumptions.
The assumed discount rate used to determine the projected benefit obligation for the domestic defined
benefit pension plan increased to 5.8% at December 31, 2024 from 5.1% at December 31, 2023. The
assumed discount rate used to determine the projected benefit obligation for foreign defined benefit
pension plans increased to 5.5% at December 31, 2024 from 4.8% at December 31, 2023. The assumed
discount rate used to determine the projected benefit obligation for other postretirement benefit
obligations increased to 5.6% at December 31, 2024 from 5.0% at December 31, 2023. The increase in
the discount rates was primarily due to higher interest rates.
In determining the rates of compensation increases, management considered historical Company
increases as well as expectations for future increases. The rate of compensation increases used to
determine the projected benefit obligation at December 31, 2024 was 3.0% for the domestic pension
plan and 3.3% for foreign pension plans, which was comparable to the rates used in the prior year.
In establishing the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, management considered the
historical rates of return, the nature of investments and an expectation for future investment
strategies. The expected long-term rate of return on assets for the domestic defined benefit pension
plan was 6.5% and 6.3% at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. The expected long-term rate of
return on assets for the foreign defined benefit pension plans was 4.8% at December 31, 2024 and
2023.
In developing the assumed health care cost trend rates, management considered industry data,
historical Company experience and expectations for future health care costs. The assumed health care
cost trend rates used to determine the projected benefit
 30 
obligation for other postretirement benefit obligations at December 31, 2024 were 6.5% and 11.8% for
medical and prescription drug cost increases, respectively, both decreasing gradually to 4.5% in
2034. The assumed health care cost trend rates for medical and prescription costs used to determine
the projected benefit obligation for other postretirement benefit obligations at December 31, 2023
were 6.0% and 9.0%, respectively.
The respective year-end assumptions described above for the Company’s defined benefit plans are also
used to determine expense for the next year. Net pension (credit) cost in 2025 for the domestic
pension plan and foreign pension plans is expected to be approximately $(1.6) million and $5.3
million, respectively. Net periodic benefit credit for other postretirement benefits in 2025 is
expected to be approximately $9.7 million. This credit is primarily due to the remaining amortization
of the impact of a plan amendment executed in 2022. This impact will be fully amortized in 2025. See
Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information on the Company’s
obligations and funded status of its defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefits.
Deferred Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes at December 31, 2024 decreased $75.6 million to $607.5 million at December 31,
2024 primarily due to amortization of intangible assets in the current year. See Note 20 to the
consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information on deferred taxes.
Other Long-Term Liabilities
Other long-term liabilities increased $401.4 million to $2.309 billion at December 31, 2024 primarily
due to liabilities associated with real estate financing transactions, finance leases and commitments
related to investments in U.S. affordable housing and historic renovation real estate partnerships,
partially offset by the impact of expected settlements related to tax positions over the next twelve
months. See Notes 1, 9, 10 and 20 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Environmental Matters
The operations of the Company, like those of other companies in the same industry, are subject to
various federal, state and local environmental laws and regulations. These laws and regulations not
only govern current operations and products, but also impose potential liability on the Company for
past operations. Management expects environmental laws and regulations to impose increasingly
stringent requirements upon the Company and the industry in the future. Management believes that the
Company conducts its operations in compliance with applicable environmental laws and regulations and
has implemented various programs designed to protect the environment and promote continued
compliance.
Depreciation of capital expenditures and other expenses related to ongoing environmental compliance
measures were included in the normal operating expenses of conducting business. The Company’s capital
expenditures, depreciation and other expenses related to ongoing environmental compliance measures
were not material to the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, cash flow or results of operations
during 2024. Management does not expect that such capital expenditures, depreciation and other
expenses will be material to the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, cash flow or results of
operations in 2025. See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for further
information on environmental-related liabilities.
Contractual and Other Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The Company has certain obligations and commitments to make future payments under contractual and
other obligations and commercial commitments. The Company believes that cash generated from operating
activities and borrowings available under long-term and short-term debt, including its committed
credit agreements and commercial paper program, will be sufficient for it to meet its contractual and
other obligations and commercial commitments. The following tables summarize such obligations and
commitments as of December 31, 2024.
 31 
(2) Relates to open purchase orders for raw materials at December 31, 2024.
(3) Relates primarily to estimated future capital contributions for investments in the U.S.
affordable housing and historic renovation real estate partnerships and various other contractual
obligations.
Additionally, the Company has an obligation with respect to an agreement signed in February 2025 to
acquire the Brazilian decorative paints business of BASF SE, which is excluded from the preceding
table. The timing and amount of this obligation is uncertain as the transaction is expected to close
in the second half of 2025 and is subject to customary closing conditions, including Brazilian
regulatory approval and post-closing adjustments. Refer to Note 3 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8 for further information.
 Amount of 
 Commitment 
 Expiration Per 
 Commercial Period Less Than More Than 
 Commitments Total 1 Year 1–3 Years 3–5 Years 5 Years 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Standby 
 letters of $ 125.5 $ 125.5 
 credit 
 Surety bonds 216.1 216.1 
 Total 
 commercial $ 341.6 $ 341.6 $ — $ — $ — 
 commitments 
Warranties
The Company offers product warranties for certain products. The specific terms and conditions of such
warranties vary depending on the product or customer contract requirements. Management estimated the
costs of unsettled product warranty claims based on historical results and experience and included an
amount in Other accruals. Management periodically assesses the adequacy of the accrual for product
warranty claims and adjusts the accrual as necessary. Changes in the Company’s accrual for product
warranty claims during 2024 and 2023, including customer satisfaction settlements during the year,
were as follows:
 2024 2023 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1 $ 40.4 $ 36.2 
 Charges to expense 34.2 37.0 
 Settlements -28.2 -32.8 
 Balance at December 31 $ 46.4 $ 40.4 
Shareholders’ Equity
Shareholders’ equity increased $335.4 million to $4.051 billion at December 31, 2024 from $3.716
billion last year. The increase was primarily attributable to the generation of $2.681 billion of Net
income and benefits from stock option exercises and the recognition of stock-based compensation
expense of $367.5 million. This was partially offset by the repurchase of $1.739 billion in Treasury
stock, the payment of $723.4 million in cash dividends and a decrease in AOCI of $250.9 million
mainly due to foreign currency translation adjustments. See the Statements of Consolidated
Shareholders’ Equity and Statements of Consolidated Comprehensive Income in Item 8 for additional
information.
The Company purchased 5.2 million shares of its common stock for treasury purposes through open
market purchases during 2024. The Company acquires its common stock for general corporate purposes,
and depending on its cash position and market
 32 
conditions, it may acquire shares in the future. The Company had remaining authorization from its
Board of Directors at December 31, 2024 to purchase 34.4 million shares of its common stock.
The Company’s 2024 annual cash dividend of $2.86 per share represented 31% of 2023 diluted net income
per share. The 2024 annual dividend represented the 46 th consecutive year of increased dividend
payments. On February 19, 2025, the Board of Directors increased the quarterly cash dividend to $0.79
per share. This quarterly dividend, if approved in each of the remaining quarters of 2025, would
result in an annual dividend for 2025 of $3.16 per share, or a 30% payout of 2024 diluted net income
per share.
Cash Flow
Net operating cash decreased $368.7 million in 2024 to a cash source of $3.153 billion from a cash
source of $3.522 billion in 2023 primarily due to higher cash requirements for working capital
partially offset by higher Net income. Net operating cash decreased as a percent of Net sales to
13.7% in 2024 compared to 15.3% in 2023.
Net investing cash usage increased $157.0 million to a usage of $1.196 billion in 2024 from a usage
of $1.039 billion in 2023 primarily due to an increase in cash used for capital expenditures,
proceeds from the divestiture of a business in 2023 and reduced proceeds from the sale of assets,
partially offset by lower cash used for acquisitions. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8 for additional information on acquisitions and divestitures.
Net financing cash usage decreased $407.5 million to a usage of $2.017 billion in 2024 from a usage
of $2.425 billion in 2023. This decrease was primarily due to a net increase in short-term
borrowings, proceeds from long-term debt in 2024 and higher proceeds from stock options exercised,
partially offset by an increase in payments of long-term debt, treasury stock purchases and payment
of cash dividends.
Market Risk
The Company is exposed to market risk associated with interest rate, foreign currency and commodity
fluctuations. The Company occasionally utilizes derivative instruments as part of its overall
financial risk management policy, but does not use derivative instruments for speculative or trading
purposes. In 2024 and 2023, the Company entered into foreign currency forward contracts with maturity
dates of less than twelve months primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency and
cross currency swap contracts to hedge its net investment in European operations. See Notes 1, 16 and
19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information related to the
Company’s use of derivative instruments.
The Company believes it may be exposed to continuing market risk from foreign currency exchange rate
and commodity price fluctuations. However, the Company does not expect that foreign currency exchange
rate and commodity price fluctuations or hedging contract losses will have a material adverse effect
on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. See Notes 1 and 19 to the
consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information related to foreign currency
translation.
Financial Covenant
Certain borrowings contain a consolidated leverage covenant. The covenant states the Company’s
consolidated leverage ratio is not to exceed 3.75 to 1.00; however, the Company may elect to
temporarily increase the leverage ratio to 4.25 to 1.00 for a period of four consecutive fiscal
quarters immediately following the consummation of a qualifying acquisition, as defined in the credit
agreement dated July 31, 2024. The leverage ratio is defined as the ratio of total indebtedness (the
sum of Short-term borrowings, Current portion of long-term debt and Long-term debt) at the reporting
date to consolidated “Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization” (EBITDA), as
defined in the credit agreement, for the 12-month period ended on the same date. Refer to the “Non-
GAAP Financial Measures” section for a reconciliation of EBITDA to Net income. At December 31, 2024,
the Company was in compliance with the covenant and expects to remain in compliance. The Company’s
notes, debentures and revolving credit agreements contain various default and cross-default
provisions. In the event of default under any one of these arrangements, acceleration of the maturity
of any one or more of these borrowings may result. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Defined Contribution Savings Plan
Participants in the Company’s defined contribution savings plan are allowed to contribute up to the
lesser of fifty percent of their annual compensation or the maximum dollar amount allowed under the
Internal Revenue Code. The Company matches one hundred percent of all contributions up to six percent
of eligible employee contributions. The Company’s matching contributions to the defined contribution
savings plan charged to operations were $165.1 million in 2024 compared to $153.9 million in 2023. At
December 31, 2024, there were 16,771,640 shares of the Company’s common stock being held by the
defined contribution savings plan, representing 6.7% of the total number of voting shares
outstanding. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional
information concerning the Company’s defined contribution savings plan.
 33 
Management utilizes certain financial measures that are not in accordance with US GAAP to analyze and
manage the performance of the business. The required disclosures for these non-GAAP measures are
shown below. The Company provides such non-GAAP information in reporting its financial results to
give investors additional data to evaluate the Company’s operations. Management does not, nor does it
suggest investors should, consider such non-GAAP measures in isolation from, or in substitution for,
financial information prepared in accordance with US GAAP.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as Net income before income taxes, Interest expense,
depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as EBITDA that
excludes certain adjustments that management believes enhances investors’ understanding of the
Company’s operating performance. Management considers EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA useful in
understanding the operating performance of the Company. The reader is cautioned that the Company’s
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be compared to other entities unknowingly. Further, EBITDA and
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered alternatives to Net income or Net operating cash as an
indicator of operating performance or as a measure of liquidity. The reader should refer to the
determination of Net income and Net operating cash in accordance with US GAAP disclosed in the
Statements of Consolidated Income and Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows in Item 8.
The following table summarizes EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as calculated by management for the years
indicated below:
 Year Ended December 31, 
 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 2,681.4 $ 2,388.8 
 Interest expense 415.7 417.5 
 Income taxes 770.4 721.1 
 Depreciation 297.4 292.3 
 Amortization 326.6 330.2 
 EBITDA $ 4,491.5 $ 4,149.9 
 Restructuring expense — 9.6 
 Impairment related to Restructuring Plan — 34.0 
 Gain on divestiture of domestic aerosol — -20.1 
 business 
 Impairment related to trademarks — 23.9 
 Devaluation of the Argentine peso — 41.8 
 Adjusted EBITDA $ 4,491.5 $ 4,239.1 
Free Cash Flow After Dividends
Free cash flow after dividends is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as Net operating cash, as
shown in the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows, less the amount reinvested in the business for
capital expenditures and the return on investment to its shareholders by the payments of cash
dividends. Management considers Free cash flow after dividends to be a useful tool in its
determination of appropriate uses of the Company’s Net operating cash. The reader is cautioned that
the Free cash flow after dividends measure should not be compared to other entities unknowingly as it
may not be comparable and it does not consider certain non-discretionary cash flows, such as
mandatory debt and interest payments. The amount shown below should not be considered an alternative
to Net operating cash or other cash flow amounts provided in accordance with US GAAP as disclosed in
the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows in Item 8.
The following table summarizes Free cash flow after dividends as calculated by management for the
years indicated below:
 Year Ended December 31, 
 2024 2023 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net operating cash $ 3,153.2 $ 3,521.9 
 Capital expenditures -1,070.0 -888.4 
 Cash dividends -723.4 -623.7 
 Free cash flow after dividends $ 1,359.8 $ 2,009.8 
 34 
Adjusted Diluted Net Income Per Share
Management believes investors’ understanding of the Company’s operating performance is enhanced by
the disclosure of diluted net income per share excluding Valspar acquisition-related amortization
expense and certain other adjustments. Valspar acquisition-related amortization expense is excluded
from diluted net income per share due to its significance as a result of the purchase price assigned
to finite-lived intangible assets at the date of acquisition and the related impact on underlying
business performance and trends. While these intangible assets contribute to the Company’s revenue
generation, the related revenue is not excluded. This adjusted earnings per share measurement is not
in accordance with US GAAP. It should not be considered a substitute for earnings per share in
accordance with US GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other
companies. The following tables reconcile diluted net income per share computed in accordance with US
GAAP to adjusted diluted net income per share.
 Year Ended 
 December 31, 2024 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Pre-Tax TaxEffect(1) After-Tax 
 Diluted net income per share $ 10.55 
 Acquisition-related amortization $ 1.02 $ .24 .78 
 expense(2) 
 Adjusted diluted net income per share $ 11.33 
 Year Ended 
 December 31, 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Pre-Tax TaxEffect(1) After-Tax 
 Diluted net income per share $ 9.25 
 Items related to Restructuring Plan: 
 Severance and other $ .06 $ .02 .04 
 Impairment of assets related to China .13 .08 .05 
 divestiture 
 Gain on divestiture of domestic 
 aerosol -.08 -.02 -.06 
 business 
 Discrete income tax expense related to — -.06 .06 
 China divestiture(1) 
 Total .11 .02 .09 
 Impairment related to trademarks .09 .02 .07 
 Devaluation of the Argentine peso .16 — .16 
 Acquisition-related amortization 1.03 .25 .78 
 expense(2) 
 Adjusted diluted net income per share $ 10.35 
(1) The tax effect is calculated based on the statutory rate and the nature of the item, unless
otherwise noted.
(2) Acquisition-related amortization expense, which is included within Selling, general and
administrative expenses, consists of the amortization of intangible assets related to the Valspar
acquisition. These intangible assets are primarily customer relationships and intellectual property
and are being amortized over their remaining useful lives.
 35 
Adjusted Segment Profit
Management believes investors’ understanding of the Company’s operating performance is enhanced by
the disclosure of Segment profit excluding Valspar acquisition-related amortization expense and
certain other adjustments. Valspar acquisition-related amortization expense is excluded from Segment
profit due to its significance as a result of the purchase price assigned to finite-lived intangible
assets at the date of acquisition and the related impact on underlying business performance and
trends. While these intangible assets contribute to the Company’s revenue generation, the related
revenue is not excluded. This Adjusted segment profit measurement is not in accordance with US GAAP.
It should not be considered a substitute for Segment profit in accordance with US GAAP and may not be
comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. The following tables reconcile
Segment profit computed in accordance with US GAAP to Adjusted segment profit.
 Year 
 Ended 
 December 
 31, 
 2024 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Adminis… Total 
 Group Group Group 
 Net $ 13,188.0 $ 3,108.0 $ 6,797.3 $ 5.2 $ 23,098… 
 sales 
 Income 
 before $ 2,902.6 $ 589.9 $ 1,027.9 $ -1,068.6 $ 3,451.8 
 income 
 taxes 
 as a 
 percent 22.0 % 19.0 % 15.1 % nm 14.9 % 
 of Net 
 sales 
 Acquis… 
 amorti… 63.8 196.3 260.1 
 expens… 
 Adjust… 
 segment $ 2,902.6 $ 653.7 $ 1,224.2 $ -1,068.6 $ 3,711.9 
 profit 
 as a 
 percent 22.0 % 21.0 % 18.0 % nm 16.1 % 
 of Net 
 sales 
 Year 
 Ended 
 December 
 31, 
 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Adminis… Total 
 Group Group Group 
 Net $ 12,839.5 $ 3,365.6 $ 6,843.1 $ 3.7 $ 23,051… 
 sales 
 Income 
 before $ 2,860.8 $ 309.3 $ 991.6 $ -1,051.8 $ 3,109.9 
 income 
 taxes 
 as a 
 percent 22.3 % 9.2 % 14.5 % nm 13.5 % 
 of Net 
 sales 
 Items 
 related 
 to 
 Restru… 
 Plan: 
 Severa… 
 and 14.2 -0.2 1.3 15.3 
 other 
 Impair… 
 of 
 assets 
 related 6.9 27.1 34.0 
 to 
 China 
 divest… 
 Gain on 
 divest… 
 of -20.1 -20.1 
 domest… 
 aerosol 
 busine… 
 Total — 21.1 -0.2 8.3 29.2 
 Impair… 
 related 23.9 23.9 
 to 
 tradem… 
 Devalu… 
 of the 30.8 11.0 41.8 
 Argent… 
 peso 
 Acquis… 
 amorti… 69.3 196.8 266.1 
 expens… 
 Adjust… 
 segment $ 2,860.8 $ 454.4 $ 1,199.2 $ -1,043.5 $ 3,470.9 
 profit 
 as a 
 percent 22.3 % 13.5 % 17.5 % nm 15.1 % 
 of Net 
 sales 
nm -not meaningful
(1) Acquisition-related amortization expense, which is included within Selling, general and
administrative expenses, consists of the amortization of intangible assets related to the Valspar
acquisition. These intangible assets are primarily customer relationships and intellectual property
and are being amortized over their remaining useful lives.
 36 
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the accompanying consolidated financial
statements. These determinations were made based upon management’s best estimates, judgments and
assumptions that were believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, giving due consideration to
materiality. We do not believe there is a great likelihood that materially different amounts would be
reported under different conditions or using different assumptions related to the critical accounting
policies and estimates described below. However, application of these critical accounting policies
and estimates involves the exercise of judgment and use of assumptions as to future uncertainties and
as a result, actual results could differ from these estimates.
All of the significant accounting policies that were followed in the preparation of the consolidated
financial statements are disclosed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Management believes that the following critical accounting policies and estimates have a significant
impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market with cost determined principally on the last-
in, first-out (LIFO) method based on inventory quantities and costs determined during the fourth
quarter and market representing current replacement cost, which is the cost to purchase or reproduce
the inventory. Market shall not exceed net realizable value and shall not be less than net realizable
value reduced by an allowance for an approximately normal profit margin. Inventory quantities are
adjusted throughout the year as formal cycle counts are completed, or during the fourth quarter as a
result of annual physical inventory counts. If inventories accounted for on the LIFO method are
reduced on a year-over-year basis, then liquidation of certain quantities carried at costs prevailing
in prior years occurs. Management records an estimate of the lower of cost or market whenever the
utility of inventory is impaired by damage, deterioration, obsolescence, changes in price levels, or
other causes based on historical experience and current trends through reductions to inventory cost
by recording a provision included in Cost of goods sold. If management estimates that the reasonable
market value is below cost or determines that future demand was lower than current inventory levels,
based on historical experience, current and projected market demand, current and projected volume
trends and other relevant current and projected factors associated with the current economic
conditions, a reduction in inventory cost to current market price is provided for in the reserve for
obsolescence. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for more information
regarding the impact of the LIFO inventory valuation and the reserve for obsolescence.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
In accordance with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC, management performs
impairment tests of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets on an annual basis, as well as
whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that indicate impairment has occurred on a more
likely than not basis. An optional qualitative assessment allows companies to forego the annual
quantitative test if it is not more likely than not that impairment has occurred based on monitoring
key Company financial performance metrics and macroeconomic conditions. The qualitative assessment is
performed when deemed appropriate.
Management tests goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level. Per the Segment Reporting Topic
of the ASC, a reporting unit is an operating segment or one level below the operating segment
(component level) as determined by the availability of discrete financial information that is
regularly reviewed by operating segment management or an aggregate of component levels of an
operating segment having similar economic characteristics. At the time of goodwill impairment testing
(if performing a quantitative assessment), management determines fair value through the use of a
discounted cash flow valuation model incorporating discount rates commensurate with the risks
involved for each reporting unit. If the calculated fair value is less than the current carrying
value, the difference represents the amount of impairment attributable to the reporting unit. The use
of a discounted cash flow valuation model to determine estimated fair value is common practice in
impairment testing. The key assumptions used in the discounted cash flow valuation model for
impairment testing include a discount rate, growth rates, cash flow projections and a terminal value
rate. Discount rates are set by using the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) methodology. The
WACC methodology considers market and industry data as well as Company-specific risk factors for each
reporting unit in determining the appropriate discount rate to be used. The discount rate utilized
for each reporting unit is indicative of the return an investor would expect to receive for investing
in such a business. Management, considering industry and Company-specific historical and projected
data, develops growth rates, sales projections and cash flow projections for each reporting unit.
Terminal value rate determination follows common methodology of capturing the present value of
perpetual cash flow estimates beyond the last projected period assuming a constant WACC and a long-
term growth rate. As an indicator that each reporting unit has been valued appropriately through the
use of the discounted cash flow valuation model, the aggregate of all reporting units’ fair value is
reconciled to the total market capitalization of the Company within a reasonable and supportable
control premium.
 37 
The Company had seven components, some of which are aggregated due to similar economic
characteristics, to form three reporting units (also the reportable operating segments) with goodwill
as of October 1, 2024, the date of the annual impairment test. The Company performed the optional
qualitative impairment test as of October 1, 2024, and determined that there was no indication of
impairment on a more likely than not basis in the Company’s reporting units.
Management tests indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment at the asset level, as determined
by appropriate asset valuations at acquisition. Management utilizes the royalty savings method to
determine the estimated fair value for each indefinite-lived intangible asset or trademark. In this
method, management estimates the royalty savings arising from the ownership of the intangible asset.
The key assumptions used in estimating the royalty savings for impairment testing include a discount
rate, a royalty rate, growth rates, sales projections, a terminal value rate and to a lesser extent,
a tax rate. The discount rate used is similar to the rate developed by the WACC methodology
considering any differences in Company-specific risk factors between reporting units and trademarks.
The royalty rate is established by management and valuation experts and periodically substantiated by
valuation experts. Management, considering industry and Company-specific historical and projected
data, develops growth rates and sales projections for each significant trademark. Terminal value rate
determination follows common methodology of capturing the present value of perpetual sales estimates
beyond the last projected period assuming a constant WACC and a low long-term growth rate. The
royalty savings valuation methodology and calculations used in 2024 impairment testing are consistent
with prior years. The Company performed the optional qualitative impairment test as of October 1,
2024, and determined that there was indication of impairment on a more likely than not basis in
certain of the Company’s trademarks. The resulting quantitative impairment test performed as of
October 1, 2024 did not result in any trademark impairment.
The discounted cash flow and royalty savings valuation methodologies require management to make
certain assumptions based upon information available at the time the valuations are performed from
the perspective of a market participant. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Item
8 for a discussion of goodwill and intangible assets and the impairment tests performed in accordance
with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC, if events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying value of long-lived assets, including operating and finance
lease right-of-use assets, may not be recoverable or the useful life has changed, impairment tests
are performed or the useful life is adjusted. Undiscounted cash flows are used to calculate the
recoverable value of long-lived assets to determine if such assets are recoverable. If the carrying
value of the assets is deemed to not be recoverable, the impairment to be recognized is the amount by
which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the estimated fair value of the assets as determined
in accordance with the Fair Value Topic of the ASC. If the usefulness of an asset is determined to be
impaired, an updated useful life is assessed based on the period of time for projected use of the
asset. Fair value approaches and changes in useful life are based on certain assumptions and
information available at the time the valuation or determination is performed. Management believes
the assumptions used are reflective of what a market participant would have used in calculating fair
value or useful life considering the current economic conditions. As of October 1, 2024, the Company
performed an analysis and determined that there were no events or changes in circumstances to suggest
the carrying value of each long-lived asset group is not recoverable and therefore, no further
impairment tests were performed. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for a
discussion of the reductions in carrying value or useful life of long-lived assets in accordance with
the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC.
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
To determine the Company’s ultimate obligation under its defined benefit pension and other
postretirement benefit plans, management estimates the future cost of benefits and attributes that
cost to the time period during which each covered employee works. To determine the obligations of the
benefit plans, management uses actuaries to calculate such amounts using key assumptions which
include discount rates, inflation rates, long-term investment returns, mortality, employee turnover,
rate of compensation increases and medical and prescription drug costs. Management reviews all of
these assumptions on an ongoing basis to ensure that the most current information available is
considered. An increase or decrease in the assumptions or economic events outside management’s
control could have a direct impact on the Company’s results of operations or financial condition.
In accordance with the Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC, the Company recognizes each plan’s
funded status as an asset for overfunded plans and as a liability for unfunded or underfunded plans.
Actuarial gains and losses and prior service costs are recognized and recorded in Accumulated other
comprehensive income (AOCI). The amounts recorded in AOCI will continue to be modified as actuarial
assumptions and service costs change, and all such amounts will be amortized to expense over a period
of years through the net pension and net periodic benefit costs. Based on facts and circumstances,
the expense amounts recorded in AOCI can also have accelerated amortization due to certain plan
changes, including those that result in a
 38 
curtailment. See Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for information concerning
the Company’s defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans.
Environmental Matters
The Company is involved with environmental investigation and remediation activities at some of its
currently and formerly owned sites (including sites which were previously owned and/or operated by
businesses acquired by the Company). The Company initially provides for estimated costs of
environmental-related activities relating to its past operations and third-party sites for which
commitments or clean-up plans have been developed and when such costs can be reasonably estimated
based on industry standards and professional judgment. These estimated costs, which are mostly
undiscounted, are determined based on currently available facts regarding each site. If the
reasonably estimable costs can only be identified as a range and no specific amount within that range
can be determined more likely than any other amount within the range, the minimum of the range is
provided.
The Company routinely assesses its potential liability for investigation and remediation-related
activities and adjusts its environmental-related accruals as information becomes available upon which
more accurate costs can be reasonably estimated and as additional accounting guidelines are issued.
Actual costs incurred may vary from the accrued estimates due to the inherent uncertainties involved.
See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for information concerning the accrual
for extended environmental-related activities and a discussion concerning unaccrued future loss
contingencies.
Litigation and Other Contingent Liabilities
In the course of its business, the Company is subject to a variety of claims and lawsuits, including,
but not limited to, litigation relating to product liability and warranty, personal injury,
environmental, intellectual property, commercial, contractual and antitrust claims. Management
accrues for all known liabilities that existed and those where a loss was deemed probable for which a
fair value was available or an amount could be reasonably estimated in accordance with US GAAP.
However, because litigation is inherently subject to many uncertainties and the ultimate result of
any present or future litigation is unpredictable, the Company’s ultimate liability may result in
costs that are significantly higher than currently accrued. In the event that the Company’s loss
contingency is ultimately determined to be significantly higher than currently accrued, the recording
of the liability may result in a material impact on Net income for the annual or interim period
during which such liability is accrued. Additionally, due to the uncertainties involved, any
potential liability determined to be attributable to the Company arising out of such litigation may
have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity or financial
condition. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for information concerning
litigation.
Income Taxes
The Company estimates income taxes for each jurisdiction in which it conducts operations. This
involves estimating taxable earnings, specific taxable and deductible items, the likelihood of
generating sufficient future taxable income to utilize deferred tax assets and possible exposures
related to future tax audits. To the extent these estimates change, adjustments to deferred and
accrued income taxes will be made in the period in which the changes occur.
The Company recognizes a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than
not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the
technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial
statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50%
likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. These assessments of uncertain tax positions
contain judgments related to the interpretation of tax regulations in the jurisdictions in which we
transact business. The judgments and estimates made at a point in time may change based on the
outcome of tax audits, expiration of statutes of limitations, as well as changes to, or further
interpretations of, tax laws and regulations. Income tax expense is adjusted in our Statements of
Consolidated Income in the period in which these events occur. See Note 20 to the consolidated
financial statements in Item 8 for information concerning income taxes.
 39 
We are exposed to market risk associated with interest rates, foreign currency and commodity
fluctuations. We occasionally utilize derivative instruments as part of our overall financial risk
management policy, but do not use derivative instruments for speculative or trading purposes. In
2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company utilized U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap contracts to hedge
the Company’s net investment in its European operations. The contracts have been designated as net
investment hedges and have various maturity dates. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8. The Company entered into forward foreign currency exchange contracts during
2024, 2023 and 2022 primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. There were no
material contracts outstanding at December 31, 2024. Forward foreign currency exchange contracts are
described in Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8. We believe we may experience
continuing losses from foreign currency fluctuations. However, we do not expect currency translation,
transaction or hedging contract losses to have a material adverse effect on our financial condition,
results of operations or cash flows.
 40 
Shareholders of The ABC corp. Company
We are responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial
reporting as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended. We recognize that internal control over financial reporting cannot provide absolute
assurance of achieving financial reporting objectives because of its inherent limitations. Internal
control over financial reporting is a process that involves human diligence and is subject to the
possibility of human error or the circumvention or the overriding of internal control. Therefore,
there is a risk that material misstatements may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis by
internal control over financial reporting. However, we believe we have designed into the process
safeguards to reduce, though not eliminate, this risk. Projections of any evaluation of effectiveness
to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in
conditions, or that the degree of compliance with policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In order to ensure that the Company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective as of
December 31, 2024, we conducted an assessment of its effectiveness under the supervision and with the
participation of our management group, including our principal executive officer and principal
financial officer. This assessment was based on the criteria established in the 2013 Internal Control
– Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission.
Based on our assessment of internal control over financial reporting under the criteria established
in Internal Control – Integrated Framework, we have concluded that, as of December 31, 2024, the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Our internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2024 has been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, an
independent registered public accounting firm, and their report on the effectiveness of our internal
control over financial reporting is included on page 43 of this report.
Heidi G. Petz
Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer
Allen J. Mistysyn
Senior Vice President - Finance and Chief Financial Officer
J. Paul Lang
Senior Vice President - Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer
 42 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of The ABC corp. Company
 Opinion on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting 
We have audited The ABC corp. Company and subsidiaries internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated
Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013
framework) (the COSO criteria). In our opinion, The ABC corp. Company and subsidiaries (the
Company) maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as
of December 31, 2024, based on the COSO criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated balance sheets of the Company as of December 31,
2024, 2023 and 2022, the related statements of consolidated income, comprehensive income, cash flows
and shareholders’ equity for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2024, and the
related notes and financial statement schedule listed in the 
February 20, 2025 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial
reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
included in the accompanying Report of Management On Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting
based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be
independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the
applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing
the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as
we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis
for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1)
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3)
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition,
use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial
statements.
 43 
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Ernst & Young, LLP
Cleveland, Ohio
February 20, 2025
 44 
Shareholders of The ABC corp. Company
We are responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial
statements, accompanying notes and related financial information included in this report of The
ABC corp. Company and its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the Company) as of December
31, 2024, 2023 and 2022 and for the years then ended in accordance with U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles. The consolidated financial information included in this report contains
certain amounts that were based upon our best estimates, judgments and assumptions that we believe
were reasonable under the circumstances.
We have conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. As discussed in the Report of Management on
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting on page 42 of this report, we concluded that the Company’s
internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2024.
The Board of Directors fulfills its responsibility for the oversight of the Company’s accounting
policies and procedures, financial statement preparation and internal control over financial
reporting through the Audit Committee, comprised exclusively of independent directors. The Audit
Committee is responsible for the appointment and compensation of the independent registered public
accounting firm. The Audit Committee meets at least quarterly with financial management, internal
auditors and the independent registered public accounting firm to review the adequacy of financial
controls, the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting and the
nature, extent and results of the audit effort. Both the internal auditors and the independent
registered public accounting firm have private and confidential access to the Audit Committee at all
times.
We believe that the consolidated financial statements, accompanying notes and related financial
information included in this report fairly reflect the form and substance of all material financial
transactions and fairly present, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position,
results of operations and cash flows as of and for the periods presented.
Heidi G. Petz
Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer
Allen J. Mistysyn
Senior Vice President - Finance and Chief Financial Officer
J. Paul Lang
Senior Vice President - Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer
 45 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of The ABC corp. Company
 Opinion on the Financial Statements 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of The ABC corp. Company and
subsidiaries (the Company) as of December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the related statements of
consolidated income, comprehensive income, cash flows and shareholders’ equity for each of the three
years in the period ended December 31, 2024, and the related notes and the financial statement
schedule listed in the 
statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the Company at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, and the results
of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
2024, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December
31, 2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report
dated February 20, 2025 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is
to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public
accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the
Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations
of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements
are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing
procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included
examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial
statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 Critical Audit Matter 
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the
financial statements that was communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and
that: (1) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2)
involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of the
critical audit matter does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements,
taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a
separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
 46 
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 1908.
Cleveland, Ohio
February 20, 2025
 47 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 48 
of $ 53.6million, $( 24.9) million and $ 34.1million, respectively, related to net investment hedges.
See Note 16.
(2) Net of taxes of $( 6.6) million, $( 2.8) million and $( 33.8) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
(3) Net of taxes of $ 4.6million, $ 5.9million and $( 1.2) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
(4) Net of taxes of $ 1.2million in 2024 and 2023 and $ 1.1million in 2022.
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 49 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 50 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 51 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 52 
Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements included in this report have been prepared by management of The
ABC corp. Company (herein referred to as the Company). These statements include the accounts
of the Company and all consolidated subsidiaries. Intercompany accounts and transactions have been
eliminated. The Company’s share of earnings or losses from nonconsolidated affiliates is included in
the consolidated financial statements using the equity method of accounting when the Company is able
to exercise significant influence over the operating and financial decisions of the affiliate.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles (US GAAP) requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that
affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual
results could differ from those amounts.
Nature of Operations
The Company is engaged in the development, manufacture, distribution and sale of paint, coatings and
related products to professional, industrial, commercial and retail customers primarily in North and
South America, with additional operations in the Caribbean region, Europe, Asia and Australia.
Cash Equivalents
Management considers all highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less when
purchased to be cash equivalents.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Current Expected Credit Losses
Accounts receivable are recorded at the time of credit sales, net of an allowance for current
expected credit losses. The Company records an allowance for current expected credit losses to reduce
Accounts receivable to the net amount expected to be collected.
Under Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 326, the Company reviews the collectibility of the
Accounts receivable balance each reporting period and estimates the allowance for current expected
credit losses based on historical bad debt experience, aging of accounts receivable, current
creditworthiness of customers, current economic factors, as well as reasonable and supportable
forward-looking information. Accounts receivable balances are written-off against the allowance for
current expected credit losses if a final determination of uncollectibility is made. All provisions
for the allowance for current expected credit losses are included in Selling, general and
administrative expenses. See Note 18 for further details.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market with cost determined principally on the last-
in, first-out (LIFO) method. Market represents current replacement cost, which is the cost to
purchase or reproduce the inventory. If inventories accounted for on the LIFO method are reduced on a
year-over-year basis, then liquidation of certain quantities carried at costs prevailing in prior
years occurs. Management records an estimate of the lower of cost or market whenever the utility of
inventory is impaired by damage, deterioration, obsolescence, changes in price levels, or other
causes based on historical experience and current trends through reductions to inventory cost by
recording a provision included in Cost of goods sold. If management estimates that the reasonable
market value is below cost or determines that future demand was lower than current inventory levels,
based on historical experience, current and projected market demand, current and projected volume
trends and other relevant current and projected factors associated with the current economic
conditions, a reduction in inventory cost to current market price is provided for in the reserve for
obsolescence. See Note 4 for further details.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment (including leasehold improvements) is stated on the basis of cost.
Depreciation is charged to expense using the straight-line method over the assets’ estimated useful
lives which range from 5to 25years for buildings and 3to 15years for machinery and equipment.
Depreciation and amortization are included in the appropriate Cost of goods sold or Selling, general
and administrative expenses caption on the Statements of Consolidated Income. See Note 5 for further
details.
 53 
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the cost in excess of fair value of net assets acquired in business combinations.
Intangible assets include software, customer relationships, intellectual property and trademarks. In
accordance with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC, goodwill and indefinite-lived
trademarks are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment on an annual basis, as well as
whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that indicate impairment has occurred on a more
likely than not basis. Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over the
expected period of benefit, which ranges primarily from 3to 29years. See Note 6 for further details.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC, management evaluates the
recoverability and remaining lives of long-lived assets, including right-of-use assets, whenever
events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable or the
useful life has changed.See Note 5 for further details.
Derivative Instruments
The Company utilizes derivative instruments to mitigate certain risk exposures as part of its overall
financial risk management policy and accounts for these instruments in accordance with the
Derivatives and Hedging Topic of the ASC. Derivatives are recorded as assets or liabilities in the
Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. Changes in fair value of the derivative instruments are
recognized immediately in earnings unless the derivative instrument qualifies for and is designated
in an effective hedging relationship.
The Company entered into foreign currency forward contracts with maturity dates of less than twelve
months in 2024, 2023 and 2022, primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. There
were nomaterial foreign currency option and forward contracts outstanding at December 31, 2024, 2023
and 2022. See Note 19 for further details.
The Company also entered into cross currency swap contracts to hedge its net investment in European
operations in 2024, 2023 and 2022. These contracts qualified for and were designated as net
investment hedges under US GAAP. The changes in fair value for the cross currency swaps are
recognized in the Foreign currency translation adjustments component of AOCI. The cash flow impact of
these instruments is classified as an investing activity in the Statements of Consolidated Cash
Flows. See Note 16 for further details.
Non-Traded Investments
The Company has invested in U.S. affordable housing, historic renovation and other real estate
investments (Non-Traded Investments) that have been identified as variable interest entities which
qualify for certain tax credits and other tax benefits. Since the Company does not have the power to
direct the day-to-day operations of the Non-Traded Investments and the risk of loss is limited to the
amount of contributed capital, the Company is not considered the primary beneficiary. Therefore, in
accordance with the Consolidation Topic of the ASC, the Non-Traded Investments are not consolidated.
Under the Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures Topic of the ASC, the Company uses the
proportional amortization method, whereby the initial cost and any subsequent changes in the level of
investment of Non-Traded Investments are amortized in proportion to the receipt of related tax
credits. The Company reasonably expects amortization based on the receipt of tax credits would
produce a measurement substantially similar to amortization based on the receipt of tax credits and
other tax benefits. Both the amortization and related tax credits and other tax benefits are
recognized in Income tax expense on the Statements of Consolidated Income.
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Amortization of Non-Traded Investments $ 75.0 $ 65.4 $ 38.5 
 Tax credits and other tax benefits 104.9 94.8 67.2 
 received 
 54 
The carrying value of Non-Traded Investments is recorded in Other assets. The liabilities for
estimated future capital contributions are recorded in Other accruals and Other long-term
liabilities. In addition, the associated impact of related tax credits and other tax benefits are
recorded as a reduction of Accrued taxes and a net deferred income tax asset within Deferred income
taxes. On the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows, the tax credits and other tax benefits are
presented as a change in Accrued taxes and in Deferred income taxes within Operating activities. Tax
credits and other tax benefits reduced Accrued taxes by $ 104.9million, $ 94.8million and $
67.2million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The following table summarizes the
balances related to Non-Traded Investments and related tax credits and other tax benefits on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Other assets $ 744.0 $ 675.0 $ 587.0 
 Other accruals 101.4 80.9 89.8 
 Other long-term liabilities 600.3 568.2 476.5 
 Net deferred income tax asset 7.6 19.4 23.4 
Standby Letters of Credit
The Company occasionally enters into standby letter of credit agreements to guarantee various
operating activities. These agreements provide credit availability to the various beneficiaries if
certain contractual events occur.Amounts outstanding under these agreements totaled $ 125.5million, $
146.2million and $ 149.8million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Product Warranties
The Company offers assurance-type product warranties for certain products. The specific terms and
conditions of such warranties vary depending on the product or customer contract requirements.
Management estimated the costs of unsettled product warranty claims based on historical results and
experience and included an amount in Other accruals. Management periodically assesses the adequacy of
the accrual for product warranty claims and adjusts the accrual as necessary. Changes in the
Company’s accrual for product warranty claims during 2024, 2023 and 2022, including customer
satisfaction settlements during the year, were as follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1 $ 40.4 $ 36.2 $ 35.2 
 Charges to expense 34.2 37.0 30.1 
 Settlements -28.2 -32.8 -29.1 
 Balance at December 31 $ 46.4 $ 40.4 $ 36.2 
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
The Company accounts for its defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans in
accordance with the Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC, which requires the Company to recognize an
asset for overfunded defined benefit pension or other postretirement benefit plans and a liability
for unfunded or underfunded plans. In addition, actuarial gains and losses and prior service costs of
such plans are recorded in AOCI. The amounts recorded in AOCI will continue to be modified as
actuarial assumptions and service costs change, and all such amounts will be amortized to expense
over a period of years through the net pension cost (credit) and net periodic benefit cost
(credit).See Note 8 for further details.
Defined Contribution Savings Plan
The Company accounts for its defined contribution savings plan in accordance with the Defined
Contribution Plans Subtopic of the Compensation – Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC. The Company
recognized compensation expense for amounts contributed to the defined contribution savings plan.See
Note 13 for further details.
Environmental Matters
Capital expenditures for ongoing environmental compliance measures are recorded in Property, plant
and equipment, net, and related expenses are included in the normal operating expenses of conducting
business. The Company accrued for environmental-related activities for which commitments or clean-up
plans have been developed and when such costs could be reasonably estimated based on industry
standards and professional judgment. Accrued amounts are primarily recorded on an undiscounted basis
and have not been recorded net of insurance proceeds in accordance with the Offsetting Subtopic of
the Balance Sheet Topic of the ASC. Environmental-related expenses include direct costs of
investigation and remediation and
 55 
indirect costs such as compensation and benefits for employees directly involved in the investigation
and remediation activities and fees paid to outside engineering, consulting and law firms.See Notes
10 and 19 for further details.
Stock-Based Compensation
The cost of the Company’s stock-based compensation is recorded in accordance with the Stock
Compensation Topic of the ASC.See Note 14 for further details.
Other Liabilities
The Company retains risk for certain liabilities, primarily workers’ compensation claims, employee
medical and disability benefits and automobile, property, general and product liability claims.
Estimated amounts are accrued for certain workers’ compensation, employee medical and disability
benefits, automobile and property claims filed but unsettled and estimated claims incurred but not
reported. Estimates are based upon management’s estimated aggregate liability for claims incurred
using historical experience, actuarial assumptions followed in the insurance industry and
actuarially-developed models for estimating certain liabilities. Certain estimated general and
product liability claims filed but unsettled are accrued based on management’s best estimate of
ultimate settlement or actuarial calculations of potential liability using industry experience and
actuarial assumptions developed for similar types of claims.
Foreign Currency Translation
All consolidated non-highly inflationary foreign operations use the local currency of the country of
operation as the functional currency. Local currency asset and liability accounts are translated at
year-end exchange rates while income and expense accounts are translated at average exchange rates.
The resulting translation adjustments are included in AOCI.
Economies with a three-year cumulative inflation rate of more than 100% are considered highly
inflationary. For subsidiaries operating in highly inflationary economies, the parent’s reporting
currency is the functional currency. Monetary assets and liabilities are translated into U.S. dollars
using rates of exchange at the balance sheet date and non-monetary assets and liabilities are
translated into U.S. dollars at their historical rates of exchange, with remeasurement adjustments
and other transaction gains and losses recognized in Net income. See Note 19 for further details.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when performance obligations under the terms of the contract are
satisfied. This generally occurs with the transfer of control of our products to the customer.
Collectibility of amounts recorded as revenue is probable at the time of recognition.See Note 18 for
further details.
Customer and Vendor Consideration
The Company offers certain customers rebate and sales incentive programs which are classified as
reductions in sales. Such programs are in the form of volume rebates, rebates that constituted a
percentage of sales or rebates for attaining certain sales goals. The Company receives consideration
from certain suppliers of raw materials in the form of volume rebates or rebates that constitute a
percentage of purchases. These rebates are recognized on an accrual basis by the Company as a
reduction of the purchase price of the raw materials and a subsequent reduction of Cost of goods sold
when the related product was sold.
Cost of Goods Sold
Included in Cost of goods sold are costs for materials, manufacturing, distribution and related
support. Distribution costs include expenses related to the distribution of products including
inbound freight charges, purchase and receiving costs, warehousing costs, internal transfer costs and
other costs incurred to ship products. Also included in Cost of goods sold are research and
development costs, quality control, product formulation expenditures and other similar items.Research
and development costs were $ 217.3million, $ 196.6million and $ 119.3million during 2024, 2023 and
2022, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling costs include advertising expenses, marketing costs, employee and store costs and sales
commissions. The cost of advertising is expensed as incurred. The Company incurred $ 386.9million, $
394.0million and $ 314.4million in advertising costs during 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
General and administrative expenses include human resources, legal, finance and other support and
administrative functions.
Government Incentives
The Company receives incentives from various government entities in the form of tax rebates or
credits, grants and loans. These incentives typically require that the Company maintain specified
spending levels and other operational metrics and may be subject to reimbursement if conditions are
not met or maintained. Government incentives are recorded in the Company’s consolidated financial
statements in accordance with their purpose as a reduction of expense, a reduction of the cost of the
 56 
capital investment or other income. The benefit of these incentives is recorded when received and all
conditions as specified in the agreement are fulfilled.
There were $ 86.6million of government incentives received as cash payments related to the
construction of the Company’s new global headquarters and research and development center in 2022.
These government incentives were recorded as a reduction in the carrying amount of the respective
assets under construction within Property, plant and equipment, net on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets and within Other as an investing activity on the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows. There
were nomaterial government incentives received in 2024 or 2023.
Supply Chain Financing
As part of our strategy to manage working capital, we have entered into agreements with various
financial institutions that act as intermediaries between the Company and certain suppliers. The
Company is not a party to agreements between the suppliers and the financial institutions. These
arrangements provide participating suppliers the option to settle outstanding accounts payable
incurred by the Company in the normal course of business early at a discount and do not impact our
rights and obligations with suppliers, including amounts due and scheduled payment terms. Under the
terms of our agreements, the Company confirms the validity of each supplier invoice to the respective
financial institution upon receipt. On the invoice due date, the Company settles the outstanding
amount with the respective financial institution. Liabilities associated with these arrangements are
recorded in Accounts payableon the Consolidated Balance Sheets and amounted to $ 215.7million, $
213.1million and $ 258.1million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The following table presents a rollforward of the Company’s outstanding obligations under its
supplier finance programs for year ended December 31, 2024.
 2024 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1 $ 213.1 
 Invoices confirmed during the year 988.8 
 Confirmed invoices paid during the year -986.2 
 Balance at December 31 $ 215.7 
Earnings Per Share
Common stock held in a revocable trust (see Note 12) is not included in outstanding shares for basic
or diluted income per share calculations. Basic and diluted net income per share are calculated using
the treasury stock method in accordance with the Earnings Per Share Topic of the ASC. Basic net
income per share amounts are computed based on the weighted-average number of shares outstanding
during the year. Diluted net income per share amounts are computed based on the weighted-average
number of shares outstanding plus all dilutive securities potentially outstanding during the year.See
Note 21 for further details.
NOTE 2 – RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Adopted
Effective January 1, 2024, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2023-02,
“Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323): Accounting for investments in tax credit
structures using the proportional amortization method.” This ASU allows entities to apply the
proportional amortization method to all tax equity investments if certain conditions are met. In
addition, the ASU requires certain disclosures about the nature and financial implications of tax
equity investments on an entity’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows, including
the impact of transition on the periods presented, if any. The adoption of the ASU did not materially
affect the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows since the Company has
historically applied the proportional amortization method to its Non-Traded Investments, however,
certain disclosures have been added based on the requirements of the ASU. See Note 1 for further
details.
Effective December 31, 2024, the Company adopted ASU 2023-07, “Segment Reporting (Topic 280):
Improvements to Reportable Segment Disclosures.” This ASU enhances reportable segment disclosures on
both an annual and interim basis primarily in regards to the disclosure of significant segment
expenses that are regularly provided to the chief operating decision maker (CODM) and included within
the reported measure(s) of segment profit or loss. In addition, the ASU requires disclosure, by
segment, of other items included in the reported measure(s) of segment profit or loss, including
qualitative information describing the composition, nature and type of each item. The ASU also
expands disclosure requirements related to the CODM, including how the reported measure(s) of segment
profit or loss are used to assess segment performance and allocate resources, the method used to
allocate overhead for significant segment expenses and others. Lastly, all current required annual
segment
 57 
reporting disclosures under Topic 280 are now effective for interim periods. The adoption of the ASU
has only impacted the Company’s segment disclosures with no impact to the consolidated financial
statements. See Note 22 for further details.
Effective January 1, 2023, the Company adopted ASU 2022-04, “Liabilities - Supplier Finance Programs
(Subtopic 405-50): Disclosure of Supplier Finance Program Obligations.” This ASU includes a
requirement to present a rollforward of supply chain financing activity prospectively, beginning with
the annual period ending December 31, 2024. The adoption of ASU 2022-04 did not affect the Company’s
financial position, results of operations or cash flows as the standard only impacts financial
statement footnote disclosures. See Note 1 for additional information.
Not Yet Adopted
In December 2023, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued ASU 2023-09, “Income Taxes
(Topic 740): Improvements to Income Tax Disclosures.” This ASU enhances income tax disclosures by
providing information to better assess how an entity’s operations, related tax risks, tax planning
and operational opportunities affect its tax rate and prospects for future cash flows. This ASU
requires additional disclosures to the annual effective tax rate reconciliation including specific
categories and further disaggregated reconciling items that meet the quantitative threshold.
Additionally, the ASU requires disclosures relating to income tax expense and payments made to
federal, state, local and foreign jurisdictions. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning
after December 15, 2024. The Company is evaluating the impact of adopting this ASU.
In November 2024, the FASB issued ASU 2024-03, “Income Statement - Reporting Comprehensive Income -
Expense Disaggregation Disclosures (Subtopic 220-40): Disaggregation of Income Statement Expenses.”
This ASU enhances expense disclosures on both an annual and interim basis by requiring public
business entities to disclose additional information about specific expense categories in the notes
to the consolidated financial statements. This ASU requires public entities to disclose, in a tabular
format, purchases of inventory, employee compensation, depreciation, intangible asset amortization
and depletion, as applicable, for each income statement line item that contains those expenses.
Specific expenses, gains and losses that are already disclosed under existing US GAAP are also
required to be included in the disaggregated income statement expense line-item disclosures, and any
remaining amounts will need to be described qualitatively. Additionally, the ASU requires disclosure
of the total amount of selling expenses and the entity’s definition of selling expenses. This ASU is
effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2026 and for interim periods within fiscal
years beginning after December 15, 2027. The Company is evaluating the impact of adopting this ASU.
 NOTE 3 – ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES 
Acquisitions
Subsequent Event
In February 2025, the Company signed an agreement to acquire the Brazilian decorative paints business
of BASF SE (BASF), which is a leading provider of architectural paints in Brazil with annual sales of
approximately $ 525.0million. The business develops, manufactures and sells a comprehensive portfolio
of innovative products under the Suvinil and Glasu! brand names to professional painters, designers,
architects, general contractors and consumers across the country. The business also operates two
production facilities located in the Northeast and Southeast regions of Brazil.
The closing of the transaction is subject to receipt of Brazilian antitrust approval, satisfaction or
waiver of certain other customary closing conditions, as well as BASF’s completion of its carve-out
of all relevant assets, properties, contracts, permits, rights and employees of the decorative paints
business into a separate entity. The Company will acquire all issued and outstanding equity interests
in this separate entity for an agreed-upon cash purchase price of $ 1.15billion, subject to customary
post-closing adjustments. The Company intends to finance the transaction through a combination of
cash on hand, liquidity available under existing facilities and new debt. The acquired business is
expected to be reported within the Company’s Consumer Brands Group.
Pending
In December 2024, the Company signed an agreement to acquire a European coil and industrial coatings
company. The transaction is subject to customary closing conditions and is expected to close in 2025.
The acquired business will be reported within the Company’s Performance Coatings Group.
Closed in Current Year
In October 2024, the Company completed the acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business for
approximately $ 80million. The acquired business develops, manufactures and sells coatings for the
food and household product markets and is reported within the Company’s Performance Coatings Group.
As of December 31, 2024, $ 33.0million of Property, plant and equipment, net, $ 27.9million of
finite-lived intangibles and $ 21.1million of Goodwill were recognized from this transaction.
 58 
The Company expects to finalize the purchase price allocation for the acquisition within the
allowable measurement period. Pro forma results of operations have not been presented as the impact
on the Company’s consolidated financial results is not material.
Closed in 2023
In October 2023, the Company completed the acquisition of German-based SIC Holding GmbH, a Peter
Möhrle Holding venture comprised of Oskar Nolte GmbH and Klumpp Coatings GmbH (SIC Holding). The
acquired business specializes in foil coatings as well as radiation-cured and waterbased industrial
wood coatings for the board, furniture and flooring industry. The total purchase price for the
acquisition was approximately $ 290million, including an immaterial amount paid in 2024 to finalize
certain representations, warranties and closing conditions. The Company finalized the purchase price
allocation within the allowable measurement period, and $ 110.8million of finite-lived intangible
assets, $ 181.3million of goodwill, $ 46.0million of other assets, net of cash and $ 47.5million of
liabilities were recognized from this transaction.
Closed in 2022
In April 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of the European industrial coatings business of
Sika AG. In July 2022, the Company completed the acquisitions of Gross & Perthun GmbH, Dur-A-Flex,
Inc. and Powdertech Oy Ltd. In December 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of Industria
Chimica Adriatica S.p.A. (ICA). The aggregate purchase price for the acquisitions completed in 2022
was approximately $ 1.024billion, including amounts withheld as security for certain representations,
warranties and obligations of the sellers. Based on the preliminary purchase price allocations for
these transactions, as of December 31, 2022, the Company recognized intangible assets and goodwill of
$ 282.8million and $ 565.8million, respectively, with the remaining purchase price for each
transaction allocated to various other assets acquired and liabilities assumed. In June 2023,
purchase price allocation adjustments were made to ICA which decreased goodwill by $ 145.9million,
increased finite-lived intangible assets by $ 195.9million and increased deferred tax liabilities by
$ 57.4million. There were no material adjustments related to the other acquisitions that closed in
2022 and the Company finalized the purchase price allocations for these transactions in the allowable
measurement period. In accordance with certain purchase agreements, the Company paid $ 29.2million in
2023 related to holdbacks for acquisitions completed in prior years.
Divestitures
Closed in 2023
The Company completed the divestiture of a non-core domestic aerosol business within the Consumer
Brands Group in April 2023. This transaction resulted in the recognition of a $ 20.1million gain in
2023 within the Administrative function. This gain was recorded within Other general (income) expense
- net (see Note 19).
During the third quarter of 2023, the Company completed the divestiture of the China architectural
business within the Consumer Brands Group. An immaterial working capital adjustment was finalized
during the first quarter of 2024. The associated net assets were classified as held for sale at June
30, 2023 in accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC. Following the
prescribed order of impairment testing, the Company first reviewed individual tangible and intangible
assets under their applicable Topic of the ASC to determine if their carrying value was higher than
their respective fair value. As a result, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $ 6.9million
within the Consumer Brands Group related to China architectural trademarks during 2023. The Company
then compared the updated carrying value of the assets and liabilities comprising the disposal group
as a whole to its respective fair value which was determined to be equal to the selling price, less
costs to sell. As a result of this comparison, the Company recorded an additional impairment charge
of $ 27.1million within the Administrative function in the second quarter of 2023. The fair value of
the disposal group was classified as level 2 in the fair value hierarchy as it was based on a
specific price and other observable inputs for similar items with no active market.
These divestitures did not meet the criteria to be reported as discontinued operations in the
consolidated financial statements as the Company’s decision to divest these businesses did not
represent a strategic shift that will have a major effect on the Company’s operations and financial
results.
 59 
Included in Inventories were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Finished goods $ 1,751.9 $ 1,810.9 $ 1,957.7 
 Work in process and raw materials 536.2 518.9 668.8 
 Inventories $ 2,288.1 $ 2,329.8 $ 2,626.5 
Inventories were stated at the lower of cost or market, with cost primarily determined on the LIFO
method. Management believes that the use of LIFO results in a better matching of costs and revenues.
The following table summarizes the extent to which the Company’s Inventories use the LIFO cost
method, and presents the effect on Inventories had the Company used the first-in, first-out (FIFO)
inventory valuation method.
 2024 2023 2022 
 Percentage of total inventories on LIFO 74 % 74 % 74 % 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Excess of FIFO over LIFO $ 630.2 $ 668.0 $ 792.7 
During 2024 and 2023, certain inventories accounted for on the LIFO method were reduced, resulting in
the liquidation of certain quantities carried at costs prevailing in prior years. The 2024 and 2023
liquidations increased Net income by $ 4.8million and $ 1.2million, respectively. There were
noliquidations in 2022.
The Company recorded a reserve for obsolescence of $ 137.7million, $ 170.8million and $ 139.0million
at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, to reduce Inventories to their estimated current
market price.
 NOTE 5 – PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 
Included in Property, plant and equipment, net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Land $ 259.9 $ 257.5 $ 263.0 
 Buildings 1,175.9 1,048.7 1,199.3 
 Machinery and equipment 3,689.5 3,459.8 3,230.2 
 Construction in progress 1,598.1 1,111.0 496.1 
 Property, plant and equipment, gross 6,723.4 5,877.0 5,188.6 
 Less allowances for depreciation 3,190.2 3,040.2 2,981.6 
 Property, plant and equipment, net $ 3,533.2 $ 2,836.8 $ 2,207.0 
The Company capitalizes interest costs incurred in the construction of certain property, plant and
equipment. In 2024 and 2023, the Company capitalized interest of $ 59.6million and $ 30.7million,
respectively. There was nointerest capitalized in 2022.
In accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC, whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying value of long-lived assets may not be recoverable or the
useful life may have changed, an impairment test is to be performed. Undiscounted cash flows are used
to calculate the recoverable value of long-lived assets to determine if such assets are not
recoverable. If the carrying value of the assets is deemed to not be recoverable, the impairment to
be recognized is the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the estimated fair
value of the assets as determined in accordance with the Fair Value Topic of the ASC. See Note 3 for
information on the impairment tests performed in 2023 for the assets held for sale prior to the
divestiture of the China architectural business. No other material impairments of Property, plant and
equipment were recorded in 2024, 2023 or 2022.
 60 
In 2024, the Company completed the acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business, which resulted
in the recognition of goodwill of $ 21.1million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 27.9million. The
acquired intangibles are being amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately
15years.
During 2023, the Company completed the acquisition of SIC Holding, which resulted in the recognition
of goodwill of $ 181.3million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 110.8million. The acquired
intangibles are being amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately 15years.
During 2022, the Company acquired fivecompanies which resulted in the recognition of goodwill of $
419.9million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 478.6million. The acquired intangibles are being
amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately 14years.
See Note 3 for additional information related to the acquisitions and divestitures.
In accordance with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC, goodwill at the reporting
unit level and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually. In addition,
interim impairment tests are performed whenever required as a result of a specific event or
circumstances which indicate potential impairment on a more likely than not basis. October 1 has been
established for the annual impairment review. An optional qualitative assessment may alleviate the
need to perform quantitative goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment tests when
there is no indication of impairment on a more likely than not basis. Should a quantitative
impairment test be performed, values are estimated separately for goodwill and indefinite-lived
intangible assets using applicable valuation models, incorporating discount rates commensurate with
the risks involved for each group of assets.
The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2024 did not result in any trademark or
goodwill impairment.
As a result of the Latin America architectural paint business moving to the Consumer Brands Group
reportable segment effective January 1, 2023, the Company performed a quantitative impairment
analysis for the impacted reporting units and determined both before and after the change, there was
no indication of impairment. The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2023 resulted in
no goodwill impairment and trademark impairment of $ 23.9million in the Consumer Brands Group
primarily related to a trademark in Europe.
The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2022 resulted in trademark impairments
totaling $ 15.5million in the Consumer Brands Group related to the discontinuation of an
architectural paint brand and lower than anticipated sales of an acquired brand and no goodwill
impairment.
A summary of changes in the Company’s carrying value of Goodwill by Reportable Segment is as follows:
 Performance 
 Paint Stores Consumer Brands Coatings Consolidated 
 Goodwill Group Group Group Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at 
 January 1, $ 2,182.1 $ 1,783.4 $ 3,169.1 $ 7,134.6 
 2022(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 49.7 21.3 422.5 493.5 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -2.8 -42.1 -44.9 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, 2,231.8 1,801.9 3,549.5 7,583.2 
 2022(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 8.3 8.3 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -9.1 43.6 34.5 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, 2,231.8 1,792.8 3,601.4 7,626.0 
 2023(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 48.2 48.2 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -0.3 -93.8 -94.1 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, $ 2,231.8 $ 1,792.5 $ 3,555.8 $ 7,580.1 
 2024(1) 
(1) Net of accumulated impairment losses of $ 19.4million ($ 10.2million in Paint Stores Group, $
8.4million in Consumer Brands Group and $ 0.8million in Performance Coatings Group).
 61 
A summary of the Company’s carrying value of Intangible assets is as follows:
 Finit… Trade… 
 Dece… Intan… With Total 
 31, Assets Custo… Intel… All Indef… Intang… 
 2024 Softw… Relat… Prope… Other Subto… Lives… Assets 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gross $ 185.0 $ 3,187… $ 1,973… $ 225.8 $ 5,571… 
 Accu… -154.3 -1,48… -747.7 -154.7 -2,54… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 30.7 $ 1,698… $ 1,225… $ 71.1 $ 3,025… $ 507.9 $ 3,533.2 
 value 
 Dece… 
 31, 
 2023 
 Gross $ 158.2 $ 3,263… $ 1,968… $ 232.6 $ 5,622… 
 Accu… -152.8 -1,31… -644.4 -152.9 -2,26… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 5.4 $ 1,952… $ 1,324… $ 79.7 $ 3,362… $ 518.5 $ 3,880.5 
 value 
 Dece… 
 31, 
 2022 
 Gross $ 180.2 $ 3,121… $ 1,732… $ 427.5 $ 5,461… 
 Accu… -148.1 -1,13… -477.4 -258.0 -2,01… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 32.1 $ 1,989… $ 1,255… $ 169.5 $ 3,445… $ 556.2 $ 4,002.0 
 value 
(1) Trademarks are net of accumulated impairment losses of $ 163.8millionas of December 31, 2024 and
2023 and $ 139.9million as of December 31, 2022.
Amortization of finite-lived intangible assets is estimated as follows for the next five years: $
317.2million in 2025, $ 315.3million in 2026, $ 310.5million in 2027, $ 307.5million in 2028 and $
305.9million in 2029.
Although the Company believes its estimates of fair value related to reporting units and indefinite-
lived intangible assets are reasonable, actual financial results could differ from these estimates
due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making such estimates. Changes in assumptions concerning
future financial results or other underlying assumptions could have a significant impact and future
impairment charges may be required.
 62 
Long-Term Debt
The table below summarizes the carrying value of the Company’s outstanding debt, net of capitalized
debt issuance costs, discounts and premiums:
 Due Date 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 3.45% Senior Notes 2027 $ 1,495.7 $ 1,493.9 $ 1,492.1 
 4.50% Senior Notes 2047 1,233.7 1,233.0 1,232.3 
 2.95% Senior Notes 2029 795.5 794.6 793.6 
 3.80% Senior Notes 2049 543.7 543.6 543.2 
 2.30% Senior Notes 2030 497.6 497.1 496.7 
 2.20% Senior Notes 2032 495.5 494.8 494.2 
 3.30% Senior Notes 2050 494.6 494.3 494.1 
 2.90% Senior Notes 2052 492.1 491.9 491.5 
 4.80% Senior Notes 2031 445.0 — — 
 3.45% Senior Notes 2025 399.8 399.4 399.1 
 4.25% Senior Notes 2025 399.5 398.6 397.7 
 4.55% Senior Notes 2045 395.4 395.2 395.0 
 4.55% Senior Notes 2028 397.6 — — 
 3.95% Senior Notes 2026 351.6 353.1 354.7 
 4.00% Senior Notes 2042 297.2 297.0 296.9 
 3.30% Senior Notes 2025 250.0 249.9 249.8 
 4.40% Senior Notes 2045 241.3 240.9 240.5 
 0.53% to8.00% Promissory Notes Through 2026 0.2 0.9 1.6 
 4.05% Senior Notes 2024 — 598.8 596.9 
 3.125% Senior Notes 2024 — 499.7 499.0 
 7.375% Debentures 2027 — — 119.2 
 7.45% Debentures 2097 — — 3.5 
 Total(1) 9,226.0 9,476.7 9,591.6 
 Less amounts due within one year 1,049.2 1,098.8 0.6 
 Long-term debt $ 8,176.8 $ 8,377.9 $ 9,591.0 
(1) Net of capitalized debt issuance costs of $ 48.6million, $ 49.3million and $ 57.3million and net
of discounts and premiums of $ 26.0million, $ 25.2million and $ 25.7million at December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022, respectively.
Maturities of long-term debt are as follows for the next five years: $ 1.050billion in 2025; $
350.2million in 2026; $ 1.500billion in 2027; $ 400.0million in 2028 and $ 800.0million in 2029.
Interest expense on long-term debt was $ 354.7million, $ 374.6million and $ 348.4million for 2024,
2023 and 2022, respectively.
In August 2024, the Company repaid principal of $ 600.0million related to the Company’s 4.05% senior
notes due August 8, 2024 using commercial paper and subsequently issued $ 400.0million of 4.55%
senior notes due 2028 and $ 450.0million of 4.80% senior notes due 2031 in a public offering. The net
proceeds from the issuance of these notes were used to repay outstanding borrowings under the
Company’s domestic commercial paper program and for general corporate purposes. The newly issued
senior notes contain customary qualitative covenants as defined in their respective agreements.
During the second quarter of 2024, the Company repaid the principal of $ 500.0million related to its
3.125% senior notes due June 1, 2024 using commercial paper.
In December 2023, the Company exercised its call provision to make-whole the entire outstanding $
119.4million aggregate principal amount of its 7.38% Debentures due 2027 and the entire outstanding $
3.5million aggregate principal amount of its 7.45% Debentures due 2097. The retirement of the
Debentures resulted in a loss of $ 12.8million recorded in Other general (income) expense - net. See
Note 19.
In August 2022, the Company issued $ 600.0million of 4.05% Senior Notes due August 2024 and $
400.0million of 4.25% Senior Notes due August 2025 in a public offering. The net proceeds from the
issuance of these notes were used to repay
 63 
borrowings outstanding under the Company’s credit agreement dated May 9, 2016, as amended, and the
domestic commercial paper program.
Short-Term Borrowings
In November 2024, the Company amended its credit agreement dated May 9, 2016, as amended, to extend
the maturity of $ 75.0million of the commitments available for borrowing and obtaining the issuance,
renewal, extension and increase of a letter of credit under the credit agreement from June 20, 2025
to December 20, 2029.
In July 2024, the Company entered into a new $ 2.500billion revolving credit agreement maturing on
July 31, 2029 (2024 Credit Agreement), which replaced the the 2022 Credit Agreement. Under the terms
of the 2024 Credit Agreement, the Company may request to extend the maturity date for twoadditional
one-yearperiods, request an uncommitted increase up to $ 750.0million and issue letters of credit
under a $ 250.0million subfacility.
In August 2022, the Company entered into a five-yearcredit agreement (2022 Credit Agreement), which
replaced the $ 2.000billion credit agreement dated June 29, 2021. The 2022 Credit Agreement gave the
Company the right to borrow $ 2.250billion and to obtain letters of credit in an amount of up to $
250.0million.
In August 2021, the Company entered into an amended and restated $ 625.0million credit agreement
(2021 Credit Agreement), which amends and restates the five-yearcredit agreement entered into in
September 2017. The 2021 Credit Agreement was subsequently amended on multiple dates to extend the
maturity of commitments available for borrowing or letters of credit under the agreement.
In May 2016, the Company entered into a five-yearcredit agreement (2016 Credit Agreement),
subsequently amended on multiple dates to extend the maturity of commitments available for borrowing
or letters of credit under the agreement. The 2016 credit agreement gives the Company the right to
borrow and obtain letters of credit up to an aggregate availability of $ 875.0million. These credit
agreements are/were used for general corporate purposes, including the financing of working capital
requirements.
At December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, there were noborrowings outstanding under these credit
agreements.
The Company’s available capacity under its committed credit agreements is reduced for amounts
outstanding under its domestic commercial paper program and letters of credit. At December 31, 2024,
the Company had unused capacity under its various credit agreements of $ 3.274billion. The table
below summarizes the Company’s Short-term borrowings:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Domestic commercial paper $ 655.6 $ 347.7 $ 938.5 
 Foreign facilities 6.8 26.5 39.6 
 Total $ 662.4 $ 374.2 $ 978.1 
 Weighted average interest rate: 
 Domestic 4.7% 5.5% 4.6% 
 Foreign 3.1% 3.6% 6.7% 
Interest expense on Short-term borrowings was $ 61.0million, $ 42.9million and $ 42.4million for
2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Among other restrictions, the Company’s notes, debentures and revolving credit agreement contain
certain covenants relating to liens, ratings changes, merger and sale of assets, consolidated
leverage and change of control, as defined in the agreements. In the event of default under any one
of these arrangements, acceleration of the maturity of any one or more of these borrowings may
result. The Company was in compliance with all covenants for all years presented.
 64 
NOTE 8 – PENSION, HEALTH CARE AND OTHER POSTRETIREMENT BENEFITS
The Company provides pension benefits to substantially all full-time employees through primarily
noncontributory defined contribution or defined benefit pension plans and certain health care and
life insurance benefits to domestic active employees and eligible retirees.
Health Care Plans
The Company provides certain domestic health care plans that are contributory and contain cost-
sharing features such as deductibles and coinsurance. There were 32,283, 31,327and 30,009active
employees covered by the benefits under these plans at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively. The cost of these benefits for active employees, which includes claims incurred but not
reported, amounted to $ 382.6million, $ 363.2million and $ 347.4million for 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
Defined Contribution Pension Plans
The Company’s annual contribution for its domestic defined contribution pension plan was $
103.5million, $ 97.8million and $ 88.9million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The contribution
percentage ranges from twopercent to sevenpercent of compensation for covered employees based on an
age and service formula. Assets in employee accounts of the domestic defined contribution pension
plan are invested in various investment funds as directed by the participants. These investment funds
did not own a significant number of shares of the Company’s common stock for any year presented.
The Company’s annual contributions for its foreign defined contribution pension plans, which are
based on various percentages of compensation for covered employees up to certain limits, were $
20.6million, $ 19.5million and $ 19.4million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Assets in
employee accounts of the foreign defined contribution pension plans are invested in various
investment funds. These investment funds did not own a significant number of shares of the Company’s
common stock for any year presented.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
At December 31, 2024, the domestic defined benefit pension plan was overfunded, with a projected
benefit obligation of $ 95.3million, fair value of plan assets of $ 148.7million and excess plan
assets of $ 53.4million. The plan was funded in accordance with all applicable regulations at
December 31, 2024.
The Company has thirty-sixforeign defined benefit pension plans. At December 31, 2024, twenty-nineof
the Company’s foreign defined benefit pension plans were unfunded or underfunded, with combined
accumulated benefit obligations, projected benefit obligations, fair values of net assets and
deficiencies of plan assets of $ 73.9million, $ 88.3million, $ 20.5million and $ 67.8million,
respectively.
The Company expects to make the following benefit payments for all domestic and foreign defined
benefit pension plans: $ 19.2million in 2025; $ 18.9million in 2026; $ 20.6million in 2027; $
22.2million in 2028; $ 22.7million in 2029; and $ 139.2million in 2030 through 2034. The Company
expects to contribute $ 5.8million to the foreign defined benefit pension plans in 2025.
The estimated net actuarial gains and prior service costs for the defined benefit pension plans that
are expected to be amortized from AOCI into net pension costs in 2025 are $ 3.2million and $
2.0million, respectively.
 65 
The following table summarizes the components of the net pension costs and AOCI related to the
defined benefit pension plans:
 Domestic Foreign 
 Defined Defined 
 Benefit Benefit 
 Net pension Pension Plan Pension Plans 
 cost: 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service cost $ 2.9 $ 3.0 $ 4.6 $ 4.6 $ 4.4 $ 6.3 
 Interest 4.9 4.6 3.2 11.8 11.8 7.3 
 cost 
 Expected 
 return on -8.3 -7.3 -7.6 -11.1 -12.3 -9.4 
 plan assets 
 Amortization 
 of prior 1.9 1.3 1.0 -0.1 -0.2 -0.2 
 service cost 
 (credit) 
 Amortization 
 of actuarial -0.5 -1.3 -1.5 0.2 
 (gains) 
 losses 
 Ongoing 0.9 1.6 1.2 3.9 2.2 4.2 
 pension cost 
 Settlement -1.1 -0.3 
 credits 
 Curtailment 7.1 
 cost 
 Net pension 0.9 1.6 1.2 11.0 1.1 3.9 
 cost 
 Other 
 changes in 
 plan assets 
 and 
 projected 
 benefit 
 obligation 
 recognized 
 in AOCI 
 (before 
 taxes): 
 Net 
 actuarial 
 (gains) 
 losses -20.9 -8.6 5.0 -8.0 5.8 -29.6 
 arising 
 during the 
 year 
 Prior 
 service cost 
 (credit) 1.0 3.0 1.6 6.9 1.1 -0.3 
 arising 
 during the 
 year 
 Amortization 
 of actuarial 0.5 1.3 1.5 -0.2 
 gains 
 (losses) 
 Amortization 
 of prior 
 service -1.9 -1.3 -1.0 -7.0 0.2 0.2 
 (cost) 
 credit 
 Loss 
 recognized 1.1 0.3 
 for 
 settlement 
 Exchange 
 rate loss 
 (gain) 1.6 -1.5 -0.4 
 recognized 
 during the 
 year 
 Total 
 recognized -21.3 -6.9 5.6 -5.2 8.2 -30.0 
 in AOCI 
 Total 
 recognized 
 in net $ -20.4 $ -5.3 $ 6.8 $ 5.8 $ 9.3 $ -26.1 
 pension cost 
 and 
 AOCI 
Service cost is recorded in Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative expenses. All
other components of Net pension costs are recorded in Other (income) expense - net.
In December 2024, the Company amended one of its foreign defined benefit plans to freeze future
benefit accruals as of December 31, 2024. As a result of the amendment, the Company recognized a non-
cash pre-tax curtailment charge of $ 7.1million primarily related to the acceleration of amounts
previously recorded within AOCI in the Statements of Consolidated Comprehensive Income.
The Company employs a total return investment approach for the domestic and foreign defined benefit
pension plan assets. A mix of equities and fixed income investments are used to maximize the long-
term return of assets for a prudent level of risk. In determining the expected long-term rate of
return on defined benefit pension plan assets, management considers the historical rates of return,
the nature of investments and an expectation of future investment strategies. The target allocations
for the domestic defined benefit pension plan assets are 35% – 65% equity securities, 35% – 65% fixed
income securities and 0% – 5% other (including alternative investments and cash). The target
allocations for the foreign defined benefit pension plan assets vary by plan, but are generally
within the following ranges: 0% – 20% equity securities, 75% – 100% fixed income securities and 0% –
10% other (including alternative investments and cash).
 66 
The following tables summarize the fair value of the defined benefit pension plan assets at December
31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. The presentation is in accordance with the Fair Value Topic of the ASC.
 Quoted Prices 
 in Active Significant 
 Markets for Other Significant 
 Fair Value at Identical Observable Unobservable 
 December 31, Assets Inputs Inputs 
 2024 (Level 1) (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Cash and cash $ 8.7 $ 8.7 $ — 
 equivalents 
 Equity investments(1) 95.3 86.6 8.7 
 Fixed income 226.5 36.8 189.7 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 24.2 24.2 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 354.7 $ 132.1 $ 222.6 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 25.3 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 380.0 
 Quoted Prices Significant 
 Fair Value at in Active Other Significant 
 December 31, Markets for Observable Unobservable 
 2023 Identical Inputs Inputs 
 Assets (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 (Level 1) 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Equity investments(1) $ 133.0 $ 72.9 $ 60.1 
 Fixed income 188.9 36.8 152.1 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 34.6 34.6 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 356.5 $ 109.7 $ 246.8 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 25.3 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 381.8 
 Quoted Prices Significant 
 Fair Value at in Active Other Significant 
 December 31, Markets for Observable Unobservable 
 2022 Identical Inputs Inputs 
 Assets (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 (Level 1) 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Equity investments(1) $ 80.1 $ 8.5 $ 71.6 
 Fixed income 117.6 117.6 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 34.4 34.4 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 232.1 $ 8.5 $ 223.6 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 110.9 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 343.0 
(1) This category includes actively managed equity assets that track primarily to the S&P 500 or an
international equity 
international bond 
or its equivalent using the practical expedient. Therefore, these investments are not classified in
the fair value hierarchy.
 67 
The following table summarizes the obligations, plan assets and assumptions used for the defined
benefit pension plans, which are all measured as of December 31:
 Domes… Forei… 
 Defin… Defin… 
 Benef… Benef… 
 Pensi… Pensi… 
 Plan Plans 
 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Accu… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 at $ 94.2 $ 100.5 $ 90.3 $ 221.7 $ 236.4 $ 209.3 
 end 
 of 
 year 
 Proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Bala… 
 at 
 begi… $ 102.1 $ 91.7 $ 120.8 $ 257.8 $ 230.4 $ 362.7 
 of 
 year 
 Serv… 2.9 3.0 4.6 4.6 4.4 6.3 
 cost 
 Inte… 4.9 4.6 3.2 11.8 11.8 7.3 
 cost 
 Actu… 
 (gai… -11.1 2.8 -32.6 -19.8 8.8 -112… 
 loss… 
 Plan 
 amen… 1.0 3.0 1.6 13.5 2.0 3.2 
 and 
 other 
 Sett… -2.2 -3.7 -2.4 
 Effe… 
 of -12.2 14.1 -28.8 
 fore… 
 exch… 
 Bene… -4.5 -3.0 -5.9 -10.5 -10.0 -5.5 
 paid 
 Bala… 
 at 
 end 95.3 102.1 91.7 243.0 257.8 230.4 
 of 
 year 
 Plan 
 asse… 
 Bala… 
 at 
 begi… 135.1 119.4 155.2 246.7 223.6 328.4 
 of 
 year 
 Actu… 
 retu… 
 on 18.1 18.7 -29.9 -2.6 15.4 -73.4 
 plan 
 asse… 
 Cont… 
 and 5.7 8.6 5.8 
 other 
 Sett… -2.2 -3.7 -2.4 
 Effe… 
 of -7.1 12.8 -29.3 
 fore… 
 exch… 
 Bene… -4.5 -3.0 -5.9 -10.5 -10.0 -5.5 
 paid 
 Bala… 
 at 
 end 148.7 135.1 119.4 231.3 246.7 223.6 
 of 
 year 
 Exce… 
 (def… 
 plan 
 asse… $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ -11.7 $ -11.1 $ -6.8 
 over 
 proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Asse… 
 and 
 liab… 
 reco… 
 in 
 the 
 Cons… 
 Bala… 
 Shee… 
 Defe… 
 pens… $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ 56.1 $ 57.9 $ 51.7 
 asse… 
 Other -6.0 -3.4 -3.0 
 accr… 
 Other 
 long… -61.8 -65.6 -55.5 
 liab… 
 $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ -11.7 $ -11.1 $ -6.8 
 Amou… 
 reco… 
 in 
 AOCI: 
 Net 
 actu… $ 36.9 $ 16.6 $ 8.0 $ 29.9 $ 24.8 $ 31.7 
 gains 
 Prior 
 serv… -7.8 -8.8 -7.1 0.4 0.3 1.6 
 (cos… 
 cred… 
 $ 29.1 $ 7.8 $ 0.9 $ 30.3 $ 25.1 $ 33.3 
 Weig… 
 assu… 
 used 
 to 
 dete… 
 proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Disc… 5.78 % 5.09 % 5.27 % 5.49 % 4.81 % 5.06 % 
 rate 
 Rate 
 of 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.29 % 3.33 % 3.39 % 
 comp… 
 incr… 
 Weig… 
 assu… 
 used 
 to 
 dete… 
 net 
 pens… 
 cost: 
 Disc… 5.09 % 5.27 % 3.12 % 4.81 % 5.06 % 2.26 % 
 rate 
 Expe… 
 long… 
 rate 
 of 6.25 % 6.25 % 5.00 % 4.78 % 5.48 % 3.19 % 
 retu… 
 on 
 asse… 
 Rate 
 of 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.33 % 3.39 % 3.25 % 
 comp… 
 incr… 
 68 
Other Postretirement Benefits
Employees of the Company hired in the United States prior to January 1, 1993 who are not members of a
collective bargaining unit, and certain groups of employees added through acquisitions, are eligible
for health care and life insurance benefits upon retirement, subject to the terms of the unfunded
plans. There were 3,354, 3,367and 3,409retired employees covered by these postretirement benefits at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The following table summarizes the obligation and the assumptions used for other postretirement
benefits:
 Other Postretirement 
 Benefits 
 Benefit obligation: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at beginning of $ 147.2 $ 153.8 $ 276.4 
 year - unfunded 
 Service cost 0.5 0.6 1.2 
 Interest cost 6.8 7.4 6.0 
 Actuarial gain -8.6 -8.0 -54.5 
 Plan amendments -62.8 
 Benefits paid -10.8 -6.6 -12.5 
 Balance at end of year - $ 135.1 $ 147.2 $ 153.8 
 unfunded 
 Liabilities recognized in 
 the 
 Consolidated Balance 
 Sheets: 
 Other accruals $ -14.4 $ -14.0 $ -14.5 
 Postretirement benefits 
 other than -120.7 -133.2 -139.3 
 pensions 
 $ -135.1 $ -147.2 $ -153.8 
 Amounts recognized in AOCI: 
 Net actuarial gains $ 21.0 $ 12.9 $ 4.7 
 Prior service credits 16.2 40.0 64.0 
 $ 37.2 $ 52.9 $ 68.7 
 Weighted-average 
 assumptions used to 
 determine benefit 
 obligation: 
 Discount rate 5.61 % 4.97 % 5.16 % 
 Health care cost trend rate 7.50 % 7.00 % 6.25 % 
 - pre-65 
 Health care cost trend rate 6.50 % 6.00 % 5.50 % 
 - post-65 
 Prescription drug cost 11.75 % 9.00 % 8.25 % 
 increases 
 Weighted-average 
 assumptions used to 
 determine net periodic 
 benefit cost: 
 Discount rate 4.97 % 5.16 % 2.83 % 
 Health care cost trend rate 7.00 % 6.25 % 6.38 % 
 - pre-65 
 Health care cost trend rate 6.00 % 5.50 % 5.13 % 
 - post-65 
 Prescription drug cost 9.00 % 8.25 % 8.25 % 
 increases 
 69 
The following table summarizes the components of the net periodic benefit cost and AOCI related to
other postretirement benefits:
 Other Postretirement Benefits 
 Net periodic benefit (credit) cost: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service cost $ 0.5 $ 0.6 $ 1.2 
 Interest cost 6.8 7.4 6.0 
 Amortization of actuarial (gains) -0.4 0.1 4.2 
 losses 
 Amortization of prior service credit -23.9 -23.9 -0.4 
 Net periodic benefit (credit) cost -17.0 -15.8 11.0 
 Other changes in projected benefit 
 obligation recognized in 
 AOCI (before taxes): 
 Net actuarial gain arising during 
 the -8.6 -8.0 -54.5 
 year 
 Prior service credit arising during 
 the -62.8 
 year 
 Amortization of actuarial gains 0.4 -0.1 -4.2 
 (losses) 
 Amortization of prior service credit 23.9 23.9 0.4 
 Total recognized in AOCI 15.7 15.8 -121.1 
 Total recognized in net periodic 
 benefit $ -1.3 $ — $ -110.1 
 cost and AOCI 
The estimated net actuarial gains and prior service credits for other postretirement benefits that
are expected to be amortized from AOCI into net periodic benefit cost in 2025 are $ 2.4million and $
14.2million, respectively.
The assumed health care cost trend rate and prescription drug cost increases used to determine the
net periodic benefit cost for postretirement health care benefits for 2025 both decrease in each
successive year until reaching 4.5% in 2034.
The Company expects to make retiree health care benefit cash payments as follows:
 2025 $ 14.4 
 2026 14.9 
 2027 14.9 
 2028 14.3 
 2029 13.2 
 2030 through 2034 48.2 
 Total expected benefit cash payments $ 119.9 
 70 
The Company leases retail stores, manufacturing and distribution facilities, office space and
equipment under operating and finance lease agreements. Operating leases are included in Operating
lease right-of-use (ROU) assets, Current portion of operating lease liabilities and Long-term
operating lease liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Finance leases are included in Other
assets, Other accruals and Other long-term liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The
finance lease related asset and liability as of December 31, 2024 was $ 187.5million and $
189.3million, respectively.
Operating and finance lease ROU assets and lease liabilities are recognized based on the present
value of lease payments over the lease term. The majority of the operating lease ROU asset and lease
liability balances are related to the retail operations of the Paint Stores Group. The majority of
the finance lease ROU asset and lease liability balances are related to a distribution facility
within the Consumer Brands Group. Most leases include oneor more options to renew. The exercise of
lease renewal options is at the Company’s discretion and is not reasonably certain at lease
commencement.
The Company does not account for lease and non-lease components of contracts separately for any
underlying asset class. Some leases have variable payments, however, because they are not based on an
estate leases relate primarily to common area maintenance, insurance, taxes and utilities associated
with the properties. Variable payments for equipment leases relate primarily to hours, miles or other
quantifiable usage factors which are not determinable at the time the lease agreement is entered into
by the Company. The Company has made an accounting policy election by underlying asset class to not
apply the recognition requirements of ASC 842 to short-term leases. As a result, certain leases with
a term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and expense is
recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Most leases do not contain an incremental borrowing rate which is readily determinable from their
associated contract. Therefore, the Company uses its estimated incremental borrowing rate on a
collateralized basis which is derived from information available at the lease commencement date,
giving consideration to publicly available credit rating data, other risk characteristics and the
term of the lease in determining the present value of lease payments.
Additional lease information is summarized below:
 Components of Lease Expense 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating lease cost $ 562.4 $ 528.5 $ 498.0 
 Finance lease cost: 
 Amortization of right-of-use assets $ 0.7 
 Interest on lease liabilities 1.5 
 Total $ 2.2 $ — $ — 
 Short-term lease cost $ 69.6 $ 58.5 $ 47.1 
 Variable lease cost $ 132.1 $ 104.1 $ 89.9 
 Supplemental Cash Flow Information 
 Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease 
 liabilities: 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating cash outflows from operating $ 545.5 $ 513.8 $ 480.1 
 leases 
 Operating cash outflows from finance 0.2 
 leases 
 Financing cash outflows from finance 0.2 
 leases 
 Leased assets obtained in exchange for 
 new lease liabilities: 
 Operating leases $ 526.9 $ 473.3 $ 463.1 
 Finance leases 188.2 
 71 
The following table reconciles the undiscounted cash flows for each of the next five years and
thereafter to the operating and finance lease liabilities recognized on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets as of December 31, 2024. The reconciliation excludes short-term leases that are not recorded
on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 Year Ending December 31, Operating Leases Finance Leases 
 2025 540.4 9.1 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2026 466.9 8.2 
 2027 378.7 8.4 
 2028 289.3 8.6 
 2029 200.5 8.8 
 Thereafter 413.3 586.6 
 Total lease payments 2,289.1 629.7 
 Amount representing interest -264.2 -440.4 
 Present value of lease liabilities $ 2,024.9 $ 189.3 
 72 
Environmental Matters
The operations of the Company, like those of other companies in its industry, are subject to various
domestic and foreign environmental laws and regulations. These laws and regulations not only govern
current operations and products, but also impose potential liability on the Company for past
operations. Management expects environmental laws and regulations to impose increasingly stringent
requirements upon the Company and the industry in the future. Management believes that the Company
conducts its operations in compliance with applicable environmental laws, regulations and
requirements and has implemented various programs designed to protect the environment and promote
continued compliance.
The Company is involved with environmental investigation and remediation activities at some of its
currently and formerly owned sites (including sites which were previously owned and/or operated by
businesses acquired by the Company). In addition, the Company, together with other parties, has been
designated a potentially responsible party under federal and state environmental protection laws for
the investigation and remediation of environmental contamination and hazardous waste at a number of
third-party sites, primarily Superfund sites. In general, these laws provide that potentially
responsible parties may be held jointly and severally liable for investigation and remediation costs
regardless of fault. The Company may be similarly designated with respect to additional third-party
sites in the future.
The Company initially provides for estimated costs of environmental-related activities relating to
its past operations and third-party sites for which commitments or clean-up plans have been developed
and when such costs can be reasonably estimated based on industry standards and professional
judgment. These estimated costs, which are mostly undiscounted, are determined based on currently
available facts regarding each site. If the reasonably estimable costs can only be identified as a
range and no specific amount within that range can be determined more likely than any other amount
within the range, the minimum of the range is provided.
The Company routinely assesses its potential liability for investigation and remediation-related
activities and adjusts its environmental-related accruals as information becomes available, including
as a result of sites progressing through investigation and remediation-related activities, upon which
more accurate costs can be reasonably estimated and as additional accounting guidelines are issued.
At December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company had accruals reported on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets as Other long-term liabilitiesof $ 230.3million, $ 230.8million and $ 240.2million,
respectively. Estimated costs of current investigation and remediation activities of $ 66.4million, $
88.1million and $ 50.2million are included in Other accrualson the Consolidated Balance Sheets at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Actual costs incurred may vary from the accrued estimates due to the inherent uncertainties involved
including, among others, the number and financial condition of parties involved with respect to any
given site, the volumetric contribution which may be attributed to the Company relative to that
attributed to other parties, the nature and magnitude of the wastes involved, the various
technologies that can be used for remediation and the determination of acceptable remediation with
respect to a particular site. If the Company’s future loss contingency is ultimately determined to be
at the unaccrued maximum of the estimated range of possible outcomes for every site for which costs
can be reasonably estimated, the Company’s accrual for environmental-related activities would be $
93.4million higher than the minimum accruals at December 31, 2024. Additionally, costs for
environmental-related activities may not be reasonably estimable at early stages of investigation and
therefore would not be included in the unaccrued maximum amount.
Fourof the Company’s currently and formerly owned manufacturing sites (Major Sites) account for the
majority of the accrual for environmental-related activities and the unaccrued maximum of the
estimated range of possible outcomes at December 31, 2024. At December 31, 2024, $ 250.3million, or
84.3% of the total accrual, related directly to the Major Sites. In the aggregate unaccrued maximum
of $ 93.4million at December 31, 2024, $ 70.6million, or 75.6%, related to the Major Sites. The
significant cost components of this liability continue to be related to remedy implementation,
regulatory agency interaction and project management and other costs. While different for each
specific environmental situation, these components generally each account for approximately 85%, 10%
and 5%, respectively, of the accrued amount and those percentages are subject to change over time.
While environmental investigations and remedial actions are in different stages at these sites,
additional investigations, remedial actions and monitoring will likely be required at each site.
The largest and most complex of the Major Sites is the Gibbsboro, New Jersey site (Gibbsboro) which
comprises the substantial majority of the environmental-related accrual. Gibbsboro, a former
manufacturing plant, and related areas, which ceased operations in 1978, has had various areas
included on the National Priorities List since 1999. This location has soil, sediment, surface water
and groundwater contamination related to the historic operations of the facility. Gibbsboro has been
divided by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) into sixoperable units (OUs) based on location
and characteristics, whose investigation and remediation efforts are likely to occur over an extended
period of time. To date, the Company has completed remedy construction on threeof the sixoperable
units. While there are administrative tasks to be completed before final agency
 73 
approval, the remediation phase of the work for these three OUs is effectively complete and future
work for these OUs is anticipated to be limited. OUs are in various phases of investigation and
remediation with the EPA that provide enough information to reasonably estimate cost ranges and
record environmental-related accruals. The most significant assumptions underlying the reliability
and precision of remediation cost estimates for the Gibbsboro site are the type and extent of future
remedies to be selected by the EPA and the costs of implementing those remedies.
The remaining threeMajor Sites comprising the majority of the accrual include: (1) a multi-party
Superfund site that (a) has received a record of decision from the federal EPA and is currently in
the remedial design phase for one OU, (b) has received a record of decision from the federal EPA for
an interim remedy for another OU and (c) has a remedial investigation ongoing for another OU, (2) a
closed paint manufacturing facility that is in the operation and maintenance phase of remediation
under both federal and state EPA programs and (3) a formerly-owned site containing warehouse and
office space that is in the remedial/design investigation phase under a state EPA program. Each of
these threeMajor Sites are in phases of investigation and remediation that provide sufficient
information to reasonably estimate cost ranges and record environmental-related accruals.
Excluding the Major Sites discussed above, no sites are individually material to the total accrual
balance. There are multiple, future events yet to occur, including further remedy selection and
design, remedy implementation and execution and securing applicable governmental agency approvals,
all of which have the potential to contribute to the uncertainty surrounding these future events. As
these events occur and to the extent that the cost estimates of the environmental remediation change,
the existing reserve will be adjusted.
Management cannot presently estimate the ultimate potential loss contingencies related to these sites
or other less significant sites until such time as a substantial portion of the investigation at the
sites is completed and remedial action plans are developed. Unasserted claims could have a material
effect on the Company’s loss contingency as more information becomes available over time. At December
31, 2024 , the Company did not have material loss contingency accruals related to unasserted claims.
Management does not expect that a material portion of unrecognized loss contingencies will be
recoverable through insurance, indemnification agreements or other sources. In the event any future
loss contingency significantly exceeds the current amount accrued, the recording of the ultimate
liability may result in a material impact on net income for the annual or interim period during which
the additional costs are accrued. Moreover, management does not believe that any potential liability
ultimately attributed to the Company for its environmental-related matters will have a material
adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity or cash flow due to the extended
length of time during which environmental investigation and remediation takes place. An estimate of
the potential impact on the Company’s operations cannot be made due to the aforementioned
uncertainties.
Management expects these contingent environmental-related liabilities to be resolved over an extended
period of time. Management is unable to provide a more specific time frame due to the indeterminate
amount of time to conduct investigation activities at any site, the indeterminate amount of time to
obtain environmental agency approval, as necessary, with respect to investigation and remediation
activities and the indeterminate amount of time necessary to conduct remediation activities.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations Topic of the ASC requires a liability to be
recognized for the fair value of a conditional asset retirement obligation if a settlement date and
fair value can be reasonably estimated. The Company recognizes a liability for any conditional asset
retirement obligation when sufficient information is available to reasonably estimate a settlement
date to determine the fair value of such a liability. The Company has identified certain conditional
asset retirement obligations at various current and closed manufacturing, distribution and store
facilities. These obligations relate primarily to asbestos abatement, hazardous waste Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) closures, well abandonment, transformers and used oil disposals
and underground storage tank closures. Using investigative, remediation and disposal methods that are
currently available to the Company, the estimated costs of these obligations were accrued and are not
significant. The recording of additional liabilities for future conditional asset retirement
obligations may result in a material impact on Net income for the annual or interim period during
which the costs are accrued. Management does not believe that any potential liability ultimately
attributed to the Company for its conditional asset retirement obligations will have a material
adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity or cash flow due to the extended
period of time over which sufficient information may become available regarding the closure or
modification of any one or group of the Company’s facilities. An estimate of the potential impact on
the Company’s operations cannot be made due to the aforementioned uncertainties.
 74 
Real Estate Financing
In December 2022, the Company closed a transaction to sell and subsequently lease back its partially-
constructed new global headquarters. As a result of this transaction, the Company has entered into
certain sale-leaseback agreements that do not qualify as asset sales and were accounted for as real
estate financing transactions. Net proceeds are recognized within the Financing Activities section in
the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows. The Company expects to receive total proceeds
approximating $ 800million to $ 850million on an incremental basis until the completion of
construction of the new global headquarters. The Company expects to receive the final proceeds for
the new global headquarters in the first quarter of 2025, at which point the Company will calculate
the remaining obligation under the terms of the lease. The following table summarizes the activity
related to this transaction and the corresponding balances recognized in the Consolidated Balance
Sheets.
 Activity: 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Proceeds received $ 244.2 $ 305.0 $ 210.0 
 Capitalized interest(1) 45.2 23.8 
 Balances: 
 Short-term liability(2) $ 49.7 $ 39.9 $ 20.0 
 Long-term liability(3) 715.9 475.9 187.0 
 Total liability $ 765.6 $ 515.8 $ 207.0 
(1) Interest is capitalized within construction in progress in Property, plant and equipment, net.
(2) The short-term portion of the liability is recorded in Other accruals.
(3) The long-term portion of the liability is recorded in Other long-term liabilities.
 NOTE 11 – LITIGATION 
In the course of its business, the Company is subject to a variety of claims and lawsuits, including,
but not limited to, litigation relating to product liability and warranty, personal injury,
environmental, intellectual property, commercial, contractual and antitrust claims, that are
inherently subject to many uncertainties regarding the possibility of a loss to the Company.
Uncertainties to which litigation is inherently subject include, among other things, costs,
unpredictable court or jury decisions that could affect other litigation against the Company and
encourage an increase in the number and nature of future claims and proceedings and differing laws
and regulations in jurisdictions where the Company operates. These uncertainties will ultimately be
resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur confirming the incurrence of a
liability or the reduction of a liability. In accordance with the Contingencies Topic of the ASC, the
Company accrues for these contingencies by a charge to income when it is both probable that one or
more future events will occur confirming the fact of a loss and the amount of the loss can be
reasonably estimated. In the event that the Company’s loss contingency is ultimately determined to be
significantly higher than currently accrued, the recording of the additional liability may result in
a material impact on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for the
annual or interim period during which such additional liability is accrued. In those cases where no
accrual is recorded because it is not probable that a liability has been incurred or the amount of
any such loss cannot be reasonably estimated, any potential liability ultimately determined to be
attributable to the Company may result in a material impact on the Company’s results of operations,
liquidity or financial condition for the annual or interim period during which such liability is
accrued. In those cases where no accrual is recorded or exposure to loss exists in excess of the
amount accrued, the Contingencies Topic of the ASC requires disclosure of the contingency when there
is a reasonable possibility that a loss or additional loss may have been incurred.
Due to the uncertainties involved in litigation, management is unable to predict the outcome of the
litigation identified below, the number or nature of possible future claims and proceedings or the
effect that any legislation and/or administrative regulations may have on the litigation or against
the Company. In addition, management cannot reasonably determine the scope or amount of the potential
costs and liabilities related to such litigation, or resulting from any such legislation and
regulations. With respect to the litigation identified below, the Company has only accrued for the
court-approved agreement related to the California Proceedings, identified in the Public Nuisance
Claim Litigation section. For the remaining litigation identified below, the Company does not believe
it is probable that a loss has occurred, or the Company believes it is not possible to estimate the
range of potential losses. In addition, any potential liability that may result from any changes to
legislation and regulations cannot reasonably be estimated. Due to the uncertainties associated with
the amount of any such liability and/or the nature of any other remedy which may be imposed in
litigation, any potential liability determined to be attributable to the Company arising out of such
litigation may have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity, or
financial condition. An estimate of the potential impact on the Company’s results of operations, cash
flow, liquidity or financial condition cannot be made due to the aforementioned uncertainties.
 75 
Lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation. The Company’s past operations included the manufacture
and sale of lead pigments and lead-based paints. The Company, along with other companies, is and has
been a defendant in a number of legal proceedings arising from the manufacture and sale of lead
pigments and lead-based paints. The plaintiffs’ claims have been based upon various legal theories,
including negligence, strict liability, breach of warranty, negligent misrepresentations and
omissions, fraudulent misrepresentations and omissions, concert of action, civil conspiracy,
violations of unfair trade practice and consumer protection laws, enterprise liability, market share
liability, public nuisance, unjust enrichment and other theories. The Company has also been a
defendant in legal proceedings arising from the manufacture and sale of non-lead-based paints that
seek recovery based upon various legal theories, including the failure to adequately warn of
potential exposure to lead during surface preparation when using non-lead-based paint on surfaces
previously painted with lead-based paint. Other than the California Proceedings and currently pending
cases, all of these legal proceedings have been concluded in favor of the Company and other
defendants at various stages in the proceedings.
In addition, from time to time, various legislation and administrative regulations have been enacted,
promulgated or proposed to impose obligations on present and former manufacturers of lead pigments
and lead-based paints respecting asserted health concerns associated with such products or to
overturn the effect of court decisions in which the Company and other manufacturers have been
successful. The Company is vigorously defending all lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation. The
Company expects that additional lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation may be filed against the
Company in the future asserting similar or different legal theories and seeking similar or different
types of damages and relief. The Company will continue to vigorously defend against any additional
litigation that may be filed, including utilizing all avenues of appeal, if necessary.
Public Nuisance Claim Litigation . The Company and other companies have been defendants in legal
proceedings seeking recovery based on public nuisance liability theories, among other theories,
brought by various states, cities and counties, including by the State of Rhode Island; the City of
St. Louis, Missouri; various cities and counties in the State of New Jersey; various cities in the
State of Ohio and the State of Ohio; the City of Chicago, Illinois; the City of Milwaukee, Wisconsin;
the County of Santa Clara, California and other public entities in the State of California (the
California Proceedings); and Lehigh and Montgomery Counties in Pennsylvania. Except for the
California Proceedings in which the Company reached a court-approved agreement in 2019 after nearly
twenty years of litigation, all of those legal proceedings have been concluded in favor of the
Company and other defendants at various stages in the proceedings. Most recently, on May 7, 2024, as
further described below in Wisconsin Litigation, threeplaintiffs filed amended complaints alleging,
in part, public nuisance claims.
Wisconsin Litigation . The Company and other companies are or have been defendants in a number of
legal proceedings seeking monetary damages and other relief from alleged personal injuries. The
current proceedings consist of twofederal court cases pending in the United States District Court for
the Eastern District of Wisconsin (Ernest Gibson v. American Cyanamid, et al. and Deziree and
Detareion Valoe v. American Cyanamid, et. al.) and onecase pending in Milwaukee County Circuit Court
in Wisconsin (Arrieona Beal v. Hattie and Jerry Mitchell, et al.). Those matters include claims by
fourindividuals allegedly injured from ingestion of lead pigment or lead-containing paint while they
were minors. The plaintiffs generally seek compensatory damages and have invoked Wisconsin’s risk
contribution theory (which is similar to market share liability, except that liability can be joint
and several) due to the plaintiff’s inability to identify the manufacturer of any product that
allegedly injured the plaintiff.
On May 20, 2021, as a result of a decision in favor of the Company by United States Court of Appeals
for the Seventh Circuit in the Ravon Owens v. American Cyanamid, et al., Cesar Sifuentes v. American
Cyanamid, et al. and Glenn Burton, Jr. v. American Cyanamid, et al. cases, the Company and the
threeother defendants filed motions for summary judgment to dismiss all claims of the approximately
150plaintiffs then pending in the Eastern District of Wisconsin, including the claims of Gibson and
the Valoes. On March 3, 2022, the district court granted summary judgment in favor of the Company and
the other defendants. On September 15, 2022, the plaintiffs filed notices of appeal with the Seventh
Circuit, seeking to appeal the district court’s summary judgment in favor of the Company and the
other defendants. On February 9, 2024, the Seventh Circuit affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment in favor of the Company and the other defendants in all cases except those filed by Gibson
and the Valoes, which cases were remanded to the district court for further proceedings. Following
remand of the Gibson and Valoe cases, the threeremaining plaintiffs filed amended complaints on May
7, 2024, alleging strict liability, negligence and public nuisance claims. The defendants filed
motions to dismiss the plaintiffs’ amended complaints on June 20, 2024. On November 8, 2024, the
district court granted in part and denied in part defendants’ motions to dismiss the amended
complaints, dismissing the second cause of action for general negligence and plaintiffs’ abatement
allegations, but otherwise permitting the case to proceed. On December 6, 2024, the Company and some
of the other defendants filed a third-party complaint against NL Industries, Inc. (NL) and the owners
and landlords of the properties where plaintiffs resided. Some of the owners and landlords filed a
motion to dismiss the third-party complaints; that motion remains pending. On January 30, 2025, the
district court entered a stipulated order dismissing NL pursuant to the execution of a Pierringer
release between plaintiffs and NL.
 76 
In the separate state court proceeding, on August 24, 2021, Arrieona Beal filed an amended complaint
in Milwaukee County Circuit Court, naming the Company and other alleged former lead pigment
manufacturers as defendants pursuant to the risk contribution liability theory. The plaintiff
previously had sued her landlords. On January 3, 2024, the Company and some of the other
manufacturing defendants filed a third-party complaint against NL and cross-claims against the
landlord defendants. On January 10, 2024, one of the landlord defendants filed a counterclaim and
cross-claim against all parties. On May 15, 2024, the plaintiff filed a motion for partial judgment
on the pleadings to strike the Company and other manufacturing defendants’ affirmative defenses, and
on August 6, 2024, the circuit court granted defendants’ motion to strike the plaintiff’s motion. On
December 6, 2024, plaintiff filed a notice of voluntary dismissal as to landlords Hattie and Jerry
Mitchell pursuant to the execution of a Pierringer release.
Insurance Coverage Litigation. The Company and its liability insurers, including certain underwriters
at Lloyd’s of London, initiated legal proceedings against each other to determine, among other
things, whether the costs and liabilities associated with the abatement of lead pigment are covered
under certain insurance policies issued to the Company. The insurers’ action, which was filed on
February 23, 2006, in the Supreme Court of the State of New York, County of New York, was dismissed.
The Company’s action, filed on March 3, 2006, in the Common Pleas Court, Cuyahoga County, Ohio,
previously was stayed and inactive.
On January 9, 2019, the Company filed an unopposed motion to lift the stay with the trial court,
which was granted, allowing the case to proceed to determine whether the insurers were required to
indemnify the Company following the California Proceedings. On June 28, 2019, the Company and its
liability insurers each filed separate motions for summary judgment seeking various forms of relief.
The trial court entered an order on December 4, 2020, granting the insurers’ motion for summary
judgment, denying the Company’s motion and entering final judgment in favor of the insurers. The
trial court sided with the Company on all of the issues presented, except one.
On December 21, 2020, the Company filed a notice of appeal to the Court of Appeals of Cuyahoga
County, Ohio, Eighth Appellate District, and the insurers filed cross-appeals. On September 1, 2022,
the appellate court reversed the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, finding in favor of the
Company on its appeal and against the insurers on their cross-appeal, and remanded the case to the
trial court. On September 12, 2022, the insurers applied to the appellate court for reconsideration
of its decision, en banc review, or certification of an appeal to the Ohio Supreme Court, which the
appellate court denied.
The insurers subsequently filed a notice of appeal to the Ohio Supreme Court, to which the Company
filed its response. On May 9, 2023, the Ohio Supreme Court accepted the insurers’ appeal. Oral
argument was held on October 24, 2023. On December 10, 2024, the Ohio Supreme Court reversed the
Court of Appeals and mandated judgment in favor of the insurers, holding that because the abatement-
fund payment was made to prevent future harm rather than compensate for past harm, payment was not
“damages” covered under the insurance policies.
This decision means that insurance proceeds could be unavailable under the policies at issue to
mitigate past or future abatement related liabilities. The Company has not recorded a receivable
related to these insurance policies or otherwise assumed that proceeds from these insurance policies
would be received in estimating any contingent liability accrual within the consolidated financial
statements. Therefore, this decision, without a determination of liability against the Company in the
lead pigment or lead-based paint litigation will have no impact on the Company’s results of
operation, liquidity or financial condition. As previously stated, except with respect to the
litigation in the California Proceedings, the Company has not accrued any amounts for the lead
pigment or lead-based paint litigation and any significant liability ultimately determined to be
attributable to the Company relating to such litigation may result in a material impact on the
Company’s results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for the annual or interim period
during which such liability is accrued.
 77 
Other matters. On December 18, 2019, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the
Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the Administrator of the
New Jersey Spill Compensation Fund (collectively, the NJ DEP) filed a lawsuit against the Company in
the Superior Court of New Jersey Law Division in Camden County, New Jersey. The NJ DEP seeks to
recover natural resource damages, punitive damages and litigation fees and costs, as well as other
costs, damages, declaratory relief and penalties pursuant to New Jersey state statutes and common law
theories in connection with the alleged discharge of hazardous substances and pollutants at the
Company’s Gibbsboro, New Jersey site, a former manufacturing plant and related facilities. Following
expert discovery, on November 20, 2024, the Company filed a motion in the United States District
Court for the District of New Jersey seeking to enforce the terms of an April 2019 Remedial
Design/Remedial Action Consent Decree between the Company and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (the Consent Decree) that is being attacked by the NJ DEP’s state court lawsuit. On
December 21, 2024, the United States filed a brief in opposition to the Company’s motion, to which
the Company filed a reply brief. The Company’s motion regarding the Consent Decree remains pending in
federal court. Meanwhile, on November 20, 2024, the Company filed a motion to stay the state court
proceedings pending resolution of the Company’s motion regarding the Consent Decree. On December 19,
2024, the state court denied the Company’s stay motion, but suspended all then-pending dates in the
court’s schedule, including the previous trial date of March 10, 2025, until an ongoing discovery
dispute between the Company and the NJ DEP is resolved. On December 20, 2024, the NJ DEP filed a
motion for partial summary judgment seeking to find the Company liable under the Spill Act and Solid
Waste Management Act. On January 31, 2025, the state court denied the NJ DEP’s motion for partial
summary judgment. On February 6, 2025, the state court sent an automated notice re-setting the trial
for March 10, 2025. Upon the parties’ request seeking clarification regarding the schedule, there is
a status conference with the state court set for February 18, 2025.
In July 2024, a third-party assurance, testing, inspection and certification provider changed its
listing for one of the Company’s protective coatings products, an intumescent coating used for fire
protection of steel beam assemblies. The Company has received claims regarding this matter and is
working with its customers and end users to assist in understanding the potential impacts of the
listing change, including the extent of potential remedial action that may involve the application of
additional product. The Company’s review of this matter is ongoing. Except for an immaterial product
warranty liability which remains recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2024,
any additional amount or range of potential loss cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
 NOTE 12 – SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY 
Capital Stock
At December 31, 2024, there were 900,000,000shares of common stock and 30,000,000shares of serial
preferred stock authorized for issuance. Of the authorized serial preferred stock, 3,000,000shares
are designated as cumulative redeemable serial preferred stock. There we no shares of serial
preferred stock issued during 2024, 2023 or 2022.
Under the 2006 Equity and Performance Incentive Plan (2006 Employee Plan), 71,100,000shares may be
issued or transferred. An aggregate of 13,603,814, 15,830,386and 17,939,143shares of common stock at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, were reserved for the exercise and future grants of
option rights and future grants of restricted stock and restricted stock units. See Note 14 for
additional information related to stock-based compensation.
Shares outstanding shown in the following table included 1,426,883shares of common stock held in a
revocable trust at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. The revocable trust is used to accumulate assets
for the purpose of funding the ultimate obligation of certain non-qualified benefit plans.
Transactions between the Company and the trust are accounted for in accordance with the Deferred
Compensation – Rabbi Trusts Subtopic of the Compensation Topic of the ASC, which requires the assets
held by the trust be consolidated with the Company’s accounts.
 78 
contributions to the domestic defined contribution plan. The related proceeds were $ 22.0million.
Dividends
The following table summarizes the dividends declared and paid on common stock:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash dividend per share $ 2.86 $ 2.42 $ 2.40 
 Total dividends (in millions) 723.4 623.7 618.5 
Treasury Stock
The Company acquires its common stock for general corporate purposes through its publicly announced
share repurchase program. As of December 31, 2024, the Company had remaining authorization from its
Board of Directors to purchase 34.4million shares of its common stock. The table below summarizes the
Company’s share repurchase activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Treasury stock purchases (in millions) $ 1,738.8 $ 1,432.0 $ 883.2 
 Treasury stock purchases (shares) 5,200,000 5,600,000 3,350,000 
 Average price per share $ 334.38 $ 255.72 $ 263.64 
 NOTE 13 – DEFINED CONTRIBUTION SAVINGS PLAN 
As of December 31, 2024, 44,917employees contributed to the Company’s defined contribution savings
plan, voluntary to all eligible salaried employees and any employee in a group of employees to which
coverage has been extended on a non-discriminatory basis by the plan’s Administration Committee.
Participants are allowed to contribute, on a pretax or after-tax basis, up to the lesser of
fiftypercent of their annual compensation or the maximum dollar amount allowed under the Internal
Revenue Code. The Company matches one hundredpercent of all contributions up to sixpercent of
eligible employee contributions. Such participant contributions may be invested in a variety of
investment funds or a Company common stock
 79 
fund and may be exchanged between investments as directed by the participant. Participants are
permitted to diversify both future and prior Company matching contributions previously allocated to
the Company common stock fund into a variety of investment funds.
The Company made contributions to the defined contribution savings plan on behalf of participating
employees, representing amounts authorized by employees to be withheld from their earnings, of $
279.6million, $ 260.5million and $ 240.1million in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The Company’s
matching contributions to the defined contribution savings plan charged to operations were $
165.1million, $ 153.9million and $ 140.0million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
At December 31, 2024, there were 16,771,640shares of the Company’s common stock being held by the
defined contribution savings plan, representing 6.7% of the total number of voting shares
outstanding. Shares of Company common stock credited to each member’s account under the defined
contribution savings plan are voted by the trustee under instructions from each individual plan
member. Shares for which no instructions are received are voted by the trustee in the same proportion
as those for which instructions are received.
 NOTE 14 – STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION 
The 2006 Employee Plan authorizes the Board of Directors, or a committee of the Board of Directors,
to issue or transfer up to an aggregate of 71,100,000shares of common stock, plus any shares relating
to awards that expire, are forfeited or canceled. The Company issues new shares upon exercise of
option rights (options) and vesting of restricted stock units (RSUs). The 2006 Employee Plan permits
the granting of options, appreciation rights, restricted stock, RSUs, performance shares and
performance units to eligible employees. At December 31, 2024, noappreciation rights, performance
shares or performance units had been granted under the 2006 Employee Plan. Shares available for
future grants under the 2006 Employee Plan were 5,458,273at December 31, 2024.
The 2006 Stock Plan for Nonemployee Directors (Nonemployee Director Plan) authorizes the Board of
Directors, or a committee of the Board of Directors, to issue or transfer up to an aggregate of
600,000shares of common stock, plus any shares relating to awards that expire, are forfeited or
canceled. The Nonemployee Director Plan permits the granting of options, appreciation rights,
restricted stock and RSUs to members of the Board of Directors who are not employees of the Company.
At December 31, 2024, nooptions or appreciation rights had been granted under the Nonemployee
Director Plan. Shares available for future grants under the Nonemployee Director Plan were 210,675at
December 31, 2024.
At December 31, 2024, the Company had total unrecognized stock-based compensation expense of $
192.7million that is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.08years.
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Stock-based compensation expense $ 138.1 $ 115.9 $ 99.7 
 Income tax benefit recognized 34.1 28.6 24.6 
Excess tax benefits from share-based payments are recognized as an income tax benefit in the
Statements of Consolidated Income when options are exercised and RSUs vest. For the years ended
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company’s excess tax benefit from options exercised and RSUs
vested reduced the income tax provision by $ 73.0million, $ 35.7million and $ 35.4million,
respectively.
Options
The fair value of the Company’s options was estimated at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes-
Merton option-pricing model with the following weighted-average assumptions for all options granted:
 2024 2023 2022 
 Risk-free interest rate 3.93 % 4.57 % 4.00 % 
 Expected life of options 5.02 years 5.02 years 5.05 years 
 Expected dividend yield of stock .83 % .94 % .92 % 
 Expected volatility of stock 27.5 % 29.3 % 31.6 % 
 80 
The risk-free interest rate is based upon the U.S. Treasury yield curve at the time of grant. The
expected life of options was calculated using a scenario analysis model. Historical data was used to
aggregate the holding period from actual exercises, post-vesting cancellations and hypothetical
assumed exercises on all outstanding options. The expected dividend yield of stock is the Company’s
best estimate of the expected future dividend yield. Expected volatility of stock was calculated
using historical and implied volatilities.
Grants of non-qualified and incentive stock options have been awarded to certain officers and key
employees under the 2006 Employee Plan. The options generally become exercisable to the extent of
one-third of the optioned shares for each full year following the date of grant and generally expire
ten yearsafter the date of grant. Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to options granted
to eligible employees amounted to $ 116.4million at December 31, 2024. The unrecognized compensation
expense is being amortized on a straight-line basis over the three-yearvesting period, net of
estimated forfeitures based on historical activity, and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-
average period of 1.14years.
The following table summarizes the Company’s option activity:
 Weighted 
 Average 
 Exercise Aggregate Weighted Average 
 Optioned Price Intrinsic Remaining Term 
 Shares Per Share Value (in Years) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstanding at 8,925,011 $ 175.70 $ 1,215.6 5.64 
 January 1, 2024 
 Granted 939,699 376.90 
 Exercised -1,871,201 131.48 
 Forfeited -53,373 254.48 
 Expired -5,270 202.79 
 Outstanding at 7,934,866 209.39 $ 1,074.4 5.69 
 December 31, 2024 
 Exercisable at 6,054,247 $ 178.95 $ 974.6 4.64 
 December 31, 2024 
The following table summarizes fair value and intrinsic value information for option activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted average grant date fair value $ 109.05 $ 77.08 $ 69.82 
 per share 
 Total fair value of options vested 66.8 61.3 57.9 
 Total intrinsic value of options 402.7 170.6 125.4 
 exercised 
RSUs
The fair value of each RSU is equal to the market value of a share of the Company’s stock on the
grant date. Grants of time-based RSUs, which generally require three yearsof continuous employment
from the date of grant before vesting and receiving the stock without restriction, have been awarded
to certain officers and key employees under the 2006 Employee Plan. The February 2024, 2023 and 2022
grants of performance-based RSUs vest at the end of a three-yearperiod based on the Company’s
achievement of specified financial and operating performance goals relating to earnings per share and
return on net assets employed.
Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to grants of RSUs to eligible employees amounted to $
74.4million at December 31, 2024. The unrecognized compensation expense is being amortized on a
straight-line basis over the vesting period and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average
period of 0.82years.
Grants of RSUs have been awarded to nonemployee directors under the Nonemployee Director Plan. These
grants generally vest and stock is received without restriction to the extent of one-third of the
RSUs for each year following the date of grant. Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to
grants of RSUs to nonemployee directors amounted to $ 1.9million at December 31, 2024. The
unrecognized compensation expense is being amortized on a straight-line basis over the three-
yearvesting period and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 0.90years.
 81 
The following table summarizes the Company’s RSU activity:
 Weighted 
 Average Grant Aggregate Weighted Average 
 Date Fair Intrinsic Remaining Term 
 Number of RSUs Value Per Share Value (in Years) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstanding at 434,874 $ 244.21 $ 135.6 1.26 
 January 1, 2024 
 Granted 124,667 305.50 
 Vested -122,276 239.14 
 Forfeited -4,251 251.80 
 Outstanding at 
 December 31, 433,014 $ 265.03 $ 147.2 1.18 
 2024 
The following table summarizes the fair value and intrinsic value information for RSU activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted average grant date fair value $ 305.50 $ 232.22 $ 271.75 
 per share 
 Intrinsic value of RSUs vested during 38.4 68.5 97.5 
 year 
NOTE 15 – ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
The components of AOCI, including the reclassification adjustments for items that were reclassified
from AOCI to Net income, are shown below.
 Pension and 
 Other Unrealized Net 
 Foreign Currency Postretirement Gains on 
 Translation Benefits Cash Flow 
 Adjustments(1) Adjustments(2) Hedges(3) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at $ -702.1 $ -32.2 $ 35.9 $ -698.4 
 January 1, 2022 
 Amounts 
 recognized in -108.7 106.8 -1.9 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified 3.7 -4.0 -0.3 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, -810.8 78.3 31.9 -700.6 
 2022 
 Amounts 
 recognized in 93.9 3.9 97.8 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified -17.9 -3.6 -21.5 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, -716.9 64.3 28.3 -624.3 
 2023 
 Amounts 
 recognized in -256.0 23.0 -233.0 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified -14.2 -3.7 -17.9 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, $ -972.9 $ 73.1 $ 24.6 $ -875.2 
 2024 
(1) Includes changes in the fair value of cross currency swap contracts of $ 53.6million, $( 24.9)
million and $ 34.1million in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. See Note 16.
(2) Net of taxes of $( 2.0) million, $ 3.1million and $( 35.0) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively. See Note 8.
(3) Net of taxes of $ 1.2million in 2024 and 2023 and $ 1.1million in 2022. See Statements of
Consolidated Comprehensive Income.
 82 
Net Investment Hedges
The Company has entered into U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap contracts with various
counterparties to hedge the Company’s net investment in its European operations. During the term of
the contracts, the Company will pay fixed-rate interest in euros and receive fixed-rate interest in
U.S. dollars, thereby effectively converting a portion of the Company's U.S. dollar denominated
fixed-rate debt to euro denominated fixed-rate debt. The outstanding contracts as of December 31,
2024 are summarized by maturity date in the table below.
 Notional Value Maturity Date 
 200.0 August 8, 2025 
 687.7 June 1, 2027 
 100.0 March 1, 2028 
 ──────────────────────────────────────── 
 525.0 August 15, 2029 
 100.0 September 1, 2031 
 $ 1,612.7 
In August 2024, the Company settled its $ 150.0million U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap
contract entered into on March 28, 2023. In May 2024, the Company settled its $ 500.0million U.S.
dollar to euro cross currency swap contract entered into on February 13, 2020. At the time of both of
these settlements, an immaterial unrealized loss was recognized in AOCI.
In December 2023, the Company settled its $ 100.0million U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap
contract entered into on August 1, 2023. At the time of settlement, an immaterial unrealized gain was
recognized in AOCI.
The following table summarizes the balance sheet location of the cross currency swap contracts. See
Note 17 for additional information on the fair value of these contracts.
 December 31, December 31, December 31, 
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Other current assets $ 9.4 $ — $ — 
 Other assets 39.5 — 9.1 
 Other accruals — 12.0 — 
 Other long-term liabilities — 12.4 — 
The changes in fair value of the cross currency swap contracts are recognized in the foreign currency
translation adjustments component of AOCI. See Note 15. The following table summarizes the unrealized
gains (losses) for the years ended December 31:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gains (losses) $ 71.2 $ -33.1 $ 45.2 
 Tax effect -17.6 8.2 -11.1 
 Gains (losses), net of taxes $ 53.6 $ -24.9 $ 34.1 
Derivatives Not Designated as Hedging Instruments
The Company enters into foreign currency option and forward contracts with maturity dates less than
twelve months primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. The related gains and
losses are recorded in Other (income) expense - net. See Note 19 for further details.
 83 
The Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures Topic of the ASC applies to the Company’s financial and
non-financial assets and liabilities. The guidance applies when other standards require or permit the
fair value measurement of assets and liabilities. Under the guidance, assets and liabilities measured
at fair value are categorized as follows:
Level 1: Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets
Level 2: Significant other observable inputs
Level 3: Significant unobservable inputs
There were no assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis classified as Level
3 at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. Except for the acquisition-related fair value measurements and
assets held for sale prior to divestiture of the China architectural business described in Note 3 and
the reporting unit impairment analysis and trademark quantitative impairment test described in Note
6, there were no assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis. The following
table summarizes the Company’s assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis,
categorized using the fair value hierarchy.
 Dec… De… Dec… 
 31, 31, 31, 
 2024 20… 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Tot… Le… Lev… To… Lev… Le… Tot… Le… Lev… 
 1 2 1 2 1 2 
 A… 
 D… 
 c… $ 98.6 $ 98… $ — $ 84… $ 84.7 $ 74.1 $ 43… $ 30.4 
 p… 
 Q… 
 r… — — 29.8 29… 
 p… 
 N… 
 i… 48.9 48.9 — 9.1 9.1 
 h… 
 $ 147… $ 98… $ 48.9 $ 84… $ 84.7 $ — $ 113… $ 73… $ 39.5 
 L… 
 N… 
 i… $ — $ 24… $ 24… $ — 
 h… 
The deferred compensation plan assets consist of the investment funds maintained for future payments
under the Company’s executive deferred compensation plans, which are structured as rabbi trusts. The
investments are marketable securities accounted for under the Debt and Equity Securities Topic of the
ASC. The level 1 investments are valued using quoted market prices multiplied by the number of
shares. The level 2 investments are valued based on vendor or broker models. There was $ 7.0million
and $ 6.4million of deferred compensation plan assets held in partnership funds measured using NAV
(or its equivalent) as a practical expedient as of December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. These
investments are not classified in the fair value hierarchy. The cost basis of all investments within
the deferred compensation plan and qualified replacement plan was $ 82.7million, $ 76.3million and $
67.2million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The qualified replacement plan assets consisted of investment funds maintained for future
contributions to the Company’s domestic defined contribution pension plan. See Note 8. During 2023,
the remaining balance was fully utilized to fund the Company’s domestic defined contribution pension
plan. The cost basis of the investment funds was $ 29.8million at December 31, 2022.
The net investment hedge asset and liability represent the fair value of the cross currency swaps.
See Note 16. The fair value is based on a valuation model that uses observable inputs, including
interest rate curves and the euro foreign currency rate.
The carrying amounts reported for Cash and cash equivalents and Short-term borrowings approximate
fair value.
The fair value of the Company’s publicly traded debt is based on quoted market prices. The fair value
of the Company’s non-publicly traded debt is estimated using discounted cash flow analyses, based on
the Company’s current incremental borrowing rates for similar types of borrowing arrangements. The
Company’s publicly traded debt and non-traded debt are classified as level 1 and level 2,
respectively, in the fair value hierarchy. The following table summarizes the carrying amounts and
fair values of the Company’s publicly traded debt and non-traded debt.
 84 
The Company manufactures and sells paint, stains, supplies, equipment and floor covering through
company-operated stores, branded and private label products through retailers and a broad range of
industrial coatings directly to global manufacturing customers through company-operated branches. A
large portion of the Company’s revenue is recognized at a point in time and made to customers who are
not engaged in a long-term supply agreement or any form of contract with the Company. These sales are
paid for at the time of sale in cash, credit card or on account with the vast majority of customers
having terms between 30 and 60 days, not to exceed one year. Many customers who purchase on account
take advantage of early payment discounts offered by paying within 30 days of being invoiced. The
Company estimates variable consideration for these sales on the basis of both historical information
and current trends to estimate the expected amount of discounts to which customers are likely to be
entitled.
The remaining revenue is governed by long-term supply agreements and related purchase orders
(contracts) that specify shipping terms and aspects of the transaction price including rebates,
discounts and other sales incentives, such as advertising support. Contracts are at standalone
pricing. The performance obligation in these contracts is determined by each of the individual
purchase orders and the respective stated quantities, with revenue being recognized at a point in
time when obligations under the terms of the agreement are satisfied. This generally occurs with the
transfer of control of our products to the customer. Sales, value add and other taxes we collect
concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue.
See Note 22 for the Company’s disaggregation of Net sales by Reportable Segment. As the Reportable
Segments are aligned by similar economic factors, trends and customers, this disaggregation best
depicts how the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows are affected by
economic factors. Approximately 80% of the Company’s net external sales are in the Company’s North
America region (which is comprised of the United States, Canada and the Caribbean region), slightly
less than 10% in the EMEAI region (Europe, Middle East, Africa and India), with the remaining global
regions accounting for the residual balance. No individual country outside of the United States is
individually significant.
The Company has made payments or given credits for various incentives at the beginning of a long-term
contract where future revenue is expected and before satisfaction of performance obligations. Under
these circumstances, the Company recognizes a contract asset and amortizes these prepayments over the
expected benefit life of the long-term contract, typically on a straight-line basis.
The majority of variable consideration in the Company’s contracts include volume rebates, discounts
and other incentives, where the customer receives a retrospective percentage rebate based on the
amount of their purchases. In these situations, the rebates are accrued as a fixed percentage of
sales and recorded as a reduction of Net sales until paid to the customer per the terms of the
contract. Forms of variable consideration such as tiered rebates, whereby a customer receives a
retrospective price decrease dependent on the volume of their purchases, are calculated using a
forecasted percentage to determine the most likely amount to accrue. Management creates a baseline
calculation using historical sales and then utilizing forecast information, estimates the anticipated
sales volume each quarter to calculate the expected reduction to Net sales. The remainder of the
transaction price is fixed as agreed upon with the customer, limiting estimation of revenues,
including constraints.
The Company’s Accounts receivable and current and long-term contract assets and liabilities are
summarized in the following table.
 85 
The difference between the opening and closing balances of the Company’s contract assets and contract
liabilities primarily results from the timing difference between the contractual performance
obligation and the associated payment.
Provisions for estimated returns are established and the expected costs continue to be recognized as
contra-revenue per ASC 606 when the products are sold. The Company only offers an assurance type
warranty on products sold, and there is no material service to the customer beyond fixing defects
that existed at the time of sale and no warranties are sold separately.
Warranty liabilities are excluded from the table above. Amounts recognized during the year from
deferred revenue were not material. The Company records a right of return liability within each of
its operations to accrue for expected customer returns. Historical actual returns are used to
estimate future returns as a percentage of current sales. Obligations for returns and refunds were
not material individually or in the aggregate.
Allowance for Current Expected Credit Losses
The following table summarizes the movement in the Company’s allowance for current expected credit
losses:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Beginning balance $ 59.6 $ 56.6 $ 48.9 
 Bad debt expense 69.5 67.9 65.3 
 Uncollectible accounts written off, net -68.7 -64.9 -57.6 
 of recoveries 
 Ending balance $ 60.4 $ 59.6 $ 56.6 
 NOTE 19 – OTHER (INCOME) EXPENSE 
Other General (Income) Expense - Net
Included in Other general (income) expense - net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Provisions for environmental matters - $ -1.3 $ 80.7 $ -7.1 
 net 
 Gain on divestiture of business (see — -20.1 — 
 Note 3) 
 (Gain) loss on sale or disposition of -49.9 0.9 -17.8 
 assets 
 Other 12.4 5.6 — 
 Total $ -38.8 $ 67.1 $ -24.9 
Provisions for environmental matters – net represent initial provisions for site-specific estimated
costs of environmental investigation or remediation and increases or decreases to environmental-
related accruals as information becomes available upon which more accurate costs can be reasonably
estimated and as additional accounting guidelines are issued. Provisions for environmental matters -
net for the year ended December 31, 2024 included an immaterial amount of insurance proceeds related
to environmental cleanup at a current manufacturing site. See Note 10 for further details on the
Company’s environmental-related activities.
The (gain) loss on sale or disposition of assets represents the net realized (gain) loss associated
with the sale or disposal of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets previously used in
the conduct of the primary business of the Company. (Gain) loss on sale or disposition of assets for
the year ended December 31, 2024 included an immaterial amount of insurance proceeds related to a
current manufacturing site.
 86 
Other (Income) Expense - Net
Included in Other (income) expense - net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investment (gains) losses $ -16.9 $ -22.9 $ 9.7 
 Loss on extinguishment of debt (see Note — 12.8 — 
 7) 
 Net expense from banking activities 15.7 15.0 12.2 
 Foreign currency transaction related 3.9 80.5 33.6 
 losses - net 
 Miscellaneous pension and benefit -13.1 -21.1 4.0 
 (income) expense 
 Other income -69.8 -48.5 -39.6 
 Other expense 35.5 49.7 27.1 
 Total $ -44.7 $ 65.5 $ 47.0 
Investment (gains) losses primarily relate to the change in market value of the investments held in
the deferred compensation plan. See Note 17 for additional information on the fair value of these
investments.
Foreign currency transaction related losses - net include the impact from foreign currency
transactions, including from highly inflationary economies such as Argentina, and net realized losses
from foreign currency option and forward contracts. See Note 16 for further details regarding these
foreign currency contracts.
Miscellaneous pension and benefit (income) expense consists of the non-service components of net
periodic pension and benefit cost (credit). See Note 8.
Other income and other expense included items of revenue, gains, expenses and losses that were
unrelated to the primary business purpose of the Company. There were no items within other income or
other expense that were individually significant at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022.
 NOTE 20 – INCOME TAXES 
Significant components of the provisions for income taxes were as follows:
 Current: 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Federal $ 558.0 $ 553.4 $ 505.5 
 Foreign 155.1 147.6 90.3 
 State and local 132.2 109.0 102.0 
 Total current 845.3 810.0 697.8 
 Deferred: 
 Federal -54.8 -39.9 -81.7 
 Foreign -15.8 -51.5 -47.3 
 State and local -4.3 2.5 -15.8 
 Total deferred -74.9 -88.9 -144.8 
 Total provisions for income taxes $ 770.4 $ 721.1 $ 553.0 
 87 
A reconciliation of the statutory federal income tax rate to the effective tax rate follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 Statutory federal income tax rate 21.0 % 21.0 % 21.0 % 
 Effect of: 
 State and local income taxes 3.2 3.0 2.8 
 Investment vehicles -0.5 -0.5 -0.4 
 Employee share-based payments -2.1 -1.1 -1.4 
 Research and development credits -0.3 -0.4 -0.6 
 Amended returns and refunds -0.2 0.2 0.4 
 Taxes on non-U.S. earnings 1.1 0.8 0.2 
 Other - net 0.1 0.2 -0.5 
 Reported effective tax rate 22.3 % 23.2 % 21.5 % 
The decrease in the effective tax rate for 2024 compared to 2023 was primarily related to a more
favorable impact from tax benefits related to employee share-based payments. The other significant
components of the Company’s effective tax rate were consistent year-over-year.
Significant components of income before income taxes as used for income tax purposes, were as
follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Domestic $ 3,046.6 $ 2,817.0 $ 2,427.6 
 Foreign 405.2 292.9 145.5 
 $ 3,451.8 $ 3,109.9 $ 2,573.1 
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying
amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income
tax purposes using the enacted tax rates and laws that are currently in effect.
Significant components of the Company’s deferred tax assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022 were as follows:
 Deferred tax assets: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Environmental and other similar items $ 66.8 $ 72.0 $ 66.4 
 Employee related and benefit items 175.2 162.1 157.1 
 Operating lease liabilities 499.6 483.2 478.1 
 Research and development capitalization 103.9 81.5 52.6 
 Other items 206.5 205.6 204.1 
 Total deferred tax assets 1,052.0 1,004.4 958.3 
 Deferred tax liabilities: 
 Intangible assets and Property, plant 948.7 1,001.1 973.4 
 and equipment 
 LIFO inventories 120.5 115.2 97.3 
 Operating lease right-of-use assets 482.1 465.6 460.5 
 Other items 40.7 28.6 31.7 
 Total deferred tax liabilities 1,592.0 1,610.5 1,562.9 
 Net deferred tax liabilities $ 540.0 $ 606.1 $ 604.6 
Netted against the Company’s other deferred tax assets were valuation allowances of $ 124.5million, $
106.6million and $ 97.5million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The Company has $
13.5million of domestic net operating loss carryforwards acquired through acquisitions that have
expiration dates through tax year 2037, foreign tax credits of $ 34.9million that expire in calendar
years 2028 through 2034 and foreign net operating losses of $ 339.1million. The foreign net
 88 
operating losses are related to various jurisdictions that provide for both indefinite carryforward
periods and others with carryforward periods that expire between tax years 2024 to 2034.
The Company and its subsidiaries file income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and various
state and foreign jurisdictions. The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2013 through 2016 income
tax returns in 2023 and paid the related assessments in the fourth quarter of 2023 and first quarter
of 2024. The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2011 income tax return in 2023 and paid the tax
assessment in the second quarter of 2024 and the interest assessment in the third quarter of 2024.
The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2017 through 2019 income tax returns in the fourth
quarter of 2024 and expects to pay the tax and interest assessment in the first quarter of 2025. The
IRS plans to start its next audit cycle of the Company’s 2020 through 2022 income tax returns in
2025. As of December 31, 2024, the federal statute of limitations has not expired for the 2017
through 2024 tax years.
As of December 31, 2024, the Company is subject to non-U.S. income tax examinations for the tax years
of 2015 through 2024. In addition, the Company is subject to state and local income tax examinations
for the tax years 2017 through 2024.
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at beginning of year $ 121.8 $ 242.4 $ 228.5 
 Additions based on tax positions related 16.0 14.2 18.7 
 to the current year 
 Additions for tax positions of prior 12.8 12.6 10.6 
 years 
 Reductions for tax positions of prior -8.6 -16.9 -6.0 
 years 
 Settlements -31.7 -123.2 -1.7 
 Lapses of statutes of limitations -11.0 -7.3 -7.7 
 Balance at end of year $ 99.3 $ 121.8 $ 242.4 
The decrease in unrecognized tax benefits was primarily related to settlements of federal adjustments
with the IRS in the tax years 2017 through 2019. There were also additions in unrecognized tax
benefits related to the reversal of benefits recognized from certain positions taken on current and
prior year income tax returns filed in U.S. federal and various state jurisdictions. These additions
were partially offset by various positions taken on prior year income tax returns filed in U.S. and
various foreign jurisdictions that were no longer deemed to be at risk. At December 31, 2024, 2023
and 2022, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the
effective tax rate was $ 84.0million, $ 109.4million and $ 230.3million, respectively.
Included in the balance of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2024 is $ 7.9million related to
tax positions for which it is reasonably possible that the total amounts could significantly change
during the next twelve months. This amount represents a decrease in unrecognized tax benefits
comprised primarily of items related to federal audits of partnership investments and expiring
statutes in federal, foreign and state jurisdictions.
The Company classifies all income tax related interest and penalties as income tax expense. During
the year ended December 31, 2024, there was an increase in income tax interest and penalties of $
7.8million. During the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022, there was an increase in income tax
interest and penalties of $ 5.9million and $ 10.3million, respectively. The Company accrued $
18.8million, $ 20.4million and $ 36.6million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, for
the potential payment of interest and penalties.
 89 
Basic and diluted net income per share are calculated using the treasury stock method.
 Basic 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 2,681.4 $ 2,388.8 $ 2,020.1 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 251.0 255.4 258.0 
 Basic net income per share $ 10.68 $ 9.35 $ 7.83 
 Diluted 
 Net income $ 2,681.4 $ 2,388.8 $ 2,020.1 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 
 assuming dilution: 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 251.0 255.4 258.0 
 Stock options and other contingently 3.1 2.9 3.8 
 issuable shares(1) 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 254.1 258.3 261.8 
 assuming dilution 
 Diluted net income per share $ 10.55 $ 9.25 $ 7.72 
(1) Stock options and other contingently issuable shares excludes 0.9million, 2.8million and
1.9million shares at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, due to their anti-dilutive
effect.
 NOTE 22 – REPORTABLE SEGMENT INFORMATION 
The Company reports its segment information in the same way that management internally organizes its
business for assessing performance and making decisions regarding the allocation of resources in
accordance with the Segment Reporting Topic of the ASC. The Company has threereportable operating
segments: Paint Stores Group, Consumer Brands Group and Performance Coatings Group (individually, a
Reportable Segment and collectively, the Reportable Segments). Factors considered in determining the
threeReportable Segments of the Company include the nature of business activities, the management
structure directly accountable to the Company’s Chief Operating Decision Maker (CODM) for operating
and administrative activities, availability of discrete financial information and information
presented to the Board of Directors. The Company reports all other business activities within the
Administrative function.
The Company’s CODM has been identified as the Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer because
she has the final authority over performance assessment and resource allocation decisions. Because of
the diverse operations of the Company, the CODM regularly receives and uses discrete financial
information about each Reportable Segment as well as select supplemental financial information about
certain divisions, business units or subsidiaries of the Company. The CODM uses all such financial
information for performance assessments and resource allocation decisions. The CODM evaluates the
performance of and allocates resources to the Reportable Segments based on Segment profit or loss,
which represents the segments’ Income before income taxes. The accounting policies of the Reportable
Segments are the same as those described in Note 1.
The Paint Stores Group consisted of 4,773company-operated specialty paint stores in the United
States, Canada and the Caribbean region at December 31, 2024. Each store in this segment is engaged
in servicing the needs of architectural and industrial paint contractors and do-it-yourself
homeowners. These stores market and sell ABC corp. ® and other controlled brand architectural
paint and coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and related products. The
majority of these products are produced by manufacturing facilities in the Consumer Brands Group. In
addition, each store sells select purchased associated products. The loss of any single customer
would not have a material adverse effect on the business of this segment. During 2024, this segment
opened 79net new stores, consisting of 84new stores opened and 5stores closed. In 2023 and 2022, this
segment opened 70and 75net new stores, respectively. In accordance with ASC 280-10-50-9, the Paint
Stores Group as a whole is considered the operating segment, and because it meets the criteria in ASC
280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Consumer Brands Group manufactures and supplies a broad portfolio of branded and private-label
architectural paint, stains, varnishes, industrial products, wood finishes products, wood
preservatives, applicators, corrosion inhibitors, aerosols, caulks and adhesives to retailers,
including home centers and hardware stores, dedicated dealers and distributors throughout North
America, Latin America and Europe. Sales and marketing of certain controlled brand and private-label
products is performed by a direct sales staff. The products distributed through third-party customers
are intended for resale to the ultimate
 90 
end-user of the product. The Consumer Brands Group also consisted of 334company-operated specialty
paint stores in Latin America at December 31, 2024. Each store in this segment is engaged in
servicing the needs of home, commercial and industrial projects to contractors and do-it-yourself
customers in Latin America. These stores market and sell ABC corp. ® and other controlled
brand architectural paint and coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and
related products which are branded for the Latin America market. In addition, each store sells select
purchased associated products. The Consumer Brands Group had sales to certain customers that,
individually, may be a significant portion of the sales and related profitability of the segment.
During 2024, the segment opened 16net new stores, consisting of 18stores opened and 2stores closed.
In 2023 and 2022, this segment opened (closed) 11and ( 3) net new stores, respectively.
The Consumer Brands Group also supports the Company’s other businesses around the world with new
product research and development, manufacturing, distribution and logistics. Approximately 63% of the
total sales of the Consumer Brands Group in 2024 were intersegment transfers of products primarily
sold through the Paint Stores Group. This segment incurred most of the Company’s capital expenditures
related to ongoing environmental compliance measures, manufacturing capacity expansion, operational
efficiencies and maintenance projects at sites currently in operation. In accordance with ASC
280-10-50-9, the Consumer Brands Group as a whole is considered the operating segment, and because it
meets the criteria in ASC 280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Performance Coatings Group develops and sells industrial coatings for wood finishing and general
industrial (metal and plastic) applications, automotive refinish, protective and marine coatings,
coil coatings, packaging coatings and performance-based resins and colorants worldwide. This segment
licenses certain technology and trade names worldwide, including ABC corp. ® and other
controlled brand products which are distributed through the Paint Stores Group, this segment’s
324company-operated branches and by a direct sales staff and outside sales representatives to
retailers, dealers, jobbers, licensees and other third-party distributors. The Performance Coatings
Group had sales to certain customers that, individually, may be a significant portion of the sales of
the segment. However, the loss of any single customer would not have a material adverse effect on the
overall profitability of the segment. During 2024, the segment added 2new branches ( nobranches were
closed). In 2023 and 2022, this segment added 5and 35net new branches, respectively. In accordance
with ASC 280-10-50-9, the Performance Coatings Group as a whole is considered the operating segment,
and because it meets the criteria in ASC 280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Administrative function includes the administrative expenses and assets of the Company’s new
global headquarters and research and development center, both currently under construction. In
addition, it includes the operations of a real estate management unit that is responsible for the
ownership, management and leasing of non-retail properties held primarily for use by the Company,
including the Company’s current global headquarters and research and development center and disposal
of idle facilities. The Administrative function’s remaining assets consist primarily of cash and cash
equivalents, investments and deferred pension assets. Also included in the Administrative function
was interest expense, interest and investment income, certain expenses related to closed facilities
and environmental-related matters and other expenses that were not directly associated with the
Reportable Segments. Sales of this function represented external leasing revenue. The Administrative
function did not include any significant foreign operations. Gains and losses from the sale of
property were not a significant operating factor in determining the performance of the Administrative
function.
Net external sales of all consolidated foreign subsidiaries were $ 4.426billion, $ 4.428billion and $
4.294billion for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Long-lived assets consisted of Property, plant and equipment, net, Goodwill, Intangible assets, net,
Operating lease right-of-use assets, deferred pension assets and Other assets. The aggregate total of
long-lived assets for the Company was $ 18.231billion, $ 17.441billion and $ 16.686billion at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Long-lived assets of consolidated foreign
subsidiaries totaled $ 3.405billion, $ 3.586billion and $ 3.369billion at December 31, 2024, 2023 and
2022, respectively.
Total Assets of the Company were $ 23.633billion, $ 22.954billion and $ 22.594billion at December 31,
2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Total assets of consolidated foreign subsidiaries were $
5.208billion, $ 5.718billion and $ 5.337billion, which represented 22.0%, 24.9% and 23.6% of the
Company’s total assets at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
No single geographic area outside the United States was significant relative to consolidated Net
sales or consolidated long-lived assets. Export sales and sales to any individual customer were each
less than 10 percent of consolidated sales to unaffiliated customers during all years presented.
In the reportable segment financial information that follows, Segment profit represents each
segment’s Income before income taxes. Domestic intersegment transfers are primarily accounted for at
the approximate fully absorbed manufactured cost, based on normal capacity volumes, plus customary
distribution costs for paint products. Non-paint domestic and all international intersegment
transfers are primarily accounted for at values comparable to normal unaffiliated customer sales. All
intersegment
 91 
transfers are eliminated within the Administrative function. In 2023, the absorbed manufactured cost
standards utilized for domestic intersegment transfers were established inclusive of forecasted cost
reductions from planned initiatives. Deviations from the forecasted cost reductions were recognized
within the Consumer Brands Group. Due to the nature of the Company’s integrated manufacturing
operations and centralized administrative and information technology support, a substantial amount of
allocations are made to determine segment financial information. Expenses that are specifically
identifiable to a certain Reportable Segment are allocated accordingly. For expenses that are not
specifically identifiable to a certain Reportable Segment, an appropriate allocation base is
identified, and expenses are allocated based on each segment’s respective share of the allocation
base. The significant expense categories and amounts align with the segment-level information that is
regularly provided to the CODM and include intersegment expenses within the amounts shown.
Identifiable assets were those directly identified with each Reportable Segment.
 2024 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Consol… 
 Group Group Group Adminis… Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net $ 13,188.0 $ 3,108.0 $ 6,797.3 $ 5.2 $ 23,098… 
 sales 
 Inters… — 5,304.3 56.8 -5,361.1 — 
 transf… 
 Total 
 net 
 sales $ 13,188.0 $ 8,412.3 $ 6,854.1 $ -5,355.9 $ 23,098… 
 and 
 inters… 
 transf… 
 Cost of 
 goods $ 5,900.8 $ 6,943.5 $ 4,406.5 $ -5,347.4 $ 11,903… 
 sold 
 Sellin… 
 general 
 and 4,405.6 863.1 1,443.0 710.4 7,422.1 
 admini… 
 expens… 
 Intere… — 1.4 — 414.3 415.7 
 expense 
 Other 
 segment -21.0 14.4 -23.3 -64.6 -94.5 
 items(… 
 Income 
 before $ 2,902.6 $ 589.9 $ 1,027.9 $ -1,068.6 $ 3,451.8 
 income 
 taxes 
 % to 
 Net 22.0 % 19.0 % 15.1 % nm 14.9 % 
 sales 
 Supple… 
 Inform… 
 Identi… $ 5,878.0 $ 6,854.7 $ 7,847.4 $ 3,052.5 $ 23,632… 
 assets 
 Capital 141.3 290.3 15.2 623.2 1,070.0 
 expend… 
 Deprec… 89.9 162.7 18.0 26.8 297.4 
 Amorti… 1.7 66.4 256.7 1.8 326.6 
 nm - 
 not 
 meanin… 
(1) Other segment items includes Other general (income) expense - net, Interest income and Other
(income) expense - net. See Note 19.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 92 
and Other (income) expense - net. See Notes 3 and 6 for information on Impairment and Note 19 for
information on Other general (income) expense - net and Other (income) expense - net.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 2022 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Consol… 
 Group Group Group Adminis… Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net $ 11,963.3 $ 3,388.4 $ 6,793.5 $ 3.7 $ 22,148… 
 sales 
 Inters… — 5,214.8 203.7 -5,418.5 — 
 transf… 
 Total 
 net 
 sales $ 11,963.3 $ 8,603.2 $ 6,997.2 $ -5,414.8 $ 22,148… 
 and 
 inters… 
 transf… 
 Cost of 
 goods $ 5,826.8 $ 7,454.8 $ 4,965.4 $ -5,423.2 $ 12,823… 
 sold 
 Sellin… 
 general 
 and 3,810.1 817.8 1,275.6 428.1 6,331.6 
 admini… 
 expens… 
 Intere… — — — 390.8 390.8 
 expense 
 Other 
 segment -21.7 16.4 21.3 13.6 29.6 
 items(… 
 Income 
 before $ 2,348.1 $ 314.2 $ 734.9 $ -824.1 $ 2,573.1 
 income 
 taxes 
 % to 
 Net 19.6 % 9.3 % 10.8 % nm 11.6 % 
 sales 
 Supple… 
 Inform… 
 Identi… $ 5,873.6 $ 6,749.6 $ 8,296.8 $ 1,674.0 $ 22,594… 
 assets 
 Capital 87.3 295.0 38.7 223.5 644.5 
 expend… 
 Deprec… 73.9 126.2 29.1 34.8 264.0 
 Amorti… 3.3 79.8 232.0 2.0 317.1 
 nm - 
 not 
 meanin… 
(1) Other segment items includes Other general (income) expense - net, Impairment, Interest income
and Other (income) expense - net. See Note 6 for information on Impairment and Note 19 for
information on Other general (income) expense - net and Other (income) expense - net.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 93 
None.
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
As of the end of the period covered by this report, we carried out an evaluation, under the
supervision and with the participation of our Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer and our
Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure
controls and procedures pursuant to Rule 13a-15 and Rule 15d-15 of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended (Exchange Act). Based upon that evaluation, our Chair, President and Chief Executive
Officer and our Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer concluded that as of the
end of the period covered by this report, our disclosure controls and procedures were effective to
ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in reports we file or submit under the
Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in
Securities and Exchange Commission rules and forms, and accumulated and communicated to our
management, including our Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer and our Senior Vice President
– Finance and Chief Financial Officer, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
The “Report of Management on Internal Control over Financial Reporting” and the “Report of the
Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Internal Control over Financial Reporting” are set
forth in Item 8.
There have been no changes in our internal control over financial reporting identified in connection
with the evaluation that occurred during the period covered by this report that have materially
affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial
reporting.
Trading Arrangements
During the quarter ended December 31, 2024, none of the Company’s directors or “officers,” as defined
in Rule 16a-1(f) of the Exchange Act, adopted, modified, or terminateda “Rule 10b5-1 trading
arrangement” or a “non-Rule 10b5-1 trading arrangement,” as each term is defined in Item 408 of
Regulation S-K.
Not applicable.
 94 
Directors
The information regarding our directors and director nominees is set forth in our Proxy Statement
under the caption “Proposal 1 – Election of 9 Directors” and is incorporated herein by reference.
There have been no material changes to the procedures by which security holders may recommend
nominees to our Board of Directors. Please refer to the information set forth in our Proxy Statement
under the caption “Board Committees,” which is incorporated herein by reference.
Executive Officers
The information regarding our executive officers is set forth under the caption “Information About
Our Executive Officers” in Part I of this report, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
To the extent disclosure of any delinquent form under Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 is made by the Company, such disclosure will be set forth in our Proxy Statement under the
caption “Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports” and is incorporated herein by reference.
Audit Committee
The information regarding the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors and audit committee financial
experts is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Board Committees” and is incorporated
herein by reference.
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a Code of Conduct, which applies to all directors, officers and employees, including
our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or
controller and persons performing similar functions, of ABC corp. and our subsidiaries
wherever located. Our Code of Conduct contains the general guidelines and principles for conducting
ABC corp.’ business consistent with the highest standards of business ethics.
We have also adopted a Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management, pursuant to which our chief
executive officer, chief financial officer and senior financial management are responsible for
creating and maintaining a culture of high ethical standards and of commitment to compliance
throughout our Company to ensure the fair and timely reporting of ABC corp.’ financial results
and condition. Senior financial management includes the controller, the treasurer, the principal
financial/accounting personnel in our operating groups and divisions and all other
financial/accounting personnel within our corporate departments and operating groups and divisions
with staff supervision responsibilities.
Our Code of Conduct and Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management are available on our Investor
Relations website, investors.sherwin.com.
We intend to disclose on our Investor Relations website, investors.sherwin.com, any amendment to, or
waiver from, a provision of our Code of Conduct or Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management
that applies to our directors and executive officers, including our principal executive officer,
principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller or any persons performing
similar functions, and that is required to be publicly disclosed pursuant to the rules of the SEC.
Insider Trading Policy
The information regarding our Insider Trading Policy is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the
caption “Insider Trading Policy” and is incorporated herein by reference. A copy of our Insider
Trading Policy is filed with this Annual Report on Form 10-K as Exhibit 19.
 95 
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the captions “2024
Director Compensation Table,” “Director Compensation Program,” “Executive Compensation,” “Executive
Compensation Tables” and “2024 CEO Pay Ratio” and is incorporatedherein by reference (other than the
Compensation Committee Report, which will be deemed furnished).
The information regarding security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management is set forth
in our Proxy Statement under the captions “Security Ownership of Management, Directors and Director
Nominees” and “Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners” and is incorporated herein by
reference.
The information regarding securities authorized for issuance under the Company’s equity compensation
plans is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Equity Compensation Plan Information”
and is incorporated herein by reference.
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the captions “Certain
Relationships and Transactions with Related Persons” and “Director Independence” and is incorporated
herein by reference.
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Matters
Relating to the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm” and is incorporated herein by
reference.
 96 
Schedule II — Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves for the years ended December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022 is set forth below. All other schedules for which provision is made in the applicable
SEC accounting regulations are not required under the related instructions or are inapplicable and
therefore have been omitted.
Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves
(Schedule II)
Changes in deferred tax asset valuation allowances were as follows:
 (millions of dollars) 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Beginning balance $ 106.6 $ 97.5 $ 97.2 
 Additions (deductions)(1) 17.9 9.1 0.3 
 Ending balance $ 124.5 $ 106.6 $ 97.5 
(1) Additions (deductions) did not have a material impact on the Income Statement in 2024, 2023 or
2022.
 97 
(3) Exhibits
 Amended and Restated Articles of 
 Incorporation of the Company, as 
 amended through February 18, 2015, 
 filed as Exhibit 3 to the Company’s 
 Current Report on Form 8-K dated 
 February 18, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Amendment to the Amended and Restated 
 Articles of Incorporation of the 
 Company, as amended through February 
 18, 2015, filed as Exhibit 3.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 3.1 dated March 3, 2021, and incorporated 
 3.2 herein by reference. 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Regulations of the Company (As Amended 
 and Restated July 19, 2023), filed as 
 3.3 Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s Current 
 Report on Form 8-K dated July 18, 2023, 
 and incorporated herein by reference. 
 Description of Securities Registered 
 under Section 12 of the Securities 
 Exchange Act of 1934 filed as Exhibit 
 4.1 4(a) to the Company’s Annual Report on 
 Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended 
 December 31, 2021, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Indenture between the Company and The 
 Bank of New York Mellon (as successor 
 to Chemical Bank), as trustee, dated as 
 4.2 of February 1, 1996, filed as Exhibit  
 4(a) to Form S-3 Registration Statement 
 Number 333-01093 dated February 20, 
 1996, and incorporated herein by 
 reference. 
 Third Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and The Bank of New 
 York Mellon, as trustee (including Form 
 4.2.1 of Note), dated as of December 7, 2012, 
 filed as Exhibit 4.2 to the Company’s 
 Current Report on Form 8-K dated 
 December 4, 2012, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Indenture by and between the Company 
 and Wells Fargo Bank, National 
 Association, as trustee, dated July 31, 
 4.3 2015, filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 First Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.1 dated July 31, 2015, (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.2 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Second Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.2 dated July 31, 2015, (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.3 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Sixth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.3 dated May 16, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.4 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated May 16, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Seventh Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.4 dated May 16, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.5 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated May 16, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Eleventh Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.5 dated June 2, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.4 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated June 2, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Twelfth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.6 dated June 2, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.5 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated June 2, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Thirteenth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.7 dated August 26, 2019 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated August 26, 2019, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 98 
None.
 104 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the
Company has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized, on February 20, 2025.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated on
February 20, 2025.
 THE ABC corp. COMPANY 
 By: /S/ MARY L. GARCEAU 
 Mary L. Garceau, Secretary 
 * HEIDI G. PETZ Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer, Director 
 (Principal Executive Officer) 
 Heidi G. Petz 
 * ALLEN J. MISTYSYN Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer (Principal 
 Financial Officer) 
 Allen J. Mistysyn 
 * J. PAUL LANG Senior Vice President – Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer 
 (Principal Accounting Officer) 
 J. Paul Lang 
 * KERRII B. ANDERSON Director 
 Kerrii B. Anderson 
 * ARTHUR F. ANTON Director 
 Arthur F. Anton 
 * JEFF M. FETTIG Director 
 Jeff M. Fettig 
 * JOHN G. MORIKIS Director 
 John G. Morikis 
 * CHRISTINE A. POON Director 
 Christine A. Poon 
 * AARON M. POWELL Director 
 Aaron M. Powell 
 * MARTA R. STEWART Director 
 Marta R. Stewart 
 * MICHAEL H. THAMAN Director 
 Michael H. Thaman 
 * MATTHEW THORNTON III Director 
 Matthew Thornton III 
 * THOMAS L. WILLIAMS Director 
 Thomas L. Williams 
 The undersigned, by signing her name hereto, does sign this report on behalf of the 
 * designated officers and directors of the Company pursuant to powers of attorney executed on 
 behalf of each such officer and director and filed as an exhibit to this report. 
 February 20, 
 By: /S/ MARY L. GARCEAU 2025 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Mary L. Garceau, Attorney-in-fact 
 105


ITEM 7A: QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
===================================================================

ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK │
We are exposed to market risk associated with interest rates, foreign currency and commodity
fluctuations. We occasionally utilize derivative instruments as part of our overall financial risk
management policy, but do not use derivative instruments for speculative or trading purposes. In
2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company utilized U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap contracts to hedge
the Company’s net investment in its European operations. The contracts have been designated as net
investment hedges and have various maturity dates. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial
statements in Item 8. The Company entered into forward foreign currency exchange contracts during
2024, 2023 and 2022 primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. There were no
material contracts outstanding at December 31, 2024. Forward foreign currency exchange contracts are
described in Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8. We believe we may experience
continuing losses from foreign currency fluctuations. However, we do not expect currency translation,
transaction or hedging contract losses to have a material adverse effect on our financial condition,
results of operations or cash flows.
 40 
Shareholders of The ABC corp. Company
We are responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial
reporting as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended. We recognize that internal control over financial reporting cannot provide absolute
assurance of achieving financial reporting objectives because of its inherent limitations. Internal
control over financial reporting is a process that involves human diligence and is subject to the
possibility of human error or the circumvention or the overriding of internal control. Therefore,
there is a risk that material misstatements may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis by
internal control over financial reporting. However, we believe we have designed into the process
safeguards to reduce, though not eliminate, this risk. Projections of any evaluation of effectiveness
to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in
conditions, or that the degree of compliance with policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In order to ensure that the Company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective as of
December 31, 2024, we conducted an assessment of its effectiveness under the supervision and with the
participation of our management group, including our principal executive officer and principal
financial officer. This assessment was based on the criteria established in the 2013 Internal Control
– Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission.
Based on our assessment of internal control over financial reporting under the criteria established
in Internal Control – Integrated Framework, we have concluded that, as of December 31, 2024, the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Our internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2024 has been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, an
independent registered public accounting firm, and their report on the effectiveness of our internal
control over financial reporting is included on page 43 of this report.
Heidi G. Petz
Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer
Allen J. Mistysyn
Senior Vice President - Finance and Chief Financial Officer
J. Paul Lang
Senior Vice President - Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer
 42 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of The ABC corp. Company
 Opinion on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting 
We have audited The ABC corp. Company and subsidiaries internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated
Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013
framework) (the COSO criteria). In our opinion, The ABC corp. Company and subsidiaries (the
Company) maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as
of December 31, 2024, based on the COSO criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated balance sheets of the Company as of December 31,
2024, 2023 and 2022, the related statements of consolidated income, comprehensive income, cash flows
and shareholders’ equity for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2024, and the
related notes and financial statement schedule listed in the 
February 20, 2025 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial
reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
included in the accompanying Report of Management On Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting
based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be
independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the
applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing
the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as
we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis
for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1)
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3)
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition,
use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial
statements.
 43 
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Ernst & Young, LLP
Cleveland, Ohio
February 20, 2025
 44 
Shareholders of The ABC corp. Company
We are responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial
statements, accompanying notes and related financial information included in this report of The
ABC corp. Company and its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the Company) as of December
31, 2024, 2023 and 2022 and for the years then ended in accordance with U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles. The consolidated financial information included in this report contains
certain amounts that were based upon our best estimates, judgments and assumptions that we believe
were reasonable under the circumstances.
We have conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. As discussed in the Report of Management on
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting on page 42 of this report, we concluded that the Company’s
internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2024.
The Board of Directors fulfills its responsibility for the oversight of the Company’s accounting
policies and procedures, financial statement preparation and internal control over financial
reporting through the Audit Committee, comprised exclusively of independent directors. The Audit
Committee is responsible for the appointment and compensation of the independent registered public
accounting firm. The Audit Committee meets at least quarterly with financial management, internal
auditors and the independent registered public accounting firm to review the adequacy of financial
controls, the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting and the
nature, extent and results of the audit effort. Both the internal auditors and the independent
registered public accounting firm have private and confidential access to the Audit Committee at all
times.
We believe that the consolidated financial statements, accompanying notes and related financial
information included in this report fairly reflect the form and substance of all material financial
transactions and fairly present, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position,
results of operations and cash flows as of and for the periods presented.
Heidi G. Petz
Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer
Allen J. Mistysyn
Senior Vice President - Finance and Chief Financial Officer
J. Paul Lang
Senior Vice President - Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer
 45 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of The ABC corp. Company
 Opinion on the Financial Statements 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of The ABC corp. Company and
subsidiaries (the Company) as of December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the related statements of
consolidated income, comprehensive income, cash flows and shareholders’ equity for each of the three
years in the period ended December 31, 2024, and the related notes and the financial statement
schedule listed in the 
statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the Company at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, and the results
of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
2024, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December
31, 2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report
dated February 20, 2025 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is
to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public
accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the
Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations
of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements
are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing
procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included
examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial
statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 Critical Audit Matter 
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the
financial statements that was communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and
that: (1) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2)
involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of the
critical audit matter does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements,
taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a
separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
 46 
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 1908.
Cleveland, Ohio
February 20, 2025
 47 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 48 
of $ 53.6million, $( 24.9) million and $ 34.1million, respectively, related to net investment hedges.
See Note 16.
(2) Net of taxes of $( 6.6) million, $( 2.8) million and $( 33.8) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
(3) Net of taxes of $ 4.6million, $ 5.9million and $( 1.2) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
(4) Net of taxes of $ 1.2million in 2024 and 2023 and $ 1.1million in 2022.
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 49 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 50 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 51 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 52 
Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements included in this report have been prepared by management of The
ABC corp. Company (herein referred to as the Company). These statements include the accounts
of the Company and all consolidated subsidiaries. Intercompany accounts and transactions have been
eliminated. The Company’s share of earnings or losses from nonconsolidated affiliates is included in
the consolidated financial statements using the equity method of accounting when the Company is able
to exercise significant influence over the operating and financial decisions of the affiliate.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles (US GAAP) requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that
affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual
results could differ from those amounts.
Nature of Operations
The Company is engaged in the development, manufacture, distribution and sale of paint, coatings and
related products to professional, industrial, commercial and retail customers primarily in North and
South America, with additional operations in the Caribbean region, Europe, Asia and Australia.
Cash Equivalents
Management considers all highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less when
purchased to be cash equivalents.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Current Expected Credit Losses
Accounts receivable are recorded at the time of credit sales, net of an allowance for current
expected credit losses. The Company records an allowance for current expected credit losses to reduce
Accounts receivable to the net amount expected to be collected.
Under Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 326, the Company reviews the collectibility of the
Accounts receivable balance each reporting period and estimates the allowance for current expected
credit losses based on historical bad debt experience, aging of accounts receivable, current
creditworthiness of customers, current economic factors, as well as reasonable and supportable
forward-looking information. Accounts receivable balances are written-off against the allowance for
current expected credit losses if a final determination of uncollectibility is made. All provisions
for the allowance for current expected credit losses are included in Selling, general and
administrative expenses. See Note 18 for further details.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market with cost determined principally on the last-
in, first-out (LIFO) method. Market represents current replacement cost, which is the cost to
purchase or reproduce the inventory. If inventories accounted for on the LIFO method are reduced on a
year-over-year basis, then liquidation of certain quantities carried at costs prevailing in prior
years occurs. Management records an estimate of the lower of cost or market whenever the utility of
inventory is impaired by damage, deterioration, obsolescence, changes in price levels, or other
causes based on historical experience and current trends through reductions to inventory cost by
recording a provision included in Cost of goods sold. If management estimates that the reasonable
market value is below cost or determines that future demand was lower than current inventory levels,
based on historical experience, current and projected market demand, current and projected volume
trends and other relevant current and projected factors associated with the current economic
conditions, a reduction in inventory cost to current market price is provided for in the reserve for
obsolescence. See Note 4 for further details.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment (including leasehold improvements) is stated on the basis of cost.
Depreciation is charged to expense using the straight-line method over the assets’ estimated useful
lives which range from 5to 25years for buildings and 3to 15years for machinery and equipment.
Depreciation and amortization are included in the appropriate Cost of goods sold or Selling, general
and administrative expenses caption on the Statements of Consolidated Income. See Note 5 for further
details.
 53 
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the cost in excess of fair value of net assets acquired in business combinations.
Intangible assets include software, customer relationships, intellectual property and trademarks. In
accordance with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC, goodwill and indefinite-lived
trademarks are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment on an annual basis, as well as
whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that indicate impairment has occurred on a more
likely than not basis. Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over the
expected period of benefit, which ranges primarily from 3to 29years. See Note 6 for further details.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC, management evaluates the
recoverability and remaining lives of long-lived assets, including right-of-use assets, whenever
events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable or the
useful life has changed.See Note 5 for further details.
Derivative Instruments
The Company utilizes derivative instruments to mitigate certain risk exposures as part of its overall
financial risk management policy and accounts for these instruments in accordance with the
Derivatives and Hedging Topic of the ASC. Derivatives are recorded as assets or liabilities in the
Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. Changes in fair value of the derivative instruments are
recognized immediately in earnings unless the derivative instrument qualifies for and is designated
in an effective hedging relationship.
The Company entered into foreign currency forward contracts with maturity dates of less than twelve
months in 2024, 2023 and 2022, primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. There
were nomaterial foreign currency option and forward contracts outstanding at December 31, 2024, 2023
and 2022. See Note 19 for further details.
The Company also entered into cross currency swap contracts to hedge its net investment in European
operations in 2024, 2023 and 2022. These contracts qualified for and were designated as net
investment hedges under US GAAP. The changes in fair value for the cross currency swaps are
recognized in the Foreign currency translation adjustments component of AOCI. The cash flow impact of
these instruments is classified as an investing activity in the Statements of Consolidated Cash
Flows. See Note 16 for further details.
Non-Traded Investments
The Company has invested in U.S. affordable housing, historic renovation and other real estate
investments (Non-Traded Investments) that have been identified as variable interest entities which
qualify for certain tax credits and other tax benefits. Since the Company does not have the power to
direct the day-to-day operations of the Non-Traded Investments and the risk of loss is limited to the
amount of contributed capital, the Company is not considered the primary beneficiary. Therefore, in
accordance with the Consolidation Topic of the ASC, the Non-Traded Investments are not consolidated.
Under the Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures Topic of the ASC, the Company uses the
proportional amortization method, whereby the initial cost and any subsequent changes in the level of
investment of Non-Traded Investments are amortized in proportion to the receipt of related tax
credits. The Company reasonably expects amortization based on the receipt of tax credits would
produce a measurement substantially similar to amortization based on the receipt of tax credits and
other tax benefits. Both the amortization and related tax credits and other tax benefits are
recognized in Income tax expense on the Statements of Consolidated Income.
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Amortization of Non-Traded Investments $ 75.0 $ 65.4 $ 38.5 
 Tax credits and other tax benefits 104.9 94.8 67.2 
 received 
 54 
The carrying value of Non-Traded Investments is recorded in Other assets. The liabilities for
estimated future capital contributions are recorded in Other accruals and Other long-term
liabilities. In addition, the associated impact of related tax credits and other tax benefits are
recorded as a reduction of Accrued taxes and a net deferred income tax asset within Deferred income
taxes. On the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows, the tax credits and other tax benefits are
presented as a change in Accrued taxes and in Deferred income taxes within Operating activities. Tax
credits and other tax benefits reduced Accrued taxes by $ 104.9million, $ 94.8million and $
67.2million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The following table summarizes the
balances related to Non-Traded Investments and related tax credits and other tax benefits on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Other assets $ 744.0 $ 675.0 $ 587.0 
 Other accruals 101.4 80.9 89.8 
 Other long-term liabilities 600.3 568.2 476.5 
 Net deferred income tax asset 7.6 19.4 23.4 
Standby Letters of Credit
The Company occasionally enters into standby letter of credit agreements to guarantee various
operating activities. These agreements provide credit availability to the various beneficiaries if
certain contractual events occur.Amounts outstanding under these agreements totaled $ 125.5million, $
146.2million and $ 149.8million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Product Warranties
The Company offers assurance-type product warranties for certain products. The specific terms and
conditions of such warranties vary depending on the product or customer contract requirements.
Management estimated the costs of unsettled product warranty claims based on historical results and
experience and included an amount in Other accruals. Management periodically assesses the adequacy of
the accrual for product warranty claims and adjusts the accrual as necessary. Changes in the
Company’s accrual for product warranty claims during 2024, 2023 and 2022, including customer
satisfaction settlements during the year, were as follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1 $ 40.4 $ 36.2 $ 35.2 
 Charges to expense 34.2 37.0 30.1 
 Settlements -28.2 -32.8 -29.1 
 Balance at December 31 $ 46.4 $ 40.4 $ 36.2 
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
The Company accounts for its defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans in
accordance with the Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC, which requires the Company to recognize an
asset for overfunded defined benefit pension or other postretirement benefit plans and a liability
for unfunded or underfunded plans. In addition, actuarial gains and losses and prior service costs of
such plans are recorded in AOCI. The amounts recorded in AOCI will continue to be modified as
actuarial assumptions and service costs change, and all such amounts will be amortized to expense
over a period of years through the net pension cost (credit) and net periodic benefit cost
(credit).See Note 8 for further details.
Defined Contribution Savings Plan
The Company accounts for its defined contribution savings plan in accordance with the Defined
Contribution Plans Subtopic of the Compensation – Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC. The Company
recognized compensation expense for amounts contributed to the defined contribution savings plan.See
Note 13 for further details.
Environmental Matters
Capital expenditures for ongoing environmental compliance measures are recorded in Property, plant
and equipment, net, and related expenses are included in the normal operating expenses of conducting
business. The Company accrued for environmental-related activities for which commitments or clean-up
plans have been developed and when such costs could be reasonably estimated based on industry
standards and professional judgment. Accrued amounts are primarily recorded on an undiscounted basis
and have not been recorded net of insurance proceeds in accordance with the Offsetting Subtopic of
the Balance Sheet Topic of the ASC. Environmental-related expenses include direct costs of
investigation and remediation and
 55 
indirect costs such as compensation and benefits for employees directly involved in the investigation
and remediation activities and fees paid to outside engineering, consulting and law firms.See Notes
10 and 19 for further details.
Stock-Based Compensation
The cost of the Company’s stock-based compensation is recorded in accordance with the Stock
Compensation Topic of the ASC.See Note 14 for further details.
Other Liabilities
The Company retains risk for certain liabilities, primarily workers’ compensation claims, employee
medical and disability benefits and automobile, property, general and product liability claims.
Estimated amounts are accrued for certain workers’ compensation, employee medical and disability
benefits, automobile and property claims filed but unsettled and estimated claims incurred but not
reported. Estimates are based upon management’s estimated aggregate liability for claims incurred
using historical experience, actuarial assumptions followed in the insurance industry and
actuarially-developed models for estimating certain liabilities. Certain estimated general and
product liability claims filed but unsettled are accrued based on management’s best estimate of
ultimate settlement or actuarial calculations of potential liability using industry experience and
actuarial assumptions developed for similar types of claims.
Foreign Currency Translation
All consolidated non-highly inflationary foreign operations use the local currency of the country of
operation as the functional currency. Local currency asset and liability accounts are translated at
year-end exchange rates while income and expense accounts are translated at average exchange rates.
The resulting translation adjustments are included in AOCI.
Economies with a three-year cumulative inflation rate of more than 100% are considered highly
inflationary. For subsidiaries operating in highly inflationary economies, the parent’s reporting
currency is the functional currency. Monetary assets and liabilities are translated into U.S. dollars
using rates of exchange at the balance sheet date and non-monetary assets and liabilities are
translated into U.S. dollars at their historical rates of exchange, with remeasurement adjustments
and other transaction gains and losses recognized in Net income. See Note 19 for further details.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when performance obligations under the terms of the contract are
satisfied. This generally occurs with the transfer of control of our products to the customer.
Collectibility of amounts recorded as revenue is probable at the time of recognition.See Note 18 for
further details.
Customer and Vendor Consideration
The Company offers certain customers rebate and sales incentive programs which are classified as
reductions in sales. Such programs are in the form of volume rebates, rebates that constituted a
percentage of sales or rebates for attaining certain sales goals. The Company receives consideration
from certain suppliers of raw materials in the form of volume rebates or rebates that constitute a
percentage of purchases. These rebates are recognized on an accrual basis by the Company as a
reduction of the purchase price of the raw materials and a subsequent reduction of Cost of goods sold
when the related product was sold.
Cost of Goods Sold
Included in Cost of goods sold are costs for materials, manufacturing, distribution and related
support. Distribution costs include expenses related to the distribution of products including
inbound freight charges, purchase and receiving costs, warehousing costs, internal transfer costs and
other costs incurred to ship products. Also included in Cost of goods sold are research and
development costs, quality control, product formulation expenditures and other similar items.Research
and development costs were $ 217.3million, $ 196.6million and $ 119.3million during 2024, 2023 and
2022, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling costs include advertising expenses, marketing costs, employee and store costs and sales
commissions. The cost of advertising is expensed as incurred. The Company incurred $ 386.9million, $
394.0million and $ 314.4million in advertising costs during 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
General and administrative expenses include human resources, legal, finance and other support and
administrative functions.
Government Incentives
The Company receives incentives from various government entities in the form of tax rebates or
credits, grants and loans. These incentives typically require that the Company maintain specified
spending levels and other operational metrics and may be subject to reimbursement if conditions are
not met or maintained. Government incentives are recorded in the Company’s consolidated financial
statements in accordance with their purpose as a reduction of expense, a reduction of the cost of the
 56 
capital investment or other income. The benefit of these incentives is recorded when received and all
conditions as specified in the agreement are fulfilled.
There were $ 86.6million of government incentives received as cash payments related to the
construction of the Company’s new global headquarters and research and development center in 2022.
These government incentives were recorded as a reduction in the carrying amount of the respective
assets under construction within Property, plant and equipment, net on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets and within Other as an investing activity on the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows. There
were nomaterial government incentives received in 2024 or 2023.
Supply Chain Financing
As part of our strategy to manage working capital, we have entered into agreements with various
financial institutions that act as intermediaries between the Company and certain suppliers. The
Company is not a party to agreements between the suppliers and the financial institutions. These
arrangements provide participating suppliers the option to settle outstanding accounts payable
incurred by the Company in the normal course of business early at a discount and do not impact our
rights and obligations with suppliers, including amounts due and scheduled payment terms. Under the
terms of our agreements, the Company confirms the validity of each supplier invoice to the respective
financial institution upon receipt. On the invoice due date, the Company settles the outstanding
amount with the respective financial institution. Liabilities associated with these arrangements are
recorded in Accounts payableon the Consolidated Balance Sheets and amounted to $ 215.7million, $
213.1million and $ 258.1million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The following table presents a rollforward of the Company’s outstanding obligations under its
supplier finance programs for year ended December 31, 2024.
 2024 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1 $ 213.1 
 Invoices confirmed during the year 988.8 
 Confirmed invoices paid during the year -986.2 
 Balance at December 31 $ 215.7 
Earnings Per Share
Common stock held in a revocable trust (see Note 12) is not included in outstanding shares for basic
or diluted income per share calculations. Basic and diluted net income per share are calculated using
the treasury stock method in accordance with the Earnings Per Share Topic of the ASC. Basic net
income per share amounts are computed based on the weighted-average number of shares outstanding
during the year. Diluted net income per share amounts are computed based on the weighted-average
number of shares outstanding plus all dilutive securities potentially outstanding during the year.See
Note 21 for further details.
NOTE 2 – RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Adopted
Effective January 1, 2024, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2023-02,
“Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323): Accounting for investments in tax credit
structures using the proportional amortization method.” This ASU allows entities to apply the
proportional amortization method to all tax equity investments if certain conditions are met. In
addition, the ASU requires certain disclosures about the nature and financial implications of tax
equity investments on an entity’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows, including
the impact of transition on the periods presented, if any. The adoption of the ASU did not materially
affect the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows since the Company has
historically applied the proportional amortization method to its Non-Traded Investments, however,
certain disclosures have been added based on the requirements of the ASU. See Note 1 for further
details.
Effective December 31, 2024, the Company adopted ASU 2023-07, “Segment Reporting (Topic 280):
Improvements to Reportable Segment Disclosures.” This ASU enhances reportable segment disclosures on
both an annual and interim basis primarily in regards to the disclosure of significant segment
expenses that are regularly provided to the chief operating decision maker (CODM) and included within
the reported measure(s) of segment profit or loss. In addition, the ASU requires disclosure, by
segment, of other items included in the reported measure(s) of segment profit or loss, including
qualitative information describing the composition, nature and type of each item. The ASU also
expands disclosure requirements related to the CODM, including how the reported measure(s) of segment
profit or loss are used to assess segment performance and allocate resources, the method used to
allocate overhead for significant segment expenses and others. Lastly, all current required annual
segment
 57 
reporting disclosures under Topic 280 are now effective for interim periods. The adoption of the ASU
has only impacted the Company’s segment disclosures with no impact to the consolidated financial
statements. See Note 22 for further details.
Effective January 1, 2023, the Company adopted ASU 2022-04, “Liabilities - Supplier Finance Programs
(Subtopic 405-50): Disclosure of Supplier Finance Program Obligations.” This ASU includes a
requirement to present a rollforward of supply chain financing activity prospectively, beginning with
the annual period ending December 31, 2024. The adoption of ASU 2022-04 did not affect the Company’s
financial position, results of operations or cash flows as the standard only impacts financial
statement footnote disclosures. See Note 1 for additional information.
Not Yet Adopted
In December 2023, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued ASU 2023-09, “Income Taxes
(Topic 740): Improvements to Income Tax Disclosures.” This ASU enhances income tax disclosures by
providing information to better assess how an entity’s operations, related tax risks, tax planning
and operational opportunities affect its tax rate and prospects for future cash flows. This ASU
requires additional disclosures to the annual effective tax rate reconciliation including specific
categories and further disaggregated reconciling items that meet the quantitative threshold.
Additionally, the ASU requires disclosures relating to income tax expense and payments made to
federal, state, local and foreign jurisdictions. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning
after December 15, 2024. The Company is evaluating the impact of adopting this ASU.
In November 2024, the FASB issued ASU 2024-03, “Income Statement - Reporting Comprehensive Income -
Expense Disaggregation Disclosures (Subtopic 220-40): Disaggregation of Income Statement Expenses.”
This ASU enhances expense disclosures on both an annual and interim basis by requiring public
business entities to disclose additional information about specific expense categories in the notes
to the consolidated financial statements. This ASU requires public entities to disclose, in a tabular
format, purchases of inventory, employee compensation, depreciation, intangible asset amortization
and depletion, as applicable, for each income statement line item that contains those expenses.
Specific expenses, gains and losses that are already disclosed under existing US GAAP are also
required to be included in the disaggregated income statement expense line-item disclosures, and any
remaining amounts will need to be described qualitatively. Additionally, the ASU requires disclosure
of the total amount of selling expenses and the entity’s definition of selling expenses. This ASU is
effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2026 and for interim periods within fiscal
years beginning after December 15, 2027. The Company is evaluating the impact of adopting this ASU.
 NOTE 3 – ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES 
Acquisitions
Subsequent Event
In February 2025, the Company signed an agreement to acquire the Brazilian decorative paints business
of BASF SE (BASF), which is a leading provider of architectural paints in Brazil with annual sales of
approximately $ 525.0million. The business develops, manufactures and sells a comprehensive portfolio
of innovative products under the Suvinil and Glasu! brand names to professional painters, designers,
architects, general contractors and consumers across the country. The business also operates two
production facilities located in the Northeast and Southeast regions of Brazil.
The closing of the transaction is subject to receipt of Brazilian antitrust approval, satisfaction or
waiver of certain other customary closing conditions, as well as BASF’s completion of its carve-out
of all relevant assets, properties, contracts, permits, rights and employees of the decorative paints
business into a separate entity. The Company will acquire all issued and outstanding equity interests
in this separate entity for an agreed-upon cash purchase price of $ 1.15billion, subject to customary
post-closing adjustments. The Company intends to finance the transaction through a combination of
cash on hand, liquidity available under existing facilities and new debt. The acquired business is
expected to be reported within the Company’s Consumer Brands Group.
Pending
In December 2024, the Company signed an agreement to acquire a European coil and industrial coatings
company. The transaction is subject to customary closing conditions and is expected to close in 2025.
The acquired business will be reported within the Company’s Performance Coatings Group.
Closed in Current Year
In October 2024, the Company completed the acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business for
approximately $ 80million. The acquired business develops, manufactures and sells coatings for the
food and household product markets and is reported within the Company’s Performance Coatings Group.
As of December 31, 2024, $ 33.0million of Property, plant and equipment, net, $ 27.9million of
finite-lived intangibles and $ 21.1million of Goodwill were recognized from this transaction.
 58 
The Company expects to finalize the purchase price allocation for the acquisition within the
allowable measurement period. Pro forma results of operations have not been presented as the impact
on the Company’s consolidated financial results is not material.
Closed in 2023
In October 2023, the Company completed the acquisition of German-based SIC Holding GmbH, a Peter
Möhrle Holding venture comprised of Oskar Nolte GmbH and Klumpp Coatings GmbH (SIC Holding). The
acquired business specializes in foil coatings as well as radiation-cured and waterbased industrial
wood coatings for the board, furniture and flooring industry. The total purchase price for the
acquisition was approximately $ 290million, including an immaterial amount paid in 2024 to finalize
certain representations, warranties and closing conditions. The Company finalized the purchase price
allocation within the allowable measurement period, and $ 110.8million of finite-lived intangible
assets, $ 181.3million of goodwill, $ 46.0million of other assets, net of cash and $ 47.5million of
liabilities were recognized from this transaction.
Closed in 2022
In April 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of the European industrial coatings business of
Sika AG. In July 2022, the Company completed the acquisitions of Gross & Perthun GmbH, Dur-A-Flex,
Inc. and Powdertech Oy Ltd. In December 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of Industria
Chimica Adriatica S.p.A. (ICA). The aggregate purchase price for the acquisitions completed in 2022
was approximately $ 1.024billion, including amounts withheld as security for certain representations,
warranties and obligations of the sellers. Based on the preliminary purchase price allocations for
these transactions, as of December 31, 2022, the Company recognized intangible assets and goodwill of
$ 282.8million and $ 565.8million, respectively, with the remaining purchase price for each
transaction allocated to various other assets acquired and liabilities assumed. In June 2023,
purchase price allocation adjustments were made to ICA which decreased goodwill by $ 145.9million,
increased finite-lived intangible assets by $ 195.9million and increased deferred tax liabilities by
$ 57.4million. There were no material adjustments related to the other acquisitions that closed in
2022 and the Company finalized the purchase price allocations for these transactions in the allowable
measurement period. In accordance with certain purchase agreements, the Company paid $ 29.2million in
2023 related to holdbacks for acquisitions completed in prior years.
Divestitures
Closed in 2023
The Company completed the divestiture of a non-core domestic aerosol business within the Consumer
Brands Group in April 2023. This transaction resulted in the recognition of a $ 20.1million gain in
2023 within the Administrative function. This gain was recorded within Other general (income) expense
- net (see Note 19).
During the third quarter of 2023, the Company completed the divestiture of the China architectural
business within the Consumer Brands Group. An immaterial working capital adjustment was finalized
during the first quarter of 2024. The associated net assets were classified as held for sale at June
30, 2023 in accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC. Following the
prescribed order of impairment testing, the Company first reviewed individual tangible and intangible
assets under their applicable Topic of the ASC to determine if their carrying value was higher than
their respective fair value. As a result, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $ 6.9million
within the Consumer Brands Group related to China architectural trademarks during 2023. The Company
then compared the updated carrying value of the assets and liabilities comprising the disposal group
as a whole to its respective fair value which was determined to be equal to the selling price, less
costs to sell. As a result of this comparison, the Company recorded an additional impairment charge
of $ 27.1million within the Administrative function in the second quarter of 2023. The fair value of
the disposal group was classified as level 2 in the fair value hierarchy as it was based on a
specific price and other observable inputs for similar items with no active market.
These divestitures did not meet the criteria to be reported as discontinued operations in the
consolidated financial statements as the Company’s decision to divest these businesses did not
represent a strategic shift that will have a major effect on the Company’s operations and financial
results.
 59 
Included in Inventories were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Finished goods $ 1,751.9 $ 1,810.9 $ 1,957.7 
 Work in process and raw materials 536.2 518.9 668.8 
 Inventories $ 2,288.1 $ 2,329.8 $ 2,626.5 
Inventories were stated at the lower of cost or market, with cost primarily determined on the LIFO
method. Management believes that the use of LIFO results in a better matching of costs and revenues.
The following table summarizes the extent to which the Company’s Inventories use the LIFO cost
method, and presents the effect on Inventories had the Company used the first-in, first-out (FIFO)
inventory valuation method.
 2024 2023 2022 
 Percentage of total inventories on LIFO 74 % 74 % 74 % 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Excess of FIFO over LIFO $ 630.2 $ 668.0 $ 792.7 
During 2024 and 2023, certain inventories accounted for on the LIFO method were reduced, resulting in
the liquidation of certain quantities carried at costs prevailing in prior years. The 2024 and 2023
liquidations increased Net income by $ 4.8million and $ 1.2million, respectively. There were
noliquidations in 2022.
The Company recorded a reserve for obsolescence of $ 137.7million, $ 170.8million and $ 139.0million
at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, to reduce Inventories to their estimated current
market price.
 NOTE 5 – PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 
Included in Property, plant and equipment, net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Land $ 259.9 $ 257.5 $ 263.0 
 Buildings 1,175.9 1,048.7 1,199.3 
 Machinery and equipment 3,689.5 3,459.8 3,230.2 
 Construction in progress 1,598.1 1,111.0 496.1 
 Property, plant and equipment, gross 6,723.4 5,877.0 5,188.6 
 Less allowances for depreciation 3,190.2 3,040.2 2,981.6 
 Property, plant and equipment, net $ 3,533.2 $ 2,836.8 $ 2,207.0 
The Company capitalizes interest costs incurred in the construction of certain property, plant and
equipment. In 2024 and 2023, the Company capitalized interest of $ 59.6million and $ 30.7million,
respectively. There was nointerest capitalized in 2022.
In accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC, whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying value of long-lived assets may not be recoverable or the
useful life may have changed, an impairment test is to be performed. Undiscounted cash flows are used
to calculate the recoverable value of long-lived assets to determine if such assets are not
recoverable. If the carrying value of the assets is deemed to not be recoverable, the impairment to
be recognized is the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the estimated fair
value of the assets as determined in accordance with the Fair Value Topic of the ASC. See Note 3 for
information on the impairment tests performed in 2023 for the assets held for sale prior to the
divestiture of the China architectural business. No other material impairments of Property, plant and
equipment were recorded in 2024, 2023 or 2022.
 60 
In 2024, the Company completed the acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business, which resulted
in the recognition of goodwill of $ 21.1million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 27.9million. The
acquired intangibles are being amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately
15years.
During 2023, the Company completed the acquisition of SIC Holding, which resulted in the recognition
of goodwill of $ 181.3million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 110.8million. The acquired
intangibles are being amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately 15years.
During 2022, the Company acquired fivecompanies which resulted in the recognition of goodwill of $
419.9million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 478.6million. The acquired intangibles are being
amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately 14years.
See Note 3 for additional information related to the acquisitions and divestitures.
In accordance with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC, goodwill at the reporting
unit level and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually. In addition,
interim impairment tests are performed whenever required as a result of a specific event or
circumstances which indicate potential impairment on a more likely than not basis. October 1 has been
established for the annual impairment review. An optional qualitative assessment may alleviate the
need to perform quantitative goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment tests when
there is no indication of impairment on a more likely than not basis. Should a quantitative
impairment test be performed, values are estimated separately for goodwill and indefinite-lived
intangible assets using applicable valuation models, incorporating discount rates commensurate with
the risks involved for each group of assets.
The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2024 did not result in any trademark or
goodwill impairment.
As a result of the Latin America architectural paint business moving to the Consumer Brands Group
reportable segment effective January 1, 2023, the Company performed a quantitative impairment
analysis for the impacted reporting units and determined both before and after the change, there was
no indication of impairment. The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2023 resulted in
no goodwill impairment and trademark impairment of $ 23.9million in the Consumer Brands Group
primarily related to a trademark in Europe.
The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2022 resulted in trademark impairments
totaling $ 15.5million in the Consumer Brands Group related to the discontinuation of an
architectural paint brand and lower than anticipated sales of an acquired brand and no goodwill
impairment.
A summary of changes in the Company’s carrying value of Goodwill by Reportable Segment is as follows:
 Performance 
 Paint Stores Consumer Brands Coatings Consolidated 
 Goodwill Group Group Group Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at 
 January 1, $ 2,182.1 $ 1,783.4 $ 3,169.1 $ 7,134.6 
 2022(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 49.7 21.3 422.5 493.5 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -2.8 -42.1 -44.9 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, 2,231.8 1,801.9 3,549.5 7,583.2 
 2022(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 8.3 8.3 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -9.1 43.6 34.5 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, 2,231.8 1,792.8 3,601.4 7,626.0 
 2023(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 48.2 48.2 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -0.3 -93.8 -94.1 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, $ 2,231.8 $ 1,792.5 $ 3,555.8 $ 7,580.1 
 2024(1) 
(1) Net of accumulated impairment losses of $ 19.4million ($ 10.2million in Paint Stores Group, $
8.4million in Consumer Brands Group and $ 0.8million in Performance Coatings Group).
 61 
A summary of the Company’s carrying value of Intangible assets is as follows:
 Finit… Trade… 
 Dece… Intan… With Total 
 31, Assets Custo… Intel… All Indef… Intang… 
 2024 Softw… Relat… Prope… Other Subto… Lives… Assets 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gross $ 185.0 $ 3,187… $ 1,973… $ 225.8 $ 5,571… 
 Accu… -154.3 -1,48… -747.7 -154.7 -2,54… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 30.7 $ 1,698… $ 1,225… $ 71.1 $ 3,025… $ 507.9 $ 3,533.2 
 value 
 Dece… 
 31, 
 2023 
 Gross $ 158.2 $ 3,263… $ 1,968… $ 232.6 $ 5,622… 
 Accu… -152.8 -1,31… -644.4 -152.9 -2,26… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 5.4 $ 1,952… $ 1,324… $ 79.7 $ 3,362… $ 518.5 $ 3,880.5 
 value 
 Dece… 
 31, 
 2022 
 Gross $ 180.2 $ 3,121… $ 1,732… $ 427.5 $ 5,461… 
 Accu… -148.1 -1,13… -477.4 -258.0 -2,01… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 32.1 $ 1,989… $ 1,255… $ 169.5 $ 3,445… $ 556.2 $ 4,002.0 
 value 
(1) Trademarks are net of accumulated impairment losses of $ 163.8millionas of December 31, 2024 and
2023 and $ 139.9million as of December 31, 2022.
Amortization of finite-lived intangible assets is estimated as follows for the next five years: $
317.2million in 2025, $ 315.3million in 2026, $ 310.5million in 2027, $ 307.5million in 2028 and $
305.9million in 2029.
Although the Company believes its estimates of fair value related to reporting units and indefinite-
lived intangible assets are reasonable, actual financial results could differ from these estimates
due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making such estimates. Changes in assumptions concerning
future financial results or other underlying assumptions could have a significant impact and future
impairment charges may be required.
 62 
Long-Term Debt
The table below summarizes the carrying value of the Company’s outstanding debt, net of capitalized
debt issuance costs, discounts and premiums:
 Due Date 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 3.45% Senior Notes 2027 $ 1,495.7 $ 1,493.9 $ 1,492.1 
 4.50% Senior Notes 2047 1,233.7 1,233.0 1,232.3 
 2.95% Senior Notes 2029 795.5 794.6 793.6 
 3.80% Senior Notes 2049 543.7 543.6 543.2 
 2.30% Senior Notes 2030 497.6 497.1 496.7 
 2.20% Senior Notes 2032 495.5 494.8 494.2 
 3.30% Senior Notes 2050 494.6 494.3 494.1 
 2.90% Senior Notes 2052 492.1 491.9 491.5 
 4.80% Senior Notes 2031 445.0 — — 
 3.45% Senior Notes 2025 399.8 399.4 399.1 
 4.25% Senior Notes 2025 399.5 398.6 397.7 
 4.55% Senior Notes 2045 395.4 395.2 395.0 
 4.55% Senior Notes 2028 397.6 — — 
 3.95% Senior Notes 2026 351.6 353.1 354.7 
 4.00% Senior Notes 2042 297.2 297.0 296.9 
 3.30% Senior Notes 2025 250.0 249.9 249.8 
 4.40% Senior Notes 2045 241.3 240.9 240.5 
 0.53% to8.00% Promissory Notes Through 2026 0.2 0.9 1.6 
 4.05% Senior Notes 2024 — 598.8 596.9 
 3.125% Senior Notes 2024 — 499.7 499.0 
 7.375% Debentures 2027 — — 119.2 
 7.45% Debentures 2097 — — 3.5 
 Total(1) 9,226.0 9,476.7 9,591.6 
 Less amounts due within one year 1,049.2 1,098.8 0.6 
 Long-term debt $ 8,176.8 $ 8,377.9 $ 9,591.0 
(1) Net of capitalized debt issuance costs of $ 48.6million, $ 49.3million and $ 57.3million and net
of discounts and premiums of $ 26.0million, $ 25.2million and $ 25.7million at December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022, respectively.
Maturities of long-term debt are as follows for the next five years: $ 1.050billion in 2025; $
350.2million in 2026; $ 1.500billion in 2027; $ 400.0million in 2028 and $ 800.0million in 2029.
Interest expense on long-term debt was $ 354.7million, $ 374.6million and $ 348.4million for 2024,
2023 and 2022, respectively.
In August 2024, the Company repaid principal of $ 600.0million related to the Company’s 4.05% senior
notes due August 8, 2024 using commercial paper and subsequently issued $ 400.0million of 4.55%
senior notes due 2028 and $ 450.0million of 4.80% senior notes due 2031 in a public offering. The net
proceeds from the issuance of these notes were used to repay outstanding borrowings under the
Company’s domestic commercial paper program and for general corporate purposes. The newly issued
senior notes contain customary qualitative covenants as defined in their respective agreements.
During the second quarter of 2024, the Company repaid the principal of $ 500.0million related to its
3.125% senior notes due June 1, 2024 using commercial paper.
In December 2023, the Company exercised its call provision to make-whole the entire outstanding $
119.4million aggregate principal amount of its 7.38% Debentures due 2027 and the entire outstanding $
3.5million aggregate principal amount of its 7.45% Debentures due 2097. The retirement of the
Debentures resulted in a loss of $ 12.8million recorded in Other general (income) expense - net. See
Note 19.
In August 2022, the Company issued $ 600.0million of 4.05% Senior Notes due August 2024 and $
400.0million of 4.25% Senior Notes due August 2025 in a public offering. The net proceeds from the
issuance of these notes were used to repay
 63 
borrowings outstanding under the Company’s credit agreement dated May 9, 2016, as amended, and the
domestic commercial paper program.
Short-Term Borrowings
In November 2024, the Company amended its credit agreement dated May 9, 2016, as amended, to extend
the maturity of $ 75.0million of the commitments available for borrowing and obtaining the issuance,
renewal, extension and increase of a letter of credit under the credit agreement from June 20, 2025
to December 20, 2029.
In July 2024, the Company entered into a new $ 2.500billion revolving credit agreement maturing on
July 31, 2029 (2024 Credit Agreement), which replaced the the 2022 Credit Agreement. Under the terms
of the 2024 Credit Agreement, the Company may request to extend the maturity date for twoadditional
one-yearperiods, request an uncommitted increase up to $ 750.0million and issue letters of credit
under a $ 250.0million subfacility.
In August 2022, the Company entered into a five-yearcredit agreement (2022 Credit Agreement), which
replaced the $ 2.000billion credit agreement dated June 29, 2021. The 2022 Credit Agreement gave the
Company the right to borrow $ 2.250billion and to obtain letters of credit in an amount of up to $
250.0million.
In August 2021, the Company entered into an amended and restated $ 625.0million credit agreement
(2021 Credit Agreement), which amends and restates the five-yearcredit agreement entered into in
September 2017. The 2021 Credit Agreement was subsequently amended on multiple dates to extend the
maturity of commitments available for borrowing or letters of credit under the agreement.
In May 2016, the Company entered into a five-yearcredit agreement (2016 Credit Agreement),
subsequently amended on multiple dates to extend the maturity of commitments available for borrowing
or letters of credit under the agreement. The 2016 credit agreement gives the Company the right to
borrow and obtain letters of credit up to an aggregate availability of $ 875.0million. These credit
agreements are/were used for general corporate purposes, including the financing of working capital
requirements.
At December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, there were noborrowings outstanding under these credit
agreements.
The Company’s available capacity under its committed credit agreements is reduced for amounts
outstanding under its domestic commercial paper program and letters of credit. At December 31, 2024,
the Company had unused capacity under its various credit agreements of $ 3.274billion. The table
below summarizes the Company’s Short-term borrowings:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Domestic commercial paper $ 655.6 $ 347.7 $ 938.5 
 Foreign facilities 6.8 26.5 39.6 
 Total $ 662.4 $ 374.2 $ 978.1 
 Weighted average interest rate: 
 Domestic 4.7% 5.5% 4.6% 
 Foreign 3.1% 3.6% 6.7% 
Interest expense on Short-term borrowings was $ 61.0million, $ 42.9million and $ 42.4million for
2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Among other restrictions, the Company’s notes, debentures and revolving credit agreement contain
certain covenants relating to liens, ratings changes, merger and sale of assets, consolidated
leverage and change of control, as defined in the agreements. In the event of default under any one
of these arrangements, acceleration of the maturity of any one or more of these borrowings may
result. The Company was in compliance with all covenants for all years presented.
 64 
NOTE 8 – PENSION, HEALTH CARE AND OTHER POSTRETIREMENT BENEFITS
The Company provides pension benefits to substantially all full-time employees through primarily
noncontributory defined contribution or defined benefit pension plans and certain health care and
life insurance benefits to domestic active employees and eligible retirees.
Health Care Plans
The Company provides certain domestic health care plans that are contributory and contain cost-
sharing features such as deductibles and coinsurance. There were 32,283, 31,327and 30,009active
employees covered by the benefits under these plans at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively. The cost of these benefits for active employees, which includes claims incurred but not
reported, amounted to $ 382.6million, $ 363.2million and $ 347.4million for 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
Defined Contribution Pension Plans
The Company’s annual contribution for its domestic defined contribution pension plan was $
103.5million, $ 97.8million and $ 88.9million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The contribution
percentage ranges from twopercent to sevenpercent of compensation for covered employees based on an
age and service formula. Assets in employee accounts of the domestic defined contribution pension
plan are invested in various investment funds as directed by the participants. These investment funds
did not own a significant number of shares of the Company’s common stock for any year presented.
The Company’s annual contributions for its foreign defined contribution pension plans, which are
based on various percentages of compensation for covered employees up to certain limits, were $
20.6million, $ 19.5million and $ 19.4million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Assets in
employee accounts of the foreign defined contribution pension plans are invested in various
investment funds. These investment funds did not own a significant number of shares of the Company’s
common stock for any year presented.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
At December 31, 2024, the domestic defined benefit pension plan was overfunded, with a projected
benefit obligation of $ 95.3million, fair value of plan assets of $ 148.7million and excess plan
assets of $ 53.4million. The plan was funded in accordance with all applicable regulations at
December 31, 2024.
The Company has thirty-sixforeign defined benefit pension plans. At December 31, 2024, twenty-nineof
the Company’s foreign defined benefit pension plans were unfunded or underfunded, with combined
accumulated benefit obligations, projected benefit obligations, fair values of net assets and
deficiencies of plan assets of $ 73.9million, $ 88.3million, $ 20.5million and $ 67.8million,
respectively.
The Company expects to make the following benefit payments for all domestic and foreign defined
benefit pension plans: $ 19.2million in 2025; $ 18.9million in 2026; $ 20.6million in 2027; $
22.2million in 2028; $ 22.7million in 2029; and $ 139.2million in 2030 through 2034. The Company
expects to contribute $ 5.8million to the foreign defined benefit pension plans in 2025.
The estimated net actuarial gains and prior service costs for the defined benefit pension plans that
are expected to be amortized from AOCI into net pension costs in 2025 are $ 3.2million and $
2.0million, respectively.
 65 
The following table summarizes the components of the net pension costs and AOCI related to the
defined benefit pension plans:
 Domestic Foreign 
 Defined Defined 
 Benefit Benefit 
 Net pension Pension Plan Pension Plans 
 cost: 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service cost $ 2.9 $ 3.0 $ 4.6 $ 4.6 $ 4.4 $ 6.3 
 Interest 4.9 4.6 3.2 11.8 11.8 7.3 
 cost 
 Expected 
 return on -8.3 -7.3 -7.6 -11.1 -12.3 -9.4 
 plan assets 
 Amortization 
 of prior 1.9 1.3 1.0 -0.1 -0.2 -0.2 
 service cost 
 (credit) 
 Amortization 
 of actuarial -0.5 -1.3 -1.5 0.2 
 (gains) 
 losses 
 Ongoing 0.9 1.6 1.2 3.9 2.2 4.2 
 pension cost 
 Settlement -1.1 -0.3 
 credits 
 Curtailment 7.1 
 cost 
 Net pension 0.9 1.6 1.2 11.0 1.1 3.9 
 cost 
 Other 
 changes in 
 plan assets 
 and 
 projected 
 benefit 
 obligation 
 recognized 
 in AOCI 
 (before 
 taxes): 
 Net 
 actuarial 
 (gains) 
 losses -20.9 -8.6 5.0 -8.0 5.8 -29.6 
 arising 
 during the 
 year 
 Prior 
 service cost 
 (credit) 1.0 3.0 1.6 6.9 1.1 -0.3 
 arising 
 during the 
 year 
 Amortization 
 of actuarial 0.5 1.3 1.5 -0.2 
 gains 
 (losses) 
 Amortization 
 of prior 
 service -1.9 -1.3 -1.0 -7.0 0.2 0.2 
 (cost) 
 credit 
 Loss 
 recognized 1.1 0.3 
 for 
 settlement 
 Exchange 
 rate loss 
 (gain) 1.6 -1.5 -0.4 
 recognized 
 during the 
 year 
 Total 
 recognized -21.3 -6.9 5.6 -5.2 8.2 -30.0 
 in AOCI 
 Total 
 recognized 
 in net $ -20.4 $ -5.3 $ 6.8 $ 5.8 $ 9.3 $ -26.1 
 pension cost 
 and 
 AOCI 
Service cost is recorded in Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative expenses. All
other components of Net pension costs are recorded in Other (income) expense - net.
In December 2024, the Company amended one of its foreign defined benefit plans to freeze future
benefit accruals as of December 31, 2024. As a result of the amendment, the Company recognized a non-
cash pre-tax curtailment charge of $ 7.1million primarily related to the acceleration of amounts
previously recorded within AOCI in the Statements of Consolidated Comprehensive Income.
The Company employs a total return investment approach for the domestic and foreign defined benefit
pension plan assets. A mix of equities and fixed income investments are used to maximize the long-
term return of assets for a prudent level of risk. In determining the expected long-term rate of
return on defined benefit pension plan assets, management considers the historical rates of return,
the nature of investments and an expectation of future investment strategies. The target allocations
for the domestic defined benefit pension plan assets are 35% – 65% equity securities, 35% – 65% fixed
income securities and 0% – 5% other (including alternative investments and cash). The target
allocations for the foreign defined benefit pension plan assets vary by plan, but are generally
within the following ranges: 0% – 20% equity securities, 75% – 100% fixed income securities and 0% –
10% other (including alternative investments and cash).
 66 
The following tables summarize the fair value of the defined benefit pension plan assets at December
31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. The presentation is in accordance with the Fair Value Topic of the ASC.
 Quoted Prices 
 in Active Significant 
 Markets for Other Significant 
 Fair Value at Identical Observable Unobservable 
 December 31, Assets Inputs Inputs 
 2024 (Level 1) (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Cash and cash $ 8.7 $ 8.7 $ — 
 equivalents 
 Equity investments(1) 95.3 86.6 8.7 
 Fixed income 226.5 36.8 189.7 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 24.2 24.2 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 354.7 $ 132.1 $ 222.6 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 25.3 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 380.0 
 Quoted Prices Significant 
 Fair Value at in Active Other Significant 
 December 31, Markets for Observable Unobservable 
 2023 Identical Inputs Inputs 
 Assets (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 (Level 1) 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Equity investments(1) $ 133.0 $ 72.9 $ 60.1 
 Fixed income 188.9 36.8 152.1 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 34.6 34.6 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 356.5 $ 109.7 $ 246.8 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 25.3 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 381.8 
 Quoted Prices Significant 
 Fair Value at in Active Other Significant 
 December 31, Markets for Observable Unobservable 
 2022 Identical Inputs Inputs 
 Assets (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 (Level 1) 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Equity investments(1) $ 80.1 $ 8.5 $ 71.6 
 Fixed income 117.6 117.6 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 34.4 34.4 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 232.1 $ 8.5 $ 223.6 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 110.9 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 343.0 
(1) This category includes actively managed equity assets that track primarily to the S&P 500 or an
international equity 
international bond 
or its equivalent using the practical expedient. Therefore, these investments are not classified in
the fair value hierarchy.
 67 
The following table summarizes the obligations, plan assets and assumptions used for the defined
benefit pension plans, which are all measured as of December 31:
 Domes… Forei… 
 Defin… Defin… 
 Benef… Benef… 
 Pensi… Pensi… 
 Plan Plans 
 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Accu… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 at $ 94.2 $ 100.5 $ 90.3 $ 221.7 $ 236.4 $ 209.3 
 end 
 of 
 year 
 Proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Bala… 
 at 
 begi… $ 102.1 $ 91.7 $ 120.8 $ 257.8 $ 230.4 $ 362.7 
 of 
 year 
 Serv… 2.9 3.0 4.6 4.6 4.4 6.3 
 cost 
 Inte… 4.9 4.6 3.2 11.8 11.8 7.3 
 cost 
 Actu… 
 (gai… -11.1 2.8 -32.6 -19.8 8.8 -112… 
 loss… 
 Plan 
 amen… 1.0 3.0 1.6 13.5 2.0 3.2 
 and 
 other 
 Sett… -2.2 -3.7 -2.4 
 Effe… 
 of -12.2 14.1 -28.8 
 fore… 
 exch… 
 Bene… -4.5 -3.0 -5.9 -10.5 -10.0 -5.5 
 paid 
 Bala… 
 at 
 end 95.3 102.1 91.7 243.0 257.8 230.4 
 of 
 year 
 Plan 
 asse… 
 Bala… 
 at 
 begi… 135.1 119.4 155.2 246.7 223.6 328.4 
 of 
 year 
 Actu… 
 retu… 
 on 18.1 18.7 -29.9 -2.6 15.4 -73.4 
 plan 
 asse… 
 Cont… 
 and 5.7 8.6 5.8 
 other 
 Sett… -2.2 -3.7 -2.4 
 Effe… 
 of -7.1 12.8 -29.3 
 fore… 
 exch… 
 Bene… -4.5 -3.0 -5.9 -10.5 -10.0 -5.5 
 paid 
 Bala… 
 at 
 end 148.7 135.1 119.4 231.3 246.7 223.6 
 of 
 year 
 Exce… 
 (def… 
 plan 
 asse… $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ -11.7 $ -11.1 $ -6.8 
 over 
 proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Asse… 
 and 
 liab… 
 reco… 
 in 
 the 
 Cons… 
 Bala… 
 Shee… 
 Defe… 
 pens… $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ 56.1 $ 57.9 $ 51.7 
 asse… 
 Other -6.0 -3.4 -3.0 
 accr… 
 Other 
 long… -61.8 -65.6 -55.5 
 liab… 
 $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ -11.7 $ -11.1 $ -6.8 
 Amou… 
 reco… 
 in 
 AOCI: 
 Net 
 actu… $ 36.9 $ 16.6 $ 8.0 $ 29.9 $ 24.8 $ 31.7 
 gains 
 Prior 
 serv… -7.8 -8.8 -7.1 0.4 0.3 1.6 
 (cos… 
 cred… 
 $ 29.1 $ 7.8 $ 0.9 $ 30.3 $ 25.1 $ 33.3 
 Weig… 
 assu… 
 used 
 to 
 dete… 
 proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Disc… 5.78 % 5.09 % 5.27 % 5.49 % 4.81 % 5.06 % 
 rate 
 Rate 
 of 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.29 % 3.33 % 3.39 % 
 comp… 
 incr… 
 Weig… 
 assu… 
 used 
 to 
 dete… 
 net 
 pens… 
 cost: 
 Disc… 5.09 % 5.27 % 3.12 % 4.81 % 5.06 % 2.26 % 
 rate 
 Expe… 
 long… 
 rate 
 of 6.25 % 6.25 % 5.00 % 4.78 % 5.48 % 3.19 % 
 retu… 
 on 
 asse… 
 Rate 
 of 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.33 % 3.39 % 3.25 % 
 comp… 
 incr… 
 68 
Other Postretirement Benefits
Employees of the Company hired in the United States prior to January 1, 1993 who are not members of a
collective bargaining unit, and certain groups of employees added through acquisitions, are eligible
for health care and life insurance benefits upon retirement, subject to the terms of the unfunded
plans. There were 3,354, 3,367and 3,409retired employees covered by these postretirement benefits at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The following table summarizes the obligation and the assumptions used for other postretirement
benefits:
 Other Postretirement 
 Benefits 
 Benefit obligation: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at beginning of $ 147.2 $ 153.8 $ 276.4 
 year - unfunded 
 Service cost 0.5 0.6 1.2 
 Interest cost 6.8 7.4 6.0 
 Actuarial gain -8.6 -8.0 -54.5 
 Plan amendments -62.8 
 Benefits paid -10.8 -6.6 -12.5 
 Balance at end of year - $ 135.1 $ 147.2 $ 153.8 
 unfunded 
 Liabilities recognized in 
 the 
 Consolidated Balance 
 Sheets: 
 Other accruals $ -14.4 $ -14.0 $ -14.5 
 Postretirement benefits 
 other than -120.7 -133.2 -139.3 
 pensions 
 $ -135.1 $ -147.2 $ -153.8 
 Amounts recognized in AOCI: 
 Net actuarial gains $ 21.0 $ 12.9 $ 4.7 
 Prior service credits 16.2 40.0 64.0 
 $ 37.2 $ 52.9 $ 68.7 
 Weighted-average 
 assumptions used to 
 determine benefit 
 obligation: 
 Discount rate 5.61 % 4.97 % 5.16 % 
 Health care cost trend rate 7.50 % 7.00 % 6.25 % 
 - pre-65 
 Health care cost trend rate 6.50 % 6.00 % 5.50 % 
 - post-65 
 Prescription drug cost 11.75 % 9.00 % 8.25 % 
 increases 
 Weighted-average 
 assumptions used to 
 determine net periodic 
 benefit cost: 
 Discount rate 4.97 % 5.16 % 2.83 % 
 Health care cost trend rate 7.00 % 6.25 % 6.38 % 
 - pre-65 
 Health care cost trend rate 6.00 % 5.50 % 5.13 % 
 - post-65 
 Prescription drug cost 9.00 % 8.25 % 8.25 % 
 increases 
 69 
The following table summarizes the components of the net periodic benefit cost and AOCI related to
other postretirement benefits:
 Other Postretirement Benefits 
 Net periodic benefit (credit) cost: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service cost $ 0.5 $ 0.6 $ 1.2 
 Interest cost 6.8 7.4 6.0 
 Amortization of actuarial (gains) -0.4 0.1 4.2 
 losses 
 Amortization of prior service credit -23.9 -23.9 -0.4 
 Net periodic benefit (credit) cost -17.0 -15.8 11.0 
 Other changes in projected benefit 
 obligation recognized in 
 AOCI (before taxes): 
 Net actuarial gain arising during 
 the -8.6 -8.0 -54.5 
 year 
 Prior service credit arising during 
 the -62.8 
 year 
 Amortization of actuarial gains 0.4 -0.1 -4.2 
 (losses) 
 Amortization of prior service credit 23.9 23.9 0.4 
 Total recognized in AOCI 15.7 15.8 -121.1 
 Total recognized in net periodic 
 benefit $ -1.3 $ — $ -110.1 
 cost and AOCI 
The estimated net actuarial gains and prior service credits for other postretirement benefits that
are expected to be amortized from AOCI into net periodic benefit cost in 2025 are $ 2.4million and $
14.2million, respectively.
The assumed health care cost trend rate and prescription drug cost increases used to determine the
net periodic benefit cost for postretirement health care benefits for 2025 both decrease in each
successive year until reaching 4.5% in 2034.
The Company expects to make retiree health care benefit cash payments as follows:
 2025 $ 14.4 
 2026 14.9 
 2027 14.9 
 2028 14.3 
 2029 13.2 
 2030 through 2034 48.2 
 Total expected benefit cash payments $ 119.9 
 70 
The Company leases retail stores, manufacturing and distribution facilities, office space and
equipment under operating and finance lease agreements. Operating leases are included in Operating
lease right-of-use (ROU) assets, Current portion of operating lease liabilities and Long-term
operating lease liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Finance leases are included in Other
assets, Other accruals and Other long-term liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The
finance lease related asset and liability as of December 31, 2024 was $ 187.5million and $
189.3million, respectively.
Operating and finance lease ROU assets and lease liabilities are recognized based on the present
value of lease payments over the lease term. The majority of the operating lease ROU asset and lease
liability balances are related to the retail operations of the Paint Stores Group. The majority of
the finance lease ROU asset and lease liability balances are related to a distribution facility
within the Consumer Brands Group. Most leases include oneor more options to renew. The exercise of
lease renewal options is at the Company’s discretion and is not reasonably certain at lease
commencement.
The Company does not account for lease and non-lease components of contracts separately for any
underlying asset class. Some leases have variable payments, however, because they are not based on an
estate leases relate primarily to common area maintenance, insurance, taxes and utilities associated
with the properties. Variable payments for equipment leases relate primarily to hours, miles or other
quantifiable usage factors which are not determinable at the time the lease agreement is entered into
by the Company. The Company has made an accounting policy election by underlying asset class to not
apply the recognition requirements of ASC 842 to short-term leases. As a result, certain leases with
a term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and expense is
recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Most leases do not contain an incremental borrowing rate which is readily determinable from their
associated contract. Therefore, the Company uses its estimated incremental borrowing rate on a
collateralized basis which is derived from information available at the lease commencement date,
giving consideration to publicly available credit rating data, other risk characteristics and the
term of the lease in determining the present value of lease payments.
Additional lease information is summarized below:
 Components of Lease Expense 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating lease cost $ 562.4 $ 528.5 $ 498.0 
 Finance lease cost: 
 Amortization of right-of-use assets $ 0.7 
 Interest on lease liabilities 1.5 
 Total $ 2.2 $ — $ — 
 Short-term lease cost $ 69.6 $ 58.5 $ 47.1 
 Variable lease cost $ 132.1 $ 104.1 $ 89.9 
 Supplemental Cash Flow Information 
 Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease 
 liabilities: 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating cash outflows from operating $ 545.5 $ 513.8 $ 480.1 
 leases 
 Operating cash outflows from finance 0.2 
 leases 
 Financing cash outflows from finance 0.2 
 leases 
 Leased assets obtained in exchange for 
 new lease liabilities: 
 Operating leases $ 526.9 $ 473.3 $ 463.1 
 Finance leases 188.2 
 71 
The following table reconciles the undiscounted cash flows for each of the next five years and
thereafter to the operating and finance lease liabilities recognized on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets as of December 31, 2024. The reconciliation excludes short-term leases that are not recorded
on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 Year Ending December 31, Operating Leases Finance Leases 
 2025 540.4 9.1 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2026 466.9 8.2 
 2027 378.7 8.4 
 2028 289.3 8.6 
 2029 200.5 8.8 
 Thereafter 413.3 586.6 
 Total lease payments 2,289.1 629.7 
 Amount representing interest -264.2 -440.4 
 Present value of lease liabilities $ 2,024.9 $ 189.3 
 72 
Environmental Matters
The operations of the Company, like those of other companies in its industry, are subject to various
domestic and foreign environmental laws and regulations. These laws and regulations not only govern
current operations and products, but also impose potential liability on the Company for past
operations. Management expects environmental laws and regulations to impose increasingly stringent
requirements upon the Company and the industry in the future. Management believes that the Company
conducts its operations in compliance with applicable environmental laws, regulations and
requirements and has implemented various programs designed to protect the environment and promote
continued compliance.
The Company is involved with environmental investigation and remediation activities at some of its
currently and formerly owned sites (including sites which were previously owned and/or operated by
businesses acquired by the Company). In addition, the Company, together with other parties, has been
designated a potentially responsible party under federal and state environmental protection laws for
the investigation and remediation of environmental contamination and hazardous waste at a number of
third-party sites, primarily Superfund sites. In general, these laws provide that potentially
responsible parties may be held jointly and severally liable for investigation and remediation costs
regardless of fault. The Company may be similarly designated with respect to additional third-party
sites in the future.
The Company initially provides for estimated costs of environmental-related activities relating to
its past operations and third-party sites for which commitments or clean-up plans have been developed
and when such costs can be reasonably estimated based on industry standards and professional
judgment. These estimated costs, which are mostly undiscounted, are determined based on currently
available facts regarding each site. If the reasonably estimable costs can only be identified as a
range and no specific amount within that range can be determined more likely than any other amount
within the range, the minimum of the range is provided.
The Company routinely assesses its potential liability for investigation and remediation-related
activities and adjusts its environmental-related accruals as information becomes available, including
as a result of sites progressing through investigation and remediation-related activities, upon which
more accurate costs can be reasonably estimated and as additional accounting guidelines are issued.
At December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company had accruals reported on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets as Other long-term liabilitiesof $ 230.3million, $ 230.8million and $ 240.2million,
respectively. Estimated costs of current investigation and remediation activities of $ 66.4million, $
88.1million and $ 50.2million are included in Other accrualson the Consolidated Balance Sheets at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Actual costs incurred may vary from the accrued estimates due to the inherent uncertainties involved
including, among others, the number and financial condition of parties involved with respect to any
given site, the volumetric contribution which may be attributed to the Company relative to that
attributed to other parties, the nature and magnitude of the wastes involved, the various
technologies that can be used for remediation and the determination of acceptable remediation with
respect to a particular site. If the Company’s future loss contingency is ultimately determined to be
at the unaccrued maximum of the estimated range of possible outcomes for every site for which costs
can be reasonably estimated, the Company’s accrual for environmental-related activities would be $
93.4million higher than the minimum accruals at December 31, 2024. Additionally, costs for
environmental-related activities may not be reasonably estimable at early stages of investigation and
therefore would not be included in the unaccrued maximum amount.
Fourof the Company’s currently and formerly owned manufacturing sites (Major Sites) account for the
majority of the accrual for environmental-related activities and the unaccrued maximum of the
estimated range of possible outcomes at December 31, 2024. At December 31, 2024, $ 250.3million, or
84.3% of the total accrual, related directly to the Major Sites. In the aggregate unaccrued maximum
of $ 93.4million at December 31, 2024, $ 70.6million, or 75.6%, related to the Major Sites. The
significant cost components of this liability continue to be related to remedy implementation,
regulatory agency interaction and project management and other costs. While different for each
specific environmental situation, these components generally each account for approximately 85%, 10%
and 5%, respectively, of the accrued amount and those percentages are subject to change over time.
While environmental investigations and remedial actions are in different stages at these sites,
additional investigations, remedial actions and monitoring will likely be required at each site.
The largest and most complex of the Major Sites is the Gibbsboro, New Jersey site (Gibbsboro) which
comprises the substantial majority of the environmental-related accrual. Gibbsboro, a former
manufacturing plant, and related areas, which ceased operations in 1978, has had various areas
included on the National Priorities List since 1999. This location has soil, sediment, surface water
and groundwater contamination related to the historic operations of the facility. Gibbsboro has been
divided by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) into sixoperable units (OUs) based on location
and characteristics, whose investigation and remediation efforts are likely to occur over an extended
period of time. To date, the Company has completed remedy construction on threeof the sixoperable
units. While there are administrative tasks to be completed before final agency
 73 
approval, the remediation phase of the work for these three OUs is effectively complete and future
work for these OUs is anticipated to be limited. OUs are in various phases of investigation and
remediation with the EPA that provide enough information to reasonably estimate cost ranges and
record environmental-related accruals. The most significant assumptions underlying the reliability
and precision of remediation cost estimates for the Gibbsboro site are the type and extent of future
remedies to be selected by the EPA and the costs of implementing those remedies.
The remaining threeMajor Sites comprising the majority of the accrual include: (1) a multi-party
Superfund site that (a) has received a record of decision from the federal EPA and is currently in
the remedial design phase for one OU, (b) has received a record of decision from the federal EPA for
an interim remedy for another OU and (c) has a remedial investigation ongoing for another OU, (2) a
closed paint manufacturing facility that is in the operation and maintenance phase of remediation
under both federal and state EPA programs and (3) a formerly-owned site containing warehouse and
office space that is in the remedial/design investigation phase under a state EPA program. Each of
these threeMajor Sites are in phases of investigation and remediation that provide sufficient
information to reasonably estimate cost ranges and record environmental-related accruals.
Excluding the Major Sites discussed above, no sites are individually material to the total accrual
balance. There are multiple, future events yet to occur, including further remedy selection and
design, remedy implementation and execution and securing applicable governmental agency approvals,
all of which have the potential to contribute to the uncertainty surrounding these future events. As
these events occur and to the extent that the cost estimates of the environmental remediation change,
the existing reserve will be adjusted.
Management cannot presently estimate the ultimate potential loss contingencies related to these sites
or other less significant sites until such time as a substantial portion of the investigation at the
sites is completed and remedial action plans are developed. Unasserted claims could have a material
effect on the Company’s loss contingency as more information becomes available over time. At December
31, 2024 , the Company did not have material loss contingency accruals related to unasserted claims.
Management does not expect that a material portion of unrecognized loss contingencies will be
recoverable through insurance, indemnification agreements or other sources. In the event any future
loss contingency significantly exceeds the current amount accrued, the recording of the ultimate
liability may result in a material impact on net income for the annual or interim period during which
the additional costs are accrued. Moreover, management does not believe that any potential liability
ultimately attributed to the Company for its environmental-related matters will have a material
adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity or cash flow due to the extended
length of time during which environmental investigation and remediation takes place. An estimate of
the potential impact on the Company’s operations cannot be made due to the aforementioned
uncertainties.
Management expects these contingent environmental-related liabilities to be resolved over an extended
period of time. Management is unable to provide a more specific time frame due to the indeterminate
amount of time to conduct investigation activities at any site, the indeterminate amount of time to
obtain environmental agency approval, as necessary, with respect to investigation and remediation
activities and the indeterminate amount of time necessary to conduct remediation activities.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations Topic of the ASC requires a liability to be
recognized for the fair value of a conditional asset retirement obligation if a settlement date and
fair value can be reasonably estimated. The Company recognizes a liability for any conditional asset
retirement obligation when sufficient information is available to reasonably estimate a settlement
date to determine the fair value of such a liability. The Company has identified certain conditional
asset retirement obligations at various current and closed manufacturing, distribution and store
facilities. These obligations relate primarily to asbestos abatement, hazardous waste Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) closures, well abandonment, transformers and used oil disposals
and underground storage tank closures. Using investigative, remediation and disposal methods that are
currently available to the Company, the estimated costs of these obligations were accrued and are not
significant. The recording of additional liabilities for future conditional asset retirement
obligations may result in a material impact on Net income for the annual or interim period during
which the costs are accrued. Management does not believe that any potential liability ultimately
attributed to the Company for its conditional asset retirement obligations will have a material
adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity or cash flow due to the extended
period of time over which sufficient information may become available regarding the closure or
modification of any one or group of the Company’s facilities. An estimate of the potential impact on
the Company’s operations cannot be made due to the aforementioned uncertainties.
 74 
Real Estate Financing
In December 2022, the Company closed a transaction to sell and subsequently lease back its partially-
constructed new global headquarters. As a result of this transaction, the Company has entered into
certain sale-leaseback agreements that do not qualify as asset sales and were accounted for as real
estate financing transactions. Net proceeds are recognized within the Financing Activities section in
the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows. The Company expects to receive total proceeds
approximating $ 800million to $ 850million on an incremental basis until the completion of
construction of the new global headquarters. The Company expects to receive the final proceeds for
the new global headquarters in the first quarter of 2025, at which point the Company will calculate
the remaining obligation under the terms of the lease. The following table summarizes the activity
related to this transaction and the corresponding balances recognized in the Consolidated Balance
Sheets.
 Activity: 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Proceeds received $ 244.2 $ 305.0 $ 210.0 
 Capitalized interest(1) 45.2 23.8 
 Balances: 
 Short-term liability(2) $ 49.7 $ 39.9 $ 20.0 
 Long-term liability(3) 715.9 475.9 187.0 
 Total liability $ 765.6 $ 515.8 $ 207.0 
(1) Interest is capitalized within construction in progress in Property, plant and equipment, net.
(2) The short-term portion of the liability is recorded in Other accruals.
(3) The long-term portion of the liability is recorded in Other long-term liabilities.
 NOTE 11 – LITIGATION 
In the course of its business, the Company is subject to a variety of claims and lawsuits, including,
but not limited to, litigation relating to product liability and warranty, personal injury,
environmental, intellectual property, commercial, contractual and antitrust claims, that are
inherently subject to many uncertainties regarding the possibility of a loss to the Company.
Uncertainties to which litigation is inherently subject include, among other things, costs,
unpredictable court or jury decisions that could affect other litigation against the Company and
encourage an increase in the number and nature of future claims and proceedings and differing laws
and regulations in jurisdictions where the Company operates. These uncertainties will ultimately be
resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur confirming the incurrence of a
liability or the reduction of a liability. In accordance with the Contingencies Topic of the ASC, the
Company accrues for these contingencies by a charge to income when it is both probable that one or
more future events will occur confirming the fact of a loss and the amount of the loss can be
reasonably estimated. In the event that the Company’s loss contingency is ultimately determined to be
significantly higher than currently accrued, the recording of the additional liability may result in
a material impact on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for the
annual or interim period during which such additional liability is accrued. In those cases where no
accrual is recorded because it is not probable that a liability has been incurred or the amount of
any such loss cannot be reasonably estimated, any potential liability ultimately determined to be
attributable to the Company may result in a material impact on the Company’s results of operations,
liquidity or financial condition for the annual or interim period during which such liability is
accrued. In those cases where no accrual is recorded or exposure to loss exists in excess of the
amount accrued, the Contingencies Topic of the ASC requires disclosure of the contingency when there
is a reasonable possibility that a loss or additional loss may have been incurred.
Due to the uncertainties involved in litigation, management is unable to predict the outcome of the
litigation identified below, the number or nature of possible future claims and proceedings or the
effect that any legislation and/or administrative regulations may have on the litigation or against
the Company. In addition, management cannot reasonably determine the scope or amount of the potential
costs and liabilities related to such litigation, or resulting from any such legislation and
regulations. With respect to the litigation identified below, the Company has only accrued for the
court-approved agreement related to the California Proceedings, identified in the Public Nuisance
Claim Litigation section. For the remaining litigation identified below, the Company does not believe
it is probable that a loss has occurred, or the Company believes it is not possible to estimate the
range of potential losses. In addition, any potential liability that may result from any changes to
legislation and regulations cannot reasonably be estimated. Due to the uncertainties associated with
the amount of any such liability and/or the nature of any other remedy which may be imposed in
litigation, any potential liability determined to be attributable to the Company arising out of such
litigation may have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity, or
financial condition. An estimate of the potential impact on the Company’s results of operations, cash
flow, liquidity or financial condition cannot be made due to the aforementioned uncertainties.
 75 
Lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation. The Company’s past operations included the manufacture
and sale of lead pigments and lead-based paints. The Company, along with other companies, is and has
been a defendant in a number of legal proceedings arising from the manufacture and sale of lead
pigments and lead-based paints. The plaintiffs’ claims have been based upon various legal theories,
including negligence, strict liability, breach of warranty, negligent misrepresentations and
omissions, fraudulent misrepresentations and omissions, concert of action, civil conspiracy,
violations of unfair trade practice and consumer protection laws, enterprise liability, market share
liability, public nuisance, unjust enrichment and other theories. The Company has also been a
defendant in legal proceedings arising from the manufacture and sale of non-lead-based paints that
seek recovery based upon various legal theories, including the failure to adequately warn of
potential exposure to lead during surface preparation when using non-lead-based paint on surfaces
previously painted with lead-based paint. Other than the California Proceedings and currently pending
cases, all of these legal proceedings have been concluded in favor of the Company and other
defendants at various stages in the proceedings.
In addition, from time to time, various legislation and administrative regulations have been enacted,
promulgated or proposed to impose obligations on present and former manufacturers of lead pigments
and lead-based paints respecting asserted health concerns associated with such products or to
overturn the effect of court decisions in which the Company and other manufacturers have been
successful. The Company is vigorously defending all lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation. The
Company expects that additional lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation may be filed against the
Company in the future asserting similar or different legal theories and seeking similar or different
types of damages and relief. The Company will continue to vigorously defend against any additional
litigation that may be filed, including utilizing all avenues of appeal, if necessary.
Public Nuisance Claim Litigation . The Company and other companies have been defendants in legal
proceedings seeking recovery based on public nuisance liability theories, among other theories,
brought by various states, cities and counties, including by the State of Rhode Island; the City of
St. Louis, Missouri; various cities and counties in the State of New Jersey; various cities in the
State of Ohio and the State of Ohio; the City of Chicago, Illinois; the City of Milwaukee, Wisconsin;
the County of Santa Clara, California and other public entities in the State of California (the
California Proceedings); and Lehigh and Montgomery Counties in Pennsylvania. Except for the
California Proceedings in which the Company reached a court-approved agreement in 2019 after nearly
twenty years of litigation, all of those legal proceedings have been concluded in favor of the
Company and other defendants at various stages in the proceedings. Most recently, on May 7, 2024, as
further described below in Wisconsin Litigation, threeplaintiffs filed amended complaints alleging,
in part, public nuisance claims.
Wisconsin Litigation . The Company and other companies are or have been defendants in a number of
legal proceedings seeking monetary damages and other relief from alleged personal injuries. The
current proceedings consist of twofederal court cases pending in the United States District Court for
the Eastern District of Wisconsin (Ernest Gibson v. American Cyanamid, et al. and Deziree and
Detareion Valoe v. American Cyanamid, et. al.) and onecase pending in Milwaukee County Circuit Court
in Wisconsin (Arrieona Beal v. Hattie and Jerry Mitchell, et al.). Those matters include claims by
fourindividuals allegedly injured from ingestion of lead pigment or lead-containing paint while they
were minors. The plaintiffs generally seek compensatory damages and have invoked Wisconsin’s risk
contribution theory (which is similar to market share liability, except that liability can be joint
and several) due to the plaintiff’s inability to identify the manufacturer of any product that
allegedly injured the plaintiff.
On May 20, 2021, as a result of a decision in favor of the Company by United States Court of Appeals
for the Seventh Circuit in the Ravon Owens v. American Cyanamid, et al., Cesar Sifuentes v. American
Cyanamid, et al. and Glenn Burton, Jr. v. American Cyanamid, et al. cases, the Company and the
threeother defendants filed motions for summary judgment to dismiss all claims of the approximately
150plaintiffs then pending in the Eastern District of Wisconsin, including the claims of Gibson and
the Valoes. On March 3, 2022, the district court granted summary judgment in favor of the Company and
the other defendants. On September 15, 2022, the plaintiffs filed notices of appeal with the Seventh
Circuit, seeking to appeal the district court’s summary judgment in favor of the Company and the
other defendants. On February 9, 2024, the Seventh Circuit affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment in favor of the Company and the other defendants in all cases except those filed by Gibson
and the Valoes, which cases were remanded to the district court for further proceedings. Following
remand of the Gibson and Valoe cases, the threeremaining plaintiffs filed amended complaints on May
7, 2024, alleging strict liability, negligence and public nuisance claims. The defendants filed
motions to dismiss the plaintiffs’ amended complaints on June 20, 2024. On November 8, 2024, the
district court granted in part and denied in part defendants’ motions to dismiss the amended
complaints, dismissing the second cause of action for general negligence and plaintiffs’ abatement
allegations, but otherwise permitting the case to proceed. On December 6, 2024, the Company and some
of the other defendants filed a third-party complaint against NL Industries, Inc. (NL) and the owners
and landlords of the properties where plaintiffs resided. Some of the owners and landlords filed a
motion to dismiss the third-party complaints; that motion remains pending. On January 30, 2025, the
district court entered a stipulated order dismissing NL pursuant to the execution of a Pierringer
release between plaintiffs and NL.
 76 
In the separate state court proceeding, on August 24, 2021, Arrieona Beal filed an amended complaint
in Milwaukee County Circuit Court, naming the Company and other alleged former lead pigment
manufacturers as defendants pursuant to the risk contribution liability theory. The plaintiff
previously had sued her landlords. On January 3, 2024, the Company and some of the other
manufacturing defendants filed a third-party complaint against NL and cross-claims against the
landlord defendants. On January 10, 2024, one of the landlord defendants filed a counterclaim and
cross-claim against all parties. On May 15, 2024, the plaintiff filed a motion for partial judgment
on the pleadings to strike the Company and other manufacturing defendants’ affirmative defenses, and
on August 6, 2024, the circuit court granted defendants’ motion to strike the plaintiff’s motion. On
December 6, 2024, plaintiff filed a notice of voluntary dismissal as to landlords Hattie and Jerry
Mitchell pursuant to the execution of a Pierringer release.
Insurance Coverage Litigation. The Company and its liability insurers, including certain underwriters
at Lloyd’s of London, initiated legal proceedings against each other to determine, among other
things, whether the costs and liabilities associated with the abatement of lead pigment are covered
under certain insurance policies issued to the Company. The insurers’ action, which was filed on
February 23, 2006, in the Supreme Court of the State of New York, County of New York, was dismissed.
The Company’s action, filed on March 3, 2006, in the Common Pleas Court, Cuyahoga County, Ohio,
previously was stayed and inactive.
On January 9, 2019, the Company filed an unopposed motion to lift the stay with the trial court,
which was granted, allowing the case to proceed to determine whether the insurers were required to
indemnify the Company following the California Proceedings. On June 28, 2019, the Company and its
liability insurers each filed separate motions for summary judgment seeking various forms of relief.
The trial court entered an order on December 4, 2020, granting the insurers’ motion for summary
judgment, denying the Company’s motion and entering final judgment in favor of the insurers. The
trial court sided with the Company on all of the issues presented, except one.
On December 21, 2020, the Company filed a notice of appeal to the Court of Appeals of Cuyahoga
County, Ohio, Eighth Appellate District, and the insurers filed cross-appeals. On September 1, 2022,
the appellate court reversed the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, finding in favor of the
Company on its appeal and against the insurers on their cross-appeal, and remanded the case to the
trial court. On September 12, 2022, the insurers applied to the appellate court for reconsideration
of its decision, en banc review, or certification of an appeal to the Ohio Supreme Court, which the
appellate court denied.
The insurers subsequently filed a notice of appeal to the Ohio Supreme Court, to which the Company
filed its response. On May 9, 2023, the Ohio Supreme Court accepted the insurers’ appeal. Oral
argument was held on October 24, 2023. On December 10, 2024, the Ohio Supreme Court reversed the
Court of Appeals and mandated judgment in favor of the insurers, holding that because the abatement-
fund payment was made to prevent future harm rather than compensate for past harm, payment was not
“damages” covered under the insurance policies.
This decision means that insurance proceeds could be unavailable under the policies at issue to
mitigate past or future abatement related liabilities. The Company has not recorded a receivable
related to these insurance policies or otherwise assumed that proceeds from these insurance policies
would be received in estimating any contingent liability accrual within the consolidated financial
statements. Therefore, this decision, without a determination of liability against the Company in the
lead pigment or lead-based paint litigation will have no impact on the Company’s results of
operation, liquidity or financial condition. As previously stated, except with respect to the
litigation in the California Proceedings, the Company has not accrued any amounts for the lead
pigment or lead-based paint litigation and any significant liability ultimately determined to be
attributable to the Company relating to such litigation may result in a material impact on the
Company’s results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for the annual or interim period
during which such liability is accrued.
 77 
Other matters. On December 18, 2019, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the
Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the Administrator of the
New Jersey Spill Compensation Fund (collectively, the NJ DEP) filed a lawsuit against the Company in
the Superior Court of New Jersey Law Division in Camden County, New Jersey. The NJ DEP seeks to
recover natural resource damages, punitive damages and litigation fees and costs, as well as other
costs, damages, declaratory relief and penalties pursuant to New Jersey state statutes and common law
theories in connection with the alleged discharge of hazardous substances and pollutants at the
Company’s Gibbsboro, New Jersey site, a former manufacturing plant and related facilities. Following
expert discovery, on November 20, 2024, the Company filed a motion in the United States District
Court for the District of New Jersey seeking to enforce the terms of an April 2019 Remedial
Design/Remedial Action Consent Decree between the Company and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (the Consent Decree) that is being attacked by the NJ DEP’s state court lawsuit. On
December 21, 2024, the United States filed a brief in opposition to the Company’s motion, to which
the Company filed a reply brief. The Company’s motion regarding the Consent Decree remains pending in
federal court. Meanwhile, on November 20, 2024, the Company filed a motion to stay the state court
proceedings pending resolution of the Company’s motion regarding the Consent Decree. On December 19,
2024, the state court denied the Company’s stay motion, but suspended all then-pending dates in the
court’s schedule, including the previous trial date of March 10, 2025, until an ongoing discovery
dispute between the Company and the NJ DEP is resolved. On December 20, 2024, the NJ DEP filed a
motion for partial summary judgment seeking to find the Company liable under the Spill Act and Solid
Waste Management Act. On January 31, 2025, the state court denied the NJ DEP’s motion for partial
summary judgment. On February 6, 2025, the state court sent an automated notice re-setting the trial
for March 10, 2025. Upon the parties’ request seeking clarification regarding the schedule, there is
a status conference with the state court set for February 18, 2025.
In July 2024, a third-party assurance, testing, inspection and certification provider changed its
listing for one of the Company’s protective coatings products, an intumescent coating used for fire
protection of steel beam assemblies. The Company has received claims regarding this matter and is
working with its customers and end users to assist in understanding the potential impacts of the
listing change, including the extent of potential remedial action that may involve the application of
additional product. The Company’s review of this matter is ongoing. Except for an immaterial product
warranty liability which remains recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2024,
any additional amount or range of potential loss cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
 NOTE 12 – SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY 
Capital Stock
At December 31, 2024, there were 900,000,000shares of common stock and 30,000,000shares of serial
preferred stock authorized for issuance. Of the authorized serial preferred stock, 3,000,000shares
are designated as cumulative redeemable serial preferred stock. There we no shares of serial
preferred stock issued during 2024, 2023 or 2022.
Under the 2006 Equity and Performance Incentive Plan (2006 Employee Plan), 71,100,000shares may be
issued or transferred. An aggregate of 13,603,814, 15,830,386and 17,939,143shares of common stock at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, were reserved for the exercise and future grants of
option rights and future grants of restricted stock and restricted stock units. See Note 14 for
additional information related to stock-based compensation.
Shares outstanding shown in the following table included 1,426,883shares of common stock held in a
revocable trust at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. The revocable trust is used to accumulate assets
for the purpose of funding the ultimate obligation of certain non-qualified benefit plans.
Transactions between the Company and the trust are accounted for in accordance with the Deferred
Compensation – Rabbi Trusts Subtopic of the Compensation Topic of the ASC, which requires the assets
held by the trust be consolidated with the Company’s accounts.
 78 
contributions to the domestic defined contribution plan. The related proceeds were $ 22.0million.
Dividends
The following table summarizes the dividends declared and paid on common stock:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash dividend per share $ 2.86 $ 2.42 $ 2.40 
 Total dividends (in millions) 723.4 623.7 618.5 
Treasury Stock
The Company acquires its common stock for general corporate purposes through its publicly announced
share repurchase program. As of December 31, 2024, the Company had remaining authorization from its
Board of Directors to purchase 34.4million shares of its common stock. The table below summarizes the
Company’s share repurchase activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Treasury stock purchases (in millions) $ 1,738.8 $ 1,432.0 $ 883.2 
 Treasury stock purchases (shares) 5,200,000 5,600,000 3,350,000 
 Average price per share $ 334.38 $ 255.72 $ 263.64 
 NOTE 13 – DEFINED CONTRIBUTION SAVINGS PLAN 
As of December 31, 2024, 44,917employees contributed to the Company’s defined contribution savings
plan, voluntary to all eligible salaried employees and any employee in a group of employees to which
coverage has been extended on a non-discriminatory basis by the plan’s Administration Committee.
Participants are allowed to contribute, on a pretax or after-tax basis, up to the lesser of
fiftypercent of their annual compensation or the maximum dollar amount allowed under the Internal
Revenue Code. The Company matches one hundredpercent of all contributions up to sixpercent of
eligible employee contributions. Such participant contributions may be invested in a variety of
investment funds or a Company common stock
 79 
fund and may be exchanged between investments as directed by the participant. Participants are
permitted to diversify both future and prior Company matching contributions previously allocated to
the Company common stock fund into a variety of investment funds.
The Company made contributions to the defined contribution savings plan on behalf of participating
employees, representing amounts authorized by employees to be withheld from their earnings, of $
279.6million, $ 260.5million and $ 240.1million in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The Company’s
matching contributions to the defined contribution savings plan charged to operations were $
165.1million, $ 153.9million and $ 140.0million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
At December 31, 2024, there were 16,771,640shares of the Company’s common stock being held by the
defined contribution savings plan, representing 6.7% of the total number of voting shares
outstanding. Shares of Company common stock credited to each member’s account under the defined
contribution savings plan are voted by the trustee under instructions from each individual plan
member. Shares for which no instructions are received are voted by the trustee in the same proportion
as those for which instructions are received.
 NOTE 14 – STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION 
The 2006 Employee Plan authorizes the Board of Directors, or a committee of the Board of Directors,
to issue or transfer up to an aggregate of 71,100,000shares of common stock, plus any shares relating
to awards that expire, are forfeited or canceled. The Company issues new shares upon exercise of
option rights (options) and vesting of restricted stock units (RSUs). The 2006 Employee Plan permits
the granting of options, appreciation rights, restricted stock, RSUs, performance shares and
performance units to eligible employees. At December 31, 2024, noappreciation rights, performance
shares or performance units had been granted under the 2006 Employee Plan. Shares available for
future grants under the 2006 Employee Plan were 5,458,273at December 31, 2024.
The 2006 Stock Plan for Nonemployee Directors (Nonemployee Director Plan) authorizes the Board of
Directors, or a committee of the Board of Directors, to issue or transfer up to an aggregate of
600,000shares of common stock, plus any shares relating to awards that expire, are forfeited or
canceled. The Nonemployee Director Plan permits the granting of options, appreciation rights,
restricted stock and RSUs to members of the Board of Directors who are not employees of the Company.
At December 31, 2024, nooptions or appreciation rights had been granted under the Nonemployee
Director Plan. Shares available for future grants under the Nonemployee Director Plan were 210,675at
December 31, 2024.
At December 31, 2024, the Company had total unrecognized stock-based compensation expense of $
192.7million that is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.08years.
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Stock-based compensation expense $ 138.1 $ 115.9 $ 99.7 
 Income tax benefit recognized 34.1 28.6 24.6 
Excess tax benefits from share-based payments are recognized as an income tax benefit in the
Statements of Consolidated Income when options are exercised and RSUs vest. For the years ended
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company’s excess tax benefit from options exercised and RSUs
vested reduced the income tax provision by $ 73.0million, $ 35.7million and $ 35.4million,
respectively.
Options
The fair value of the Company’s options was estimated at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes-
Merton option-pricing model with the following weighted-average assumptions for all options granted:
 2024 2023 2022 
 Risk-free interest rate 3.93 % 4.57 % 4.00 % 
 Expected life of options 5.02 years 5.02 years 5.05 years 
 Expected dividend yield of stock .83 % .94 % .92 % 
 Expected volatility of stock 27.5 % 29.3 % 31.6 % 
 80 
The risk-free interest rate is based upon the U.S. Treasury yield curve at the time of grant. The
expected life of options was calculated using a scenario analysis model. Historical data was used to
aggregate the holding period from actual exercises, post-vesting cancellations and hypothetical
assumed exercises on all outstanding options. The expected dividend yield of stock is the Company’s
best estimate of the expected future dividend yield. Expected volatility of stock was calculated
using historical and implied volatilities.
Grants of non-qualified and incentive stock options have been awarded to certain officers and key
employees under the 2006 Employee Plan. The options generally become exercisable to the extent of
one-third of the optioned shares for each full year following the date of grant and generally expire
ten yearsafter the date of grant. Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to options granted
to eligible employees amounted to $ 116.4million at December 31, 2024. The unrecognized compensation
expense is being amortized on a straight-line basis over the three-yearvesting period, net of
estimated forfeitures based on historical activity, and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-
average period of 1.14years.
The following table summarizes the Company’s option activity:
 Weighted 
 Average 
 Exercise Aggregate Weighted Average 
 Optioned Price Intrinsic Remaining Term 
 Shares Per Share Value (in Years) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstanding at 8,925,011 $ 175.70 $ 1,215.6 5.64 
 January 1, 2024 
 Granted 939,699 376.90 
 Exercised -1,871,201 131.48 
 Forfeited -53,373 254.48 
 Expired -5,270 202.79 
 Outstanding at 7,934,866 209.39 $ 1,074.4 5.69 
 December 31, 2024 
 Exercisable at 6,054,247 $ 178.95 $ 974.6 4.64 
 December 31, 2024 
The following table summarizes fair value and intrinsic value information for option activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted average grant date fair value $ 109.05 $ 77.08 $ 69.82 
 per share 
 Total fair value of options vested 66.8 61.3 57.9 
 Total intrinsic value of options 402.7 170.6 125.4 
 exercised 
RSUs
The fair value of each RSU is equal to the market value of a share of the Company’s stock on the
grant date. Grants of time-based RSUs, which generally require three yearsof continuous employment
from the date of grant before vesting and receiving the stock without restriction, have been awarded
to certain officers and key employees under the 2006 Employee Plan. The February 2024, 2023 and 2022
grants of performance-based RSUs vest at the end of a three-yearperiod based on the Company’s
achievement of specified financial and operating performance goals relating to earnings per share and
return on net assets employed.
Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to grants of RSUs to eligible employees amounted to $
74.4million at December 31, 2024. The unrecognized compensation expense is being amortized on a
straight-line basis over the vesting period and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average
period of 0.82years.
Grants of RSUs have been awarded to nonemployee directors under the Nonemployee Director Plan. These
grants generally vest and stock is received without restriction to the extent of one-third of the
RSUs for each year following the date of grant. Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to
grants of RSUs to nonemployee directors amounted to $ 1.9million at December 31, 2024. The
unrecognized compensation expense is being amortized on a straight-line basis over the three-
yearvesting period and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 0.90years.
 81 
The following table summarizes the Company’s RSU activity:
 Weighted 
 Average Grant Aggregate Weighted Average 
 Date Fair Intrinsic Remaining Term 
 Number of RSUs Value Per Share Value (in Years) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstanding at 434,874 $ 244.21 $ 135.6 1.26 
 January 1, 2024 
 Granted 124,667 305.50 
 Vested -122,276 239.14 
 Forfeited -4,251 251.80 
 Outstanding at 
 December 31, 433,014 $ 265.03 $ 147.2 1.18 
 2024 
The following table summarizes the fair value and intrinsic value information for RSU activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted average grant date fair value $ 305.50 $ 232.22 $ 271.75 
 per share 
 Intrinsic value of RSUs vested during 38.4 68.5 97.5 
 year 
NOTE 15 – ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
The components of AOCI, including the reclassification adjustments for items that were reclassified
from AOCI to Net income, are shown below.
 Pension and 
 Other Unrealized Net 
 Foreign Currency Postretirement Gains on 
 Translation Benefits Cash Flow 
 Adjustments(1) Adjustments(2) Hedges(3) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at $ -702.1 $ -32.2 $ 35.9 $ -698.4 
 January 1, 2022 
 Amounts 
 recognized in -108.7 106.8 -1.9 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified 3.7 -4.0 -0.3 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, -810.8 78.3 31.9 -700.6 
 2022 
 Amounts 
 recognized in 93.9 3.9 97.8 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified -17.9 -3.6 -21.5 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, -716.9 64.3 28.3 -624.3 
 2023 
 Amounts 
 recognized in -256.0 23.0 -233.0 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified -14.2 -3.7 -17.9 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, $ -972.9 $ 73.1 $ 24.6 $ -875.2 
 2024 
(1) Includes changes in the fair value of cross currency swap contracts of $ 53.6million, $( 24.9)
million and $ 34.1million in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. See Note 16.
(2) Net of taxes of $( 2.0) million, $ 3.1million and $( 35.0) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively. See Note 8.
(3) Net of taxes of $ 1.2million in 2024 and 2023 and $ 1.1million in 2022. See Statements of
Consolidated Comprehensive Income.
 82 
Net Investment Hedges
The Company has entered into U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap contracts with various
counterparties to hedge the Company’s net investment in its European operations. During the term of
the contracts, the Company will pay fixed-rate interest in euros and receive fixed-rate interest in
U.S. dollars, thereby effectively converting a portion of the Company's U.S. dollar denominated
fixed-rate debt to euro denominated fixed-rate debt. The outstanding contracts as of December 31,
2024 are summarized by maturity date in the table below.
 Notional Value Maturity Date 
 200.0 August 8, 2025 
 687.7 June 1, 2027 
 100.0 March 1, 2028 
 ──────────────────────────────────────── 
 525.0 August 15, 2029 
 100.0 September 1, 2031 
 $ 1,612.7 
In August 2024, the Company settled its $ 150.0million U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap
contract entered into on March 28, 2023. In May 2024, the Company settled its $ 500.0million U.S.
dollar to euro cross currency swap contract entered into on February 13, 2020. At the time of both of
these settlements, an immaterial unrealized loss was recognized in AOCI.
In December 2023, the Company settled its $ 100.0million U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap
contract entered into on August 1, 2023. At the time of settlement, an immaterial unrealized gain was
recognized in AOCI.
The following table summarizes the balance sheet location of the cross currency swap contracts. See
Note 17 for additional information on the fair value of these contracts.
 December 31, December 31, December 31, 
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Other current assets $ 9.4 $ — $ — 
 Other assets 39.5 — 9.1 
 Other accruals — 12.0 — 
 Other long-term liabilities — 12.4 — 
The changes in fair value of the cross currency swap contracts are recognized in the foreign currency
translation adjustments component of AOCI. See Note 15. The following table summarizes the unrealized
gains (losses) for the years ended December 31:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gains (losses) $ 71.2 $ -33.1 $ 45.2 
 Tax effect -17.6 8.2 -11.1 
 Gains (losses), net of taxes $ 53.6 $ -24.9 $ 34.1 
Derivatives Not Designated as Hedging Instruments
The Company enters into foreign currency option and forward contracts with maturity dates less than
twelve months primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. The related gains and
losses are recorded in Other (income) expense - net. See Note 19 for further details.
 83 
The Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures Topic of the ASC applies to the Company’s financial and
non-financial assets and liabilities. The guidance applies when other standards require or permit the
fair value measurement of assets and liabilities. Under the guidance, assets and liabilities measured
at fair value are categorized as follows:
Level 1: Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets
Level 2: Significant other observable inputs
Level 3: Significant unobservable inputs
There were no assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis classified as Level
3 at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. Except for the acquisition-related fair value measurements and
assets held for sale prior to divestiture of the China architectural business described in Note 3 and
the reporting unit impairment analysis and trademark quantitative impairment test described in Note
6, there were no assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis. The following
table summarizes the Company’s assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis,
categorized using the fair value hierarchy.
 Dec… De… Dec… 
 31, 31, 31, 
 2024 20… 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Tot… Le… Lev… To… Lev… Le… Tot… Le… Lev… 
 1 2 1 2 1 2 
 A… 
 D… 
 c… $ 98.6 $ 98… $ — $ 84… $ 84.7 $ 74.1 $ 43… $ 30.4 
 p… 
 Q… 
 r… — — 29.8 29… 
 p… 
 N… 
 i… 48.9 48.9 — 9.1 9.1 
 h… 
 $ 147… $ 98… $ 48.9 $ 84… $ 84.7 $ — $ 113… $ 73… $ 39.5 
 L… 
 N… 
 i… $ — $ 24… $ 24… $ — 
 h… 
The deferred compensation plan assets consist of the investment funds maintained for future payments
under the Company’s executive deferred compensation plans, which are structured as rabbi trusts. The
investments are marketable securities accounted for under the Debt and Equity Securities Topic of the
ASC. The level 1 investments are valued using quoted market prices multiplied by the number of
shares. The level 2 investments are valued based on vendor or broker models. There was $ 7.0million
and $ 6.4million of deferred compensation plan assets held in partnership funds measured using NAV
(or its equivalent) as a practical expedient as of December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. These
investments are not classified in the fair value hierarchy. The cost basis of all investments within
the deferred compensation plan and qualified replacement plan was $ 82.7million, $ 76.3million and $
67.2million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The qualified replacement plan assets consisted of investment funds maintained for future
contributions to the Company’s domestic defined contribution pension plan. See Note 8. During 2023,
the remaining balance was fully utilized to fund the Company’s domestic defined contribution pension
plan. The cost basis of the investment funds was $ 29.8million at December 31, 2022.
The net investment hedge asset and liability represent the fair value of the cross currency swaps.
See Note 16. The fair value is based on a valuation model that uses observable inputs, including
interest rate curves and the euro foreign currency rate.
The carrying amounts reported for Cash and cash equivalents and Short-term borrowings approximate
fair value.
The fair value of the Company’s publicly traded debt is based on quoted market prices. The fair value
of the Company’s non-publicly traded debt is estimated using discounted cash flow analyses, based on
the Company’s current incremental borrowing rates for similar types of borrowing arrangements. The
Company’s publicly traded debt and non-traded debt are classified as level 1 and level 2,
respectively, in the fair value hierarchy. The following table summarizes the carrying amounts and
fair values of the Company’s publicly traded debt and non-traded debt.
 84 
The Company manufactures and sells paint, stains, supplies, equipment and floor covering through
company-operated stores, branded and private label products through retailers and a broad range of
industrial coatings directly to global manufacturing customers through company-operated branches. A
large portion of the Company’s revenue is recognized at a point in time and made to customers who are
not engaged in a long-term supply agreement or any form of contract with the Company. These sales are
paid for at the time of sale in cash, credit card or on account with the vast majority of customers
having terms between 30 and 60 days, not to exceed one year. Many customers who purchase on account
take advantage of early payment discounts offered by paying within 30 days of being invoiced. The
Company estimates variable consideration for these sales on the basis of both historical information
and current trends to estimate the expected amount of discounts to which customers are likely to be
entitled.
The remaining revenue is governed by long-term supply agreements and related purchase orders
(contracts) that specify shipping terms and aspects of the transaction price including rebates,
discounts and other sales incentives, such as advertising support. Contracts are at standalone
pricing. The performance obligation in these contracts is determined by each of the individual
purchase orders and the respective stated quantities, with revenue being recognized at a point in
time when obligations under the terms of the agreement are satisfied. This generally occurs with the
transfer of control of our products to the customer. Sales, value add and other taxes we collect
concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue.
See Note 22 for the Company’s disaggregation of Net sales by Reportable Segment. As the Reportable
Segments are aligned by similar economic factors, trends and customers, this disaggregation best
depicts how the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows are affected by
economic factors. Approximately 80% of the Company’s net external sales are in the Company’s North
America region (which is comprised of the United States, Canada and the Caribbean region), slightly
less than 10% in the EMEAI region (Europe, Middle East, Africa and India), with the remaining global
regions accounting for the residual balance. No individual country outside of the United States is
individually significant.
The Company has made payments or given credits for various incentives at the beginning of a long-term
contract where future revenue is expected and before satisfaction of performance obligations. Under
these circumstances, the Company recognizes a contract asset and amortizes these prepayments over the
expected benefit life of the long-term contract, typically on a straight-line basis.
The majority of variable consideration in the Company’s contracts include volume rebates, discounts
and other incentives, where the customer receives a retrospective percentage rebate based on the
amount of their purchases. In these situations, the rebates are accrued as a fixed percentage of
sales and recorded as a reduction of Net sales until paid to the customer per the terms of the
contract. Forms of variable consideration such as tiered rebates, whereby a customer receives a
retrospective price decrease dependent on the volume of their purchases, are calculated using a
forecasted percentage to determine the most likely amount to accrue. Management creates a baseline
calculation using historical sales and then utilizing forecast information, estimates the anticipated
sales volume each quarter to calculate the expected reduction to Net sales. The remainder of the
transaction price is fixed as agreed upon with the customer, limiting estimation of revenues,
including constraints.
The Company’s Accounts receivable and current and long-term contract assets and liabilities are
summarized in the following table.
 85 
The difference between the opening and closing balances of the Company’s contract assets and contract
liabilities primarily results from the timing difference between the contractual performance
obligation and the associated payment.
Provisions for estimated returns are established and the expected costs continue to be recognized as
contra-revenue per ASC 606 when the products are sold. The Company only offers an assurance type
warranty on products sold, and there is no material service to the customer beyond fixing defects
that existed at the time of sale and no warranties are sold separately.
Warranty liabilities are excluded from the table above. Amounts recognized during the year from
deferred revenue were not material. The Company records a right of return liability within each of
its operations to accrue for expected customer returns. Historical actual returns are used to
estimate future returns as a percentage of current sales. Obligations for returns and refunds were
not material individually or in the aggregate.
Allowance for Current Expected Credit Losses
The following table summarizes the movement in the Company’s allowance for current expected credit
losses:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Beginning balance $ 59.6 $ 56.6 $ 48.9 
 Bad debt expense 69.5 67.9 65.3 
 Uncollectible accounts written off, net -68.7 -64.9 -57.6 
 of recoveries 
 Ending balance $ 60.4 $ 59.6 $ 56.6 
 NOTE 19 – OTHER (INCOME) EXPENSE 
Other General (Income) Expense - Net
Included in Other general (income) expense - net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Provisions for environmental matters - $ -1.3 $ 80.7 $ -7.1 
 net 
 Gain on divestiture of business (see — -20.1 — 
 Note 3) 
 (Gain) loss on sale or disposition of -49.9 0.9 -17.8 
 assets 
 Other 12.4 5.6 — 
 Total $ -38.8 $ 67.1 $ -24.9 
Provisions for environmental matters – net represent initial provisions for site-specific estimated
costs of environmental investigation or remediation and increases or decreases to environmental-
related accruals as information becomes available upon which more accurate costs can be reasonably
estimated and as additional accounting guidelines are issued. Provisions for environmental matters -
net for the year ended December 31, 2024 included an immaterial amount of insurance proceeds related
to environmental cleanup at a current manufacturing site. See Note 10 for further details on the
Company’s environmental-related activities.
The (gain) loss on sale or disposition of assets represents the net realized (gain) loss associated
with the sale or disposal of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets previously used in
the conduct of the primary business of the Company. (Gain) loss on sale or disposition of assets for
the year ended December 31, 2024 included an immaterial amount of insurance proceeds related to a
current manufacturing site.
 86 
Other (Income) Expense - Net
Included in Other (income) expense - net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investment (gains) losses $ -16.9 $ -22.9 $ 9.7 
 Loss on extinguishment of debt (see Note — 12.8 — 
 7) 
 Net expense from banking activities 15.7 15.0 12.2 
 Foreign currency transaction related 3.9 80.5 33.6 
 losses - net 
 Miscellaneous pension and benefit -13.1 -21.1 4.0 
 (income) expense 
 Other income -69.8 -48.5 -39.6 
 Other expense 35.5 49.7 27.1 
 Total $ -44.7 $ 65.5 $ 47.0 
Investment (gains) losses primarily relate to the change in market value of the investments held in
the deferred compensation plan. See Note 17 for additional information on the fair value of these
investments.
Foreign currency transaction related losses - net include the impact from foreign currency
transactions, including from highly inflationary economies such as Argentina, and net realized losses
from foreign currency option and forward contracts. See Note 16 for further details regarding these
foreign currency contracts.
Miscellaneous pension and benefit (income) expense consists of the non-service components of net
periodic pension and benefit cost (credit). See Note 8.
Other income and other expense included items of revenue, gains, expenses and losses that were
unrelated to the primary business purpose of the Company. There were no items within other income or
other expense that were individually significant at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022.
 NOTE 20 – INCOME TAXES 
Significant components of the provisions for income taxes were as follows:
 Current: 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Federal $ 558.0 $ 553.4 $ 505.5 
 Foreign 155.1 147.6 90.3 
 State and local 132.2 109.0 102.0 
 Total current 845.3 810.0 697.8 
 Deferred: 
 Federal -54.8 -39.9 -81.7 
 Foreign -15.8 -51.5 -47.3 
 State and local -4.3 2.5 -15.8 
 Total deferred -74.9 -88.9 -144.8 
 Total provisions for income taxes $ 770.4 $ 721.1 $ 553.0 
 87 
A reconciliation of the statutory federal income tax rate to the effective tax rate follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 Statutory federal income tax rate 21.0 % 21.0 % 21.0 % 
 Effect of: 
 State and local income taxes 3.2 3.0 2.8 
 Investment vehicles -0.5 -0.5 -0.4 
 Employee share-based payments -2.1 -1.1 -1.4 
 Research and development credits -0.3 -0.4 -0.6 
 Amended returns and refunds -0.2 0.2 0.4 
 Taxes on non-U.S. earnings 1.1 0.8 0.2 
 Other - net 0.1 0.2 -0.5 
 Reported effective tax rate 22.3 % 23.2 % 21.5 % 
The decrease in the effective tax rate for 2024 compared to 2023 was primarily related to a more
favorable impact from tax benefits related to employee share-based payments. The other significant
components of the Company’s effective tax rate were consistent year-over-year.
Significant components of income before income taxes as used for income tax purposes, were as
follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Domestic $ 3,046.6 $ 2,817.0 $ 2,427.6 
 Foreign 405.2 292.9 145.5 
 $ 3,451.8 $ 3,109.9 $ 2,573.1 
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying
amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income
tax purposes using the enacted tax rates and laws that are currently in effect.
Significant components of the Company’s deferred tax assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022 were as follows:
 Deferred tax assets: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Environmental and other similar items $ 66.8 $ 72.0 $ 66.4 
 Employee related and benefit items 175.2 162.1 157.1 
 Operating lease liabilities 499.6 483.2 478.1 
 Research and development capitalization 103.9 81.5 52.6 
 Other items 206.5 205.6 204.1 
 Total deferred tax assets 1,052.0 1,004.4 958.3 
 Deferred tax liabilities: 
 Intangible assets and Property, plant 948.7 1,001.1 973.4 
 and equipment 
 LIFO inventories 120.5 115.2 97.3 
 Operating lease right-of-use assets 482.1 465.6 460.5 
 Other items 40.7 28.6 31.7 
 Total deferred tax liabilities 1,592.0 1,610.5 1,562.9 
 Net deferred tax liabilities $ 540.0 $ 606.1 $ 604.6 
Netted against the Company’s other deferred tax assets were valuation allowances of $ 124.5million, $
106.6million and $ 97.5million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The Company has $
13.5million of domestic net operating loss carryforwards acquired through acquisitions that have
expiration dates through tax year 2037, foreign tax credits of $ 34.9million that expire in calendar
years 2028 through 2034 and foreign net operating losses of $ 339.1million. The foreign net
 88 
operating losses are related to various jurisdictions that provide for both indefinite carryforward
periods and others with carryforward periods that expire between tax years 2024 to 2034.
The Company and its subsidiaries file income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and various
state and foreign jurisdictions. The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2013 through 2016 income
tax returns in 2023 and paid the related assessments in the fourth quarter of 2023 and first quarter
of 2024. The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2011 income tax return in 2023 and paid the tax
assessment in the second quarter of 2024 and the interest assessment in the third quarter of 2024.
The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2017 through 2019 income tax returns in the fourth
quarter of 2024 and expects to pay the tax and interest assessment in the first quarter of 2025. The
IRS plans to start its next audit cycle of the Company’s 2020 through 2022 income tax returns in
2025. As of December 31, 2024, the federal statute of limitations has not expired for the 2017
through 2024 tax years.
As of December 31, 2024, the Company is subject to non-U.S. income tax examinations for the tax years
of 2015 through 2024. In addition, the Company is subject to state and local income tax examinations
for the tax years 2017 through 2024.
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at beginning of year $ 121.8 $ 242.4 $ 228.5 
 Additions based on tax positions related 16.0 14.2 18.7 
 to the current year 
 Additions for tax positions of prior 12.8 12.6 10.6 
 years 
 Reductions for tax positions of prior -8.6 -16.9 -6.0 
 years 
 Settlements -31.7 -123.2 -1.7 
 Lapses of statutes of limitations -11.0 -7.3 -7.7 
 Balance at end of year $ 99.3 $ 121.8 $ 242.4 
The decrease in unrecognized tax benefits was primarily related to settlements of federal adjustments
with the IRS in the tax years 2017 through 2019. There were also additions in unrecognized tax
benefits related to the reversal of benefits recognized from certain positions taken on current and
prior year income tax returns filed in U.S. federal and various state jurisdictions. These additions
were partially offset by various positions taken on prior year income tax returns filed in U.S. and
various foreign jurisdictions that were no longer deemed to be at risk. At December 31, 2024, 2023
and 2022, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the
effective tax rate was $ 84.0million, $ 109.4million and $ 230.3million, respectively.
Included in the balance of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2024 is $ 7.9million related to
tax positions for which it is reasonably possible that the total amounts could significantly change
during the next twelve months. This amount represents a decrease in unrecognized tax benefits
comprised primarily of items related to federal audits of partnership investments and expiring
statutes in federal, foreign and state jurisdictions.
The Company classifies all income tax related interest and penalties as income tax expense. During
the year ended December 31, 2024, there was an increase in income tax interest and penalties of $
7.8million. During the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022, there was an increase in income tax
interest and penalties of $ 5.9million and $ 10.3million, respectively. The Company accrued $
18.8million, $ 20.4million and $ 36.6million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, for
the potential payment of interest and penalties.
 89 
Basic and diluted net income per share are calculated using the treasury stock method.
 Basic 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 2,681.4 $ 2,388.8 $ 2,020.1 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 251.0 255.4 258.0 
 Basic net income per share $ 10.68 $ 9.35 $ 7.83 
 Diluted 
 Net income $ 2,681.4 $ 2,388.8 $ 2,020.1 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 
 assuming dilution: 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 251.0 255.4 258.0 
 Stock options and other contingently 3.1 2.9 3.8 
 issuable shares(1) 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 254.1 258.3 261.8 
 assuming dilution 
 Diluted net income per share $ 10.55 $ 9.25 $ 7.72 
(1) Stock options and other contingently issuable shares excludes 0.9million, 2.8million and
1.9million shares at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, due to their anti-dilutive
effect.
 NOTE 22 – REPORTABLE SEGMENT INFORMATION 
The Company reports its segment information in the same way that management internally organizes its
business for assessing performance and making decisions regarding the allocation of resources in
accordance with the Segment Reporting Topic of the ASC. The Company has threereportable operating
segments: Paint Stores Group, Consumer Brands Group and Performance Coatings Group (individually, a
Reportable Segment and collectively, the Reportable Segments). Factors considered in determining the
threeReportable Segments of the Company include the nature of business activities, the management
structure directly accountable to the Company’s Chief Operating Decision Maker (CODM) for operating
and administrative activities, availability of discrete financial information and information
presented to the Board of Directors. The Company reports all other business activities within the
Administrative function.
The Company’s CODM has been identified as the Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer because
she has the final authority over performance assessment and resource allocation decisions. Because of
the diverse operations of the Company, the CODM regularly receives and uses discrete financial
information about each Reportable Segment as well as select supplemental financial information about
certain divisions, business units or subsidiaries of the Company. The CODM uses all such financial
information for performance assessments and resource allocation decisions. The CODM evaluates the
performance of and allocates resources to the Reportable Segments based on Segment profit or loss,
which represents the segments’ Income before income taxes. The accounting policies of the Reportable
Segments are the same as those described in Note 1.
The Paint Stores Group consisted of 4,773company-operated specialty paint stores in the United
States, Canada and the Caribbean region at December 31, 2024. Each store in this segment is engaged
in servicing the needs of architectural and industrial paint contractors and do-it-yourself
homeowners. These stores market and sell ABC corp. ® and other controlled brand architectural
paint and coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and related products. The
majority of these products are produced by manufacturing facilities in the Consumer Brands Group. In
addition, each store sells select purchased associated products. The loss of any single customer
would not have a material adverse effect on the business of this segment. During 2024, this segment
opened 79net new stores, consisting of 84new stores opened and 5stores closed. In 2023 and 2022, this
segment opened 70and 75net new stores, respectively. In accordance with ASC 280-10-50-9, the Paint
Stores Group as a whole is considered the operating segment, and because it meets the criteria in ASC
280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Consumer Brands Group manufactures and supplies a broad portfolio of branded and private-label
architectural paint, stains, varnishes, industrial products, wood finishes products, wood
preservatives, applicators, corrosion inhibitors, aerosols, caulks and adhesives to retailers,
including home centers and hardware stores, dedicated dealers and distributors throughout North
America, Latin America and Europe. Sales and marketing of certain controlled brand and private-label
products is performed by a direct sales staff. The products distributed through third-party customers
are intended for resale to the ultimate
 90 
end-user of the product. The Consumer Brands Group also consisted of 334company-operated specialty
paint stores in Latin America at December 31, 2024. Each store in this segment is engaged in
servicing the needs of home, commercial and industrial projects to contractors and do-it-yourself
customers in Latin America. These stores market and sell ABC corp. ® and other controlled
brand architectural paint and coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and
related products which are branded for the Latin America market. In addition, each store sells select
purchased associated products. The Consumer Brands Group had sales to certain customers that,
individually, may be a significant portion of the sales and related profitability of the segment.
During 2024, the segment opened 16net new stores, consisting of 18stores opened and 2stores closed.
In 2023 and 2022, this segment opened (closed) 11and ( 3) net new stores, respectively.
The Consumer Brands Group also supports the Company’s other businesses around the world with new
product research and development, manufacturing, distribution and logistics. Approximately 63% of the
total sales of the Consumer Brands Group in 2024 were intersegment transfers of products primarily
sold through the Paint Stores Group. This segment incurred most of the Company’s capital expenditures
related to ongoing environmental compliance measures, manufacturing capacity expansion, operational
efficiencies and maintenance projects at sites currently in operation. In accordance with ASC
280-10-50-9, the Consumer Brands Group as a whole is considered the operating segment, and because it
meets the criteria in ASC 280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Performance Coatings Group develops and sells industrial coatings for wood finishing and general
industrial (metal and plastic) applications, automotive refinish, protective and marine coatings,
coil coatings, packaging coatings and performance-based resins and colorants worldwide. This segment
licenses certain technology and trade names worldwide, including ABC corp. ® and other
controlled brand products which are distributed through the Paint Stores Group, this segment’s
324company-operated branches and by a direct sales staff and outside sales representatives to
retailers, dealers, jobbers, licensees and other third-party distributors. The Performance Coatings
Group had sales to certain customers that, individually, may be a significant portion of the sales of
the segment. However, the loss of any single customer would not have a material adverse effect on the
overall profitability of the segment. During 2024, the segment added 2new branches ( nobranches were
closed). In 2023 and 2022, this segment added 5and 35net new branches, respectively. In accordance
with ASC 280-10-50-9, the Performance Coatings Group as a whole is considered the operating segment,
and because it meets the criteria in ASC 280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Administrative function includes the administrative expenses and assets of the Company’s new
global headquarters and research and development center, both currently under construction. In
addition, it includes the operations of a real estate management unit that is responsible for the
ownership, management and leasing of non-retail properties held primarily for use by the Company,
including the Company’s current global headquarters and research and development center and disposal
of idle facilities. The Administrative function’s remaining assets consist primarily of cash and cash
equivalents, investments and deferred pension assets. Also included in the Administrative function
was interest expense, interest and investment income, certain expenses related to closed facilities
and environmental-related matters and other expenses that were not directly associated with the
Reportable Segments. Sales of this function represented external leasing revenue. The Administrative
function did not include any significant foreign operations. Gains and losses from the sale of
property were not a significant operating factor in determining the performance of the Administrative
function.
Net external sales of all consolidated foreign subsidiaries were $ 4.426billion, $ 4.428billion and $
4.294billion for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Long-lived assets consisted of Property, plant and equipment, net, Goodwill, Intangible assets, net,
Operating lease right-of-use assets, deferred pension assets and Other assets. The aggregate total of
long-lived assets for the Company was $ 18.231billion, $ 17.441billion and $ 16.686billion at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Long-lived assets of consolidated foreign
subsidiaries totaled $ 3.405billion, $ 3.586billion and $ 3.369billion at December 31, 2024, 2023 and
2022, respectively.
Total Assets of the Company were $ 23.633billion, $ 22.954billion and $ 22.594billion at December 31,
2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Total assets of consolidated foreign subsidiaries were $
5.208billion, $ 5.718billion and $ 5.337billion, which represented 22.0%, 24.9% and 23.6% of the
Company’s total assets at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
No single geographic area outside the United States was significant relative to consolidated Net
sales or consolidated long-lived assets. Export sales and sales to any individual customer were each
less than 10 percent of consolidated sales to unaffiliated customers during all years presented.
In the reportable segment financial information that follows, Segment profit represents each
segment’s Income before income taxes. Domestic intersegment transfers are primarily accounted for at
the approximate fully absorbed manufactured cost, based on normal capacity volumes, plus customary
distribution costs for paint products. Non-paint domestic and all international intersegment
transfers are primarily accounted for at values comparable to normal unaffiliated customer sales. All
intersegment
 91 
transfers are eliminated within the Administrative function. In 2023, the absorbed manufactured cost
standards utilized for domestic intersegment transfers were established inclusive of forecasted cost
reductions from planned initiatives. Deviations from the forecasted cost reductions were recognized
within the Consumer Brands Group. Due to the nature of the Company’s integrated manufacturing
operations and centralized administrative and information technology support, a substantial amount of
allocations are made to determine segment financial information. Expenses that are specifically
identifiable to a certain Reportable Segment are allocated accordingly. For expenses that are not
specifically identifiable to a certain Reportable Segment, an appropriate allocation base is
identified, and expenses are allocated based on each segment’s respective share of the allocation
base. The significant expense categories and amounts align with the segment-level information that is
regularly provided to the CODM and include intersegment expenses within the amounts shown.
Identifiable assets were those directly identified with each Reportable Segment.
 2024 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Consol… 
 Group Group Group Adminis… Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net $ 13,188.0 $ 3,108.0 $ 6,797.3 $ 5.2 $ 23,098… 
 sales 
 Inters… — 5,304.3 56.8 -5,361.1 — 
 transf… 
 Total 
 net 
 sales $ 13,188.0 $ 8,412.3 $ 6,854.1 $ -5,355.9 $ 23,098… 
 and 
 inters… 
 transf… 
 Cost of 
 goods $ 5,900.8 $ 6,943.5 $ 4,406.5 $ -5,347.4 $ 11,903… 
 sold 
 Sellin… 
 general 
 and 4,405.6 863.1 1,443.0 710.4 7,422.1 
 admini… 
 expens… 
 Intere… — 1.4 — 414.3 415.7 
 expense 
 Other 
 segment -21.0 14.4 -23.3 -64.6 -94.5 
 items(… 
 Income 
 before $ 2,902.6 $ 589.9 $ 1,027.9 $ -1,068.6 $ 3,451.8 
 income 
 taxes 
 % to 
 Net 22.0 % 19.0 % 15.1 % nm 14.9 % 
 sales 
 Supple… 
 Inform… 
 Identi… $ 5,878.0 $ 6,854.7 $ 7,847.4 $ 3,052.5 $ 23,632… 
 assets 
 Capital 141.3 290.3 15.2 623.2 1,070.0 
 expend… 
 Deprec… 89.9 162.7 18.0 26.8 297.4 
 Amorti… 1.7 66.4 256.7 1.8 326.6 
 nm - 
 not 
 meanin… 
(1) Other segment items includes Other general (income) expense - net, Interest income and Other
(income) expense - net. See Note 19.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 92 
and Other (income) expense - net. See Notes 3 and 6 for information on Impairment and Note 19 for
information on Other general (income) expense - net and Other (income) expense - net.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 2022 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Consol… 
 Group Group Group Adminis… Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net $ 11,963.3 $ 3,388.4 $ 6,793.5 $ 3.7 $ 22,148… 
 sales 
 Inters… — 5,214.8 203.7 -5,418.5 — 
 transf… 
 Total 
 net 
 sales $ 11,963.3 $ 8,603.2 $ 6,997.2 $ -5,414.8 $ 22,148… 
 and 
 inters… 
 transf… 
 Cost of 
 goods $ 5,826.8 $ 7,454.8 $ 4,965.4 $ -5,423.2 $ 12,823… 
 sold 
 Sellin… 
 general 
 and 3,810.1 817.8 1,275.6 428.1 6,331.6 
 admini… 
 expens… 
 Intere… — — — 390.8 390.8 
 expense 
 Other 
 segment -21.7 16.4 21.3 13.6 29.6 
 items(… 
 Income 
 before $ 2,348.1 $ 314.2 $ 734.9 $ -824.1 $ 2,573.1 
 income 
 taxes 
 % to 
 Net 19.6 % 9.3 % 10.8 % nm 11.6 % 
 sales 
 Supple… 
 Inform… 
 Identi… $ 5,873.6 $ 6,749.6 $ 8,296.8 $ 1,674.0 $ 22,594… 
 assets 
 Capital 87.3 295.0 38.7 223.5 644.5 
 expend… 
 Deprec… 73.9 126.2 29.1 34.8 264.0 
 Amorti… 3.3 79.8 232.0 2.0 317.1 
 nm - 
 not 
 meanin… 
(1) Other segment items includes Other general (income) expense - net, Impairment, Interest income
and Other (income) expense - net. See Note 6 for information on Impairment and Note 19 for
information on Other general (income) expense - net and Other (income) expense - net.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 93 
None.
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
As of the end of the period covered by this report, we carried out an evaluation, under the
supervision and with the participation of our Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer and our
Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure
controls and procedures pursuant to Rule 13a-15 and Rule 15d-15 of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended (Exchange Act). Based upon that evaluation, our Chair, President and Chief Executive
Officer and our Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer concluded that as of the
end of the period covered by this report, our disclosure controls and procedures were effective to
ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in reports we file or submit under the
Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in
Securities and Exchange Commission rules and forms, and accumulated and communicated to our
management, including our Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer and our Senior Vice President
– Finance and Chief Financial Officer, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
The “Report of Management on Internal Control over Financial Reporting” and the “Report of the
Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Internal Control over Financial Reporting” are set
forth in Item 8.
There have been no changes in our internal control over financial reporting identified in connection
with the evaluation that occurred during the period covered by this report that have materially
affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial
reporting.
Trading Arrangements
During the quarter ended December 31, 2024, none of the Company’s directors or “officers,” as defined
in Rule 16a-1(f) of the Exchange Act, adopted, modified, or terminateda “Rule 10b5-1 trading
arrangement” or a “non-Rule 10b5-1 trading arrangement,” as each term is defined in Item 408 of
Regulation S-K.
Not applicable.
 94 
Directors
The information regarding our directors and director nominees is set forth in our Proxy Statement
under the caption “Proposal 1 – Election of 9 Directors” and is incorporated herein by reference.
There have been no material changes to the procedures by which security holders may recommend
nominees to our Board of Directors. Please refer to the information set forth in our Proxy Statement
under the caption “Board Committees,” which is incorporated herein by reference.
Executive Officers
The information regarding our executive officers is set forth under the caption “Information About
Our Executive Officers” in Part I of this report, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
To the extent disclosure of any delinquent form under Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 is made by the Company, such disclosure will be set forth in our Proxy Statement under the
caption “Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports” and is incorporated herein by reference.
Audit Committee
The information regarding the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors and audit committee financial
experts is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Board Committees” and is incorporated
herein by reference.
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a Code of Conduct, which applies to all directors, officers and employees, including
our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or
controller and persons performing similar functions, of ABC corp. and our subsidiaries
wherever located. Our Code of Conduct contains the general guidelines and principles for conducting
ABC corp.’ business consistent with the highest standards of business ethics.
We have also adopted a Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management, pursuant to which our chief
executive officer, chief financial officer and senior financial management are responsible for
creating and maintaining a culture of high ethical standards and of commitment to compliance
throughout our Company to ensure the fair and timely reporting of ABC corp.’ financial results
and condition. Senior financial management includes the controller, the treasurer, the principal
financial/accounting personnel in our operating groups and divisions and all other
financial/accounting personnel within our corporate departments and operating groups and divisions
with staff supervision responsibilities.
Our Code of Conduct and Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management are available on our Investor
Relations website, investors.sherwin.com.
We intend to disclose on our Investor Relations website, investors.sherwin.com, any amendment to, or
waiver from, a provision of our Code of Conduct or Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management
that applies to our directors and executive officers, including our principal executive officer,
principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller or any persons performing
similar functions, and that is required to be publicly disclosed pursuant to the rules of the SEC.
Insider Trading Policy
The information regarding our Insider Trading Policy is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the
caption “Insider Trading Policy” and is incorporated herein by reference. A copy of our Insider
Trading Policy is filed with this Annual Report on Form 10-K as Exhibit 19.
 95 
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the captions “2024
Director Compensation Table,” “Director Compensation Program,” “Executive Compensation,” “Executive
Compensation Tables” and “2024 CEO Pay Ratio” and is incorporatedherein by reference (other than the
Compensation Committee Report, which will be deemed furnished).
The information regarding security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management is set forth
in our Proxy Statement under the captions “Security Ownership of Management, Directors and Director
Nominees” and “Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners” and is incorporated herein by
reference.
The information regarding securities authorized for issuance under the Company’s equity compensation
plans is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Equity Compensation Plan Information”
and is incorporated herein by reference.
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the captions “Certain
Relationships and Transactions with Related Persons” and “Director Independence” and is incorporated
herein by reference.
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Matters
Relating to the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm” and is incorporated herein by
reference.
 96 
Schedule II — Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves for the years ended December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022 is set forth below. All other schedules for which provision is made in the applicable
SEC accounting regulations are not required under the related instructions or are inapplicable and
therefore have been omitted.
Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves
(Schedule II)
Changes in deferred tax asset valuation allowances were as follows:
 (millions of dollars) 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Beginning balance $ 106.6 $ 97.5 $ 97.2 
 Additions (deductions)(1) 17.9 9.1 0.3 
 Ending balance $ 124.5 $ 106.6 $ 97.5 
(1) Additions (deductions) did not have a material impact on the Income Statement in 2024, 2023 or
2022.
 97 
(3) Exhibits
 Amended and Restated Articles of 
 Incorporation of the Company, as 
 amended through February 18, 2015, 
 filed as Exhibit 3 to the Company’s 
 Current Report on Form 8-K dated 
 February 18, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Amendment to the Amended and Restated 
 Articles of Incorporation of the 
 Company, as amended through February 
 18, 2015, filed as Exhibit 3.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 3.1 dated March 3, 2021, and incorporated 
 3.2 herein by reference. 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Regulations of the Company (As Amended 
 and Restated July 19, 2023), filed as 
 3.3 Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s Current 
 Report on Form 8-K dated July 18, 2023, 
 and incorporated herein by reference. 
 Description of Securities Registered 
 under Section 12 of the Securities 
 Exchange Act of 1934 filed as Exhibit 
 4.1 4(a) to the Company’s Annual Report on 
 Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended 
 December 31, 2021, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Indenture between the Company and The 
 Bank of New York Mellon (as successor 
 to Chemical Bank), as trustee, dated as 
 4.2 of February 1, 1996, filed as Exhibit  
 4(a) to Form S-3 Registration Statement 
 Number 333-01093 dated February 20, 
 1996, and incorporated herein by 
 reference. 
 Third Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and The Bank of New 
 York Mellon, as trustee (including Form 
 4.2.1 of Note), dated as of December 7, 2012, 
 filed as Exhibit 4.2 to the Company’s 
 Current Report on Form 8-K dated 
 December 4, 2012, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Indenture by and between the Company 
 and Wells Fargo Bank, National 
 Association, as trustee, dated July 31, 
 4.3 2015, filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 First Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.1 dated July 31, 2015, (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.2 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Second Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.2 dated July 31, 2015, (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.3 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Sixth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.3 dated May 16, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.4 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated May 16, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Seventh Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.4 dated May 16, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.5 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated May 16, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Eleventh Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.5 dated June 2, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.4 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated June 2, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Twelfth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.6 dated June 2, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.5 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated June 2, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Thirteenth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.7 dated August 26, 2019 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated August 26, 2019, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 98 
None.
 104 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the
Company has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized, on February 20, 2025.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated on
February 20, 2025.
 THE ABC corp. COMPANY 
 By: /S/ MARY L. GARCEAU 
 Mary L. Garceau, Secretary 
 * HEIDI G. PETZ Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer, Director 
 (Principal Executive Officer) 
 Heidi G. Petz 
 * ALLEN J. MISTYSYN Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer (Principal 
 Financial Officer) 
 Allen J. Mistysyn 
 * J. PAUL LANG Senior Vice President – Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer 
 (Principal Accounting Officer) 
 J. Paul Lang 
 * KERRII B. ANDERSON Director 
 Kerrii B. Anderson 
 * ARTHUR F. ANTON Director 
 Arthur F. Anton 
 * JEFF M. FETTIG Director 
 Jeff M. Fettig 
 * JOHN G. MORIKIS Director 
 John G. Morikis 
 * CHRISTINE A. POON Director 
 Christine A. Poon 
 * AARON M. POWELL Director 
 Aaron M. Powell 
 * MARTA R. STEWART Director 
 Marta R. Stewart 
 * MICHAEL H. THAMAN Director 
 Michael H. Thaman 
 * MATTHEW THORNTON III Director 
 Matthew Thornton III 
 * THOMAS L. WILLIAMS Director 
 Thomas L. Williams 
 The undersigned, by signing her name hereto, does sign this report on behalf of the 
 * designated officers and directors of the Company pursuant to powers of attorney executed on 
 behalf of each such officer and director and filed as an exhibit to this report. 
 February 20, 
 By: /S/ MARY L. GARCEAU 2025 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Mary L. Garceau, Attorney-in-fact 
 105


ITEM 8: FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
===================================================

ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA │
Shareholders of The ABC corp. Company
We are responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial
reporting as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended. We recognize that internal control over financial reporting cannot provide absolute
assurance of achieving financial reporting objectives because of its inherent limitations. Internal
control over financial reporting is a process that involves human diligence and is subject to the
possibility of human error or the circumvention or the overriding of internal control. Therefore,
there is a risk that material misstatements may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis by
internal control over financial reporting. However, we believe we have designed into the process
safeguards to reduce, though not eliminate, this risk. Projections of any evaluation of effectiveness
to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in
conditions, or that the degree of compliance with policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In order to ensure that the Company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective as of
December 31, 2024, we conducted an assessment of its effectiveness under the supervision and with the
participation of our management group, including our principal executive officer and principal
financial officer. This assessment was based on the criteria established in the 2013 Internal Control
– Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission.
Based on our assessment of internal control over financial reporting under the criteria established
in Internal Control – Integrated Framework, we have concluded that, as of December 31, 2024, the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Our internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2024 has been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, an
independent registered public accounting firm, and their report on the effectiveness of our internal
control over financial reporting is included on page 43 of this report.
Heidi G. Petz
Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer
Allen J. Mistysyn
Senior Vice President - Finance and Chief Financial Officer
J. Paul Lang
Senior Vice President - Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer
 42 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of The ABC corp. Company
 Opinion on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting 
We have audited The ABC corp. Company and subsidiaries internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated
Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013
framework) (the COSO criteria). In our opinion, The ABC corp. Company and subsidiaries (the
Company) maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as
of December 31, 2024, based on the COSO criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated balance sheets of the Company as of December 31,
2024, 2023 and 2022, the related statements of consolidated income, comprehensive income, cash flows
and shareholders’ equity for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2024, and the
related notes and financial statement schedule listed in the 
February 20, 2025 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial
reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
included in the accompanying Report of Management On Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting
based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be
independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the
applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing
the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as
we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis
for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1)
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3)
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition,
use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial
statements.
 43 
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Ernst & Young, LLP
Cleveland, Ohio
February 20, 2025
 44 
Shareholders of The ABC corp. Company
We are responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial
statements, accompanying notes and related financial information included in this report of The
ABC corp. Company and its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the Company) as of December
31, 2024, 2023 and 2022 and for the years then ended in accordance with U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles. The consolidated financial information included in this report contains
certain amounts that were based upon our best estimates, judgments and assumptions that we believe
were reasonable under the circumstances.
We have conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. As discussed in the Report of Management on
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting on page 42 of this report, we concluded that the Company’s
internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2024.
The Board of Directors fulfills its responsibility for the oversight of the Company’s accounting
policies and procedures, financial statement preparation and internal control over financial
reporting through the Audit Committee, comprised exclusively of independent directors. The Audit
Committee is responsible for the appointment and compensation of the independent registered public
accounting firm. The Audit Committee meets at least quarterly with financial management, internal
auditors and the independent registered public accounting firm to review the adequacy of financial
controls, the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting and the
nature, extent and results of the audit effort. Both the internal auditors and the independent
registered public accounting firm have private and confidential access to the Audit Committee at all
times.
We believe that the consolidated financial statements, accompanying notes and related financial
information included in this report fairly reflect the form and substance of all material financial
transactions and fairly present, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position,
results of operations and cash flows as of and for the periods presented.
Heidi G. Petz
Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer
Allen J. Mistysyn
Senior Vice President - Finance and Chief Financial Officer
J. Paul Lang
Senior Vice President - Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer
 45 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of The ABC corp. Company
 Opinion on the Financial Statements 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of The ABC corp. Company and
subsidiaries (the Company) as of December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the related statements of
consolidated income, comprehensive income, cash flows and shareholders’ equity for each of the three
years in the period ended December 31, 2024, and the related notes and the financial statement
schedule listed in the 
statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the Company at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, and the results
of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
2024, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December
31, 2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report
dated February 20, 2025 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is
to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public
accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the
Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations
of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements
are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing
procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included
examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial
statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 Critical Audit Matter 
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the
financial statements that was communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and
that: (1) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2)
involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of the
critical audit matter does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements,
taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a
separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
 46 
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 1908.
Cleveland, Ohio
February 20, 2025
 47 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 48 
of $ 53.6million, $( 24.9) million and $ 34.1million, respectively, related to net investment hedges.
See Note 16.
(2) Net of taxes of $( 6.6) million, $( 2.8) million and $( 33.8) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
(3) Net of taxes of $ 4.6million, $ 5.9million and $( 1.2) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
(4) Net of taxes of $ 1.2million in 2024 and 2023 and $ 1.1million in 2022.
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 49 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 50 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 51 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
 52 
Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements included in this report have been prepared by management of The
ABC corp. Company (herein referred to as the Company). These statements include the accounts
of the Company and all consolidated subsidiaries. Intercompany accounts and transactions have been
eliminated. The Company’s share of earnings or losses from nonconsolidated affiliates is included in
the consolidated financial statements using the equity method of accounting when the Company is able
to exercise significant influence over the operating and financial decisions of the affiliate.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles (US GAAP) requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that
affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual
results could differ from those amounts.
Nature of Operations
The Company is engaged in the development, manufacture, distribution and sale of paint, coatings and
related products to professional, industrial, commercial and retail customers primarily in North and
South America, with additional operations in the Caribbean region, Europe, Asia and Australia.
Cash Equivalents
Management considers all highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less when
purchased to be cash equivalents.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Current Expected Credit Losses
Accounts receivable are recorded at the time of credit sales, net of an allowance for current
expected credit losses. The Company records an allowance for current expected credit losses to reduce
Accounts receivable to the net amount expected to be collected.
Under Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 326, the Company reviews the collectibility of the
Accounts receivable balance each reporting period and estimates the allowance for current expected
credit losses based on historical bad debt experience, aging of accounts receivable, current
creditworthiness of customers, current economic factors, as well as reasonable and supportable
forward-looking information. Accounts receivable balances are written-off against the allowance for
current expected credit losses if a final determination of uncollectibility is made. All provisions
for the allowance for current expected credit losses are included in Selling, general and
administrative expenses. See Note 18 for further details.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market with cost determined principally on the last-
in, first-out (LIFO) method. Market represents current replacement cost, which is the cost to
purchase or reproduce the inventory. If inventories accounted for on the LIFO method are reduced on a
year-over-year basis, then liquidation of certain quantities carried at costs prevailing in prior
years occurs. Management records an estimate of the lower of cost or market whenever the utility of
inventory is impaired by damage, deterioration, obsolescence, changes in price levels, or other
causes based on historical experience and current trends through reductions to inventory cost by
recording a provision included in Cost of goods sold. If management estimates that the reasonable
market value is below cost or determines that future demand was lower than current inventory levels,
based on historical experience, current and projected market demand, current and projected volume
trends and other relevant current and projected factors associated with the current economic
conditions, a reduction in inventory cost to current market price is provided for in the reserve for
obsolescence. See Note 4 for further details.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment (including leasehold improvements) is stated on the basis of cost.
Depreciation is charged to expense using the straight-line method over the assets’ estimated useful
lives which range from 5to 25years for buildings and 3to 15years for machinery and equipment.
Depreciation and amortization are included in the appropriate Cost of goods sold or Selling, general
and administrative expenses caption on the Statements of Consolidated Income. See Note 5 for further
details.
 53 
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the cost in excess of fair value of net assets acquired in business combinations.
Intangible assets include software, customer relationships, intellectual property and trademarks. In
accordance with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC, goodwill and indefinite-lived
trademarks are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment on an annual basis, as well as
whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that indicate impairment has occurred on a more
likely than not basis. Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over the
expected period of benefit, which ranges primarily from 3to 29years. See Note 6 for further details.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC, management evaluates the
recoverability and remaining lives of long-lived assets, including right-of-use assets, whenever
events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable or the
useful life has changed.See Note 5 for further details.
Derivative Instruments
The Company utilizes derivative instruments to mitigate certain risk exposures as part of its overall
financial risk management policy and accounts for these instruments in accordance with the
Derivatives and Hedging Topic of the ASC. Derivatives are recorded as assets or liabilities in the
Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. Changes in fair value of the derivative instruments are
recognized immediately in earnings unless the derivative instrument qualifies for and is designated
in an effective hedging relationship.
The Company entered into foreign currency forward contracts with maturity dates of less than twelve
months in 2024, 2023 and 2022, primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. There
were nomaterial foreign currency option and forward contracts outstanding at December 31, 2024, 2023
and 2022. See Note 19 for further details.
The Company also entered into cross currency swap contracts to hedge its net investment in European
operations in 2024, 2023 and 2022. These contracts qualified for and were designated as net
investment hedges under US GAAP. The changes in fair value for the cross currency swaps are
recognized in the Foreign currency translation adjustments component of AOCI. The cash flow impact of
these instruments is classified as an investing activity in the Statements of Consolidated Cash
Flows. See Note 16 for further details.
Non-Traded Investments
The Company has invested in U.S. affordable housing, historic renovation and other real estate
investments (Non-Traded Investments) that have been identified as variable interest entities which
qualify for certain tax credits and other tax benefits. Since the Company does not have the power to
direct the day-to-day operations of the Non-Traded Investments and the risk of loss is limited to the
amount of contributed capital, the Company is not considered the primary beneficiary. Therefore, in
accordance with the Consolidation Topic of the ASC, the Non-Traded Investments are not consolidated.
Under the Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures Topic of the ASC, the Company uses the
proportional amortization method, whereby the initial cost and any subsequent changes in the level of
investment of Non-Traded Investments are amortized in proportion to the receipt of related tax
credits. The Company reasonably expects amortization based on the receipt of tax credits would
produce a measurement substantially similar to amortization based on the receipt of tax credits and
other tax benefits. Both the amortization and related tax credits and other tax benefits are
recognized in Income tax expense on the Statements of Consolidated Income.
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Amortization of Non-Traded Investments $ 75.0 $ 65.4 $ 38.5 
 Tax credits and other tax benefits 104.9 94.8 67.2 
 received 
 54 
The carrying value of Non-Traded Investments is recorded in Other assets. The liabilities for
estimated future capital contributions are recorded in Other accruals and Other long-term
liabilities. In addition, the associated impact of related tax credits and other tax benefits are
recorded as a reduction of Accrued taxes and a net deferred income tax asset within Deferred income
taxes. On the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows, the tax credits and other tax benefits are
presented as a change in Accrued taxes and in Deferred income taxes within Operating activities. Tax
credits and other tax benefits reduced Accrued taxes by $ 104.9million, $ 94.8million and $
67.2million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The following table summarizes the
balances related to Non-Traded Investments and related tax credits and other tax benefits on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Other assets $ 744.0 $ 675.0 $ 587.0 
 Other accruals 101.4 80.9 89.8 
 Other long-term liabilities 600.3 568.2 476.5 
 Net deferred income tax asset 7.6 19.4 23.4 
Standby Letters of Credit
The Company occasionally enters into standby letter of credit agreements to guarantee various
operating activities. These agreements provide credit availability to the various beneficiaries if
certain contractual events occur.Amounts outstanding under these agreements totaled $ 125.5million, $
146.2million and $ 149.8million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Product Warranties
The Company offers assurance-type product warranties for certain products. The specific terms and
conditions of such warranties vary depending on the product or customer contract requirements.
Management estimated the costs of unsettled product warranty claims based on historical results and
experience and included an amount in Other accruals. Management periodically assesses the adequacy of
the accrual for product warranty claims and adjusts the accrual as necessary. Changes in the
Company’s accrual for product warranty claims during 2024, 2023 and 2022, including customer
satisfaction settlements during the year, were as follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1 $ 40.4 $ 36.2 $ 35.2 
 Charges to expense 34.2 37.0 30.1 
 Settlements -28.2 -32.8 -29.1 
 Balance at December 31 $ 46.4 $ 40.4 $ 36.2 
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
The Company accounts for its defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans in
accordance with the Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC, which requires the Company to recognize an
asset for overfunded defined benefit pension or other postretirement benefit plans and a liability
for unfunded or underfunded plans. In addition, actuarial gains and losses and prior service costs of
such plans are recorded in AOCI. The amounts recorded in AOCI will continue to be modified as
actuarial assumptions and service costs change, and all such amounts will be amortized to expense
over a period of years through the net pension cost (credit) and net periodic benefit cost
(credit).See Note 8 for further details.
Defined Contribution Savings Plan
The Company accounts for its defined contribution savings plan in accordance with the Defined
Contribution Plans Subtopic of the Compensation – Retirement Benefits Topic of the ASC. The Company
recognized compensation expense for amounts contributed to the defined contribution savings plan.See
Note 13 for further details.
Environmental Matters
Capital expenditures for ongoing environmental compliance measures are recorded in Property, plant
and equipment, net, and related expenses are included in the normal operating expenses of conducting
business. The Company accrued for environmental-related activities for which commitments or clean-up
plans have been developed and when such costs could be reasonably estimated based on industry
standards and professional judgment. Accrued amounts are primarily recorded on an undiscounted basis
and have not been recorded net of insurance proceeds in accordance with the Offsetting Subtopic of
the Balance Sheet Topic of the ASC. Environmental-related expenses include direct costs of
investigation and remediation and
 55 
indirect costs such as compensation and benefits for employees directly involved in the investigation
and remediation activities and fees paid to outside engineering, consulting and law firms.See Notes
10 and 19 for further details.
Stock-Based Compensation
The cost of the Company’s stock-based compensation is recorded in accordance with the Stock
Compensation Topic of the ASC.See Note 14 for further details.
Other Liabilities
The Company retains risk for certain liabilities, primarily workers’ compensation claims, employee
medical and disability benefits and automobile, property, general and product liability claims.
Estimated amounts are accrued for certain workers’ compensation, employee medical and disability
benefits, automobile and property claims filed but unsettled and estimated claims incurred but not
reported. Estimates are based upon management’s estimated aggregate liability for claims incurred
using historical experience, actuarial assumptions followed in the insurance industry and
actuarially-developed models for estimating certain liabilities. Certain estimated general and
product liability claims filed but unsettled are accrued based on management’s best estimate of
ultimate settlement or actuarial calculations of potential liability using industry experience and
actuarial assumptions developed for similar types of claims.
Foreign Currency Translation
All consolidated non-highly inflationary foreign operations use the local currency of the country of
operation as the functional currency. Local currency asset and liability accounts are translated at
year-end exchange rates while income and expense accounts are translated at average exchange rates.
The resulting translation adjustments are included in AOCI.
Economies with a three-year cumulative inflation rate of more than 100% are considered highly
inflationary. For subsidiaries operating in highly inflationary economies, the parent’s reporting
currency is the functional currency. Monetary assets and liabilities are translated into U.S. dollars
using rates of exchange at the balance sheet date and non-monetary assets and liabilities are
translated into U.S. dollars at their historical rates of exchange, with remeasurement adjustments
and other transaction gains and losses recognized in Net income. See Note 19 for further details.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when performance obligations under the terms of the contract are
satisfied. This generally occurs with the transfer of control of our products to the customer.
Collectibility of amounts recorded as revenue is probable at the time of recognition.See Note 18 for
further details.
Customer and Vendor Consideration
The Company offers certain customers rebate and sales incentive programs which are classified as
reductions in sales. Such programs are in the form of volume rebates, rebates that constituted a
percentage of sales or rebates for attaining certain sales goals. The Company receives consideration
from certain suppliers of raw materials in the form of volume rebates or rebates that constitute a
percentage of purchases. These rebates are recognized on an accrual basis by the Company as a
reduction of the purchase price of the raw materials and a subsequent reduction of Cost of goods sold
when the related product was sold.
Cost of Goods Sold
Included in Cost of goods sold are costs for materials, manufacturing, distribution and related
support. Distribution costs include expenses related to the distribution of products including
inbound freight charges, purchase and receiving costs, warehousing costs, internal transfer costs and
other costs incurred to ship products. Also included in Cost of goods sold are research and
development costs, quality control, product formulation expenditures and other similar items.Research
and development costs were $ 217.3million, $ 196.6million and $ 119.3million during 2024, 2023 and
2022, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling costs include advertising expenses, marketing costs, employee and store costs and sales
commissions. The cost of advertising is expensed as incurred. The Company incurred $ 386.9million, $
394.0million and $ 314.4million in advertising costs during 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
General and administrative expenses include human resources, legal, finance and other support and
administrative functions.
Government Incentives
The Company receives incentives from various government entities in the form of tax rebates or
credits, grants and loans. These incentives typically require that the Company maintain specified
spending levels and other operational metrics and may be subject to reimbursement if conditions are
not met or maintained. Government incentives are recorded in the Company’s consolidated financial
statements in accordance with their purpose as a reduction of expense, a reduction of the cost of the
 56 
capital investment or other income. The benefit of these incentives is recorded when received and all
conditions as specified in the agreement are fulfilled.
There were $ 86.6million of government incentives received as cash payments related to the
construction of the Company’s new global headquarters and research and development center in 2022.
These government incentives were recorded as a reduction in the carrying amount of the respective
assets under construction within Property, plant and equipment, net on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets and within Other as an investing activity on the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows. There
were nomaterial government incentives received in 2024 or 2023.
Supply Chain Financing
As part of our strategy to manage working capital, we have entered into agreements with various
financial institutions that act as intermediaries between the Company and certain suppliers. The
Company is not a party to agreements between the suppliers and the financial institutions. These
arrangements provide participating suppliers the option to settle outstanding accounts payable
incurred by the Company in the normal course of business early at a discount and do not impact our
rights and obligations with suppliers, including amounts due and scheduled payment terms. Under the
terms of our agreements, the Company confirms the validity of each supplier invoice to the respective
financial institution upon receipt. On the invoice due date, the Company settles the outstanding
amount with the respective financial institution. Liabilities associated with these arrangements are
recorded in Accounts payableon the Consolidated Balance Sheets and amounted to $ 215.7million, $
213.1million and $ 258.1million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The following table presents a rollforward of the Company’s outstanding obligations under its
supplier finance programs for year ended December 31, 2024.
 2024 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1 $ 213.1 
 Invoices confirmed during the year 988.8 
 Confirmed invoices paid during the year -986.2 
 Balance at December 31 $ 215.7 
Earnings Per Share
Common stock held in a revocable trust (see Note 12) is not included in outstanding shares for basic
or diluted income per share calculations. Basic and diluted net income per share are calculated using
the treasury stock method in accordance with the Earnings Per Share Topic of the ASC. Basic net
income per share amounts are computed based on the weighted-average number of shares outstanding
during the year. Diluted net income per share amounts are computed based on the weighted-average
number of shares outstanding plus all dilutive securities potentially outstanding during the year.See
Note 21 for further details.
NOTE 2 – RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Adopted
Effective January 1, 2024, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2023-02,
“Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323): Accounting for investments in tax credit
structures using the proportional amortization method.” This ASU allows entities to apply the
proportional amortization method to all tax equity investments if certain conditions are met. In
addition, the ASU requires certain disclosures about the nature and financial implications of tax
equity investments on an entity’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows, including
the impact of transition on the periods presented, if any. The adoption of the ASU did not materially
affect the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows since the Company has
historically applied the proportional amortization method to its Non-Traded Investments, however,
certain disclosures have been added based on the requirements of the ASU. See Note 1 for further
details.
Effective December 31, 2024, the Company adopted ASU 2023-07, “Segment Reporting (Topic 280):
Improvements to Reportable Segment Disclosures.” This ASU enhances reportable segment disclosures on
both an annual and interim basis primarily in regards to the disclosure of significant segment
expenses that are regularly provided to the chief operating decision maker (CODM) and included within
the reported measure(s) of segment profit or loss. In addition, the ASU requires disclosure, by
segment, of other items included in the reported measure(s) of segment profit or loss, including
qualitative information describing the composition, nature and type of each item. The ASU also
expands disclosure requirements related to the CODM, including how the reported measure(s) of segment
profit or loss are used to assess segment performance and allocate resources, the method used to
allocate overhead for significant segment expenses and others. Lastly, all current required annual
segment
 57 
reporting disclosures under Topic 280 are now effective for interim periods. The adoption of the ASU
has only impacted the Company’s segment disclosures with no impact to the consolidated financial
statements. See Note 22 for further details.
Effective January 1, 2023, the Company adopted ASU 2022-04, “Liabilities - Supplier Finance Programs
(Subtopic 405-50): Disclosure of Supplier Finance Program Obligations.” This ASU includes a
requirement to present a rollforward of supply chain financing activity prospectively, beginning with
the annual period ending December 31, 2024. The adoption of ASU 2022-04 did not affect the Company’s
financial position, results of operations or cash flows as the standard only impacts financial
statement footnote disclosures. See Note 1 for additional information.
Not Yet Adopted
In December 2023, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued ASU 2023-09, “Income Taxes
(Topic 740): Improvements to Income Tax Disclosures.” This ASU enhances income tax disclosures by
providing information to better assess how an entity’s operations, related tax risks, tax planning
and operational opportunities affect its tax rate and prospects for future cash flows. This ASU
requires additional disclosures to the annual effective tax rate reconciliation including specific
categories and further disaggregated reconciling items that meet the quantitative threshold.
Additionally, the ASU requires disclosures relating to income tax expense and payments made to
federal, state, local and foreign jurisdictions. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning
after December 15, 2024. The Company is evaluating the impact of adopting this ASU.
In November 2024, the FASB issued ASU 2024-03, “Income Statement - Reporting Comprehensive Income -
Expense Disaggregation Disclosures (Subtopic 220-40): Disaggregation of Income Statement Expenses.”
This ASU enhances expense disclosures on both an annual and interim basis by requiring public
business entities to disclose additional information about specific expense categories in the notes
to the consolidated financial statements. This ASU requires public entities to disclose, in a tabular
format, purchases of inventory, employee compensation, depreciation, intangible asset amortization
and depletion, as applicable, for each income statement line item that contains those expenses.
Specific expenses, gains and losses that are already disclosed under existing US GAAP are also
required to be included in the disaggregated income statement expense line-item disclosures, and any
remaining amounts will need to be described qualitatively. Additionally, the ASU requires disclosure
of the total amount of selling expenses and the entity’s definition of selling expenses. This ASU is
effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2026 and for interim periods within fiscal
years beginning after December 15, 2027. The Company is evaluating the impact of adopting this ASU.
 NOTE 3 – ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES 
Acquisitions
Subsequent Event
In February 2025, the Company signed an agreement to acquire the Brazilian decorative paints business
of BASF SE (BASF), which is a leading provider of architectural paints in Brazil with annual sales of
approximately $ 525.0million. The business develops, manufactures and sells a comprehensive portfolio
of innovative products under the Suvinil and Glasu! brand names to professional painters, designers,
architects, general contractors and consumers across the country. The business also operates two
production facilities located in the Northeast and Southeast regions of Brazil.
The closing of the transaction is subject to receipt of Brazilian antitrust approval, satisfaction or
waiver of certain other customary closing conditions, as well as BASF’s completion of its carve-out
of all relevant assets, properties, contracts, permits, rights and employees of the decorative paints
business into a separate entity. The Company will acquire all issued and outstanding equity interests
in this separate entity for an agreed-upon cash purchase price of $ 1.15billion, subject to customary
post-closing adjustments. The Company intends to finance the transaction through a combination of
cash on hand, liquidity available under existing facilities and new debt. The acquired business is
expected to be reported within the Company’s Consumer Brands Group.
Pending
In December 2024, the Company signed an agreement to acquire a European coil and industrial coatings
company. The transaction is subject to customary closing conditions and is expected to close in 2025.
The acquired business will be reported within the Company’s Performance Coatings Group.
Closed in Current Year
In October 2024, the Company completed the acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business for
approximately $ 80million. The acquired business develops, manufactures and sells coatings for the
food and household product markets and is reported within the Company’s Performance Coatings Group.
As of December 31, 2024, $ 33.0million of Property, plant and equipment, net, $ 27.9million of
finite-lived intangibles and $ 21.1million of Goodwill were recognized from this transaction.
 58 
The Company expects to finalize the purchase price allocation for the acquisition within the
allowable measurement period. Pro forma results of operations have not been presented as the impact
on the Company’s consolidated financial results is not material.
Closed in 2023
In October 2023, the Company completed the acquisition of German-based SIC Holding GmbH, a Peter
Möhrle Holding venture comprised of Oskar Nolte GmbH and Klumpp Coatings GmbH (SIC Holding). The
acquired business specializes in foil coatings as well as radiation-cured and waterbased industrial
wood coatings for the board, furniture and flooring industry. The total purchase price for the
acquisition was approximately $ 290million, including an immaterial amount paid in 2024 to finalize
certain representations, warranties and closing conditions. The Company finalized the purchase price
allocation within the allowable measurement period, and $ 110.8million of finite-lived intangible
assets, $ 181.3million of goodwill, $ 46.0million of other assets, net of cash and $ 47.5million of
liabilities were recognized from this transaction.
Closed in 2022
In April 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of the European industrial coatings business of
Sika AG. In July 2022, the Company completed the acquisitions of Gross & Perthun GmbH, Dur-A-Flex,
Inc. and Powdertech Oy Ltd. In December 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of Industria
Chimica Adriatica S.p.A. (ICA). The aggregate purchase price for the acquisitions completed in 2022
was approximately $ 1.024billion, including amounts withheld as security for certain representations,
warranties and obligations of the sellers. Based on the preliminary purchase price allocations for
these transactions, as of December 31, 2022, the Company recognized intangible assets and goodwill of
$ 282.8million and $ 565.8million, respectively, with the remaining purchase price for each
transaction allocated to various other assets acquired and liabilities assumed. In June 2023,
purchase price allocation adjustments were made to ICA which decreased goodwill by $ 145.9million,
increased finite-lived intangible assets by $ 195.9million and increased deferred tax liabilities by
$ 57.4million. There were no material adjustments related to the other acquisitions that closed in
2022 and the Company finalized the purchase price allocations for these transactions in the allowable
measurement period. In accordance with certain purchase agreements, the Company paid $ 29.2million in
2023 related to holdbacks for acquisitions completed in prior years.
Divestitures
Closed in 2023
The Company completed the divestiture of a non-core domestic aerosol business within the Consumer
Brands Group in April 2023. This transaction resulted in the recognition of a $ 20.1million gain in
2023 within the Administrative function. This gain was recorded within Other general (income) expense
- net (see Note 19).
During the third quarter of 2023, the Company completed the divestiture of the China architectural
business within the Consumer Brands Group. An immaterial working capital adjustment was finalized
during the first quarter of 2024. The associated net assets were classified as held for sale at June
30, 2023 in accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC. Following the
prescribed order of impairment testing, the Company first reviewed individual tangible and intangible
assets under their applicable Topic of the ASC to determine if their carrying value was higher than
their respective fair value. As a result, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $ 6.9million
within the Consumer Brands Group related to China architectural trademarks during 2023. The Company
then compared the updated carrying value of the assets and liabilities comprising the disposal group
as a whole to its respective fair value which was determined to be equal to the selling price, less
costs to sell. As a result of this comparison, the Company recorded an additional impairment charge
of $ 27.1million within the Administrative function in the second quarter of 2023. The fair value of
the disposal group was classified as level 2 in the fair value hierarchy as it was based on a
specific price and other observable inputs for similar items with no active market.
These divestitures did not meet the criteria to be reported as discontinued operations in the
consolidated financial statements as the Company’s decision to divest these businesses did not
represent a strategic shift that will have a major effect on the Company’s operations and financial
results.
 59 
Included in Inventories were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Finished goods $ 1,751.9 $ 1,810.9 $ 1,957.7 
 Work in process and raw materials 536.2 518.9 668.8 
 Inventories $ 2,288.1 $ 2,329.8 $ 2,626.5 
Inventories were stated at the lower of cost or market, with cost primarily determined on the LIFO
method. Management believes that the use of LIFO results in a better matching of costs and revenues.
The following table summarizes the extent to which the Company’s Inventories use the LIFO cost
method, and presents the effect on Inventories had the Company used the first-in, first-out (FIFO)
inventory valuation method.
 2024 2023 2022 
 Percentage of total inventories on LIFO 74 % 74 % 74 % 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Excess of FIFO over LIFO $ 630.2 $ 668.0 $ 792.7 
During 2024 and 2023, certain inventories accounted for on the LIFO method were reduced, resulting in
the liquidation of certain quantities carried at costs prevailing in prior years. The 2024 and 2023
liquidations increased Net income by $ 4.8million and $ 1.2million, respectively. There were
noliquidations in 2022.
The Company recorded a reserve for obsolescence of $ 137.7million, $ 170.8million and $ 139.0million
at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, to reduce Inventories to their estimated current
market price.
 NOTE 5 – PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 
Included in Property, plant and equipment, net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Land $ 259.9 $ 257.5 $ 263.0 
 Buildings 1,175.9 1,048.7 1,199.3 
 Machinery and equipment 3,689.5 3,459.8 3,230.2 
 Construction in progress 1,598.1 1,111.0 496.1 
 Property, plant and equipment, gross 6,723.4 5,877.0 5,188.6 
 Less allowances for depreciation 3,190.2 3,040.2 2,981.6 
 Property, plant and equipment, net $ 3,533.2 $ 2,836.8 $ 2,207.0 
The Company capitalizes interest costs incurred in the construction of certain property, plant and
equipment. In 2024 and 2023, the Company capitalized interest of $ 59.6million and $ 30.7million,
respectively. There was nointerest capitalized in 2022.
In accordance with the Property, Plant and Equipment Topic of the ASC, whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying value of long-lived assets may not be recoverable or the
useful life may have changed, an impairment test is to be performed. Undiscounted cash flows are used
to calculate the recoverable value of long-lived assets to determine if such assets are not
recoverable. If the carrying value of the assets is deemed to not be recoverable, the impairment to
be recognized is the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the estimated fair
value of the assets as determined in accordance with the Fair Value Topic of the ASC. See Note 3 for
information on the impairment tests performed in 2023 for the assets held for sale prior to the
divestiture of the China architectural business. No other material impairments of Property, plant and
equipment were recorded in 2024, 2023 or 2022.
 60 
In 2024, the Company completed the acquisition of a metal packaging coatings business, which resulted
in the recognition of goodwill of $ 21.1million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 27.9million. The
acquired intangibles are being amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately
15years.
During 2023, the Company completed the acquisition of SIC Holding, which resulted in the recognition
of goodwill of $ 181.3million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 110.8million. The acquired
intangibles are being amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately 15years.
During 2022, the Company acquired fivecompanies which resulted in the recognition of goodwill of $
419.9million and finite-lived intangibles of $ 478.6million. The acquired intangibles are being
amortized over a weighted-average useful life of approximately 14years.
See Note 3 for additional information related to the acquisitions and divestitures.
In accordance with the Goodwill and Other Intangibles Topic of the ASC, goodwill at the reporting
unit level and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually. In addition,
interim impairment tests are performed whenever required as a result of a specific event or
circumstances which indicate potential impairment on a more likely than not basis. October 1 has been
established for the annual impairment review. An optional qualitative assessment may alleviate the
need to perform quantitative goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment tests when
there is no indication of impairment on a more likely than not basis. Should a quantitative
impairment test be performed, values are estimated separately for goodwill and indefinite-lived
intangible assets using applicable valuation models, incorporating discount rates commensurate with
the risks involved for each group of assets.
The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2024 did not result in any trademark or
goodwill impairment.
As a result of the Latin America architectural paint business moving to the Consumer Brands Group
reportable segment effective January 1, 2023, the Company performed a quantitative impairment
analysis for the impacted reporting units and determined both before and after the change, there was
no indication of impairment. The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2023 resulted in
no goodwill impairment and trademark impairment of $ 23.9million in the Consumer Brands Group
primarily related to a trademark in Europe.
The annual impairment review performed as of October 1, 2022 resulted in trademark impairments
totaling $ 15.5million in the Consumer Brands Group related to the discontinuation of an
architectural paint brand and lower than anticipated sales of an acquired brand and no goodwill
impairment.
A summary of changes in the Company’s carrying value of Goodwill by Reportable Segment is as follows:
 Performance 
 Paint Stores Consumer Brands Coatings Consolidated 
 Goodwill Group Group Group Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at 
 January 1, $ 2,182.1 $ 1,783.4 $ 3,169.1 $ 7,134.6 
 2022(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 49.7 21.3 422.5 493.5 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -2.8 -42.1 -44.9 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, 2,231.8 1,801.9 3,549.5 7,583.2 
 2022(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 8.3 8.3 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -9.1 43.6 34.5 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, 2,231.8 1,792.8 3,601.4 7,626.0 
 2023(1) 
 Acquisitions 
 and 48.2 48.2 
 acquisition 
 adjustments 
 Currency and 
 other -0.3 -93.8 -94.1 
 adjustments 
 Balance at 
 December 31, $ 2,231.8 $ 1,792.5 $ 3,555.8 $ 7,580.1 
 2024(1) 
(1) Net of accumulated impairment losses of $ 19.4million ($ 10.2million in Paint Stores Group, $
8.4million in Consumer Brands Group and $ 0.8million in Performance Coatings Group).
 61 
A summary of the Company’s carrying value of Intangible assets is as follows:
 Finit… Trade… 
 Dece… Intan… With Total 
 31, Assets Custo… Intel… All Indef… Intang… 
 2024 Softw… Relat… Prope… Other Subto… Lives… Assets 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gross $ 185.0 $ 3,187… $ 1,973… $ 225.8 $ 5,571… 
 Accu… -154.3 -1,48… -747.7 -154.7 -2,54… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 30.7 $ 1,698… $ 1,225… $ 71.1 $ 3,025… $ 507.9 $ 3,533.2 
 value 
 Dece… 
 31, 
 2023 
 Gross $ 158.2 $ 3,263… $ 1,968… $ 232.6 $ 5,622… 
 Accu… -152.8 -1,31… -644.4 -152.9 -2,26… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 5.4 $ 1,952… $ 1,324… $ 79.7 $ 3,362… $ 518.5 $ 3,880.5 
 value 
 Dece… 
 31, 
 2022 
 Gross $ 180.2 $ 3,121… $ 1,732… $ 427.5 $ 5,461… 
 Accu… -148.1 -1,13… -477.4 -258.0 -2,01… 
 amor… 
 Net $ 32.1 $ 1,989… $ 1,255… $ 169.5 $ 3,445… $ 556.2 $ 4,002.0 
 value 
(1) Trademarks are net of accumulated impairment losses of $ 163.8millionas of December 31, 2024 and
2023 and $ 139.9million as of December 31, 2022.
Amortization of finite-lived intangible assets is estimated as follows for the next five years: $
317.2million in 2025, $ 315.3million in 2026, $ 310.5million in 2027, $ 307.5million in 2028 and $
305.9million in 2029.
Although the Company believes its estimates of fair value related to reporting units and indefinite-
lived intangible assets are reasonable, actual financial results could differ from these estimates
due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making such estimates. Changes in assumptions concerning
future financial results or other underlying assumptions could have a significant impact and future
impairment charges may be required.
 62 
Long-Term Debt
The table below summarizes the carrying value of the Company’s outstanding debt, net of capitalized
debt issuance costs, discounts and premiums:
 Due Date 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 3.45% Senior Notes 2027 $ 1,495.7 $ 1,493.9 $ 1,492.1 
 4.50% Senior Notes 2047 1,233.7 1,233.0 1,232.3 
 2.95% Senior Notes 2029 795.5 794.6 793.6 
 3.80% Senior Notes 2049 543.7 543.6 543.2 
 2.30% Senior Notes 2030 497.6 497.1 496.7 
 2.20% Senior Notes 2032 495.5 494.8 494.2 
 3.30% Senior Notes 2050 494.6 494.3 494.1 
 2.90% Senior Notes 2052 492.1 491.9 491.5 
 4.80% Senior Notes 2031 445.0 — — 
 3.45% Senior Notes 2025 399.8 399.4 399.1 
 4.25% Senior Notes 2025 399.5 398.6 397.7 
 4.55% Senior Notes 2045 395.4 395.2 395.0 
 4.55% Senior Notes 2028 397.6 — — 
 3.95% Senior Notes 2026 351.6 353.1 354.7 
 4.00% Senior Notes 2042 297.2 297.0 296.9 
 3.30% Senior Notes 2025 250.0 249.9 249.8 
 4.40% Senior Notes 2045 241.3 240.9 240.5 
 0.53% to8.00% Promissory Notes Through 2026 0.2 0.9 1.6 
 4.05% Senior Notes 2024 — 598.8 596.9 
 3.125% Senior Notes 2024 — 499.7 499.0 
 7.375% Debentures 2027 — — 119.2 
 7.45% Debentures 2097 — — 3.5 
 Total(1) 9,226.0 9,476.7 9,591.6 
 Less amounts due within one year 1,049.2 1,098.8 0.6 
 Long-term debt $ 8,176.8 $ 8,377.9 $ 9,591.0 
(1) Net of capitalized debt issuance costs of $ 48.6million, $ 49.3million and $ 57.3million and net
of discounts and premiums of $ 26.0million, $ 25.2million and $ 25.7million at December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022, respectively.
Maturities of long-term debt are as follows for the next five years: $ 1.050billion in 2025; $
350.2million in 2026; $ 1.500billion in 2027; $ 400.0million in 2028 and $ 800.0million in 2029.
Interest expense on long-term debt was $ 354.7million, $ 374.6million and $ 348.4million for 2024,
2023 and 2022, respectively.
In August 2024, the Company repaid principal of $ 600.0million related to the Company’s 4.05% senior
notes due August 8, 2024 using commercial paper and subsequently issued $ 400.0million of 4.55%
senior notes due 2028 and $ 450.0million of 4.80% senior notes due 2031 in a public offering. The net
proceeds from the issuance of these notes were used to repay outstanding borrowings under the
Company’s domestic commercial paper program and for general corporate purposes. The newly issued
senior notes contain customary qualitative covenants as defined in their respective agreements.
During the second quarter of 2024, the Company repaid the principal of $ 500.0million related to its
3.125% senior notes due June 1, 2024 using commercial paper.
In December 2023, the Company exercised its call provision to make-whole the entire outstanding $
119.4million aggregate principal amount of its 7.38% Debentures due 2027 and the entire outstanding $
3.5million aggregate principal amount of its 7.45% Debentures due 2097. The retirement of the
Debentures resulted in a loss of $ 12.8million recorded in Other general (income) expense - net. See
Note 19.
In August 2022, the Company issued $ 600.0million of 4.05% Senior Notes due August 2024 and $
400.0million of 4.25% Senior Notes due August 2025 in a public offering. The net proceeds from the
issuance of these notes were used to repay
 63 
borrowings outstanding under the Company’s credit agreement dated May 9, 2016, as amended, and the
domestic commercial paper program.
Short-Term Borrowings
In November 2024, the Company amended its credit agreement dated May 9, 2016, as amended, to extend
the maturity of $ 75.0million of the commitments available for borrowing and obtaining the issuance,
renewal, extension and increase of a letter of credit under the credit agreement from June 20, 2025
to December 20, 2029.
In July 2024, the Company entered into a new $ 2.500billion revolving credit agreement maturing on
July 31, 2029 (2024 Credit Agreement), which replaced the the 2022 Credit Agreement. Under the terms
of the 2024 Credit Agreement, the Company may request to extend the maturity date for twoadditional
one-yearperiods, request an uncommitted increase up to $ 750.0million and issue letters of credit
under a $ 250.0million subfacility.
In August 2022, the Company entered into a five-yearcredit agreement (2022 Credit Agreement), which
replaced the $ 2.000billion credit agreement dated June 29, 2021. The 2022 Credit Agreement gave the
Company the right to borrow $ 2.250billion and to obtain letters of credit in an amount of up to $
250.0million.
In August 2021, the Company entered into an amended and restated $ 625.0million credit agreement
(2021 Credit Agreement), which amends and restates the five-yearcredit agreement entered into in
September 2017. The 2021 Credit Agreement was subsequently amended on multiple dates to extend the
maturity of commitments available for borrowing or letters of credit under the agreement.
In May 2016, the Company entered into a five-yearcredit agreement (2016 Credit Agreement),
subsequently amended on multiple dates to extend the maturity of commitments available for borrowing
or letters of credit under the agreement. The 2016 credit agreement gives the Company the right to
borrow and obtain letters of credit up to an aggregate availability of $ 875.0million. These credit
agreements are/were used for general corporate purposes, including the financing of working capital
requirements.
At December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, there were noborrowings outstanding under these credit
agreements.
The Company’s available capacity under its committed credit agreements is reduced for amounts
outstanding under its domestic commercial paper program and letters of credit. At December 31, 2024,
the Company had unused capacity under its various credit agreements of $ 3.274billion. The table
below summarizes the Company’s Short-term borrowings:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Domestic commercial paper $ 655.6 $ 347.7 $ 938.5 
 Foreign facilities 6.8 26.5 39.6 
 Total $ 662.4 $ 374.2 $ 978.1 
 Weighted average interest rate: 
 Domestic 4.7% 5.5% 4.6% 
 Foreign 3.1% 3.6% 6.7% 
Interest expense on Short-term borrowings was $ 61.0million, $ 42.9million and $ 42.4million for
2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Among other restrictions, the Company’s notes, debentures and revolving credit agreement contain
certain covenants relating to liens, ratings changes, merger and sale of assets, consolidated
leverage and change of control, as defined in the agreements. In the event of default under any one
of these arrangements, acceleration of the maturity of any one or more of these borrowings may
result. The Company was in compliance with all covenants for all years presented.
 64 
NOTE 8 – PENSION, HEALTH CARE AND OTHER POSTRETIREMENT BENEFITS
The Company provides pension benefits to substantially all full-time employees through primarily
noncontributory defined contribution or defined benefit pension plans and certain health care and
life insurance benefits to domestic active employees and eligible retirees.
Health Care Plans
The Company provides certain domestic health care plans that are contributory and contain cost-
sharing features such as deductibles and coinsurance. There were 32,283, 31,327and 30,009active
employees covered by the benefits under these plans at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively. The cost of these benefits for active employees, which includes claims incurred but not
reported, amounted to $ 382.6million, $ 363.2million and $ 347.4million for 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively.
Defined Contribution Pension Plans
The Company’s annual contribution for its domestic defined contribution pension plan was $
103.5million, $ 97.8million and $ 88.9million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The contribution
percentage ranges from twopercent to sevenpercent of compensation for covered employees based on an
age and service formula. Assets in employee accounts of the domestic defined contribution pension
plan are invested in various investment funds as directed by the participants. These investment funds
did not own a significant number of shares of the Company’s common stock for any year presented.
The Company’s annual contributions for its foreign defined contribution pension plans, which are
based on various percentages of compensation for covered employees up to certain limits, were $
20.6million, $ 19.5million and $ 19.4million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Assets in
employee accounts of the foreign defined contribution pension plans are invested in various
investment funds. These investment funds did not own a significant number of shares of the Company’s
common stock for any year presented.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
At December 31, 2024, the domestic defined benefit pension plan was overfunded, with a projected
benefit obligation of $ 95.3million, fair value of plan assets of $ 148.7million and excess plan
assets of $ 53.4million. The plan was funded in accordance with all applicable regulations at
December 31, 2024.
The Company has thirty-sixforeign defined benefit pension plans. At December 31, 2024, twenty-nineof
the Company’s foreign defined benefit pension plans were unfunded or underfunded, with combined
accumulated benefit obligations, projected benefit obligations, fair values of net assets and
deficiencies of plan assets of $ 73.9million, $ 88.3million, $ 20.5million and $ 67.8million,
respectively.
The Company expects to make the following benefit payments for all domestic and foreign defined
benefit pension plans: $ 19.2million in 2025; $ 18.9million in 2026; $ 20.6million in 2027; $
22.2million in 2028; $ 22.7million in 2029; and $ 139.2million in 2030 through 2034. The Company
expects to contribute $ 5.8million to the foreign defined benefit pension plans in 2025.
The estimated net actuarial gains and prior service costs for the defined benefit pension plans that
are expected to be amortized from AOCI into net pension costs in 2025 are $ 3.2million and $
2.0million, respectively.
 65 
The following table summarizes the components of the net pension costs and AOCI related to the
defined benefit pension plans:
 Domestic Foreign 
 Defined Defined 
 Benefit Benefit 
 Net pension Pension Plan Pension Plans 
 cost: 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service cost $ 2.9 $ 3.0 $ 4.6 $ 4.6 $ 4.4 $ 6.3 
 Interest 4.9 4.6 3.2 11.8 11.8 7.3 
 cost 
 Expected 
 return on -8.3 -7.3 -7.6 -11.1 -12.3 -9.4 
 plan assets 
 Amortization 
 of prior 1.9 1.3 1.0 -0.1 -0.2 -0.2 
 service cost 
 (credit) 
 Amortization 
 of actuarial -0.5 -1.3 -1.5 0.2 
 (gains) 
 losses 
 Ongoing 0.9 1.6 1.2 3.9 2.2 4.2 
 pension cost 
 Settlement -1.1 -0.3 
 credits 
 Curtailment 7.1 
 cost 
 Net pension 0.9 1.6 1.2 11.0 1.1 3.9 
 cost 
 Other 
 changes in 
 plan assets 
 and 
 projected 
 benefit 
 obligation 
 recognized 
 in AOCI 
 (before 
 taxes): 
 Net 
 actuarial 
 (gains) 
 losses -20.9 -8.6 5.0 -8.0 5.8 -29.6 
 arising 
 during the 
 year 
 Prior 
 service cost 
 (credit) 1.0 3.0 1.6 6.9 1.1 -0.3 
 arising 
 during the 
 year 
 Amortization 
 of actuarial 0.5 1.3 1.5 -0.2 
 gains 
 (losses) 
 Amortization 
 of prior 
 service -1.9 -1.3 -1.0 -7.0 0.2 0.2 
 (cost) 
 credit 
 Loss 
 recognized 1.1 0.3 
 for 
 settlement 
 Exchange 
 rate loss 
 (gain) 1.6 -1.5 -0.4 
 recognized 
 during the 
 year 
 Total 
 recognized -21.3 -6.9 5.6 -5.2 8.2 -30.0 
 in AOCI 
 Total 
 recognized 
 in net $ -20.4 $ -5.3 $ 6.8 $ 5.8 $ 9.3 $ -26.1 
 pension cost 
 and 
 AOCI 
Service cost is recorded in Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative expenses. All
other components of Net pension costs are recorded in Other (income) expense - net.
In December 2024, the Company amended one of its foreign defined benefit plans to freeze future
benefit accruals as of December 31, 2024. As a result of the amendment, the Company recognized a non-
cash pre-tax curtailment charge of $ 7.1million primarily related to the acceleration of amounts
previously recorded within AOCI in the Statements of Consolidated Comprehensive Income.
The Company employs a total return investment approach for the domestic and foreign defined benefit
pension plan assets. A mix of equities and fixed income investments are used to maximize the long-
term return of assets for a prudent level of risk. In determining the expected long-term rate of
return on defined benefit pension plan assets, management considers the historical rates of return,
the nature of investments and an expectation of future investment strategies. The target allocations
for the domestic defined benefit pension plan assets are 35% – 65% equity securities, 35% – 65% fixed
income securities and 0% – 5% other (including alternative investments and cash). The target
allocations for the foreign defined benefit pension plan assets vary by plan, but are generally
within the following ranges: 0% – 20% equity securities, 75% – 100% fixed income securities and 0% –
10% other (including alternative investments and cash).
 66 
The following tables summarize the fair value of the defined benefit pension plan assets at December
31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. The presentation is in accordance with the Fair Value Topic of the ASC.
 Quoted Prices 
 in Active Significant 
 Markets for Other Significant 
 Fair Value at Identical Observable Unobservable 
 December 31, Assets Inputs Inputs 
 2024 (Level 1) (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Cash and cash $ 8.7 $ 8.7 $ — 
 equivalents 
 Equity investments(1) 95.3 86.6 8.7 
 Fixed income 226.5 36.8 189.7 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 24.2 24.2 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 354.7 $ 132.1 $ 222.6 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 25.3 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 380.0 
 Quoted Prices Significant 
 Fair Value at in Active Other Significant 
 December 31, Markets for Observable Unobservable 
 2023 Identical Inputs Inputs 
 Assets (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 (Level 1) 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Equity investments(1) $ 133.0 $ 72.9 $ 60.1 
 Fixed income 188.9 36.8 152.1 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 34.6 34.6 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 356.5 $ 109.7 $ 246.8 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 25.3 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 381.8 
 Quoted Prices Significant 
 Fair Value at in Active Other Significant 
 December 31, Markets for Observable Unobservable 
 2022 Identical Inputs Inputs 
 Assets (Level 2) (Level 3) 
 (Level 1) 
 Investments at fair 
 value: 
 Equity investments(1) $ 80.1 $ 8.5 $ 71.6 
 Fixed income 117.6 117.6 
 investments(2) 
 Other assets(3) 34.4 34.4 
 Total investments in 
 fair value $ 232.1 $ 8.5 $ 223.6 
 hierarchy 
 Investments measured at 
 NAV or its 110.9 
 equivalent(4) 
 Total investments $ 343.0 
(1) This category includes actively managed equity assets that track primarily to the S&P 500 or an
international equity 
international bond 
or its equivalent using the practical expedient. Therefore, these investments are not classified in
the fair value hierarchy.
 67 
The following table summarizes the obligations, plan assets and assumptions used for the defined
benefit pension plans, which are all measured as of December 31:
 Domes… Forei… 
 Defin… Defin… 
 Benef… Benef… 
 Pensi… Pensi… 
 Plan Plans 
 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Accu… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 at $ 94.2 $ 100.5 $ 90.3 $ 221.7 $ 236.4 $ 209.3 
 end 
 of 
 year 
 Proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Bala… 
 at 
 begi… $ 102.1 $ 91.7 $ 120.8 $ 257.8 $ 230.4 $ 362.7 
 of 
 year 
 Serv… 2.9 3.0 4.6 4.6 4.4 6.3 
 cost 
 Inte… 4.9 4.6 3.2 11.8 11.8 7.3 
 cost 
 Actu… 
 (gai… -11.1 2.8 -32.6 -19.8 8.8 -112… 
 loss… 
 Plan 
 amen… 1.0 3.0 1.6 13.5 2.0 3.2 
 and 
 other 
 Sett… -2.2 -3.7 -2.4 
 Effe… 
 of -12.2 14.1 -28.8 
 fore… 
 exch… 
 Bene… -4.5 -3.0 -5.9 -10.5 -10.0 -5.5 
 paid 
 Bala… 
 at 
 end 95.3 102.1 91.7 243.0 257.8 230.4 
 of 
 year 
 Plan 
 asse… 
 Bala… 
 at 
 begi… 135.1 119.4 155.2 246.7 223.6 328.4 
 of 
 year 
 Actu… 
 retu… 
 on 18.1 18.7 -29.9 -2.6 15.4 -73.4 
 plan 
 asse… 
 Cont… 
 and 5.7 8.6 5.8 
 other 
 Sett… -2.2 -3.7 -2.4 
 Effe… 
 of -7.1 12.8 -29.3 
 fore… 
 exch… 
 Bene… -4.5 -3.0 -5.9 -10.5 -10.0 -5.5 
 paid 
 Bala… 
 at 
 end 148.7 135.1 119.4 231.3 246.7 223.6 
 of 
 year 
 Exce… 
 (def… 
 plan 
 asse… $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ -11.7 $ -11.1 $ -6.8 
 over 
 proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Asse… 
 and 
 liab… 
 reco… 
 in 
 the 
 Cons… 
 Bala… 
 Shee… 
 Defe… 
 pens… $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ 56.1 $ 57.9 $ 51.7 
 asse… 
 Other -6.0 -3.4 -3.0 
 accr… 
 Other 
 long… -61.8 -65.6 -55.5 
 liab… 
 $ 53.4 $ 33.0 $ 27.7 $ -11.7 $ -11.1 $ -6.8 
 Amou… 
 reco… 
 in 
 AOCI: 
 Net 
 actu… $ 36.9 $ 16.6 $ 8.0 $ 29.9 $ 24.8 $ 31.7 
 gains 
 Prior 
 serv… -7.8 -8.8 -7.1 0.4 0.3 1.6 
 (cos… 
 cred… 
 $ 29.1 $ 7.8 $ 0.9 $ 30.3 $ 25.1 $ 33.3 
 Weig… 
 assu… 
 used 
 to 
 dete… 
 proj… 
 bene… 
 obli… 
 Disc… 5.78 % 5.09 % 5.27 % 5.49 % 4.81 % 5.06 % 
 rate 
 Rate 
 of 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.29 % 3.33 % 3.39 % 
 comp… 
 incr… 
 Weig… 
 assu… 
 used 
 to 
 dete… 
 net 
 pens… 
 cost: 
 Disc… 5.09 % 5.27 % 3.12 % 4.81 % 5.06 % 2.26 % 
 rate 
 Expe… 
 long… 
 rate 
 of 6.25 % 6.25 % 5.00 % 4.78 % 5.48 % 3.19 % 
 retu… 
 on 
 asse… 
 Rate 
 of 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.00 % 3.33 % 3.39 % 3.25 % 
 comp… 
 incr… 
 68 
Other Postretirement Benefits
Employees of the Company hired in the United States prior to January 1, 1993 who are not members of a
collective bargaining unit, and certain groups of employees added through acquisitions, are eligible
for health care and life insurance benefits upon retirement, subject to the terms of the unfunded
plans. There were 3,354, 3,367and 3,409retired employees covered by these postretirement benefits at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The following table summarizes the obligation and the assumptions used for other postretirement
benefits:
 Other Postretirement 
 Benefits 
 Benefit obligation: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at beginning of $ 147.2 $ 153.8 $ 276.4 
 year - unfunded 
 Service cost 0.5 0.6 1.2 
 Interest cost 6.8 7.4 6.0 
 Actuarial gain -8.6 -8.0 -54.5 
 Plan amendments -62.8 
 Benefits paid -10.8 -6.6 -12.5 
 Balance at end of year - $ 135.1 $ 147.2 $ 153.8 
 unfunded 
 Liabilities recognized in 
 the 
 Consolidated Balance 
 Sheets: 
 Other accruals $ -14.4 $ -14.0 $ -14.5 
 Postretirement benefits 
 other than -120.7 -133.2 -139.3 
 pensions 
 $ -135.1 $ -147.2 $ -153.8 
 Amounts recognized in AOCI: 
 Net actuarial gains $ 21.0 $ 12.9 $ 4.7 
 Prior service credits 16.2 40.0 64.0 
 $ 37.2 $ 52.9 $ 68.7 
 Weighted-average 
 assumptions used to 
 determine benefit 
 obligation: 
 Discount rate 5.61 % 4.97 % 5.16 % 
 Health care cost trend rate 7.50 % 7.00 % 6.25 % 
 - pre-65 
 Health care cost trend rate 6.50 % 6.00 % 5.50 % 
 - post-65 
 Prescription drug cost 11.75 % 9.00 % 8.25 % 
 increases 
 Weighted-average 
 assumptions used to 
 determine net periodic 
 benefit cost: 
 Discount rate 4.97 % 5.16 % 2.83 % 
 Health care cost trend rate 7.00 % 6.25 % 6.38 % 
 - pre-65 
 Health care cost trend rate 6.00 % 5.50 % 5.13 % 
 - post-65 
 Prescription drug cost 9.00 % 8.25 % 8.25 % 
 increases 
 69 
The following table summarizes the components of the net periodic benefit cost and AOCI related to
other postretirement benefits:
 Other Postretirement Benefits 
 Net periodic benefit (credit) cost: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service cost $ 0.5 $ 0.6 $ 1.2 
 Interest cost 6.8 7.4 6.0 
 Amortization of actuarial (gains) -0.4 0.1 4.2 
 losses 
 Amortization of prior service credit -23.9 -23.9 -0.4 
 Net periodic benefit (credit) cost -17.0 -15.8 11.0 
 Other changes in projected benefit 
 obligation recognized in 
 AOCI (before taxes): 
 Net actuarial gain arising during 
 the -8.6 -8.0 -54.5 
 year 
 Prior service credit arising during 
 the -62.8 
 year 
 Amortization of actuarial gains 0.4 -0.1 -4.2 
 (losses) 
 Amortization of prior service credit 23.9 23.9 0.4 
 Total recognized in AOCI 15.7 15.8 -121.1 
 Total recognized in net periodic 
 benefit $ -1.3 $ — $ -110.1 
 cost and AOCI 
The estimated net actuarial gains and prior service credits for other postretirement benefits that
are expected to be amortized from AOCI into net periodic benefit cost in 2025 are $ 2.4million and $
14.2million, respectively.
The assumed health care cost trend rate and prescription drug cost increases used to determine the
net periodic benefit cost for postretirement health care benefits for 2025 both decrease in each
successive year until reaching 4.5% in 2034.
The Company expects to make retiree health care benefit cash payments as follows:
 2025 $ 14.4 
 2026 14.9 
 2027 14.9 
 2028 14.3 
 2029 13.2 
 2030 through 2034 48.2 
 Total expected benefit cash payments $ 119.9 
 70 
The Company leases retail stores, manufacturing and distribution facilities, office space and
equipment under operating and finance lease agreements. Operating leases are included in Operating
lease right-of-use (ROU) assets, Current portion of operating lease liabilities and Long-term
operating lease liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Finance leases are included in Other
assets, Other accruals and Other long-term liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The
finance lease related asset and liability as of December 31, 2024 was $ 187.5million and $
189.3million, respectively.
Operating and finance lease ROU assets and lease liabilities are recognized based on the present
value of lease payments over the lease term. The majority of the operating lease ROU asset and lease
liability balances are related to the retail operations of the Paint Stores Group. The majority of
the finance lease ROU asset and lease liability balances are related to a distribution facility
within the Consumer Brands Group. Most leases include oneor more options to renew. The exercise of
lease renewal options is at the Company’s discretion and is not reasonably certain at lease
commencement.
The Company does not account for lease and non-lease components of contracts separately for any
underlying asset class. Some leases have variable payments, however, because they are not based on an
estate leases relate primarily to common area maintenance, insurance, taxes and utilities associated
with the properties. Variable payments for equipment leases relate primarily to hours, miles or other
quantifiable usage factors which are not determinable at the time the lease agreement is entered into
by the Company. The Company has made an accounting policy election by underlying asset class to not
apply the recognition requirements of ASC 842 to short-term leases. As a result, certain leases with
a term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and expense is
recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Most leases do not contain an incremental borrowing rate which is readily determinable from their
associated contract. Therefore, the Company uses its estimated incremental borrowing rate on a
collateralized basis which is derived from information available at the lease commencement date,
giving consideration to publicly available credit rating data, other risk characteristics and the
term of the lease in determining the present value of lease payments.
Additional lease information is summarized below:
 Components of Lease Expense 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating lease cost $ 562.4 $ 528.5 $ 498.0 
 Finance lease cost: 
 Amortization of right-of-use assets $ 0.7 
 Interest on lease liabilities 1.5 
 Total $ 2.2 $ — $ — 
 Short-term lease cost $ 69.6 $ 58.5 $ 47.1 
 Variable lease cost $ 132.1 $ 104.1 $ 89.9 
 Supplemental Cash Flow Information 
 Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease 
 liabilities: 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating cash outflows from operating $ 545.5 $ 513.8 $ 480.1 
 leases 
 Operating cash outflows from finance 0.2 
 leases 
 Financing cash outflows from finance 0.2 
 leases 
 Leased assets obtained in exchange for 
 new lease liabilities: 
 Operating leases $ 526.9 $ 473.3 $ 463.1 
 Finance leases 188.2 
 71 
The following table reconciles the undiscounted cash flows for each of the next five years and
thereafter to the operating and finance lease liabilities recognized on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets as of December 31, 2024. The reconciliation excludes short-term leases that are not recorded
on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 Year Ending December 31, Operating Leases Finance Leases 
 2025 540.4 9.1 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2026 466.9 8.2 
 2027 378.7 8.4 
 2028 289.3 8.6 
 2029 200.5 8.8 
 Thereafter 413.3 586.6 
 Total lease payments 2,289.1 629.7 
 Amount representing interest -264.2 -440.4 
 Present value of lease liabilities $ 2,024.9 $ 189.3 
 72 
Environmental Matters
The operations of the Company, like those of other companies in its industry, are subject to various
domestic and foreign environmental laws and regulations. These laws and regulations not only govern
current operations and products, but also impose potential liability on the Company for past
operations. Management expects environmental laws and regulations to impose increasingly stringent
requirements upon the Company and the industry in the future. Management believes that the Company
conducts its operations in compliance with applicable environmental laws, regulations and
requirements and has implemented various programs designed to protect the environment and promote
continued compliance.
The Company is involved with environmental investigation and remediation activities at some of its
currently and formerly owned sites (including sites which were previously owned and/or operated by
businesses acquired by the Company). In addition, the Company, together with other parties, has been
designated a potentially responsible party under federal and state environmental protection laws for
the investigation and remediation of environmental contamination and hazardous waste at a number of
third-party sites, primarily Superfund sites. In general, these laws provide that potentially
responsible parties may be held jointly and severally liable for investigation and remediation costs
regardless of fault. The Company may be similarly designated with respect to additional third-party
sites in the future.
The Company initially provides for estimated costs of environmental-related activities relating to
its past operations and third-party sites for which commitments or clean-up plans have been developed
and when such costs can be reasonably estimated based on industry standards and professional
judgment. These estimated costs, which are mostly undiscounted, are determined based on currently
available facts regarding each site. If the reasonably estimable costs can only be identified as a
range and no specific amount within that range can be determined more likely than any other amount
within the range, the minimum of the range is provided.
The Company routinely assesses its potential liability for investigation and remediation-related
activities and adjusts its environmental-related accruals as information becomes available, including
as a result of sites progressing through investigation and remediation-related activities, upon which
more accurate costs can be reasonably estimated and as additional accounting guidelines are issued.
At December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company had accruals reported on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets as Other long-term liabilitiesof $ 230.3million, $ 230.8million and $ 240.2million,
respectively. Estimated costs of current investigation and remediation activities of $ 66.4million, $
88.1million and $ 50.2million are included in Other accrualson the Consolidated Balance Sheets at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Actual costs incurred may vary from the accrued estimates due to the inherent uncertainties involved
including, among others, the number and financial condition of parties involved with respect to any
given site, the volumetric contribution which may be attributed to the Company relative to that
attributed to other parties, the nature and magnitude of the wastes involved, the various
technologies that can be used for remediation and the determination of acceptable remediation with
respect to a particular site. If the Company’s future loss contingency is ultimately determined to be
at the unaccrued maximum of the estimated range of possible outcomes for every site for which costs
can be reasonably estimated, the Company’s accrual for environmental-related activities would be $
93.4million higher than the minimum accruals at December 31, 2024. Additionally, costs for
environmental-related activities may not be reasonably estimable at early stages of investigation and
therefore would not be included in the unaccrued maximum amount.
Fourof the Company’s currently and formerly owned manufacturing sites (Major Sites) account for the
majority of the accrual for environmental-related activities and the unaccrued maximum of the
estimated range of possible outcomes at December 31, 2024. At December 31, 2024, $ 250.3million, or
84.3% of the total accrual, related directly to the Major Sites. In the aggregate unaccrued maximum
of $ 93.4million at December 31, 2024, $ 70.6million, or 75.6%, related to the Major Sites. The
significant cost components of this liability continue to be related to remedy implementation,
regulatory agency interaction and project management and other costs. While different for each
specific environmental situation, these components generally each account for approximately 85%, 10%
and 5%, respectively, of the accrued amount and those percentages are subject to change over time.
While environmental investigations and remedial actions are in different stages at these sites,
additional investigations, remedial actions and monitoring will likely be required at each site.
The largest and most complex of the Major Sites is the Gibbsboro, New Jersey site (Gibbsboro) which
comprises the substantial majority of the environmental-related accrual. Gibbsboro, a former
manufacturing plant, and related areas, which ceased operations in 1978, has had various areas
included on the National Priorities List since 1999. This location has soil, sediment, surface water
and groundwater contamination related to the historic operations of the facility. Gibbsboro has been
divided by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) into sixoperable units (OUs) based on location
and characteristics, whose investigation and remediation efforts are likely to occur over an extended
period of time. To date, the Company has completed remedy construction on threeof the sixoperable
units. While there are administrative tasks to be completed before final agency
 73 
approval, the remediation phase of the work for these three OUs is effectively complete and future
work for these OUs is anticipated to be limited. OUs are in various phases of investigation and
remediation with the EPA that provide enough information to reasonably estimate cost ranges and
record environmental-related accruals. The most significant assumptions underlying the reliability
and precision of remediation cost estimates for the Gibbsboro site are the type and extent of future
remedies to be selected by the EPA and the costs of implementing those remedies.
The remaining threeMajor Sites comprising the majority of the accrual include: (1) a multi-party
Superfund site that (a) has received a record of decision from the federal EPA and is currently in
the remedial design phase for one OU, (b) has received a record of decision from the federal EPA for
an interim remedy for another OU and (c) has a remedial investigation ongoing for another OU, (2) a
closed paint manufacturing facility that is in the operation and maintenance phase of remediation
under both federal and state EPA programs and (3) a formerly-owned site containing warehouse and
office space that is in the remedial/design investigation phase under a state EPA program. Each of
these threeMajor Sites are in phases of investigation and remediation that provide sufficient
information to reasonably estimate cost ranges and record environmental-related accruals.
Excluding the Major Sites discussed above, no sites are individually material to the total accrual
balance. There are multiple, future events yet to occur, including further remedy selection and
design, remedy implementation and execution and securing applicable governmental agency approvals,
all of which have the potential to contribute to the uncertainty surrounding these future events. As
these events occur and to the extent that the cost estimates of the environmental remediation change,
the existing reserve will be adjusted.
Management cannot presently estimate the ultimate potential loss contingencies related to these sites
or other less significant sites until such time as a substantial portion of the investigation at the
sites is completed and remedial action plans are developed. Unasserted claims could have a material
effect on the Company’s loss contingency as more information becomes available over time. At December
31, 2024 , the Company did not have material loss contingency accruals related to unasserted claims.
Management does not expect that a material portion of unrecognized loss contingencies will be
recoverable through insurance, indemnification agreements or other sources. In the event any future
loss contingency significantly exceeds the current amount accrued, the recording of the ultimate
liability may result in a material impact on net income for the annual or interim period during which
the additional costs are accrued. Moreover, management does not believe that any potential liability
ultimately attributed to the Company for its environmental-related matters will have a material
adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity or cash flow due to the extended
length of time during which environmental investigation and remediation takes place. An estimate of
the potential impact on the Company’s operations cannot be made due to the aforementioned
uncertainties.
Management expects these contingent environmental-related liabilities to be resolved over an extended
period of time. Management is unable to provide a more specific time frame due to the indeterminate
amount of time to conduct investigation activities at any site, the indeterminate amount of time to
obtain environmental agency approval, as necessary, with respect to investigation and remediation
activities and the indeterminate amount of time necessary to conduct remediation activities.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations Topic of the ASC requires a liability to be
recognized for the fair value of a conditional asset retirement obligation if a settlement date and
fair value can be reasonably estimated. The Company recognizes a liability for any conditional asset
retirement obligation when sufficient information is available to reasonably estimate a settlement
date to determine the fair value of such a liability. The Company has identified certain conditional
asset retirement obligations at various current and closed manufacturing, distribution and store
facilities. These obligations relate primarily to asbestos abatement, hazardous waste Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) closures, well abandonment, transformers and used oil disposals
and underground storage tank closures. Using investigative, remediation and disposal methods that are
currently available to the Company, the estimated costs of these obligations were accrued and are not
significant. The recording of additional liabilities for future conditional asset retirement
obligations may result in a material impact on Net income for the annual or interim period during
which the costs are accrued. Management does not believe that any potential liability ultimately
attributed to the Company for its conditional asset retirement obligations will have a material
adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity or cash flow due to the extended
period of time over which sufficient information may become available regarding the closure or
modification of any one or group of the Company’s facilities. An estimate of the potential impact on
the Company’s operations cannot be made due to the aforementioned uncertainties.
 74 
Real Estate Financing
In December 2022, the Company closed a transaction to sell and subsequently lease back its partially-
constructed new global headquarters. As a result of this transaction, the Company has entered into
certain sale-leaseback agreements that do not qualify as asset sales and were accounted for as real
estate financing transactions. Net proceeds are recognized within the Financing Activities section in
the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows. The Company expects to receive total proceeds
approximating $ 800million to $ 850million on an incremental basis until the completion of
construction of the new global headquarters. The Company expects to receive the final proceeds for
the new global headquarters in the first quarter of 2025, at which point the Company will calculate
the remaining obligation under the terms of the lease. The following table summarizes the activity
related to this transaction and the corresponding balances recognized in the Consolidated Balance
Sheets.
 Activity: 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Proceeds received $ 244.2 $ 305.0 $ 210.0 
 Capitalized interest(1) 45.2 23.8 
 Balances: 
 Short-term liability(2) $ 49.7 $ 39.9 $ 20.0 
 Long-term liability(3) 715.9 475.9 187.0 
 Total liability $ 765.6 $ 515.8 $ 207.0 
(1) Interest is capitalized within construction in progress in Property, plant and equipment, net.
(2) The short-term portion of the liability is recorded in Other accruals.
(3) The long-term portion of the liability is recorded in Other long-term liabilities.
 NOTE 11 – LITIGATION 
In the course of its business, the Company is subject to a variety of claims and lawsuits, including,
but not limited to, litigation relating to product liability and warranty, personal injury,
environmental, intellectual property, commercial, contractual and antitrust claims, that are
inherently subject to many uncertainties regarding the possibility of a loss to the Company.
Uncertainties to which litigation is inherently subject include, among other things, costs,
unpredictable court or jury decisions that could affect other litigation against the Company and
encourage an increase in the number and nature of future claims and proceedings and differing laws
and regulations in jurisdictions where the Company operates. These uncertainties will ultimately be
resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur confirming the incurrence of a
liability or the reduction of a liability. In accordance with the Contingencies Topic of the ASC, the
Company accrues for these contingencies by a charge to income when it is both probable that one or
more future events will occur confirming the fact of a loss and the amount of the loss can be
reasonably estimated. In the event that the Company’s loss contingency is ultimately determined to be
significantly higher than currently accrued, the recording of the additional liability may result in
a material impact on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for the
annual or interim period during which such additional liability is accrued. In those cases where no
accrual is recorded because it is not probable that a liability has been incurred or the amount of
any such loss cannot be reasonably estimated, any potential liability ultimately determined to be
attributable to the Company may result in a material impact on the Company’s results of operations,
liquidity or financial condition for the annual or interim period during which such liability is
accrued. In those cases where no accrual is recorded or exposure to loss exists in excess of the
amount accrued, the Contingencies Topic of the ASC requires disclosure of the contingency when there
is a reasonable possibility that a loss or additional loss may have been incurred.
Due to the uncertainties involved in litigation, management is unable to predict the outcome of the
litigation identified below, the number or nature of possible future claims and proceedings or the
effect that any legislation and/or administrative regulations may have on the litigation or against
the Company. In addition, management cannot reasonably determine the scope or amount of the potential
costs and liabilities related to such litigation, or resulting from any such legislation and
regulations. With respect to the litigation identified below, the Company has only accrued for the
court-approved agreement related to the California Proceedings, identified in the Public Nuisance
Claim Litigation section. For the remaining litigation identified below, the Company does not believe
it is probable that a loss has occurred, or the Company believes it is not possible to estimate the
range of potential losses. In addition, any potential liability that may result from any changes to
legislation and regulations cannot reasonably be estimated. Due to the uncertainties associated with
the amount of any such liability and/or the nature of any other remedy which may be imposed in
litigation, any potential liability determined to be attributable to the Company arising out of such
litigation may have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity, or
financial condition. An estimate of the potential impact on the Company’s results of operations, cash
flow, liquidity or financial condition cannot be made due to the aforementioned uncertainties.
 75 
Lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation. The Company’s past operations included the manufacture
and sale of lead pigments and lead-based paints. The Company, along with other companies, is and has
been a defendant in a number of legal proceedings arising from the manufacture and sale of lead
pigments and lead-based paints. The plaintiffs’ claims have been based upon various legal theories,
including negligence, strict liability, breach of warranty, negligent misrepresentations and
omissions, fraudulent misrepresentations and omissions, concert of action, civil conspiracy,
violations of unfair trade practice and consumer protection laws, enterprise liability, market share
liability, public nuisance, unjust enrichment and other theories. The Company has also been a
defendant in legal proceedings arising from the manufacture and sale of non-lead-based paints that
seek recovery based upon various legal theories, including the failure to adequately warn of
potential exposure to lead during surface preparation when using non-lead-based paint on surfaces
previously painted with lead-based paint. Other than the California Proceedings and currently pending
cases, all of these legal proceedings have been concluded in favor of the Company and other
defendants at various stages in the proceedings.
In addition, from time to time, various legislation and administrative regulations have been enacted,
promulgated or proposed to impose obligations on present and former manufacturers of lead pigments
and lead-based paints respecting asserted health concerns associated with such products or to
overturn the effect of court decisions in which the Company and other manufacturers have been
successful. The Company is vigorously defending all lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation. The
Company expects that additional lead pigment and lead-based paint litigation may be filed against the
Company in the future asserting similar or different legal theories and seeking similar or different
types of damages and relief. The Company will continue to vigorously defend against any additional
litigation that may be filed, including utilizing all avenues of appeal, if necessary.
Public Nuisance Claim Litigation . The Company and other companies have been defendants in legal
proceedings seeking recovery based on public nuisance liability theories, among other theories,
brought by various states, cities and counties, including by the State of Rhode Island; the City of
St. Louis, Missouri; various cities and counties in the State of New Jersey; various cities in the
State of Ohio and the State of Ohio; the City of Chicago, Illinois; the City of Milwaukee, Wisconsin;
the County of Santa Clara, California and other public entities in the State of California (the
California Proceedings); and Lehigh and Montgomery Counties in Pennsylvania. Except for the
California Proceedings in which the Company reached a court-approved agreement in 2019 after nearly
twenty years of litigation, all of those legal proceedings have been concluded in favor of the
Company and other defendants at various stages in the proceedings. Most recently, on May 7, 2024, as
further described below in Wisconsin Litigation, threeplaintiffs filed amended complaints alleging,
in part, public nuisance claims.
Wisconsin Litigation . The Company and other companies are or have been defendants in a number of
legal proceedings seeking monetary damages and other relief from alleged personal injuries. The
current proceedings consist of twofederal court cases pending in the United States District Court for
the Eastern District of Wisconsin (Ernest Gibson v. American Cyanamid, et al. and Deziree and
Detareion Valoe v. American Cyanamid, et. al.) and onecase pending in Milwaukee County Circuit Court
in Wisconsin (Arrieona Beal v. Hattie and Jerry Mitchell, et al.). Those matters include claims by
fourindividuals allegedly injured from ingestion of lead pigment or lead-containing paint while they
were minors. The plaintiffs generally seek compensatory damages and have invoked Wisconsin’s risk
contribution theory (which is similar to market share liability, except that liability can be joint
and several) due to the plaintiff’s inability to identify the manufacturer of any product that
allegedly injured the plaintiff.
On May 20, 2021, as a result of a decision in favor of the Company by United States Court of Appeals
for the Seventh Circuit in the Ravon Owens v. American Cyanamid, et al., Cesar Sifuentes v. American
Cyanamid, et al. and Glenn Burton, Jr. v. American Cyanamid, et al. cases, the Company and the
threeother defendants filed motions for summary judgment to dismiss all claims of the approximately
150plaintiffs then pending in the Eastern District of Wisconsin, including the claims of Gibson and
the Valoes. On March 3, 2022, the district court granted summary judgment in favor of the Company and
the other defendants. On September 15, 2022, the plaintiffs filed notices of appeal with the Seventh
Circuit, seeking to appeal the district court’s summary judgment in favor of the Company and the
other defendants. On February 9, 2024, the Seventh Circuit affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment in favor of the Company and the other defendants in all cases except those filed by Gibson
and the Valoes, which cases were remanded to the district court for further proceedings. Following
remand of the Gibson and Valoe cases, the threeremaining plaintiffs filed amended complaints on May
7, 2024, alleging strict liability, negligence and public nuisance claims. The defendants filed
motions to dismiss the plaintiffs’ amended complaints on June 20, 2024. On November 8, 2024, the
district court granted in part and denied in part defendants’ motions to dismiss the amended
complaints, dismissing the second cause of action for general negligence and plaintiffs’ abatement
allegations, but otherwise permitting the case to proceed. On December 6, 2024, the Company and some
of the other defendants filed a third-party complaint against NL Industries, Inc. (NL) and the owners
and landlords of the properties where plaintiffs resided. Some of the owners and landlords filed a
motion to dismiss the third-party complaints; that motion remains pending. On January 30, 2025, the
district court entered a stipulated order dismissing NL pursuant to the execution of a Pierringer
release between plaintiffs and NL.
 76 
In the separate state court proceeding, on August 24, 2021, Arrieona Beal filed an amended complaint
in Milwaukee County Circuit Court, naming the Company and other alleged former lead pigment
manufacturers as defendants pursuant to the risk contribution liability theory. The plaintiff
previously had sued her landlords. On January 3, 2024, the Company and some of the other
manufacturing defendants filed a third-party complaint against NL and cross-claims against the
landlord defendants. On January 10, 2024, one of the landlord defendants filed a counterclaim and
cross-claim against all parties. On May 15, 2024, the plaintiff filed a motion for partial judgment
on the pleadings to strike the Company and other manufacturing defendants’ affirmative defenses, and
on August 6, 2024, the circuit court granted defendants’ motion to strike the plaintiff’s motion. On
December 6, 2024, plaintiff filed a notice of voluntary dismissal as to landlords Hattie and Jerry
Mitchell pursuant to the execution of a Pierringer release.
Insurance Coverage Litigation. The Company and its liability insurers, including certain underwriters
at Lloyd’s of London, initiated legal proceedings against each other to determine, among other
things, whether the costs and liabilities associated with the abatement of lead pigment are covered
under certain insurance policies issued to the Company. The insurers’ action, which was filed on
February 23, 2006, in the Supreme Court of the State of New York, County of New York, was dismissed.
The Company’s action, filed on March 3, 2006, in the Common Pleas Court, Cuyahoga County, Ohio,
previously was stayed and inactive.
On January 9, 2019, the Company filed an unopposed motion to lift the stay with the trial court,
which was granted, allowing the case to proceed to determine whether the insurers were required to
indemnify the Company following the California Proceedings. On June 28, 2019, the Company and its
liability insurers each filed separate motions for summary judgment seeking various forms of relief.
The trial court entered an order on December 4, 2020, granting the insurers’ motion for summary
judgment, denying the Company’s motion and entering final judgment in favor of the insurers. The
trial court sided with the Company on all of the issues presented, except one.
On December 21, 2020, the Company filed a notice of appeal to the Court of Appeals of Cuyahoga
County, Ohio, Eighth Appellate District, and the insurers filed cross-appeals. On September 1, 2022,
the appellate court reversed the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, finding in favor of the
Company on its appeal and against the insurers on their cross-appeal, and remanded the case to the
trial court. On September 12, 2022, the insurers applied to the appellate court for reconsideration
of its decision, en banc review, or certification of an appeal to the Ohio Supreme Court, which the
appellate court denied.
The insurers subsequently filed a notice of appeal to the Ohio Supreme Court, to which the Company
filed its response. On May 9, 2023, the Ohio Supreme Court accepted the insurers’ appeal. Oral
argument was held on October 24, 2023. On December 10, 2024, the Ohio Supreme Court reversed the
Court of Appeals and mandated judgment in favor of the insurers, holding that because the abatement-
fund payment was made to prevent future harm rather than compensate for past harm, payment was not
“damages” covered under the insurance policies.
This decision means that insurance proceeds could be unavailable under the policies at issue to
mitigate past or future abatement related liabilities. The Company has not recorded a receivable
related to these insurance policies or otherwise assumed that proceeds from these insurance policies
would be received in estimating any contingent liability accrual within the consolidated financial
statements. Therefore, this decision, without a determination of liability against the Company in the
lead pigment or lead-based paint litigation will have no impact on the Company’s results of
operation, liquidity or financial condition. As previously stated, except with respect to the
litigation in the California Proceedings, the Company has not accrued any amounts for the lead
pigment or lead-based paint litigation and any significant liability ultimately determined to be
attributable to the Company relating to such litigation may result in a material impact on the
Company’s results of operations, liquidity or financial condition for the annual or interim period
during which such liability is accrued.
 77 
Other matters. On December 18, 2019, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the
Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the Administrator of the
New Jersey Spill Compensation Fund (collectively, the NJ DEP) filed a lawsuit against the Company in
the Superior Court of New Jersey Law Division in Camden County, New Jersey. The NJ DEP seeks to
recover natural resource damages, punitive damages and litigation fees and costs, as well as other
costs, damages, declaratory relief and penalties pursuant to New Jersey state statutes and common law
theories in connection with the alleged discharge of hazardous substances and pollutants at the
Company’s Gibbsboro, New Jersey site, a former manufacturing plant and related facilities. Following
expert discovery, on November 20, 2024, the Company filed a motion in the United States District
Court for the District of New Jersey seeking to enforce the terms of an April 2019 Remedial
Design/Remedial Action Consent Decree between the Company and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (the Consent Decree) that is being attacked by the NJ DEP’s state court lawsuit. On
December 21, 2024, the United States filed a brief in opposition to the Company’s motion, to which
the Company filed a reply brief. The Company’s motion regarding the Consent Decree remains pending in
federal court. Meanwhile, on November 20, 2024, the Company filed a motion to stay the state court
proceedings pending resolution of the Company’s motion regarding the Consent Decree. On December 19,
2024, the state court denied the Company’s stay motion, but suspended all then-pending dates in the
court’s schedule, including the previous trial date of March 10, 2025, until an ongoing discovery
dispute between the Company and the NJ DEP is resolved. On December 20, 2024, the NJ DEP filed a
motion for partial summary judgment seeking to find the Company liable under the Spill Act and Solid
Waste Management Act. On January 31, 2025, the state court denied the NJ DEP’s motion for partial
summary judgment. On February 6, 2025, the state court sent an automated notice re-setting the trial
for March 10, 2025. Upon the parties’ request seeking clarification regarding the schedule, there is
a status conference with the state court set for February 18, 2025.
In July 2024, a third-party assurance, testing, inspection and certification provider changed its
listing for one of the Company’s protective coatings products, an intumescent coating used for fire
protection of steel beam assemblies. The Company has received claims regarding this matter and is
working with its customers and end users to assist in understanding the potential impacts of the
listing change, including the extent of potential remedial action that may involve the application of
additional product. The Company’s review of this matter is ongoing. Except for an immaterial product
warranty liability which remains recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2024,
any additional amount or range of potential loss cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
 NOTE 12 – SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY 
Capital Stock
At December 31, 2024, there were 900,000,000shares of common stock and 30,000,000shares of serial
preferred stock authorized for issuance. Of the authorized serial preferred stock, 3,000,000shares
are designated as cumulative redeemable serial preferred stock. There we no shares of serial
preferred stock issued during 2024, 2023 or 2022.
Under the 2006 Equity and Performance Incentive Plan (2006 Employee Plan), 71,100,000shares may be
issued or transferred. An aggregate of 13,603,814, 15,830,386and 17,939,143shares of common stock at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, were reserved for the exercise and future grants of
option rights and future grants of restricted stock and restricted stock units. See Note 14 for
additional information related to stock-based compensation.
Shares outstanding shown in the following table included 1,426,883shares of common stock held in a
revocable trust at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. The revocable trust is used to accumulate assets
for the purpose of funding the ultimate obligation of certain non-qualified benefit plans.
Transactions between the Company and the trust are accounted for in accordance with the Deferred
Compensation – Rabbi Trusts Subtopic of the Compensation Topic of the ASC, which requires the assets
held by the trust be consolidated with the Company’s accounts.
 78 
contributions to the domestic defined contribution plan. The related proceeds were $ 22.0million.
Dividends
The following table summarizes the dividends declared and paid on common stock:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash dividend per share $ 2.86 $ 2.42 $ 2.40 
 Total dividends (in millions) 723.4 623.7 618.5 
Treasury Stock
The Company acquires its common stock for general corporate purposes through its publicly announced
share repurchase program. As of December 31, 2024, the Company had remaining authorization from its
Board of Directors to purchase 34.4million shares of its common stock. The table below summarizes the
Company’s share repurchase activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Treasury stock purchases (in millions) $ 1,738.8 $ 1,432.0 $ 883.2 
 Treasury stock purchases (shares) 5,200,000 5,600,000 3,350,000 
 Average price per share $ 334.38 $ 255.72 $ 263.64 
 NOTE 13 – DEFINED CONTRIBUTION SAVINGS PLAN 
As of December 31, 2024, 44,917employees contributed to the Company’s defined contribution savings
plan, voluntary to all eligible salaried employees and any employee in a group of employees to which
coverage has been extended on a non-discriminatory basis by the plan’s Administration Committee.
Participants are allowed to contribute, on a pretax or after-tax basis, up to the lesser of
fiftypercent of their annual compensation or the maximum dollar amount allowed under the Internal
Revenue Code. The Company matches one hundredpercent of all contributions up to sixpercent of
eligible employee contributions. Such participant contributions may be invested in a variety of
investment funds or a Company common stock
 79 
fund and may be exchanged between investments as directed by the participant. Participants are
permitted to diversify both future and prior Company matching contributions previously allocated to
the Company common stock fund into a variety of investment funds.
The Company made contributions to the defined contribution savings plan on behalf of participating
employees, representing amounts authorized by employees to be withheld from their earnings, of $
279.6million, $ 260.5million and $ 240.1million in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The Company’s
matching contributions to the defined contribution savings plan charged to operations were $
165.1million, $ 153.9million and $ 140.0million for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
At December 31, 2024, there were 16,771,640shares of the Company’s common stock being held by the
defined contribution savings plan, representing 6.7% of the total number of voting shares
outstanding. Shares of Company common stock credited to each member’s account under the defined
contribution savings plan are voted by the trustee under instructions from each individual plan
member. Shares for which no instructions are received are voted by the trustee in the same proportion
as those for which instructions are received.
 NOTE 14 – STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION 
The 2006 Employee Plan authorizes the Board of Directors, or a committee of the Board of Directors,
to issue or transfer up to an aggregate of 71,100,000shares of common stock, plus any shares relating
to awards that expire, are forfeited or canceled. The Company issues new shares upon exercise of
option rights (options) and vesting of restricted stock units (RSUs). The 2006 Employee Plan permits
the granting of options, appreciation rights, restricted stock, RSUs, performance shares and
performance units to eligible employees. At December 31, 2024, noappreciation rights, performance
shares or performance units had been granted under the 2006 Employee Plan. Shares available for
future grants under the 2006 Employee Plan were 5,458,273at December 31, 2024.
The 2006 Stock Plan for Nonemployee Directors (Nonemployee Director Plan) authorizes the Board of
Directors, or a committee of the Board of Directors, to issue or transfer up to an aggregate of
600,000shares of common stock, plus any shares relating to awards that expire, are forfeited or
canceled. The Nonemployee Director Plan permits the granting of options, appreciation rights,
restricted stock and RSUs to members of the Board of Directors who are not employees of the Company.
At December 31, 2024, nooptions or appreciation rights had been granted under the Nonemployee
Director Plan. Shares available for future grants under the Nonemployee Director Plan were 210,675at
December 31, 2024.
At December 31, 2024, the Company had total unrecognized stock-based compensation expense of $
192.7million that is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.08years.
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Stock-based compensation expense $ 138.1 $ 115.9 $ 99.7 
 Income tax benefit recognized 34.1 28.6 24.6 
Excess tax benefits from share-based payments are recognized as an income tax benefit in the
Statements of Consolidated Income when options are exercised and RSUs vest. For the years ended
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the Company’s excess tax benefit from options exercised and RSUs
vested reduced the income tax provision by $ 73.0million, $ 35.7million and $ 35.4million,
respectively.
Options
The fair value of the Company’s options was estimated at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes-
Merton option-pricing model with the following weighted-average assumptions for all options granted:
 2024 2023 2022 
 Risk-free interest rate 3.93 % 4.57 % 4.00 % 
 Expected life of options 5.02 years 5.02 years 5.05 years 
 Expected dividend yield of stock .83 % .94 % .92 % 
 Expected volatility of stock 27.5 % 29.3 % 31.6 % 
 80 
The risk-free interest rate is based upon the U.S. Treasury yield curve at the time of grant. The
expected life of options was calculated using a scenario analysis model. Historical data was used to
aggregate the holding period from actual exercises, post-vesting cancellations and hypothetical
assumed exercises on all outstanding options. The expected dividend yield of stock is the Company’s
best estimate of the expected future dividend yield. Expected volatility of stock was calculated
using historical and implied volatilities.
Grants of non-qualified and incentive stock options have been awarded to certain officers and key
employees under the 2006 Employee Plan. The options generally become exercisable to the extent of
one-third of the optioned shares for each full year following the date of grant and generally expire
ten yearsafter the date of grant. Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to options granted
to eligible employees amounted to $ 116.4million at December 31, 2024. The unrecognized compensation
expense is being amortized on a straight-line basis over the three-yearvesting period, net of
estimated forfeitures based on historical activity, and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-
average period of 1.14years.
The following table summarizes the Company’s option activity:
 Weighted 
 Average 
 Exercise Aggregate Weighted Average 
 Optioned Price Intrinsic Remaining Term 
 Shares Per Share Value (in Years) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstanding at 8,925,011 $ 175.70 $ 1,215.6 5.64 
 January 1, 2024 
 Granted 939,699 376.90 
 Exercised -1,871,201 131.48 
 Forfeited -53,373 254.48 
 Expired -5,270 202.79 
 Outstanding at 7,934,866 209.39 $ 1,074.4 5.69 
 December 31, 2024 
 Exercisable at 6,054,247 $ 178.95 $ 974.6 4.64 
 December 31, 2024 
The following table summarizes fair value and intrinsic value information for option activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted average grant date fair value $ 109.05 $ 77.08 $ 69.82 
 per share 
 Total fair value of options vested 66.8 61.3 57.9 
 Total intrinsic value of options 402.7 170.6 125.4 
 exercised 
RSUs
The fair value of each RSU is equal to the market value of a share of the Company’s stock on the
grant date. Grants of time-based RSUs, which generally require three yearsof continuous employment
from the date of grant before vesting and receiving the stock without restriction, have been awarded
to certain officers and key employees under the 2006 Employee Plan. The February 2024, 2023 and 2022
grants of performance-based RSUs vest at the end of a three-yearperiod based on the Company’s
achievement of specified financial and operating performance goals relating to earnings per share and
return on net assets employed.
Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to grants of RSUs to eligible employees amounted to $
74.4million at December 31, 2024. The unrecognized compensation expense is being amortized on a
straight-line basis over the vesting period and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average
period of 0.82years.
Grants of RSUs have been awarded to nonemployee directors under the Nonemployee Director Plan. These
grants generally vest and stock is received without restriction to the extent of one-third of the
RSUs for each year following the date of grant. Unrecognized compensation expense with respect to
grants of RSUs to nonemployee directors amounted to $ 1.9million at December 31, 2024. The
unrecognized compensation expense is being amortized on a straight-line basis over the three-
yearvesting period and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 0.90years.
 81 
The following table summarizes the Company’s RSU activity:
 Weighted 
 Average Grant Aggregate Weighted Average 
 Date Fair Intrinsic Remaining Term 
 Number of RSUs Value Per Share Value (in Years) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstanding at 434,874 $ 244.21 $ 135.6 1.26 
 January 1, 2024 
 Granted 124,667 305.50 
 Vested -122,276 239.14 
 Forfeited -4,251 251.80 
 Outstanding at 
 December 31, 433,014 $ 265.03 $ 147.2 1.18 
 2024 
The following table summarizes the fair value and intrinsic value information for RSU activity:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted average grant date fair value $ 305.50 $ 232.22 $ 271.75 
 per share 
 Intrinsic value of RSUs vested during 38.4 68.5 97.5 
 year 
NOTE 15 – ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
The components of AOCI, including the reclassification adjustments for items that were reclassified
from AOCI to Net income, are shown below.
 Pension and 
 Other Unrealized Net 
 Foreign Currency Postretirement Gains on 
 Translation Benefits Cash Flow 
 Adjustments(1) Adjustments(2) Hedges(3) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at $ -702.1 $ -32.2 $ 35.9 $ -698.4 
 January 1, 2022 
 Amounts 
 recognized in -108.7 106.8 -1.9 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified 3.7 -4.0 -0.3 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, -810.8 78.3 31.9 -700.6 
 2022 
 Amounts 
 recognized in 93.9 3.9 97.8 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified -17.9 -3.6 -21.5 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, -716.9 64.3 28.3 -624.3 
 2023 
 Amounts 
 recognized in -256.0 23.0 -233.0 
 AOCI 
 Amounts 
 reclassified -14.2 -3.7 -17.9 
 from AOCI 
 Balance at 
 December 31, $ -972.9 $ 73.1 $ 24.6 $ -875.2 
 2024 
(1) Includes changes in the fair value of cross currency swap contracts of $ 53.6million, $( 24.9)
million and $ 34.1million in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. See Note 16.
(2) Net of taxes of $( 2.0) million, $ 3.1million and $( 35.0) million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively. See Note 8.
(3) Net of taxes of $ 1.2million in 2024 and 2023 and $ 1.1million in 2022. See Statements of
Consolidated Comprehensive Income.
 82 
Net Investment Hedges
The Company has entered into U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap contracts with various
counterparties to hedge the Company’s net investment in its European operations. During the term of
the contracts, the Company will pay fixed-rate interest in euros and receive fixed-rate interest in
U.S. dollars, thereby effectively converting a portion of the Company's U.S. dollar denominated
fixed-rate debt to euro denominated fixed-rate debt. The outstanding contracts as of December 31,
2024 are summarized by maturity date in the table below.
 Notional Value Maturity Date 
 200.0 August 8, 2025 
 687.7 June 1, 2027 
 100.0 March 1, 2028 
 ──────────────────────────────────────── 
 525.0 August 15, 2029 
 100.0 September 1, 2031 
 $ 1,612.7 
In August 2024, the Company settled its $ 150.0million U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap
contract entered into on March 28, 2023. In May 2024, the Company settled its $ 500.0million U.S.
dollar to euro cross currency swap contract entered into on February 13, 2020. At the time of both of
these settlements, an immaterial unrealized loss was recognized in AOCI.
In December 2023, the Company settled its $ 100.0million U.S. dollar to euro cross currency swap
contract entered into on August 1, 2023. At the time of settlement, an immaterial unrealized gain was
recognized in AOCI.
The following table summarizes the balance sheet location of the cross currency swap contracts. See
Note 17 for additional information on the fair value of these contracts.
 December 31, December 31, December 31, 
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Other current assets $ 9.4 $ — $ — 
 Other assets 39.5 — 9.1 
 Other accruals — 12.0 — 
 Other long-term liabilities — 12.4 — 
The changes in fair value of the cross currency swap contracts are recognized in the foreign currency
translation adjustments component of AOCI. See Note 15. The following table summarizes the unrealized
gains (losses) for the years ended December 31:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gains (losses) $ 71.2 $ -33.1 $ 45.2 
 Tax effect -17.6 8.2 -11.1 
 Gains (losses), net of taxes $ 53.6 $ -24.9 $ 34.1 
Derivatives Not Designated as Hedging Instruments
The Company enters into foreign currency option and forward contracts with maturity dates less than
twelve months primarily to hedge against value changes in foreign currency. The related gains and
losses are recorded in Other (income) expense - net. See Note 19 for further details.
 83 
The Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures Topic of the ASC applies to the Company’s financial and
non-financial assets and liabilities. The guidance applies when other standards require or permit the
fair value measurement of assets and liabilities. Under the guidance, assets and liabilities measured
at fair value are categorized as follows:
Level 1: Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets
Level 2: Significant other observable inputs
Level 3: Significant unobservable inputs
There were no assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis classified as Level
3 at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. Except for the acquisition-related fair value measurements and
assets held for sale prior to divestiture of the China architectural business described in Note 3 and
the reporting unit impairment analysis and trademark quantitative impairment test described in Note
6, there were no assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis. The following
table summarizes the Company’s assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis,
categorized using the fair value hierarchy.
 Dec… De… Dec… 
 31, 31, 31, 
 2024 20… 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Tot… Le… Lev… To… Lev… Le… Tot… Le… Lev… 
 1 2 1 2 1 2 
 A… 
 D… 
 c… $ 98.6 $ 98… $ — $ 84… $ 84.7 $ 74.1 $ 43… $ 30.4 
 p… 
 Q… 
 r… — — 29.8 29… 
 p… 
 N… 
 i… 48.9 48.9 — 9.1 9.1 
 h… 
 $ 147… $ 98… $ 48.9 $ 84… $ 84.7 $ — $ 113… $ 73… $ 39.5 
 L… 
 N… 
 i… $ — $ 24… $ 24… $ — 
 h… 
The deferred compensation plan assets consist of the investment funds maintained for future payments
under the Company’s executive deferred compensation plans, which are structured as rabbi trusts. The
investments are marketable securities accounted for under the Debt and Equity Securities Topic of the
ASC. The level 1 investments are valued using quoted market prices multiplied by the number of
shares. The level 2 investments are valued based on vendor or broker models. There was $ 7.0million
and $ 6.4million of deferred compensation plan assets held in partnership funds measured using NAV
(or its equivalent) as a practical expedient as of December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. These
investments are not classified in the fair value hierarchy. The cost basis of all investments within
the deferred compensation plan and qualified replacement plan was $ 82.7million, $ 76.3million and $
67.2million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The qualified replacement plan assets consisted of investment funds maintained for future
contributions to the Company’s domestic defined contribution pension plan. See Note 8. During 2023,
the remaining balance was fully utilized to fund the Company’s domestic defined contribution pension
plan. The cost basis of the investment funds was $ 29.8million at December 31, 2022.
The net investment hedge asset and liability represent the fair value of the cross currency swaps.
See Note 16. The fair value is based on a valuation model that uses observable inputs, including
interest rate curves and the euro foreign currency rate.
The carrying amounts reported for Cash and cash equivalents and Short-term borrowings approximate
fair value.
The fair value of the Company’s publicly traded debt is based on quoted market prices. The fair value
of the Company’s non-publicly traded debt is estimated using discounted cash flow analyses, based on
the Company’s current incremental borrowing rates for similar types of borrowing arrangements. The
Company’s publicly traded debt and non-traded debt are classified as level 1 and level 2,
respectively, in the fair value hierarchy. The following table summarizes the carrying amounts and
fair values of the Company’s publicly traded debt and non-traded debt.
 84 
The Company manufactures and sells paint, stains, supplies, equipment and floor covering through
company-operated stores, branded and private label products through retailers and a broad range of
industrial coatings directly to global manufacturing customers through company-operated branches. A
large portion of the Company’s revenue is recognized at a point in time and made to customers who are
not engaged in a long-term supply agreement or any form of contract with the Company. These sales are
paid for at the time of sale in cash, credit card or on account with the vast majority of customers
having terms between 30 and 60 days, not to exceed one year. Many customers who purchase on account
take advantage of early payment discounts offered by paying within 30 days of being invoiced. The
Company estimates variable consideration for these sales on the basis of both historical information
and current trends to estimate the expected amount of discounts to which customers are likely to be
entitled.
The remaining revenue is governed by long-term supply agreements and related purchase orders
(contracts) that specify shipping terms and aspects of the transaction price including rebates,
discounts and other sales incentives, such as advertising support. Contracts are at standalone
pricing. The performance obligation in these contracts is determined by each of the individual
purchase orders and the respective stated quantities, with revenue being recognized at a point in
time when obligations under the terms of the agreement are satisfied. This generally occurs with the
transfer of control of our products to the customer. Sales, value add and other taxes we collect
concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue.
See Note 22 for the Company’s disaggregation of Net sales by Reportable Segment. As the Reportable
Segments are aligned by similar economic factors, trends and customers, this disaggregation best
depicts how the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows are affected by
economic factors. Approximately 80% of the Company’s net external sales are in the Company’s North
America region (which is comprised of the United States, Canada and the Caribbean region), slightly
less than 10% in the EMEAI region (Europe, Middle East, Africa and India), with the remaining global
regions accounting for the residual balance. No individual country outside of the United States is
individually significant.
The Company has made payments or given credits for various incentives at the beginning of a long-term
contract where future revenue is expected and before satisfaction of performance obligations. Under
these circumstances, the Company recognizes a contract asset and amortizes these prepayments over the
expected benefit life of the long-term contract, typically on a straight-line basis.
The majority of variable consideration in the Company’s contracts include volume rebates, discounts
and other incentives, where the customer receives a retrospective percentage rebate based on the
amount of their purchases. In these situations, the rebates are accrued as a fixed percentage of
sales and recorded as a reduction of Net sales until paid to the customer per the terms of the
contract. Forms of variable consideration such as tiered rebates, whereby a customer receives a
retrospective price decrease dependent on the volume of their purchases, are calculated using a
forecasted percentage to determine the most likely amount to accrue. Management creates a baseline
calculation using historical sales and then utilizing forecast information, estimates the anticipated
sales volume each quarter to calculate the expected reduction to Net sales. The remainder of the
transaction price is fixed as agreed upon with the customer, limiting estimation of revenues,
including constraints.
The Company’s Accounts receivable and current and long-term contract assets and liabilities are
summarized in the following table.
 85 
The difference between the opening and closing balances of the Company’s contract assets and contract
liabilities primarily results from the timing difference between the contractual performance
obligation and the associated payment.
Provisions for estimated returns are established and the expected costs continue to be recognized as
contra-revenue per ASC 606 when the products are sold. The Company only offers an assurance type
warranty on products sold, and there is no material service to the customer beyond fixing defects
that existed at the time of sale and no warranties are sold separately.
Warranty liabilities are excluded from the table above. Amounts recognized during the year from
deferred revenue were not material. The Company records a right of return liability within each of
its operations to accrue for expected customer returns. Historical actual returns are used to
estimate future returns as a percentage of current sales. Obligations for returns and refunds were
not material individually or in the aggregate.
Allowance for Current Expected Credit Losses
The following table summarizes the movement in the Company’s allowance for current expected credit
losses:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Beginning balance $ 59.6 $ 56.6 $ 48.9 
 Bad debt expense 69.5 67.9 65.3 
 Uncollectible accounts written off, net -68.7 -64.9 -57.6 
 of recoveries 
 Ending balance $ 60.4 $ 59.6 $ 56.6 
 NOTE 19 – OTHER (INCOME) EXPENSE 
Other General (Income) Expense - Net
Included in Other general (income) expense - net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Provisions for environmental matters - $ -1.3 $ 80.7 $ -7.1 
 net 
 Gain on divestiture of business (see — -20.1 — 
 Note 3) 
 (Gain) loss on sale or disposition of -49.9 0.9 -17.8 
 assets 
 Other 12.4 5.6 — 
 Total $ -38.8 $ 67.1 $ -24.9 
Provisions for environmental matters – net represent initial provisions for site-specific estimated
costs of environmental investigation or remediation and increases or decreases to environmental-
related accruals as information becomes available upon which more accurate costs can be reasonably
estimated and as additional accounting guidelines are issued. Provisions for environmental matters -
net for the year ended December 31, 2024 included an immaterial amount of insurance proceeds related
to environmental cleanup at a current manufacturing site. See Note 10 for further details on the
Company’s environmental-related activities.
The (gain) loss on sale or disposition of assets represents the net realized (gain) loss associated
with the sale or disposal of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets previously used in
the conduct of the primary business of the Company. (Gain) loss on sale or disposition of assets for
the year ended December 31, 2024 included an immaterial amount of insurance proceeds related to a
current manufacturing site.
 86 
Other (Income) Expense - Net
Included in Other (income) expense - net were the following:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investment (gains) losses $ -16.9 $ -22.9 $ 9.7 
 Loss on extinguishment of debt (see Note — 12.8 — 
 7) 
 Net expense from banking activities 15.7 15.0 12.2 
 Foreign currency transaction related 3.9 80.5 33.6 
 losses - net 
 Miscellaneous pension and benefit -13.1 -21.1 4.0 
 (income) expense 
 Other income -69.8 -48.5 -39.6 
 Other expense 35.5 49.7 27.1 
 Total $ -44.7 $ 65.5 $ 47.0 
Investment (gains) losses primarily relate to the change in market value of the investments held in
the deferred compensation plan. See Note 17 for additional information on the fair value of these
investments.
Foreign currency transaction related losses - net include the impact from foreign currency
transactions, including from highly inflationary economies such as Argentina, and net realized losses
from foreign currency option and forward contracts. See Note 16 for further details regarding these
foreign currency contracts.
Miscellaneous pension and benefit (income) expense consists of the non-service components of net
periodic pension and benefit cost (credit). See Note 8.
Other income and other expense included items of revenue, gains, expenses and losses that were
unrelated to the primary business purpose of the Company. There were no items within other income or
other expense that were individually significant at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022.
 NOTE 20 – INCOME TAXES 
Significant components of the provisions for income taxes were as follows:
 Current: 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Federal $ 558.0 $ 553.4 $ 505.5 
 Foreign 155.1 147.6 90.3 
 State and local 132.2 109.0 102.0 
 Total current 845.3 810.0 697.8 
 Deferred: 
 Federal -54.8 -39.9 -81.7 
 Foreign -15.8 -51.5 -47.3 
 State and local -4.3 2.5 -15.8 
 Total deferred -74.9 -88.9 -144.8 
 Total provisions for income taxes $ 770.4 $ 721.1 $ 553.0 
 87 
A reconciliation of the statutory federal income tax rate to the effective tax rate follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 Statutory federal income tax rate 21.0 % 21.0 % 21.0 % 
 Effect of: 
 State and local income taxes 3.2 3.0 2.8 
 Investment vehicles -0.5 -0.5 -0.4 
 Employee share-based payments -2.1 -1.1 -1.4 
 Research and development credits -0.3 -0.4 -0.6 
 Amended returns and refunds -0.2 0.2 0.4 
 Taxes on non-U.S. earnings 1.1 0.8 0.2 
 Other - net 0.1 0.2 -0.5 
 Reported effective tax rate 22.3 % 23.2 % 21.5 % 
The decrease in the effective tax rate for 2024 compared to 2023 was primarily related to a more
favorable impact from tax benefits related to employee share-based payments. The other significant
components of the Company’s effective tax rate were consistent year-over-year.
Significant components of income before income taxes as used for income tax purposes, were as
follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Domestic $ 3,046.6 $ 2,817.0 $ 2,427.6 
 Foreign 405.2 292.9 145.5 
 $ 3,451.8 $ 3,109.9 $ 2,573.1 
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying
amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income
tax purposes using the enacted tax rates and laws that are currently in effect.
Significant components of the Company’s deferred tax assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022 were as follows:
 Deferred tax assets: 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Environmental and other similar items $ 66.8 $ 72.0 $ 66.4 
 Employee related and benefit items 175.2 162.1 157.1 
 Operating lease liabilities 499.6 483.2 478.1 
 Research and development capitalization 103.9 81.5 52.6 
 Other items 206.5 205.6 204.1 
 Total deferred tax assets 1,052.0 1,004.4 958.3 
 Deferred tax liabilities: 
 Intangible assets and Property, plant 948.7 1,001.1 973.4 
 and equipment 
 LIFO inventories 120.5 115.2 97.3 
 Operating lease right-of-use assets 482.1 465.6 460.5 
 Other items 40.7 28.6 31.7 
 Total deferred tax liabilities 1,592.0 1,610.5 1,562.9 
 Net deferred tax liabilities $ 540.0 $ 606.1 $ 604.6 
Netted against the Company’s other deferred tax assets were valuation allowances of $ 124.5million, $
106.6million and $ 97.5million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The Company has $
13.5million of domestic net operating loss carryforwards acquired through acquisitions that have
expiration dates through tax year 2037, foreign tax credits of $ 34.9million that expire in calendar
years 2028 through 2034 and foreign net operating losses of $ 339.1million. The foreign net
 88 
operating losses are related to various jurisdictions that provide for both indefinite carryforward
periods and others with carryforward periods that expire between tax years 2024 to 2034.
The Company and its subsidiaries file income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and various
state and foreign jurisdictions. The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2013 through 2016 income
tax returns in 2023 and paid the related assessments in the fourth quarter of 2023 and first quarter
of 2024. The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2011 income tax return in 2023 and paid the tax
assessment in the second quarter of 2024 and the interest assessment in the third quarter of 2024.
The Company finalized the IRS audit for the 2017 through 2019 income tax returns in the fourth
quarter of 2024 and expects to pay the tax and interest assessment in the first quarter of 2025. The
IRS plans to start its next audit cycle of the Company’s 2020 through 2022 income tax returns in
2025. As of December 31, 2024, the federal statute of limitations has not expired for the 2017
through 2024 tax years.
As of December 31, 2024, the Company is subject to non-U.S. income tax examinations for the tax years
of 2015 through 2024. In addition, the Company is subject to state and local income tax examinations
for the tax years 2017 through 2024.
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at beginning of year $ 121.8 $ 242.4 $ 228.5 
 Additions based on tax positions related 16.0 14.2 18.7 
 to the current year 
 Additions for tax positions of prior 12.8 12.6 10.6 
 years 
 Reductions for tax positions of prior -8.6 -16.9 -6.0 
 years 
 Settlements -31.7 -123.2 -1.7 
 Lapses of statutes of limitations -11.0 -7.3 -7.7 
 Balance at end of year $ 99.3 $ 121.8 $ 242.4 
The decrease in unrecognized tax benefits was primarily related to settlements of federal adjustments
with the IRS in the tax years 2017 through 2019. There were also additions in unrecognized tax
benefits related to the reversal of benefits recognized from certain positions taken on current and
prior year income tax returns filed in U.S. federal and various state jurisdictions. These additions
were partially offset by various positions taken on prior year income tax returns filed in U.S. and
various foreign jurisdictions that were no longer deemed to be at risk. At December 31, 2024, 2023
and 2022, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the
effective tax rate was $ 84.0million, $ 109.4million and $ 230.3million, respectively.
Included in the balance of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2024 is $ 7.9million related to
tax positions for which it is reasonably possible that the total amounts could significantly change
during the next twelve months. This amount represents a decrease in unrecognized tax benefits
comprised primarily of items related to federal audits of partnership investments and expiring
statutes in federal, foreign and state jurisdictions.
The Company classifies all income tax related interest and penalties as income tax expense. During
the year ended December 31, 2024, there was an increase in income tax interest and penalties of $
7.8million. During the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022, there was an increase in income tax
interest and penalties of $ 5.9million and $ 10.3million, respectively. The Company accrued $
18.8million, $ 20.4million and $ 36.6million at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, for
the potential payment of interest and penalties.
 89 
Basic and diluted net income per share are calculated using the treasury stock method.
 Basic 2024 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 2,681.4 $ 2,388.8 $ 2,020.1 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 251.0 255.4 258.0 
 Basic net income per share $ 10.68 $ 9.35 $ 7.83 
 Diluted 
 Net income $ 2,681.4 $ 2,388.8 $ 2,020.1 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 
 assuming dilution: 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 251.0 255.4 258.0 
 Stock options and other contingently 3.1 2.9 3.8 
 issuable shares(1) 
 Weighted average shares outstanding 254.1 258.3 261.8 
 assuming dilution 
 Diluted net income per share $ 10.55 $ 9.25 $ 7.72 
(1) Stock options and other contingently issuable shares excludes 0.9million, 2.8million and
1.9million shares at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, due to their anti-dilutive
effect.
 NOTE 22 – REPORTABLE SEGMENT INFORMATION 
The Company reports its segment information in the same way that management internally organizes its
business for assessing performance and making decisions regarding the allocation of resources in
accordance with the Segment Reporting Topic of the ASC. The Company has threereportable operating
segments: Paint Stores Group, Consumer Brands Group and Performance Coatings Group (individually, a
Reportable Segment and collectively, the Reportable Segments). Factors considered in determining the
threeReportable Segments of the Company include the nature of business activities, the management
structure directly accountable to the Company’s Chief Operating Decision Maker (CODM) for operating
and administrative activities, availability of discrete financial information and information
presented to the Board of Directors. The Company reports all other business activities within the
Administrative function.
The Company’s CODM has been identified as the Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer because
she has the final authority over performance assessment and resource allocation decisions. Because of
the diverse operations of the Company, the CODM regularly receives and uses discrete financial
information about each Reportable Segment as well as select supplemental financial information about
certain divisions, business units or subsidiaries of the Company. The CODM uses all such financial
information for performance assessments and resource allocation decisions. The CODM evaluates the
performance of and allocates resources to the Reportable Segments based on Segment profit or loss,
which represents the segments’ Income before income taxes. The accounting policies of the Reportable
Segments are the same as those described in Note 1.
The Paint Stores Group consisted of 4,773company-operated specialty paint stores in the United
States, Canada and the Caribbean region at December 31, 2024. Each store in this segment is engaged
in servicing the needs of architectural and industrial paint contractors and do-it-yourself
homeowners. These stores market and sell ABC corp. ® and other controlled brand architectural
paint and coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and related products. The
majority of these products are produced by manufacturing facilities in the Consumer Brands Group. In
addition, each store sells select purchased associated products. The loss of any single customer
would not have a material adverse effect on the business of this segment. During 2024, this segment
opened 79net new stores, consisting of 84new stores opened and 5stores closed. In 2023 and 2022, this
segment opened 70and 75net new stores, respectively. In accordance with ASC 280-10-50-9, the Paint
Stores Group as a whole is considered the operating segment, and because it meets the criteria in ASC
280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Consumer Brands Group manufactures and supplies a broad portfolio of branded and private-label
architectural paint, stains, varnishes, industrial products, wood finishes products, wood
preservatives, applicators, corrosion inhibitors, aerosols, caulks and adhesives to retailers,
including home centers and hardware stores, dedicated dealers and distributors throughout North
America, Latin America and Europe. Sales and marketing of certain controlled brand and private-label
products is performed by a direct sales staff. The products distributed through third-party customers
are intended for resale to the ultimate
 90 
end-user of the product. The Consumer Brands Group also consisted of 334company-operated specialty
paint stores in Latin America at December 31, 2024. Each store in this segment is engaged in
servicing the needs of home, commercial and industrial projects to contractors and do-it-yourself
customers in Latin America. These stores market and sell ABC corp. ® and other controlled
brand architectural paint and coatings, protective and marine products, OEM product finishes and
related products which are branded for the Latin America market. In addition, each store sells select
purchased associated products. The Consumer Brands Group had sales to certain customers that,
individually, may be a significant portion of the sales and related profitability of the segment.
During 2024, the segment opened 16net new stores, consisting of 18stores opened and 2stores closed.
In 2023 and 2022, this segment opened (closed) 11and ( 3) net new stores, respectively.
The Consumer Brands Group also supports the Company’s other businesses around the world with new
product research and development, manufacturing, distribution and logistics. Approximately 63% of the
total sales of the Consumer Brands Group in 2024 were intersegment transfers of products primarily
sold through the Paint Stores Group. This segment incurred most of the Company’s capital expenditures
related to ongoing environmental compliance measures, manufacturing capacity expansion, operational
efficiencies and maintenance projects at sites currently in operation. In accordance with ASC
280-10-50-9, the Consumer Brands Group as a whole is considered the operating segment, and because it
meets the criteria in ASC 280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Performance Coatings Group develops and sells industrial coatings for wood finishing and general
industrial (metal and plastic) applications, automotive refinish, protective and marine coatings,
coil coatings, packaging coatings and performance-based resins and colorants worldwide. This segment
licenses certain technology and trade names worldwide, including ABC corp. ® and other
controlled brand products which are distributed through the Paint Stores Group, this segment’s
324company-operated branches and by a direct sales staff and outside sales representatives to
retailers, dealers, jobbers, licensees and other third-party distributors. The Performance Coatings
Group had sales to certain customers that, individually, may be a significant portion of the sales of
the segment. However, the loss of any single customer would not have a material adverse effect on the
overall profitability of the segment. During 2024, the segment added 2new branches ( nobranches were
closed). In 2023 and 2022, this segment added 5and 35net new branches, respectively. In accordance
with ASC 280-10-50-9, the Performance Coatings Group as a whole is considered the operating segment,
and because it meets the criteria in ASC 280-10-50-10, it is also considered a Reportable Segment.
The Administrative function includes the administrative expenses and assets of the Company’s new
global headquarters and research and development center, both currently under construction. In
addition, it includes the operations of a real estate management unit that is responsible for the
ownership, management and leasing of non-retail properties held primarily for use by the Company,
including the Company’s current global headquarters and research and development center and disposal
of idle facilities. The Administrative function’s remaining assets consist primarily of cash and cash
equivalents, investments and deferred pension assets. Also included in the Administrative function
was interest expense, interest and investment income, certain expenses related to closed facilities
and environmental-related matters and other expenses that were not directly associated with the
Reportable Segments. Sales of this function represented external leasing revenue. The Administrative
function did not include any significant foreign operations. Gains and losses from the sale of
property were not a significant operating factor in determining the performance of the Administrative
function.
Net external sales of all consolidated foreign subsidiaries were $ 4.426billion, $ 4.428billion and $
4.294billion for 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Long-lived assets consisted of Property, plant and equipment, net, Goodwill, Intangible assets, net,
Operating lease right-of-use assets, deferred pension assets and Other assets. The aggregate total of
long-lived assets for the Company was $ 18.231billion, $ 17.441billion and $ 16.686billion at
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Long-lived assets of consolidated foreign
subsidiaries totaled $ 3.405billion, $ 3.586billion and $ 3.369billion at December 31, 2024, 2023 and
2022, respectively.
Total Assets of the Company were $ 23.633billion, $ 22.954billion and $ 22.594billion at December 31,
2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Total assets of consolidated foreign subsidiaries were $
5.208billion, $ 5.718billion and $ 5.337billion, which represented 22.0%, 24.9% and 23.6% of the
Company’s total assets at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
No single geographic area outside the United States was significant relative to consolidated Net
sales or consolidated long-lived assets. Export sales and sales to any individual customer were each
less than 10 percent of consolidated sales to unaffiliated customers during all years presented.
In the reportable segment financial information that follows, Segment profit represents each
segment’s Income before income taxes. Domestic intersegment transfers are primarily accounted for at
the approximate fully absorbed manufactured cost, based on normal capacity volumes, plus customary
distribution costs for paint products. Non-paint domestic and all international intersegment
transfers are primarily accounted for at values comparable to normal unaffiliated customer sales. All
intersegment
 91 
transfers are eliminated within the Administrative function. In 2023, the absorbed manufactured cost
standards utilized for domestic intersegment transfers were established inclusive of forecasted cost
reductions from planned initiatives. Deviations from the forecasted cost reductions were recognized
within the Consumer Brands Group. Due to the nature of the Company’s integrated manufacturing
operations and centralized administrative and information technology support, a substantial amount of
allocations are made to determine segment financial information. Expenses that are specifically
identifiable to a certain Reportable Segment are allocated accordingly. For expenses that are not
specifically identifiable to a certain Reportable Segment, an appropriate allocation base is
identified, and expenses are allocated based on each segment’s respective share of the allocation
base. The significant expense categories and amounts align with the segment-level information that is
regularly provided to the CODM and include intersegment expenses within the amounts shown.
Identifiable assets were those directly identified with each Reportable Segment.
 2024 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Consol… 
 Group Group Group Adminis… Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net $ 13,188.0 $ 3,108.0 $ 6,797.3 $ 5.2 $ 23,098… 
 sales 
 Inters… — 5,304.3 56.8 -5,361.1 — 
 transf… 
 Total 
 net 
 sales $ 13,188.0 $ 8,412.3 $ 6,854.1 $ -5,355.9 $ 23,098… 
 and 
 inters… 
 transf… 
 Cost of 
 goods $ 5,900.8 $ 6,943.5 $ 4,406.5 $ -5,347.4 $ 11,903… 
 sold 
 Sellin… 
 general 
 and 4,405.6 863.1 1,443.0 710.4 7,422.1 
 admini… 
 expens… 
 Intere… — 1.4 — 414.3 415.7 
 expense 
 Other 
 segment -21.0 14.4 -23.3 -64.6 -94.5 
 items(… 
 Income 
 before $ 2,902.6 $ 589.9 $ 1,027.9 $ -1,068.6 $ 3,451.8 
 income 
 taxes 
 % to 
 Net 22.0 % 19.0 % 15.1 % nm 14.9 % 
 sales 
 Supple… 
 Inform… 
 Identi… $ 5,878.0 $ 6,854.7 $ 7,847.4 $ 3,052.5 $ 23,632… 
 assets 
 Capital 141.3 290.3 15.2 623.2 1,070.0 
 expend… 
 Deprec… 89.9 162.7 18.0 26.8 297.4 
 Amorti… 1.7 66.4 256.7 1.8 326.6 
 nm - 
 not 
 meanin… 
(1) Other segment items includes Other general (income) expense - net, Interest income and Other
(income) expense - net. See Note 19.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 92 
and Other (income) expense - net. See Notes 3 and 6 for information on Impairment and Note 19 for
information on Other general (income) expense - net and Other (income) expense - net.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 2022 
 Paint Consumer Perform… 
 Stores Brands Coatings Consol… 
 Group Group Group Adminis… Totals 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net $ 11,963.3 $ 3,388.4 $ 6,793.5 $ 3.7 $ 22,148… 
 sales 
 Inters… — 5,214.8 203.7 -5,418.5 — 
 transf… 
 Total 
 net 
 sales $ 11,963.3 $ 8,603.2 $ 6,997.2 $ -5,414.8 $ 22,148… 
 and 
 inters… 
 transf… 
 Cost of 
 goods $ 5,826.8 $ 7,454.8 $ 4,965.4 $ -5,423.2 $ 12,823… 
 sold 
 Sellin… 
 general 
 and 3,810.1 817.8 1,275.6 428.1 6,331.6 
 admini… 
 expens… 
 Intere… — — — 390.8 390.8 
 expense 
 Other 
 segment -21.7 16.4 21.3 13.6 29.6 
 items(… 
 Income 
 before $ 2,348.1 $ 314.2 $ 734.9 $ -824.1 $ 2,573.1 
 income 
 taxes 
 % to 
 Net 19.6 % 9.3 % 10.8 % nm 11.6 % 
 sales 
 Supple… 
 Inform… 
 Identi… $ 5,873.6 $ 6,749.6 $ 8,296.8 $ 1,674.0 $ 22,594… 
 assets 
 Capital 87.3 295.0 38.7 223.5 644.5 
 expend… 
 Deprec… 73.9 126.2 29.1 34.8 264.0 
 Amorti… 3.3 79.8 232.0 2.0 317.1 
 nm - 
 not 
 meanin… 
(1) Other segment items includes Other general (income) expense - net, Impairment, Interest income
and Other (income) expense - net. See Note 6 for information on Impairment and Note 19 for
information on Other general (income) expense - net and Other (income) expense - net.
(2) Depreciation is recorded within Cost of goods sold and Selling, general and administrative
expenses.
(3) Amortization is recorded within Selling, general and administrative expenses.
 93 
None.
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
As of the end of the period covered by this report, we carried out an evaluation, under the
supervision and with the participation of our Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer and our
Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure
controls and procedures pursuant to Rule 13a-15 and Rule 15d-15 of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended (Exchange Act). Based upon that evaluation, our Chair, President and Chief Executive
Officer and our Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer concluded that as of the
end of the period covered by this report, our disclosure controls and procedures were effective to
ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in reports we file or submit under the
Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in
Securities and Exchange Commission rules and forms, and accumulated and communicated to our
management, including our Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer and our Senior Vice President
– Finance and Chief Financial Officer, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
The “Report of Management on Internal Control over Financial Reporting” and the “Report of the
Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Internal Control over Financial Reporting” are set
forth in Item 8.
There have been no changes in our internal control over financial reporting identified in connection
with the evaluation that occurred during the period covered by this report that have materially
affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial
reporting.
Trading Arrangements
During the quarter ended December 31, 2024, none of the Company’s directors or “officers,” as defined
in Rule 16a-1(f) of the Exchange Act, adopted, modified, or terminateda “Rule 10b5-1 trading
arrangement” or a “non-Rule 10b5-1 trading arrangement,” as each term is defined in Item 408 of
Regulation S-K.
Not applicable.
 94 
Directors
The information regarding our directors and director nominees is set forth in our Proxy Statement
under the caption “Proposal 1 – Election of 9 Directors” and is incorporated herein by reference.
There have been no material changes to the procedures by which security holders may recommend
nominees to our Board of Directors. Please refer to the information set forth in our Proxy Statement
under the caption “Board Committees,” which is incorporated herein by reference.
Executive Officers
The information regarding our executive officers is set forth under the caption “Information About
Our Executive Officers” in Part I of this report, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
To the extent disclosure of any delinquent form under Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 is made by the Company, such disclosure will be set forth in our Proxy Statement under the
caption “Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports” and is incorporated herein by reference.
Audit Committee
The information regarding the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors and audit committee financial
experts is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Board Committees” and is incorporated
herein by reference.
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a Code of Conduct, which applies to all directors, officers and employees, including
our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or
controller and persons performing similar functions, of ABC corp. and our subsidiaries
wherever located. Our Code of Conduct contains the general guidelines and principles for conducting
ABC corp.’ business consistent with the highest standards of business ethics.
We have also adopted a Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management, pursuant to which our chief
executive officer, chief financial officer and senior financial management are responsible for
creating and maintaining a culture of high ethical standards and of commitment to compliance
throughout our Company to ensure the fair and timely reporting of ABC corp.’ financial results
and condition. Senior financial management includes the controller, the treasurer, the principal
financial/accounting personnel in our operating groups and divisions and all other
financial/accounting personnel within our corporate departments and operating groups and divisions
with staff supervision responsibilities.
Our Code of Conduct and Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management are available on our Investor
Relations website, investors.sherwin.com.
We intend to disclose on our Investor Relations website, investors.sherwin.com, any amendment to, or
waiver from, a provision of our Code of Conduct or Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Management
that applies to our directors and executive officers, including our principal executive officer,
principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller or any persons performing
similar functions, and that is required to be publicly disclosed pursuant to the rules of the SEC.
Insider Trading Policy
The information regarding our Insider Trading Policy is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the
caption “Insider Trading Policy” and is incorporated herein by reference. A copy of our Insider
Trading Policy is filed with this Annual Report on Form 10-K as Exhibit 19.
 95 
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the captions “2024
Director Compensation Table,” “Director Compensation Program,” “Executive Compensation,” “Executive
Compensation Tables” and “2024 CEO Pay Ratio” and is incorporatedherein by reference (other than the
Compensation Committee Report, which will be deemed furnished).
The information regarding security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management is set forth
in our Proxy Statement under the captions “Security Ownership of Management, Directors and Director
Nominees” and “Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners” and is incorporated herein by
reference.
The information regarding securities authorized for issuance under the Company’s equity compensation
plans is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Equity Compensation Plan Information”
and is incorporated herein by reference.
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the captions “Certain
Relationships and Transactions with Related Persons” and “Director Independence” and is incorporated
herein by reference.
The information required by this item is set forth in our Proxy Statement under the caption “Matters
Relating to the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm” and is incorporated herein by
reference.
 96 
Schedule II — Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves for the years ended December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022 is set forth below. All other schedules for which provision is made in the applicable
SEC accounting regulations are not required under the related instructions or are inapplicable and
therefore have been omitted.
Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves
(Schedule II)
Changes in deferred tax asset valuation allowances were as follows:
 (millions of dollars) 2024 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Beginning balance $ 106.6 $ 97.5 $ 97.2 
 Additions (deductions)(1) 17.9 9.1 0.3 
 Ending balance $ 124.5 $ 106.6 $ 97.5 
(1) Additions (deductions) did not have a material impact on the Income Statement in 2024, 2023 or
2022.
 97 
(3) Exhibits
 Amended and Restated Articles of 
 Incorporation of the Company, as 
 amended through February 18, 2015, 
 filed as Exhibit 3 to the Company’s 
 Current Report on Form 8-K dated 
 February 18, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Amendment to the Amended and Restated 
 Articles of Incorporation of the 
 Company, as amended through February 
 18, 2015, filed as Exhibit 3.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 3.1 dated March 3, 2021, and incorporated 
 3.2 herein by reference. 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Regulations of the Company (As Amended 
 and Restated July 19, 2023), filed as 
 3.3 Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s Current 
 Report on Form 8-K dated July 18, 2023, 
 and incorporated herein by reference. 
 Description of Securities Registered 
 under Section 12 of the Securities 
 Exchange Act of 1934 filed as Exhibit 
 4.1 4(a) to the Company’s Annual Report on 
 Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended 
 December 31, 2021, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Indenture between the Company and The 
 Bank of New York Mellon (as successor 
 to Chemical Bank), as trustee, dated as 
 4.2 of February 1, 1996, filed as Exhibit  
 4(a) to Form S-3 Registration Statement 
 Number 333-01093 dated February 20, 
 1996, and incorporated herein by 
 reference. 
 Third Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and The Bank of New 
 York Mellon, as trustee (including Form 
 4.2.1 of Note), dated as of December 7, 2012, 
 filed as Exhibit 4.2 to the Company’s 
 Current Report on Form 8-K dated 
 December 4, 2012, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Indenture by and between the Company 
 and Wells Fargo Bank, National 
 Association, as trustee, dated July 31, 
 4.3 2015, filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 First Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.1 dated July 31, 2015, (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.2 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Second Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.2 dated July 31, 2015, (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.3 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated July 28, 2015, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Sixth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.3 dated May 16, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.4 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated May 16, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Seventh Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.4 dated May 16, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.5 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated May 16, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Eleventh Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.5 dated June 2, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.4 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated June 2, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Twelfth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.6 dated June 2, 2017 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.5 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated June 2, 2017, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 Thirteenth Supplemental Indenture by and 
 between the Company and Wells Fargo 
 Bank, National Association, as trustee, 
 4.3.7 dated August 26, 2019 (including Form of 
 Note), filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the 
 Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
 dated August 26, 2019, and incorporated 
 herein by reference. 
 98 
None.
 104 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the
Company has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized, on February 20, 2025.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated on
February 20, 2025.
 THE ABC corp. COMPANY 
 By: /S/ MARY L. GARCEAU 
 Mary L. Garceau, Secretary 
 * HEIDI G. PETZ Chair, President and Chief Executive Officer, Director 
 (Principal Executive Officer) 
 Heidi G. Petz 
 * ALLEN J. MISTYSYN Senior Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial Officer (Principal 
 Financial Officer) 
 Allen J. Mistysyn 
 * J. PAUL LANG Senior Vice President – Enterprise Finance and Chief Accounting Officer 
 (Principal Accounting Officer) 
 J. Paul Lang 
 * KERRII B. ANDERSON Director 
 Kerrii B. Anderson 
 * ARTHUR F. ANTON Director 
 Arthur F. Anton 
 * JEFF M. FETTIG Director 
 Jeff M. Fettig 
 * JOHN G. MORIKIS Director 
 John G. Morikis 
 * CHRISTINE A. POON Director 
 Christine A. Poon 
 * AARON M. POWELL Director 
 Aaron M. Powell 
 * MARTA R. STEWART Director 
 Marta R. Stewart 
 * MICHAEL H. THAMAN Director 
 Michael H. Thaman 
 * MATTHEW THORNTON III Director 
 Matthew Thornton III 
 * THOMAS L. WILLIAMS Director 
 Thomas L. Williams 
 The undersigned, by signing her name hereto, does sign this report on behalf of the 
 * designated officers and directors of the Company pursuant to powers of attorney executed on 
 behalf of each such officer and director and filed as an exhibit to this report. 
 February 20, 
 By: /S/ MARY L. GARCEAU 2025 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Mary L. Garceau, Attorney-in-fact 
 105
<|endoftext|>
