Description
Business Summary:
This seems somewhat self-explanatory, but Costco Wholesale Corporation (NASDAQ: COST) is a membership-based warehouse club that operates over 890 locations worldwide, primarily in the United States (616), Canada (109), and Mexico (41). The company offers a limited selection of nationally branded and private-label products across a wide range of categories, including groceries, appliances, electronics, apparel, and household goods. Costco’s business model emphasizes high sales volumes and rapid inventory turnover. Revenue is primarily generated through merchandise sales, while a significant portion of operating income comes from annual membership fees. The company also operates e-commerce platforms in several countries and provides ancillary services such as pharmacy, optical, and fuel.
Thesis Summary:
Costco is no doubt a quality business. However, I believe the market has become overly enamored with its business model in recent years, as it has benefited from some tailwinds that are now reversing. This has caused the P/E multiple to expand 15x to 20x above its historical average (from a historical P/E of 30x–35x to 50x currently). I believe the market is not properly assessing the risks to sales and margins as these tailwinds potentially reverse. As they do, there is downside risk to both earnings and the multiple.
If the company misses earnings, as I expect over the next year, I see 40% to 60% downside to the share price as the multiple reverts to reality and earnings expectations are reduced. At the same time, Costco would need to grow earnings at 10% per year for the next five years for it to trade at 32x, which is in line with its historical multiple. Thus, an investor would earn zero nominal return over the next five years if the stock grows earnings as analysts currently expect, and it reverts to its historical average multiple at the end of that period.
Key Points:
Costco caters to the affluent consumer ($100k to $150k average income), and the environment has been excellent for that demographic over the last couple of years. A booming stock market and significant fiscal stimulus, along with strong jobs, have been great for these customers. Over the last month, sentiment among consumers—particularly affluent consumers—has declined materially. I expect this to be a headwind for sales broadly, though the market seems to think Costco is immune to any economic impact.
The perception is that Costco sells staples and is therefore recession-proof. However, I believe this perception is somewhat incorrect, as a significant percentage of its sales are higher-ticket discretionary items, including TVs, home appliances, and other seasonal items. While the company does not disclose the exact breakdown of higher-ticket items versus lower-ticket consumables, I believe they represent at least 25% of sales and likely a higher percentage of gross profits. I believe that sales across all categories will come under pressure as job losses and stock market losses take hold, but discretionary categories will be hit in a more significant way, which will affect both sales and margins.
I estimate that 20% to 25% of sales are to businesses. I believe that commercial food consumption is likely under cyclical pressure, which could reduce sales to this channel. We’ve seen a number of data points indicating that commercial food purchases are under pressure recently.
Over 10% of sales are in Canada, where consumers may be boycotting American brands due to hostility from Trump. This is the highest exposure to Canada of any major U.S. big-box retailer. There are some signs on social media and elsewhere that Canadian consumers are going to Costco less frequently.
Costco sales have likely benefited from gold bar sales to the tune of 1% to 2%. Based on Google search trends, sales of gold at Costco increased materially last year, but the company should start to lap the step-up in gold bar sales in the second half of this year. Of course, this is somewhat dependent on your view of gold prices and macro demand for gold bars. Either way, I see this as a lower-quality, cyclical stream of sales and earnings.
It is worth noting that Costco is currently the largest constituent in the XLP (Consumer Staples Index), with a 10% weighting. As investors have been mindlessly piling into defensive stocks in recent weeks, I think the divergence between perception and reality sets up a potentially nasty negative surprise.
Summary:
There are a handful of potential cracks emerging in the Costco earnings story. Any one of them on its own might not make a compelling short case, but I believe collectively they can add up to something material and cause the company’s earnings to disappoint, at least modestly. As that happens, I expect the multiple to correct to at or below historical norms. A 30x to 35x P/E is still an extremely high multiple for a mature big-box retailer, so while my price target may seem surprising to those anchored to where the stock currently trades, it seems reasonable—perhaps even generous—in my view.
<|endoftext|>
