Pinduoduo Inc Thesis
Background
Greatest disruptor in e-commerce
PDD has an amazing growth story. It’s the fastest company in the world to pass $100b market cap. It took Microsoft 25 years, Google and Facebook more than 12 years, and even for their closest competitor Alibaba, it took 14 years. PDD entered into the Chinese e-commerce industry when it’s very mature and highly competitive. From 2018 (IPO) to 2023, GMV market share almost quadrupled from 5.9% to 19.6% to overtake JD and reach parity with Taobao this year (to overtake Taobao in 2024). Number of active buyers exceeded JD in 2019 and reached parity with the combined Tmall and Taobao in 2022. Even after attaining 20% GMV market share, it still managed to grow revenue by 63% YoY in 1H23, driven by both GMV growth and increase in take-rates, when BABA and JD only grew by 8.0% and 4.7% respectively. PDD is one of the greatest disruption stories in the global e-commerce industry.
Tipping point in re-rating
As a NASDAQ-listed company, PDD is in an awkward position as Western investors have always found it elusive and difficult to understand, partly because the PDD model doesn’t exist outside China. However, investors’ conviction in the company is starting to change since it started turning profitable since 2Q21. Critics are overturned as the company not only proves it can achieve profitability, but management’s assertion during IPO that there are significant scale economies from a very lean labor force has been proven true.
EBIT margin expanded from 8.7% in 2Q21 to its peak of 29.7% in 3Q22, before falling to 24.3% in 2Q23, due to the launch of Temu. The idea that the business model is unsustainable as it grows from giving massive consumer subsidies has been shattered – Opex ratio halved from 70% in 1Q21 to 39.9% despite large Temu’s losses in 2Q23. 2Q23 is a unique data point as PDD maintained its EBIT margin at 24.3% vs 27.7% last year, due to operating leverage, despite large Temu’s fulfillment costs in the quarter which reduced GPM by 10%.
High-quality earnings growth drives re-rating
As a recap of its historical share price. PDD’s share price peaked at $196 in Feb-21 on euphoria that PDD is emerging as the leader in the fast growth community group purchase model with only DDG and Meituan staying in the race. That quickly turned sour as 1Q21 showed a major decline in GPM by 20.5% due to investments in cold chain logistics; operating loss doubled sequentially from RMB 2b to 4b. However, 2Q21 saw its maiden profit and PDD’s share price recovered from $84 to $104 post-results. This again didn’t last as management mentioned in the earnings call that the positive EBIT may not be sustained due to future investment in AgriTech as part of the RMB 10b agriculture subsidy program. 2H21 was also the period of the second tech crackdown. As a result, the agriculture subsidy program and the tech crackdown plunged the share price down to $32 by Mar-22. However, all these share price volatility obscures the fact that PDD has been consecutively profitable since 2Q21, though EBIT margin did slip in one of the quarters in 1Q22 to HSD from higher investment in S&M and fulfillment costs. Share price has been on an upward trend since March-22 due to strong revenue growth every quarter of 36-66% YoY while maintaining high EBIT margin of 20-30%. Therefore, it is clear that the market is re-rating PDD due to high-quality earnings growth.
Different stages of Chinese E-commerce
There is an important shift in the stages of Chinese e-commerce which benefitted PDD:
Traditional marketplace for resellers
From 2009 to 2015, the traditional e-commerce marketplace was dominant, one where merchants were mainly resellers. They simply needed to take good photos, be the first to list products in each category niche and bid up for advertising keywords. Consumers experience e-commerce through search as they brought over their habits from the web to mobile. It was during this time when JD tried to differentiate from BABA through better fulfillment and aftersales service, product quality, and later extending that from 3C to other categories.
Shift towards a brands platform
From 2018-2022, Taobao started shifting traffic towards Tmall and the monetization model changed from earnings advertising revenue from small merchants towards earning commission from brands. Many smaller merchants were also displaced as livestreaming plays a bigger role in traffic allocation; livestreaming operations require a lot of resources and expertise to build an engaging online shop. Livestreaming in this era was dominated by mega influencers like Viva and Lipstick King. This model continues to allocate traffic based on keyword search, but to brand stores, rather than to specific products.
Birth of social commerce
While the e-commerce landscape was mature, there remained a large untapped demand, developed logistics infrastructure, and strong supply chain interest to work with e-commerce platforms to offload excess capacity. PDD was conceived in 2016 when Colin Huang observed that while mobile penetration is approaching 1 billion users on WeChat, only 500m are e-commerce users. The remaining 500m dwelled in lower tier cities and were left out as they have different purchasing power, needs and social habits. In contrast, Taobao has penetration as low as 1% in some of China’s smaller cities. Initially, PDD cleverly targeted housewives in lower-tier cities who had spare time, in charge of household budgets, and had social bonds to share deals through WeChat. These housewives were proactive in initiating group purchases, creating a strong “sales team” for PDD. This model allocates traffic based on products rather than brand stores. By focusing on products, viral hits are more likely on the platform as demand is driven bottom-up (C2M) and prices are much cheaper by cutting out the middlemen. Product iteration is faster than brands.
Birth of content commerce
Since 2020, short video platforms started to focus on e-commerce. These platforms started from content creators and advertising, then moved towards e-commerce through livestreaming. Similar to PDD, content commerce generate viral hits through engagement with users. They were so successful in engagement that they created records for long user time spent and high ad loads. They provide top-of-funnel reach for big brands through livestreaming events, and users view these events at a much higher frequency than on traditional e-commerce due to the entertainment nature. As a result, Douyin has recently displaced Taobao’s livestreaming GMV despite being a late entrant.
The downside of content commerce livestreaming is that they remain mostly as top-of-funnel channel. They have limited private domain traffic, force big brands to discount 40-50% in livestreaming events, and are limited in product variety and merchant variety. In terms of product category, Douyin and Kuaishou’s GMV are very heavy in apparel sales at 43% and 34% respectively vs BABA at 15%. Douyin’s traffic heavily leans towards top influencers, and big marketing budgets are required for these livestreaming events. Most brands earn zero to negative ROI on these livestreaming events due to the heavy costs. Short video platforms created a new way for brands to reach users through interest-based commerce. However, this strategy is mostly top-of-funnel reach and appears to have more success with advertising revenue (>50% of advertising revenue is generated from e-commerce), rather than repeat sales in e-commerce. As a result, they are transitioning towards shelf-based commerce to increase purchase frequency. Live streaming is used as an engagement tool and TikTok Shop is created as an online marketplace.
Yet there remains a lack of user trust in the platform, poor fulfillment, aftersales service, lack of integrated payments system etc. Data from interest-based short video feeds also limit the potential for product cross-selling. Unlike PDD which strictly enforces private domain traffic to remain on the platform, ie. merchants are not allowed to give out their WeChat IDs, most of the e-commerce generated from ads on short video platforms lead to landing pages outside the ecosystem. We understand a good portion of Douyin’s fulfillment and transaction also go through PDD.
Between the two, Kuaishou has the biggest potential for shelf-based commerce, due to its value proposition built on social bonds and community trust. In 3Q23, only 20% of GMV is generated from shelf-based commerce (Kuai Shop), implying that 80% of GMV comes from one-off livestreaming events.
This is different from PDD where its ecosystem created two mutually reinforcing cycles to sustain GMV growth. As top-of-funnel channels, short video platforms are likely to remain niche players in e-commerce. Douyin and Kuaishou have 8.2% and 5.2% GMV share, against PDD with 20% and BABA with 40%.
PDD’s growth trajectory in next few years
Harvesting phase of growth
Our thesis concludes that PDD is currently in the harvesting phase of growth, where spend required to drive growth is only incremental. As mentioned, PDD’s opex ratio halved from 70% in 1Q21 to 39.9% in 2Q23, while revenue has grown 120% over the period.
GMV growth to come from frequency rather than AOV
On the other hand, the number of active buyers for BABA and JD have peaked as the number of Chinese e-commerce users reached 1 billion. This means GMV growth can only come from an increase in annual spend per active buyer. All three e-commerce companies have proven this is driven almost entirely from an increase in frequency of orders per buyer, rather than an increase in average order value (AOV). AOV stagnated partly because consumer preference and habits are formed for each platform, which limits cross-selling into new product categories to increase AOV.
PDD’s business model is designed to drive frequency
PDD’s entire business model has been designed to drive frequency of orders. Its annual frequency of order per buyer has grown at an astonishing rate from 17.5x in FY17 to 115.1x in FY23, almost one purchase in every three days! In comparison, BABA has an annual frequency of 52x and JD at 14.1x last year. The vast disparity in frequency makes it very difficult for peers to catch up, because users rarely open their apps which makes it harder to incentivize them to purchase more (except for Singles Day) and cross-sell into new product categories. Their relatively low frequency also reflects that buyers shop with intent, rather than the browsing habit that’s driving Douyin’s high ad load and PDD’s order frequency. PDD also has an equal mix across multiple large product categories which have high frequency of purchase, namely apparel, FMCG and household daily goods, and agriculture produce and groceries. Every other e-commerce retailer is overweight on one or two product categories, making it hard to cross-sell and increase frequency of purchase. As a result of growing frequency, annual spend per active buyer has grown significantly for PDD from USD 82 in FY17 to USD 618 in FY23, whereas BABA has stagnated at USD 1,185 in FY17 to USD 1,115 in FY23, and JD grew marginally from USD 443 in FY17 to USD 584 in FY23.
Growth in annual spend per buyer stimulates higher merchant ad take-rate
Importantly, growth of annual spend per buyer is one of the important drivers to stimulate an increase in merchant marketing revenue with the platform. We will discuss more on why PDD’s advertising take-rate will exceed BABA in the later section.
What has changed?
Given nine consecutive quarters of profitability, PDD is no longer viewed as an unsustainable business model. In fact, PDD’s main app non-GAAP EBIT margin is estimated in the mid-to-high 50s (2Q23 company EBIT margin at 24.3% includes DDG & Temu’s losses), higher than BABA which peaked at 30.9% EBIT margin in FY17 and has come down to 15% in 3Q23. DDG is known to breakeven this year and turn profitable next year.
And while Temu was launched in Jul-22 and remains in the investing phase, 2Q23 showed that a 10% decline in GPM can be mitigated by 7% reduction in Opex ratio, due to operating leverage in the main app business and DDG, resulting in only 3.3% decline in EBIT margin. Temu’s losses are estimated at around 40% of PDD’s non-GAAP EBIT and will maintain at this level for the next two years. This is helped by a focus on Temu’s operational efficiency, namely in customer acquisition cost (CAC), fulfillment cost, and expanding GPM through increasing AOV. For Temu, PDD has copied the same approach it has previously used for DDG: ‘subsidize aggressively in the first stage, cutting operating and customer acquisition costs in the later stage, eventually achieve profitability’. PDD even transferred a lot of staff from DDG to Temu, including Gu Ping Ping, the architect behind PDD’s original business model. We are very conservative in our assumptions for Temu’s losses. Should Temu reach breakeven by FY25 as some sell-side analysts believe (PDD has a similar philosophy like Bytedance to turn a new business profitable in 3 years), we could see tremendous earnings growth surprise due to Temu’s loss currently at c.40% of PDD’s EBIT.
There was a common misconception in the past that PDD was unsustainable as its low prices are only possible from heavy platform subsidies. Or that BABA and JD could easily disrupt its growth by going into a price competition. On the contrary, PDD has attained a high EBIT margin due to various unique business model features working together to create a low-cost structure and drive fast-growing annual spend per buyer, which in turn spurs advertising revenue growth. Given that e-commerce user penetration in China reached 1 billion (PDD’s active buyer has grown to 900m) from 500 million when PDD was started in 2017, it’s no surprise that PDD’s customer acquisition cost has come down significantly. Instead, S&M expense is now focused on driving GMV growth and higher take-rates, where PDD has seen increasing marketing efficiency whereas BABA has seen declining efficiency and JD has remained stagnant.
This drives back to the point. Firstly, GMV growth in China will be driven by frequency rather than AOV, where PDD’s business model has a significant advantage. Secondly, as e-commerce has reached maturity, user perception of the various platforms is mostly fixed, and it is very difficult to drive a different brand message. Thirdly, the fact that BABA and JD’s GMV lean heavily in a single category whereas PDD is equal weighted across 3 large categories helps PDD to drive frequency in cross-category purchase.
Fourthly, one must remember that PDD’s offerings are everyday low-priced vs BABA and JD which focus heavily on major events like Singles Day. This means that the incompatibility of the sales models makes it very difficult for competitors to offer the same value proposition as PDD. In fact, when JD announced its RMB 10b subsidy to rival PDD in March 2023, it’s very limited in SKUs and product categories.
Investment Thesis
Unique business model design
PDD’s unique business model design from Day One makes it difficult for Taobao or other competitors to emulate. There are two virtuous cycles, for both the consumer and the manufacturer:
On the consumer side, it’s the unique combination of social commerce, algorithm-feeds & gamification. This promote browsing habit, aggregates demand quickly, and creates social graph data. The high frequency that users purchase on the platform and average daily user time at 20 mins show that users are highly engaged on the platform.
On the supply side, it’s the focus on OEM factories, C2M, high frequency product categories and high operating leverage. This allows it to offer extremely low prices, fast product iteration and diversity in product offerings. This is similar to Shein’s powerful supply chain moat which uses a “small order quick response” system, where more than 2,000 designs from suppliers are launched every day, providing an enormous A-B testing, followed by sharing the data with suppliers through a linked IT system with the supplier’s backend.
As a result, the price savings to consumers go to the extent that if a product sells for RMB 29 on Taobao, it can be sold at RMB 9.9 on PDD. The cost savings go even further when compared to international e-commerce. A closely similar organizer bag can retail for 44 Euros on Amazon, 27 Euros on Shein, 20 Euros on Temu and only 3 Euros on PDD main app.
Viral hit products
PDD is popular with OEMs because it helps them to achieve viral hit products called “爆款”. It has very granular data on the purchasing behavior of social groups:
One reason for Pinduoduo’s high order volume is that it puts low-priced and high-quality products in front of these consumers, allowing them to get together with people with similar consumption levels, similar needs and aesthetic preferences to buy in groups. In turn, that provides insurance to OEMs to produce in bulk and focus on only 2-3 SKUs, giving them greater economies of scale which is passed back to consumers to drive even higher volumes.
The group buying function alone is rather easy to imitate. JD also enjoys the multi-level access from WeChat and API access to WePay’s data. In fact, JD started its group buying in 2016 and offered the same service levels as its main app. Taobao Special Deals was also launched in March 2017. But they never came close to PDD’s success. The primary reason is that their listings are highly curated and incurred an additional layer of cost to the platform, on top of the fulfillment cost and high customer acquisition cost. JD’s group buying deals were priced at only 10-20% cheaper than individual deals compared to PDD at 50% cheaper. They failed because the audience wasn’t large enough to aggregate demand effectively.
PDD’s supplier curation mechanism is a lot more bottom-up. There are consumer and IP protection measures such as a 10x penalty on merchants found guilty of selling counterfeit goods. However, the main mechanism comes from the social graph data and algorithms which allocate traffic to OEMs who have demonstrated consistency to win demand and receive good consumer feedback. Over time, PDD’s supply chain has gone through many rounds of iteration which competitors couldn’t imitate. The number of OEMs on PDD has grown at a fast pace from 3.6m in FY17 to 13m in FY22 to exceed Taobao with 10m merchant. PDD’s GMV per merchant continues growing at 10% CAGR in recent years and Taobao’s GMV per merchant is declining.
Taobao’s suppliers are usually not OEMs, but merchants who operate online shops and link up with OEMs in villages. On the other hand, PDD works directly with OEMs by making it easy for them to sell on the platform. This is because PDD’s platform allow new suppliers to quickly reach customers. Competitors’ interfaces were search-driven, required heavy investment in SEO, and often centered on multiple product displays. PDD’s feed-based interface placed more exposure on single products. This gave it full control over distribution to influence consumer purchase decisions in ways most favorable to PDD and its suppliers’. This was similar to how TikTok helped new creators quickly build social capital and earn fans.
Deeper understanding of local OEMs
PDD has a deeper understanding of local OEMs:
On the demand side, its focus on single products and full control over distribution gave OEMs the opportunity to quickly reach customers, iterate small batches until products become viral. Taobao merchants would not be able to receive feedback quickly from customers to iterate their product listings. Therefore, Taobao merchants tend to focus on marketing their online stores with multiple product displays, whereas PDD’s OEM suppliers focus on a few SKUs each time.
On the supply side, PDD’s cost economics are better balanced against quality. For example, tissue paper is sold in oversized products to reduce cost but allowed some margin of error in consistency, the same applies to fresh produce. In livestreaming operations, BABA requires OEMs to invest <$50k on IoT equipment for surveillance, whereas PDD teaches OEMs to use a smartphone to do livestreaming in to build trust with customers on the quality and give assurance they are not fake goods. There is also a high level of cooperation with municipal governments and local farmers to promote AgriTech to improve yields and quality of produce, thus making agriculture its strongest category. PDD’s agriculture sales in 2021 exceeded the biggest supermarkets Walmart and Yong Hui’s grocery sales by 1.5x.
Operating leverage from technology embedded in business model design
PDD has a very differentiated cost structure which drives its operating leverage:
An interesting point that PDD stated in its 2018 IPO; it had a technology team with more than 700 engineers where over 100 of whom focus on algorithm design and development. In contrast, BABA and JD had ten of thousands of staff focusing in top-heavy offline operations in procurement, customer service and sales. 
Given PDD’s FY23 GMV at RMB 3.9 trillion, vs BABA at RMB 8.1 trillion, and JD at RMB 3.7 trillion, PDD has a workforce of only 13k, vs BABA at 255k, and JD at 450k. Revenue per employee for PDD is RMB 10m, vs BABA at RMB 2.2m, and JD at RMB 2.3m.
Sales and marketing expense % sales declined significantly from 102.5% in FY18 to 33.6% in 2Q23. This is because PDD has a high marketing spend efficiency after the user acquisition phase, as there is user stickiness and differentiation in the platform.
This is the reason why the PDD main app has such a high EBIT margin of 53%, vs BABA at 14.7%, and JD at 2.5%. PDD has a very high operating leverage as it doesn’t need to scale up workforce or marketing spend proportionately to grow GMV.
Proprietary social graph & higher user engagement
PDD’s social graph is now mostly proprietary rather than relying on WeChat. No. of active buyers metric counts both total buyers from its standalone app and its mini program on WeChat. MAU only counts users on the standalone app. MAU-to-Buyers ratio has increased from 58% in FY17 to 91% in FY20 before declining to 85% in FY22 due to new users from DDG. This implies higher user engagement and heavier usage patterns which take place on the feature-rich standalone app.
C2M needs to work with social commerce to attain scale
Social commerce and C2M must work together in order to create fast-moving batches of viral products at low prices:
For many export-dependent manufacturers, embracing C2M has come at an opportune time since the heightened trade tariffs in 2018, because domestic orders could make up for the drop in overseas orders, and consumers are increasingly open to buying value-for-money goods instead of paying a brand premium for products of similar quality. Customization options were previously costly and limited to luxury product categories. Currently, the post-80s and post-90s generation is the key consumer group. The younger consumer groups have a stronger demand for product customization. C2M caters to the needs of personalized and differentiated products that young consumers pursued.
BABA, JD and Netease have tried to create a separate C2M business but failed to gain scale. JD started its C2M unit Jingzao in 2018, offering products such as custom shirts, luggage, towels and beddings, as well as electronic brands such as Lenovo, Konka, HP and Dell to develop tailored products. BABA launched Taobao Select in Mar 2019 to work with factories to create C2M products. Its goal over the next three years is to help 1000 industries build ‘super’ factories that can directly supply customers, starting from Chinese apparel, sportswear, fashion categories. Netease Yanxuan was started in 2016 to become the first large-scale ODM platform by working with factories that contract with MNC brands to give the impression of high quality at low prices. We understand that JD Jingzao and Taobao Select have remained as small niche businesses, with Taobao Select having more traction recently after its revamp. Taobao Select recently integrated with the grocery group buying app Juhuasuan and started to focus on a smaller number of SKUs like PDD. Netease Yanxuan has a revenue of only RMB 8b in FY22 and growing at MSD this year, compared to PDD’s revenue of RMB 130.5b and growing 56% this year.
The biggest issue for the peers is business model design which limits the aggregation of scale. They do C2M in a top-down process, where the curated suppliers are often large ODMs of MNC brands, with established culture and work practices. There is also the issue of alignment as these ODMs still get the bulk of orders from MNC brands, hence their resources and spare capacity are limited for e-commerce platforms. For example, there are very few highly skilled labor who can do small batches of niche products, whereas there are lines of factory workers for mass production. As Colin Huang pointed out, peers like Taobao cannot do C2M effectively because it tries to sell too many different types of products. Coupled with the top-heavy approach, there is little scale in its C2M business to draw customers with low prices and draw suppliers with volume. This is reflected in JD’s group purchase price at only 10-20% cheaper than individual deals while PDD is 50% cheaper.
These factories are looking for high margins and high turnover for the 10-20% of orders fulfilled through e-commerce platforms. Therefore, platforms need to quickly aggregate orders for small batches of production in order for OEMs to be incentivized. However, BABA and JD required them to make high levels of investment, and the highly curated supplier list means there is limited economies of scale for both demand and supply. The root cause of the problem is that these internet platforms take their big data and try to transform manufacturers, without sufficient understanding of the latter, while still trying to identify 70% common problems in the manufacturing industry to come up with common solutions for large-scale applications.
As a result, these peers end up learning from traditional manufacturing industries and having to follow their logic and rules – the organizational setup, product development, formulation of contracts and accounts payable periods with suppliers stay within the framework of brands in the traditional go-to-market model. There are limited cost savings to pass on to consumers under this business model.
PDD stands out by having its entire business centred on C2M, enabled by social commerce. With its emphasis on interactivity and social connections, it can more accurately pinpoint consumer trends and predict demand among different social groups from its one billion active buyers. These insights allow OEMs to customize products to the latest trends in great detail, such as functionality, material, color, analysis by age, gender and spending power, and also advise on packaging redesign and price point setting. PDD mentioned that its C2M model allows the factory to develop and produce in a more timely manner. Product development cycle is shortened by 50% in some cases.
Its C2M model doesn’t focus on brands but on products, is less top heavy and more flexible. OEMs can decide whether to scale up a batch from the demand feedback in the 24-hour group buying timeframe. At the onset of product introduction, OEMs leverage on its big data to see the winning product attributes and customer demographics in each product category. But for the platform, it’s through thousands of new product listings daily, similar to Shein with 2,000 new product listings daily, that viral products are created and quickly connected to the right buyer groups. This means that PDD’s C2M model is successful because it has high purchase frequency and user engagement to provide timely demand feedback to manufacturers.
Marketing services revenue model
From a top-level differentiation based on revenue model, traditional e-commerce like BABA and JD earn from transaction commissions, whereas PDD earns from marketing services to OEMs. Not only does PDD’s revenue model lower the cost for new suppliers, OEMs are also heavy users of the platform’s marketing tools rather than brands. PDD’s marketing tools are diverse with various promotional tools, rather than simply SEO keyword bidding, with multiple sources of traffic due to different ways of engaging with the customer. Diverse traffic sources is important because they enhance marketing ROI for merchants by allowing them to customize their marketing spend according to product lifecycle, target audience, product feature etc.
PDD’s growth strategy is highly complementary
In contrast to BABA and JD, which take a land grab approach to investing in new businesses,  PDD’s growth strategy is highly complementary to its core business. DDG exists in a very competitive grocery delivery business, where only DDG and Meituan Select survived and DDG is the far leader in growth and margins. When operating DDG, PDD leveraged on its strong supply chain in agriculture (20% of GMV), brought over a very lean but capable team from the core business, utilized its deep understanding of Tier 3/4 cities and designed a cost-effective delivery model, where deliveries are next day and customers pick up at a nearby location to avoid incurring last mile delivery costs.
Importantly, the core business benefitted tremendously from the higher purchase frequency and cross-selling that DDG brings. We see a near doubling of purchase frequency from 48.5x to 88.2x in FY20-22 (DDG was started in Aug-20), while AOV declined by a comparatively small extent from RMB 43.6 to RMB 38.5. This means that customers are not only purchasing a lot more frequently after DDG was launched, but are also cross-sold to buy new category SKUs or across different categories to maintain their AOV.
For Temu, PDD is ramping up its leverage of supply chain of local OEMs to do cross border sales. Roughly 50% of Temu’s suppliers were manufacturers, while the other half are trade merchants who could offer a low price because they are trying to get rid of excess inventory. Of the manufacturers, 20% comes from PDD (increased from 10% when it started) while 80% are manufacturers who have previously been selling cross-border on Amazon or Shopee. The lack of cross-border market knowledge is the key reason Temu is so strict about OEM selection, but we understand that China’s state of overcapacity gives Temu a strong bargaining position with manufacturers, especially when Temu’s AOV is RMB 240 vs RMB 40 on PDD. Temu already benefitted from another of PDD’s expertise. When Temu shifted its product category focus (away from Shein) from women’s clothing to standardized household and personal care products, it doubled its AOV to USD 40.
Recommend to BUY at USD 110 at FY23 22x P/E and 19.3x EV/EVITDA. We are forecasting NPAT growth of 23.7% CAGR from FY23-25. Given that we conservatively forecast Temu’s losses at 43% of PDD’s EBIT in FY25, should Temu breakeven by FY25, there could be 40% further upside in earnings.
Social commerce (PDD, Douyin, Kuaishou) has been gaining share in e-commerce, at the expense of traditional e-commerce players. Social commerce reached critical scale at 31% in FY22. E-commerce penetration in China has reached 40% and 1 billion population. BABA ad JD are expected to grow significantly below the e-commerce industry (7-8% vs 11-13%).
These data points imply that buyers are increasingly looking for new ways of shopping, such as live-streaming, entertainment, social feeds, viral trends, that predict and recommend what they might like to purchase, rather than users buying more because they know what other purchases they want to make.
As mentioned, the continued strong growth in GMV per active buyer is one of the key drivers of PDD’s increasing advertising take-rate. PDD is highly differentiated to merchants since Chinese e-commerce has matured and BABA and JD are not able to continue growing annual spend per buyer
PDD has equal weighting across three high frequency product categories, namely basic apparel, FMCG & household daily and fresh food. This makes it easier to drive higher frequency by leveraging cross-category sales. On the other hand, JD is too focused on 3C, the short video platforms are too focused on apparel and beauty products. BABA is too focused on 3C, home furnishings/deco/lifestyle products and branded apparel. This also explains why consumer habits are fixed for each platform.
The key difference here is the frequency of orders, where PDD is significantly higher. With that big of a gap, it’s nearly impossible for peers to implement everyday low price business model to compete with PDD directly. PDD saw an acceleration of frequency growth since FY20 when DDG was launched in August. Frequency has been driving annual spend per buyer, and BABA and JD clearly lag in the growth of annual spend per buyer compared to PDD. In FY22, JD showed a decline in AOV which is compensated by higher frequency. This could signal that even the richest segment of the middle class – males in Tier 1 and 2 cities aged between 25-40 yo who are the core customers of JD, are starting to shift towards smaller purchases but higher frequency.
While the core business earns mostly from online marketing services, DDG and Temu are under a different revenue model. They do not earn from marketing services but from transaction services. They are operated under a managed marketplace model, where PDD doesn’t take inventory but set the final retail price, the quantity, and is fully in charge of the marketing services, merchandise selection and fulfillment. In return, it earns a markup of 17% from DDG and 24% from Temu as shown below.
One key reason that PDD started turning profitable since 2Q21 is because the core business’ marketing cost % GMV came down significantly from 2.5% in FY20 to 1.4% in FY21. DDG has also seen operating leverage due to a decline in both commission to community leaders and platform subsidies % GMV. This is because user stickiness has improved, and the number of active buyers has peaked for the core business.
Looking at the marketing efficiency table, as China e-commerce penetration peaked, it’s clear that marketing cost per buyer has increased significantly across all platforms. Marketing cost per order driven by frequency becomes the driver of marketing efficiency. BABA is likely to see an increase in marketing cost per order, while JD remained stagnant until FY22 when users started to switch towards lower basket size and higher frequency. Only PDD has seen a significant improvement in marketing efficiency, disregarding FY17 when the business was started.
Higher order frequency drove PDD’s GMV per marketing cost to expand significantly over the years. Revenue per marketing cost grew even faster due to the potential for higher take-rates. BABA has seen a major decline in GMV per marketing cost, but it maintained revenue per cost by increasing VAS take-rate. JD has a slight improvement in GMV per marketing cost but sales was pretty stagnant.
Can PDD’s marketing take-rate continue to increase?
A key question for PDD’s trajectory is whether advertising take-rate can continue to improve further. The market has assumed that the e-commerce industry’s take-rate is capped by BABA’s core monetization rate at 4%. This doesn’t include BABA’s VAS take-rate since PDD doesn’t provide fulfillment in its core business, except for DDG. However, that’s a wrong assumption.
Taobao charges advertising take-rate, while Tmall charges 1-5% transaction commission. Given that 80% of Taobao’s revenue comes from advertising and Taobao is roughly half of its China e-commerce GMV, that implies Taobao has an advertising take-rate of 4.8%.
However, there are also several other reasons why PDD will earn much higher advertising take-rate than BABA at the group level or Taobao over time. PDD has higher marketing efficiency than BABA as merchants don’t have much free traffic. Because BABA’s feeds are brand-focused and buyers visit the app with intent to make a specific purchase, smaller brands don’t earn high ROI from marketing spend. Big brands also draw in free traffic from influencers who promote them on social media. On the other hand, PDD is product-focused and OEM-focused. Its ability to aggregate orders quickly through its social graph and C2M helps OEMs to earn high ROI.
As Hayden Capital, Morgan Stanley Alpha Wise and an expert in Chinese e-commerce confirmed, based on a survey of CMOs, PDD’s marketing services provide the highest ROI at 4-5x vs 2-3x on Taobao or JD.
Besides ROI, the OEMs also save on cost when selling on PDD as it cuts out the middlemen, focuses on a few SKUs and hold lean inventory. Hayden Capital stated that its primary research of a cosmetic factory shows that it can earn as high as 26% EBIT margin on PDD, vs 1.1% in its OEM business, and 16.5% in its distribution business. This higher margin means there’s still headroom for factory merchants to afford higher take-rates.
GMV growth per buyer and GMV growth per merchant are important metrics to gauge whether a platform can continue to earn higher advertising take-rates. As we noted earlier, PDD is the only platform where GMV growth per buyer continues in the high-teens for the next few years. GMV per merchant also continues to grow at 10% CAGR in the last two years despite rapid growth in no. of merchants. In comparison, Taobao is seeing MSD decline in GMV per merchant. For PDD, this will drive a virtuous cycle where GMV growth per buyer and per merchant will drive vertical expansion of merchants within product categories, increase merchant competition, expand advertising take-rate, and further enhance price competitiveness and product variety richness for consumers.
PDD’s marketing tools are different from BABA or JD. When PDD first started, search contributed most of the traffic to merchants. As the social graph is developed, PDD intentionally weakened the search function by placing it at the bottom of the page and now traffic is mostly directed from algorithm-driven product feeds and promotional campaigns at the top of the page.
Generally speaking, there are three major marketing tools. Duoduo Search, Duoduo Scenarios and Full-Site Promotion. Search traffic is the display page that comes out when users search for keywords and these advertising slots appear in the (1+6n) positions. It’s important for merchants to be very specific and accurate to product features and draw traffic from multi-level categories to build a good sales base for the product links (eg. Boxed sea duck egg yolk crisps), so that the traffic for Duoduo Scenarios can be more accurate. Search is most useful for new stores as they have less natural traffic and they need accurate traffic and basic sales base with high conversion.
Duoduo Scenarios differentiate it from other platforms by emphasizing links on various activity resources, with gamifications and social connections. For example, “Cutting price for free”, where a buyer can cut down the price of an item to zero by inviting more friends to join in the purchase, albeit with diminishing discounts per referral. This is different from the group purchase price at 50% cheaper than individual price, where only two people in a group are required to obtain the group price. The exposure is very large but there are multiple products in each activity, so the competition is intense and user conversion is not as high as Duoduo Search. Duoduo Scenarios accelerate viral hits when the product image, features and price points are highly differentiated, and accurate traffic, targeted sales base and internal operational capabilities are already optimized for the listing.
Full-Site Promotion is the new set of automatic marketing tools rolled out last year. Merchants can specify a level of marketing spend and target ROI, and the platform’s algorithm will automatically work within those parameters to allocate the budget across various tools to maximize profits. No other Chinese e-commerce platform had launched an algorithm-based, automatic marketing suite which optimizes for ROI and profits before. BABA has a similar tool but it optimizes for GMV. This benefits the platform, since take-rates are charged as % GMV, but it may not create the optimal profit structure for the merchant. For eg. It will allocate marketing budget to the higher-priced, low-margin product to maximize GMV, rather than to lower-priced high margin product for the merchant. This new marketing tool is another example of PDD possessing a greater understanding of the needs of smaller and unsophisticated sellers. Merchants on BABA’s platforms tend to use third party agencies to navigate its set of complicated legacy marketing mechanisms to survive on the platform. Hayden Capital’s channel checks indicated that most of the merchants have reacted positively to the new tool, in terms of generating them superior ROI, and there were few complaints around this feature reducing the amount of free traffic.
How high can advertising take-rate go? Hayden Capital believes it isn’t an issue to reach 4.4% in FY25, 18% higher than FY23 at 3.74% (2Q23: 3.9%). We project 4.2% in FY25. Should merchants pay 18% more budget, assuming sales doesn’t increase at all from the current budget, factory EBIT margins would still remain healthy above 15%. Further increase to 5+% or even 6% is possible over a longer horizon, but it depends on the vertical expansion of merchants and no. of SKUs in each product category, the frequency of purchase, probability of new viral hits, which would then require paying for more activity resources etc.
Ultimately, we believe the trend towards buying good quality white label products, and the increasing consumer trust in the platform, are strong tailwinds for PDD’s advertising take-rate to improve further in the long run.
Although the Community Group Buying (CGB) model was started in 2018 by Xingsheng, it was in 2020 when big players started investing heavily into affiliates and internal operations. Big Tech was drawn for a number of reasons. In 2020, only 10% of groceries in China were sold via e-commerce, 50% were sold in wet markets and 40% via supermarkets. Covid accelerated the trend towards buying groceries online in 2020. The high buying frequency was particularly interesting as two-thirds of people who bought fresh produce online did so at least once a week in 2019. It was very popular in lower-tier cities, where one billion people lived in Tier 3 cities and below.
By 2022, CGB had developed into two forms. The first model is in larger cities, where it’s a form of grocery delivery e-commerce, usually same-day delivery. It competes with many other models like ship-from-store (Hema, 7Fresh), front-end warehouses (Dingdong, MissFresh), and instant retail (JD Daojia, Taoxianda). The second model is in the sinking markets, where groceries were supposed to be just an entry method for a platform to later cross-sell all kinds of products. In rural areas, supermarkets were absent and CGB offered low-cost food delivery without stores and inventory. Last year, DDG achieved 1.5x GMV of Meituan Select. DDG was stronger in lower-tier cities and the Southwest (Yunnan, Guizhou, Sichuan), while Meituan led in Southern, Central and certain Northern provinces. There are several reasons why DDG emerged as the leader of the CGB model.
Grocery delivery is very different from Meituan’s core business. For meal delivery, the restaurant procures and prepares the goods. For grocery, Meituan needs to buy and sell the goods in a self-operated model and find its own supply chain. To increase profit margins, Meituan launched private labels of non-grocery products, with limited success as grocery remains the main buying reason. Meituan Select is also too focused on sales with a large workforce, and pays high commissions to community leaders to incentivize them to do social selling.
DDG’s strong supply chain leverage means it could use a bidding mode with the merchants supplying the products. Several merchants bid for a certain volume every day, and the lowest price gets the order. Meituan Select used a buyer model in which each category with a fixed supplier (top-heavy model). DDG has advantages in a huge buyer and supplier traffic from its main app. It uses big data from the main app to find suppliers to do daily bidding, and it has a much lower customer acquisition cost due to the large base of users.
DDG was also the only company to follow an asset-light model, which outsourced the warehousing and logistics functions. It also has a very agile culture like a startup. Decisions to delegated to city-level managers, and a handful of employees would be dropped into a new city, within days and weeks the service would be fully operational. This asset light strategy and agile culture allows it to expand much faster than its competitors into new cities.
The CGB model is unlikely to face new intense competition, as the govt has penalized and sent out a strong message to the big tech platforms to refrain from disorderly expansion of capital. As a result, we see DDG maintaining strong topline growth as the market potential remains in lower tier cities, and Meituan isn’t able to compete effectively against DDG in the sinking markets. At the same time, customer acquisition cost in the form of commission for community leaders, and platform subsidies continue to trend downwards as competitive cost pressure subsides. Procurement GPM also trends towards the high-teens due to rationalization of SKUs from 1200 to 760, and expanding into high margin items like electronic accessories and footwear. There are also new channels added for special goods, damaged goods, and nearly-expired goods. For instance, normal channel sales for Mengniu milk have a 6-7% gross margin, while nearly-expired products can reach 50-70%, and special channel products 20-30%.
These operating leverage helps DDG to breakeven in FY23 and start making a profit in FY24. While margins are still low, there are still ways to improve margins, such as further product cross-selling, and increasing the drop density to reduce fulfillment cost.
More importantly, DDG has helped the core business to grow frequency of purchase significantly and brought in new users as a base to cross-sell into the core app.
Temu was launched in July 2022, and was supposed to catch up to Shein’s GMV in 5 years time, Shein’s GMV in FY22 was $32b. However, it started to overtake Shein’s average sales per day in Oct 2023 and forced Shein to seek an IPO listing early due to increasing pressure from Temu.
AliExpress is no longer focusing on the US and its market share seems to have been taken by Temu. Most of Temu’s growth is coming at the expense of AliExpress, Shein and discount retailers. Temu’s model is often described as ‘lowering supplier prices + large subsidies + crazy advertising’. The pain for the merchants is in the first part of that equation. While Amazon should remain insulated for the near term as it caters to the middle income families who place great importance in trust and service, it should be noted that 63% of Amazon’s 3P marketplace merchants are from China. And merchants are starting to find the appeal of listing on Temu, despite being forced to list at 30-50% cheaper than Amazon, because Amazon charges them 28% for fulfillment and shipping cost, 12% for commission and another 12% for advertising. As a comparison, merchants usually have a markup of only 50% on Temu, 100% on Shein, and 200% on Amazon to mitigate the high costs.
There are three stages to Temu’s roadmap. By Dec 2022, Temu should have 3 million sellers and 2 million customers. In 2023 and 2024, target to break-even mainly by product optimization. From 2025, target to reach full profitability in all markets. In the US, Temu has shifted its goal three times. From user recruitment, to increasing AOV, to increasing the conversion rate. This tells us how quickly Temu has attained critical mass of users (13m DAU in Mar-23) and started to focus on operational improvements. This positive progress is also reflected in Temu raising its GMV target for FY23 from $3b to $5b to $10b.
The biggest milestone for Temu, apart from rapid user acquisition, is that it managed to substantially double AOV from $20 at the beginning of the year to $40, and aiming to further increase to $50+. This is due to shifting its focus from clothing (like Shein), to standardized household and personal care products. It started with selling viral basic items like chargers and wires in the US, which expanded to other viral products like earphones and mobile phones, driving up AOV. The share of male buyers has increased due to 3C category, which makes up 30% of GMV. 20% of GMV comes from basic apparel, 25% from home decoration, improvement and gardening, mostly products below $20, a category Wish used to dominate. Household items are at least 40% cheaper than on Amazon.
Increasing AOV helps to lift both revenue and margins. More importantly, success of this strategy has branded Temu into the only super value-for-money white label platform for a wide range of products. Shein tried to diversify away from young women’s apparel but it still makes up 75% of GMV (from 90%). Amazon is known to be 30-50% more expensive than Temu for similar products.
Even though Temu has significant gross margins at 25%, it will still lose money since it sees 20-30% logistical costs and 30% marketing costs (incl. customer acquisition), plus taxes, custom duties and storage costs. In total, Temu’s average loss per order is $30 in 4Q22. However, we believe Temu’s loss per order is stabilizing as shown in the table, which uses conservative assumptions, as expanding GPM helps to offset some of the increase in customer acquisition cost.
Temu invested heavily in discounts and subsidies to attract new users and then have them recruit friends and family through gamification similar to PDD.  Games incentivize users to ask friends and family to install the app in order to win discounts or free products for themselves. In the US, the normal acquisition cost for webshops is >$35. Temu gets people to download the app for $5 and spends a total of $10-25 to complete a first order. Along with gaining 16m MAU by Jan 2023, the app’s 7-day retention rate had increased from 14% in Nov 2022 to 22%, along with AOV increasing from $20 to $35.
The bigger issue is improving fulfillment cost per order. There are 3 legs to fulfillment. The first leg is from factory to Temu’s warehouse in Guangdong at RMB 5 per order, where merchant is required to pay half. The second leg is from Temu warehouse in Guangdong to the US sorting center which costs USD 10 per order where Jitu is subsidizing $4-5. The costs of the overseas shipping could be reduced by 2/3 if Temu can generate more orders and book a whole cargo flight. The costs of the third leg which is delivery by US courier at USD 5 is the hardest to reduce as Temu doesn’t have much bargaining power, but it could potentially decrease by 30% when it attains scale similar to Shein. In order to reduce fulfillment costs, Temu has been consistently adjusting its logistics policies. For instance, in the initial domestic shipping leg, the transportation fees that were initially covered by the platform are now shared between merchants and Temu. Additionally, Temu has begun constructing overseas warehouses, with plans for one on the East Coast and another on the West Coast of the United States. These efforts aim to improve fulfillment experiences and further optimize costs.
We are not factoring in reduction in fulfillment cost per order in the near term till FY25. Amazon took 5 years to build out its regional fulfillment centers and work on robotic automation before turning the US e-commerce arm profitable again. At present, Amazon’s shipping cost per order is $4.4 and fulfillment cost is also $4.4, which is more expensive due to same day delivery. This makes us realize that Temu’s main savings will probably come in the cross-border shipping, though that will likely take a few years to be reduced should Jitu start to reduce its subsidy.
Temu and Shein are both using the so-called ‘minimis rule’ which exempts imports valued at $800 or less from import taxes if they are shipped to individual consumers. Ironically, the amount was raised from $200 in 2016. Bulk shipments from China are unpacked when they arrive in the U.S. and enter customs as small packages. A bipartisan group plans to introduce a bill in June that would immediately ban such shipments. Federal brief claimed that “exploit” de minimis to avoid duties and import illegal items. If the bill passes, it which would have a serious impact on both platforms.
While there is no current legislation that could easily ban Temu, the proposed RESTRICT Act of March 23rd 2023, which seems to have been designed as a possible way to ban TikTok, could open a door if it is passed. The Act would allow for blocking information and communications technologies, products or services (including e-commerce platforms) of “foreign adversaries” of the U.S. (such as China) when they pose an “undue and unacceptable risk” to the national security of the U.S. or its citizens. Anticipating potential problems, Temu has already started to separate its information management systems from PDD.
<|endoftext|>
