Long RCL
Royal Caribbean is the highest-quality cruise company in the public markets and is the most forward-thinking and has the highest yielding portfolio of assets in the mass market segment of the market.  It is the second largest cruise holding company, but the largest that focuses on the North American market.  This will be a medium-length writeup focused on three main aspects: (1) Why the cruise business is interesting, (2) the EPS growth algorithm, and (2) RCL’s private destination portfolio.  I will touch on critical aspects of the cruise business, but will not provide all the background and depth on them.  Interested investors should know where they want to dive deeper on their own.  
RCL’s stock has been an amazing performer over the past few years since the Covid shutdowns ended, but it is still rather moderately valued relative to its future earnings power.  
Why is the Cruise Business Interesting?
This is the most important question.  I think there are a lot of old perceptions of the cruise business.  It’s not The Love Boat anymore.  It’s not even the business from 10 or 20 years ago. Cruise companies operate in the $2 trillion vacation market, offering a wide variety of experiences.  All itineraries offer a mix of ship amenities and destination experiences.  They can range from short (3-5 days) to very long (6-12 months).  
The onboard experience has evolved in a big way and guests are flocking to this underpenetrated form of vacation because it offers a unique, turnkey experience that also is a great value.  Modern cruise ships have amenities that rival Las Vegas hotel/casino resorts.  They often have dozens of F&B venues, a variety of free and paid entertainment, high-quality gaming operations, luxurious spas, pools, waterparks, and more.  The diversity of onboard experiences makes cruising a popular format for multi-generational vacationing.  Cruise companies pair these onboard amenities with site-seeing experiences onshore that range from good to great.  
From an investment perspective, the company has attractive unit economics.  Utopia of the Seas, one of RCL’s newest ships, cost roughly $1.8B in capex.  It was funded with $1.5B of export credit agency (ECA) debt at 3% fixed coupon with a 12-year amortization.  New ships like Utopia tend to earn high-teens ROICs.  The math roughly looks like this:
$1.8B total check, $1.5B ECA financing, $300M “equity check”
18% ROIC = $324M of ship-level EBITDA contribution
Deduct -$45M of annual ECA interest expense and -$120M of principal amortization = $159M of FCF available to RCL, or a 53% return on the equity check.  
These economics exist when a new ship is added to an existing brand with full-scale, global demand generation, logistics capabilities, and port agreements.  A new operator with one ship cannot access these economics and it would be much more difficult to source demand to compete with the likes of RCL’s brands.
Cruise ship assets generate significant return on equity checks immediately and have useful lives of about 30 years.  Despite the attractive economics and thus the incentive to do so, the industry cannot grow supply faster than MSD per year because there is a small handful of shipyards that can make vessels this large.  If you were to order a large ocean cruise ship today, you wouldn’t be able to take delivery until 2028 or 2029.  It is easier to find data center space and power for AI within the next 3 years than it is to build a new cruise ship in that time frame.  
It’s worth noting that the heavy vertical integration of these assets allows the cruise operators to extract economic rents across multiple dimensions.  They can increase their yields by in-sourcing more of the bookings, cutting out third-party agency commissions.  They can use their mobile apps and digital properties to curate and push bundles and opportunistic discounts for onboard amenities and cabin upgrades to customers to capture more wallet share before and during their voyages.  There are many ways for these companies to keep winning with customers - especially because cruises often are booked 6-9 months (or more) in advance, allowing for many touchpoints before guests’ journeys begin.  
Finally, the cruise business has repeat customer behavior that is enviable for many industries.  Only 10% of all Americans have ever been on a cruise ship.  It’s a LSD % of Europeans and <1% of Asians.  It is relatively underpenetrated everywhere.  However, guest satisfaction is well into the >90% range and there is a high repeat customer rate, generally about 60% but often higher for upscale brands.  Growth is fueled by past guests returning and by the industry attracting more new-to-cruise customers (which then convert efficiently into repeat guests).  We’ll touch on the demand funnel dynamics in the section about private destinations.
The Value Creation Model
Attractive IRRs for RCL requires the company to generate demand growth above the MSD supply growth that the shipyard industry can support.  Many analysts investors get concerned when supply growth increases from 3% to 5% in a year, but they miss the big picture - that the industry is increasing demand well above those levels, and likely well into the double digits.  Supply growth is easy to quantify, but demand growth is nebulous and cannot be quantified specifically until we see the output in pricing growth.  
The value creation algorithm is very straightforward.  On a normalized basis, it consists of:
LSD-MSD capacity growth
+ LSD-MSD pricing growth
= HSD/LDD revenue growth
This is a nice growth algorithm, but it's been even better recently - pricing has been stronger than normalized and I believe will continue to be above-normalized for at least the next 3-5 years.  A combination of onboard amenities like high-quality wifi (now Starlink), disruptive price/value compared to land-based alternatives, and the development of new private destinations has opened the demand funnel which has translated into strong pricing power.  
EBITDA grows faster than revenue because net cruise costs per passenger cruise day excluding fuel grow less than inflation and generally very LSD on a normalized basis.  
EPS, which closely approximates normalized FCF/share, tends to grow faster than EBITDA because of the steady reduction in interest expense as the company de-levers and reduces its cost of capital via ECA-funded ship debt and higher credit ratings, as well as opportunistic buybacks.  
If we put all these elements together, RCL is a business that can generate >15% EPS growth per annum while steadily increasing the ROIC of the business.  It trades at a mid-teens multiple of 2025 earnings (guided to have a $14-handle this far in advance).  
Next, let’s discuss the private destination developments in RCL’s portfolio.  It is farthest ahead and it is differentiating itself in the vacation market and among its cruise peers.
Private Destinations
Most major cruise companies have controlled private islands in the Caribbean for decades, but they have been relatively simple - hundreds or thousands of beach chairs, a few huts offering hamburgers and hot dogs, snorkeling gear available, etc.  RCL was the first to pioneer a more exciting private destination - Perfect Day at CocoCay.  
CocoCay underwent a $250M renovation project to create NA’s largest water park, rentable bungalows, great pools and restaurants, ziplines, and more.  It later added Hideaway Beach, an adult-only “beach club” area of the island.  
The economics of CocoCay are incredible.  Every ship that visits the island generates a 10-20% ticket premium for the whole itinerary.  Let’s say average Caribbean per diems are $200 per person for a five-night cruise - that means ones visiting CocoCay might earn $230/day of ticket revenue.  Since CocoCay (including Hideaway Beach) receives 3M visitors per year, that $30/day equates to $90M of incremental annual ticket revenue.  
On shore, guests spend an average of $100-150/day per person.  Some people pay nothing and have a great time relaxing, while others pay $235 to spend the day at Hideaway Beach, $100+ to access the water park, or thousands of dollars to rent an over-the-water bungalow.  Importantly, there is no leakage to third-party vendors offering alternative experiences, so RCL captures 100% wallet share for all guests onshore (this is reported in “onboard & other revenue” even though it is onshore).  
Let’s highlight the returns on Perfect Day at CocoCay.  2.5 million visitors per year x $125 per person per visitor = $313M of incremental onboard revenue.  Combined with the $90M of incremental ticket revenue, RCL’s $250M development project generates $540M of incremental revenue.  Applying about 80% gross margins to this, we get to about $430M of incremental gross profit contribution, and probably about $400M+ of incremental EBITDA and FCF.  It’s been an incredible, high-ROIC project.  
CocoCay and Hideaway Beach were the first of several projects in RCL’s pipeline.  In the coming years, the company will open Royal Beach Club at Paradise Island (Nassau, 2025), Royal Beach Club Cozumel (2026), Perfect Day Mexico (2027), and Royal Beach Club Lelepa (Vanuatu, 2026-2027).  While some of the details are still unknown, I believe these private destinations can support over 7 million annual visitors, more than 2x what is possible at CocoCay and Hideaway Beach combined.  
Importantly, adding destinations that specifically address the Western Caribbean opens up significant demand from gulf coast markets in Texas, Louisiana and Western Florida.  Currently RCL operates out of Galveston, TX, New Orleans, LA, and Tampa, FL.  This comment from the Q3 2024 earnings call explains the opportunity well:
“Perfect Day Mexico is strategically located to deliver exceptional vacation experiences in both the Eastern and Western Caribbean, and supports our ambition that every guest on the Royal Caribbean brand will have a perfect day on their Caribbean itinerary. It also allows us to further grow the large and growing Gulf Coast area, including the Texas market, which is larger than Florida, and has a similar cruise consideration, but only half of the penetration.” - Jason Liberty, CEO of Royal Caribbean International.  
This map highlights the types of itineraries that can be enhanced by adding RCL’s private destinations in Mexico (Cozumel and Quintana Roo, i.e. Perfect Day Mexico).  Apologies for the polygons, it’s the quickest and easiest way to draw in Google Maps.  The yellow routes are new Western Caribbean short cruises.  The green routes touch the Eastern Caribbean destinations in the Bahamas (CocoCay & Hideaway Beach, Paradise Island in Nassau).
Importantly, these destinations are gateway experiences that appeal to all vacationers - not just classic cruise guests.  RCL can offer a 3-5 day cruise vacation that competes in experience and on price against vacation options going to Hawaii, Las Vegas, Mexico, and Florida (Orlando and Miami).  As the private destination portfolio fills out, RCL will have the opportunity to curate fully captive vacations that touch multiple private destinations.  These destinations have the highest guest satisfaction scores and the highest economic returns to RCL. 
These private destinations massively outpunch their weight on an ROIC basis.  CocoCay (Perfect Day + Hideaway Beach) provides the same economic punch as a new $1.8B ship like Utopia of the Seas.  Interestingly, these destinations provide a halo effect on the whole fleet, enhancing returns for both newer and older hardware.  
In addition to industry-wide tailwinds that are benefiting cruising, RCL’s private destinations allow the company to generate significant demand growth well in excess of its capacity growth.  All ships sail full, which means excess demand translates into higher prices.  Tilting the growth algorithm to higher pricing growth improves returns across the business and, before long, RCL will be seen as a “quality compounder” type of business with a growth algorithm similar to Charter or Comcast before the retail broadband markets became overly competitive.  
One possible risk to RCL is that the incremental economics will degrade from CocoCay’s levels because Carnival is opening Celebration Key in 2025 and NCLH is renovating Great Stirrup Cay in the Bahamas.  I don’t worry about these too much - they should generate more buzz for the industry and many millions of media impressions.  These projects take many years to develop and RCL is far ahead of the rest already, and looks to be well ahead in the future based on known developments among the major cruise companies.  
Conclusion
RCL’s baseline value algorithm generates >15% EPS growth per annum.  I believe the development of RCL’s private destination portfolio easily can add another 200-300 bps of pricing growth per annum over the next 3-5 years. It is not difficult to pencil out EPS exceeding $30/share by the end of the decade, suggesting CAGRs exceeding 20% per year.  Even from $30/share, the growth algorithm may revert to the ~15% normalized CAGRs.  
The combination of unbounded demand growth, restricted supply growth, oligopoly industry structure, and attractive and unique ship financing results in a nice stream of steady, long-term earnings growth.  
<|endoftext|>
