UPS was last written up as a short on VIC nearly eight years ago. Since then, the total return of UPS is 52% compared to the S&P 500’s total return of 200%. Thus, it’s been a very good short on a relative basis. Going forward I believe a short in UPS will not only continue to be good on a relative basis, but on an absolute return basis as well. I think UPS can decline by 30%+ over the next few years and even more so over the long run. With a $115B market cap, $525M average daily volume and less than 2% of the float short, there should be no “meme risk” with this short.
The crux of the short thesis is quite simple—Amazon.com (AMZN). If you believe as I do that AMZN will continue to take market share of retail goods sold, particularly within the U.S., then UPS is in for tough sledding. That is because of AMZN’s domestic in-house delivery network it is increasingly using to deliver more of its own packages. AMZN is increasingly using UPS mainly as a shipper for returns (outbound) as opposed to both inbound and outbound delivery. You can see it in the numbers over the past five plus years that are publicly disclosed by UPS and AMZN. If AMZN ever decides to make a concerted effort to at least partially use its own delivery network for returns, that would accelerate the pain UPS is likely to endure in the coming years.
In 2023, AMZN made up ~40% of UPS’ operating profit. In its 10-K, UPS discloses the percentage of revenue from AMZN (11.8% in 2023), which is almost entirely domestic revenue. UPS’ gross margin range is in the low-mid 20s and has a high-singles operating margin. I use a ~30% contribution margin on AMZN’s revenue taking into consideration the volume pricing discount AMZN likely enjoys, and the fixed cost operating leverage AMZN’s package volume brings to UPS.
AMZN has an unmatched flywheel effect that should allow it to continue to take retail share for many years/decades to come. In a nutshell its best-in-class selection (and easy return policy) coupled with “free shipping” for Prime members makes it increasingly the first and only stop to shop for consumers. For every additional item AMZN sells, it not only captures the gross profit on selling the item (either directly on 1P or indirectly on 3P), but also very high margin advertising related to that item. Its growing high margin advertising revenue and prime membership fees helps pay for the “free shipping” and to keep the price of its goods low. Over time, as consumers move more of their spending to AMZN, it can further raise Prime membership fees (because consumers gain more and more value from that membership), and therefore this flywheel is further reinforced.
Essentially, what you’re seeing in AMZN’s numbers is that it is getting a higher “attachment rate” of advertising and subscription services for every dollar of retail goods sold. In 2019, advertising and subscription services as a % of online stores and third-party seller services was 16.3%. In 2021 it was 19.3% and in 2023 it was 23.4%. In Q3’24 this “attachment rate” grew to 25.8% compared to 24.3% in Q3’23. Basically, what you’re seeing is manufacturers (through advertising) and consumers (through Prime membership) helping accelerate market share to AMZN and thus hurting UPS increasingly over time.
Not only does UPS have this AMZN issue looming over its head, but for the foreseeable future it has a structural issue with regards to its largest cost component at nearly 60% of its expenses, compensation and benefits. That is because its labor force is heavily unionized. The International Brotherhood of Teamsters represents a significant portion of UPS’ workforce. Contrast this to FDX’s labor force, which besides its pilots, is largely not unionized.
Looking at UPS’ Domestic Package segment, in the first nine months of 2024 its revenue declined by -0.6% while its operating expenses increased by 1.7%. These seemingly small changes on both sides of the P&L resulted in a -25.5% decline in operating profit compared to the first nine months of 2023. For UPS’ total operations, in the first nine months of 2024 compared to 2023, its revenue declined -0.4% whereas its compensation and benefits increased 2.7%. This resulted in its operating profit declining by -16.8% year-over-year. Compensation and benefits as a % of revenue increased by 160 bps to 53.4% and explains the majority of its 202 bps of operating margin degradation in the first nine months of 2024.
The only major partial offset to these two main issues is the continued high-single digit growth of ecommerce. However, I believe the impacts from AMZN and its unionized labor force will more than offset this.
Since 2019, UPS has grown its revenue, operating profit and EPS at a 4.4%, 1.6% and 5.6% CAGR, respectively. This is against a very favorable ecommerce double digit growth backdrop. 
Consensus has UPS growing at a much higher rate over the next four years through 2028. The estimated CAGR for revenue, operating income and EPS are 10.5%, 13.2% and 15.3%, respectively. I don’t believe these estimates, which is what is likely holding up the stock price, will materialize.
If UPS earns well below these estimates, I could see its valuation come down rather meaningfully over time. Low/no growth businesses with meaningful financial and operating leverage often trade down to a high-single/low-double digit P/E multiple. UPS has traded as low as an 11x forward P/E in the past 10 years and has averaged a 17x forward P/E over this time. Currently, it trades at 15.2x 2025E EPS I do not believe it will earn.
UPS trades at 20.4x LTM EPS with 2.3x net debt/operating income leverage. Meanwhile a stock like GOOGL trades at a similar valuation on a P/E basis with a net cash balance sheet position and better collection of businesses with much faster current and expected future growth. This dichotomy doesn’t make much sense.
If UPS earns ~$7.50 in 2026 as opposed to the seemingly fanciful ~$10.00 consensus estimate, I could see its P/E multiple decline to 11x. This would result in a total return of -34% over the next year including dividends.