Description
Executive Summary
Near-monopoly business which recently hired a world-class capital allocator to be its new CEO, trading for ~ 5x FCF with near-term catalysts to realize price/value discrepancy through increased share repurchases.
Overview
The best investments are the easy ones: those that require little more than napkin math and a paragraph. PItney Bowes (NYSE: PBI) is the easiest long I’ve seen in years. First, a disclaimer: PBI recently announced it hired Kurt Wolf, its largest shareholder who won a proxy contest in 2023 and has been instrumental in its turnaround, to be its new CEO. He and I have gotten to know each other over the last few years; we first connected over a shared position in GameStop (my firm owned the bonds, he was a large shareholder engaged in a proxy fight). Since then, we have spoken on numerous occasions, usually sharing investment ideas. He convinced me that Pitney Bowes was a long at $3 (we were already in the bonds) around August 2023. Since then, the company has made drastic changes that have transformed Pitney Bowes from a distressed credit with declining EBITDA and cash flow to a cash cow with multiple positive catalysts on the horizon. And yet the stock remains remarkably cheap at around a 20% levered free cash flow yield. The company is at an inflection point, and I anticipate not only a near-term catalyst to help boost its share price, but a sustainable long-term compounding machine thanks to a combination of durable competitive advantages and a world-class capital allocator at the helm.
A brief overview of the Pitney Bowes business is in order. Following the sale and subsequent liquidation of its cash-incinerating Global E-Commerce business in August 2024 (done at Kurt’s behest following the successful proxy fight), Pitney Bowes now has two reportable segments: Presort and SendTech. Presort provides mail sortation solutions for businesses and enjoys a dominant market position, estimated to have 25% market share (the next closest competitor is 2%). Over the trailing twelve month period, Presort has generated $671m in revenues and $217m of EBITDA (32.3% EBITDA margin). While sorting mail is certainly not a growth business, it has more durable economics than most perceive. Consider UnitedHealth for example. UNH’s Optum processes approximately 1.7 billion in claims per year (source: Bloomberg). Assuming 10% of those claims are sent out via mail, which is probably conservative (I still receive paper claims for whatever that’s worth), implies 170 million in paper claims volume per annum or 466k/day. That is a substantial amount of mail volume for one customer and requires real technology to efficiently sort and ship those out.
SendTech, which includes within it the Pitney Bowes Bank, is the crown jewel. SendTech is a high-margin, high-cash-generative equipment leasing, SaaS and payments business hiding beneath the veneer of an old-line industrial business. It leases mail meters, which are machines businesses use to weigh parcels and print postage on them in lieu of using stamps. It absolutely towers over its competitors with a 70% market share position; as Kurt once told me, “it’s basically a monopoly.”
The majority of SendTech’s revenues come from leasing transactions and financing. Using FY2024 figures, SendTech’s revenue breakdown was:
Revenues from leasing and financing: $532m (42%)
Support services: $375m (29%)
Supplies: $143m (11%)
Business services: $139m (11%)
Equipment sales: $91m (7%)
=$1.28bn revenues in total for FY2024
Leasing and financing revenue provides a steady, recurring income stream, and volume declines in the other segments can be largely offset with price increases, thanks to PBI’s dominant market position.
Over the trailing twelve month period, SendTech has generated $1.25bn in revenues and $418m in EBITDA (33.5% EBITDA margin).
So how do I come to the conclusion that SendTech is largely a payments business? Think about a piece of business mail you receive that has some sort of indicia printed on the top right corner instead of an actual stamp; companies have to pay for that postage from the USPS, which is accomplished with a mail meter device. Postage is considered a legal form of currency in the U.S. In fact, mail meters cannot be sold, they have to be leased from USPS-authorized dealers, creating a captive customer base for PBI. There are only 4 such authorized dealers in the United States.
Pitney Bowes leases its mail meters out to customers and offers many different types of payment solutions to suit their postage and mailing needs and further monetize their products. The most popular solution is prepaying for postage via deposits to PB Bank. It works as follows: when a company buys $100 worth of postage on its mail meter, its bank account is debited by $100. The funds are transferred to PB Bank, who remits them to the USPS* as the customer draws on its meter balance when it prints postage.
Other payments solutions include revolving credit solutions whereby PBI purchases the postage up front on behalf of its customers and charges interest and fees, then collects when they use the meter balance. Customers can also interface directly with the USPS, but doing so is not as common as the other payment solutions.
The captive nature of PBI’s business model enables PB Bank to access low-cost deposits, enabling the bank to generate extraordinary returns on equity capital. Over the last twelve months, PB Bank has generated $49.5m of net income on average equity capital of $61.5m for a return on equity of 80.5% (source: ibanknet.com, verified with call reports filed with FFIEC). One of Kurt’s recent value-enhancing initiatives included transferring leases that were held by the company in a separate captive leasing subsidiary over to PB Bank’s balance sheet, to further leverage its low-cost deposits and free up corporate cash.
After adding contributions from its “Other” segment and backing out corporate overhead costs, total Pitney Bowes Inc. revenues and EBITDA over the trailing twelve month period are $2.0bn and $526m. This represents a substantial improvement, as EBITDA declined every year from 2019 through 2023, averaging $345m over the period. The improvement largely reflects 1) the divestiture of Global E-Commerce which represented a roughly $100m EBITDA loss per annum and 2) internal restructuring/cost savings which the company recently raised to an estimated $180m to $200m per annum from the previously issued guidance of $170m to $190m. In the same press release that the company announced the appointment of Kurt Wolf as CEO, the company reiterated its previously issued full year 2025 financial guidance, which included adjusted EBIT range of $450m to $480m (about $575m EBITDA assuming $115m D&A expense add-back) and free cash flow in the range of $330m to $370m. Or as Kurt put it during a recent call, “Pitney Bowes generates $1 million of free cash flow per day every day of the year including holidays.” At the current shares outstanding of 181.3m, that represents $1.93/sh in FCF. The current market price of $10.39 represents a mere 5.4x multiple of FCF, or a 18.6% leveraged FCF yield to equity.
Catalyst
Also in the same press release, the company made two announcements relevant to its capital allocation priorities. First, it said the company intends to execute the full $150m share repurchase authorization in 2025. Second, it expects to reach its adjusted leverage ratio target of 3.0x by the end of the second quarter without the need to retire additional debt. The second part of this is critical. On the first quarter earnings call, former CEO Lance Rosenzweig said they expect to hit the 3.0x leverage ratio by the end of 3Q, so the subsequent announcement indicates they are a full quarter ahead of schedule. Further, he said the following (emphasis added):
“Secondly, we've noted that the -- a really key kind of debt metric for us is getting below a 3.0 leverage ratio because at that point, restrictions on our use of cash become much more limited. And so we are continuing to prioritize debt reduction so that we get below that 3.0 number. But once we've done that, then I think we've got far more flexibility to allocate greater amounts toward shareholders.”
Given these comments, I expect PBI to announce an increase to its current share repurchase authorization, which provides an additional catalyst for near-term price appreciation. A quick note on the buyback math: let’s assume PBI generates $700m cumulatively of FCF over the next two years. Assuming they use $400m of that to repurchase shares at an average price of $12/sh implies around 33m shares repurchased, an 18% reduction in share count. Assuming FCF is flat over that period means FCF/sh will grow to $2.37, a 23% increase. Without any change in the equity multiple (i.e. 5.4x) implies a share price of $12.77. Add another 56c of dividends to that (cumulatively over the next two years assuming current quarterly dividend rate of 7c/sh) and you’re looking at a 13% annualized return. And that is all without any growth in aggregate FCF, multiple expansion, or credit for the additional $300m cash on its balance sheet (or debt reduction if that’s what it’s used for). In reality that is probably far too conservative, and a multiple expansion to at least 7-8x is more likely, implying a share price between $16.50 and $19.00 and an annualized return of 28% to 37%.
A recent conversation with Kurt reveals he agrees that a 20% FCF yield is an attractive opportunity to buy back stock. Indeed, when the company announced it hired Kurt to be CEO, it described him as an “architect” of Pitney Bowes’ recent turnaround, a major shareholder, and “is best positioned to refine the Company’s strategy, effectively allocate capital, and empower and support the organization’s talented business leaders and employees.” Given his extraordinary track record running Hestia Capital, suffice it to say Pitney Bowes has a world-class capital allocator at the helm who will combine investment savvy and analytical rigor to this new endeavor. With a $350m annual FCF budget to work with, there are opportunities aplenty for Kurt to enhance shareholder value through buybacks, dividends, debt paydown and/or M&A.
Margin of Safety
What’s perhaps most compelling about this opportunity, in my view, is the limited downside risk. Mail meters and sortation aren’t exactly growth businesses, which is exactly why there won’t be any new competition entering the fold. While AI is set to disrupt many industries, no one sitting in a corporate boardroom today would propose entering this market. And even if they did, unseating an incumbent with 70% share would be extraordinarily difficult. Pitney Bowes’ economic franchise is a function of its dominant market position in an industry with three other competitors that is controlled by the USPS; even entering this industry requires becoming a USPS-authorized dealer. That is not going to change any time soon. If anything, PBI will be able to leverage AI capabilities to cross-sell new products and services to its customers.
At 5.4x leveraged FCF, and roughly 7.5x TEV/EBIT, the shares are incredibly cheap for a business with such a sustainable, durable competitive position. And the share repurchase program is not only value-enhancing for shareholders, but provides technical support for the stock, which in my opinion is becoming increasingly important in a world where active investment managers face chronic outflows. The buyback makes the stock “investable” in the eyes of the active investment community. This combination severely limits the downside risk of this investment, in my view, especially compared with the potential upside.
Risks
That all being said, there are still risks of course. Pitney Bowes is a single-B rated credit with a $372m bond coming due in 2027, a $160m term loan due in 2028, and another $335m bond due in 2029. The bonds trade around par, and I see no reason for the company to have any trouble refinancing. But of course, it’s a risk. I expect the company to address these maturities in the coming quarters.
Another risk is Kurt’s lack of experience as an operator. Picking stocks is one thing, but being CEO of a company that has global operations and billions in annual revenues is a whole different animal. I can say with absolute confidence that Kurt is up to the task. He is one of the hardest working and thorough investors I’ve ever met, and his background in consulting gave him valuable experiences with operating companies. His management style appears to be fairly “hands-off;” on a recent call, he spoke enthusiastically about the talented and experienced managers Pitney Bowes has leading its various divisions, noting some of them have been at the company for over 40 years. As he explained, these people understand their business in and out and he views his role as CEO as supporting the company's managers, not micromanaging them. I found this all encouraging about his prospects for success in this role.
Already, we’ve seen an alignment of incentives between Kurt and PBI shareholders. This makes sense, as he is the largest individual shareholder and has 80% of his net worth invested in the company. In the employment letter signed on May 21, it listed his annual salary at a mere $40k, a $500k annual target bonus contingent on hitting certain metrics, and a $3m long-term incentive award made up of stock option grants, which would vest in three equal tranches at strike prices of $12, $14, and $16. These strike prices give me comfort my earlier price targets and return scenarios for the next few years are reasonable.