This Clydesdale isn’t a One-Trick Pony
Key takeaways:
1) The undisputed King of Beers is trading at a pauper-like price
2) Possesses an incredibly resilient cash flow profile regardless of economic backdrop or backlash from controversial marketing campaigns
3) Controls nearly 2x the global market share as its next closest competitor and features a whopping 20 brands with over $1 bil. of annual revenues.
One of my top New Year’s resolutions for 2025 is to worry less.  Admittedly as an investor, this is an ambitious goal.  Whether it's the stratospheric valuations for the Mag 7, looming tariffs, or ongoing Middle East tensions, today’s investing landscape is full of uncertainties and potential pitfalls.  One name that I believe will at least help ease some of these anxieties is BUD, which looks especially attractive following value’s notable underperformance versus growth during Q4 24. 
As a quick background, Anheuser-Busch InBev SA/NV (NYSE: BUD) is the world’s largest brewer by volume and one of the world’s top ten consumer companies by revenues.  It produces, markets, distributes, and sells a diversified portfolio of 500+ beer and other malt beverage brands.  Its four global brands include Budweiser, Corona, Stella Artois, and Michelob ULTRA among the 20 of its brands which generated gross revenues of over $1 bil. in 2023, giving it the strongest portfolio in the industry.  BrandZ ranked seven of BUD’s brands (Budweiser, Brahma, Bud Light, Corona, Michelob ULTRA, Skol, and Stella Artois) in its Global Top Ten most valuable beer brands.  Throughout its storied history, BUD has grown both organically and through acquisitions such as the $100 bil.+ merger with SABMiller in October 2016 and the $20 bil. combination with Grupo Modelo in 2013.  BUD’s 2023 revenue exceeded $59 bil. while its adj EBITDA was nearly $20 bil.  In 2023, roughly 25% of its revenues were generated in NAM (22% of total revenues from US), 28% in Middle Americas, 20% in South America, 14% in EMEA, and 11% in Asia Pacific. 
BUD has seen its share price decline over 25% since the end of Q3 24.  This compares to a roughly 3% increase in the S&P 500, a 9% decline for iShares Global Consumer Staples ETF (KXI), and a 4% decline for peer Molson Coors (NYSE: TAP) over that same time period.  What’s surprising about BUD’s recent share price downdraft is that it comes following a Q3 24 earnings beat in late October.  Adj EPS was $0.98, solidly above consensus $0.89 as margin expansion (adj EBITDA margins up nearly 170 bps y/y) and lower financing costs more than offset a top-line miss ($15.05 bil. revenues v. consensus of $15.57 bil.).  BUD even upped its buyback to $2 bil., more than double the prior year’s pace, and upwardly revised its FY24 adj EBITDA growth outlook to 6-8% from 4-8% previously.  Despite all these positives, investors punished the stock (it fell roughly 8% on the day of its earnings announcement) largely due to 2.4% y/y downtick in volumes, which was worse than expected.  Recall that volumes fell 1.7% y/y in 2023.  YTD 2024 volumes are down 1.3% y/y.  I view BUD’s latest pullback following headlines from earlier today that the outgoing US surgeon general is recommending adding cancer risk warnings on alcohol labels as an over-reaction and see a vastly improved risk/reward dynamic at its current sub-$50/sh price.
Although BUD did stub its toe badly in 2023 with the Dylan Mulvaney Bud Light marketing fiasco, it has managed to regain its mojo, especially internationally.  In fact, in Q3 24 BUD gained or maintained market share in 60% of its markets.  Even in arguably its most beleaguered market, the United States, mgmt. noted that Michelob ULTRA and Busch Light have recently gained market share, signaling that the fallout from Bud Light to its other brands is indeed contained.  Another under-appreciated aspect of the BUD story is the continued growth of its premium brands, which still represent less than 40% of total volumes.  Simply stated, BUD remains a price maker, not a price taker with a dominant global market share in the beer industry.  Further, FCF generation remains robust at roughly $9 bil. annually, enabling both debt repayment and return of capital through the buyback and dividend, to a lesser extent.  BUD also has an advantaged cost of capital (4% average interest rate on its debt with 14 years average time to maturity).  Last but not least, FY24 will mark another year of roughly 7% y/y adj EBITDA growth, keeping this brewing giant well on track with its medium-term goal of 4-8% annual growth.
I take comfort in owning a name in which one of its key brands was just supplanted by another one of its brands as the top beer on draft in the US.  That's something that I would categorize as a good versus bad problem.  Similarly, despite global volume growth remaining subdued this year, BUD now expects to achieve the high end of its original revenue guidance of 4-8% given the continued success of its premiumization strategy.  As a deep value investor, I'm a big believer in value over volume.  And that's exactly what BUD is delivering.  Its adj EBITDA margins have begun to rebound from a 2023 trough of slightly under 34% with all signs pointing to further margin expansion in the years ahead from a likely 35% margin in 2024.  BUD’s adj EBITDA margins are still some 500 bps below what it averaged in the three years before the pandemic hit in 2020.  Thus, I see margin risk skewed to the upside versus downside over the medium term.
I see a price target of $70/sh for BUD and 40%+ upside from present levels.  My valuation imbeds revenues of $60.75 bil. and an adj EBITDA margin of 35.6% and implies roughly 10.3x EV/EBITDA and 19.7x P/E.  Over the last decade, BUD has commanded roughly 12.2x EV/EBITDA and 19.7x P/E as seen in the table below.
Conclusion:
Bottom line is that this King of Beers has largely put the 2023 Bud Light controversy in the rear view mirror and is back to delivering both margin expansion and mid-to-high single digits adj EBITDA growth.  It remains a global consumer staples powerhouse with a resilient cash flow profile and solid l-t outlook.  Whether it’s the roughly $9 bil. of FCF this company generates annually, or its 20 brands that each produce over $1 bil. in annual revenues, or its I-grade rated balance sheet (3.2x net debt/EBITDA) highlighted by a WA maturity of 14 years at a coupon of 4% for its debt, there’s plenty to like here.