Description
I am long the shares of Reddit (ticker RDDT US) and think it is a compelling multi-year investment.  The company went public last year.  Reddit is known as the Internet’s forum where users congregate around common interests, ask others for guidance and get trusted recommendations, and also where businesses lurk to monitor customer feedback/complaints and track product buzz / brand perceptions.  In these areas, Reddit defeated competitors such as Yahoo Answers and Quora.  Historically, the Reddit platform often had a reputation for being cantankerous and its moderators (mods) as being combative and unreceptive to top-down platform changes made by Reddit’s management; and from businesses’ POV, Reddit was not viewed as a ‘brand-safe’ platform for advertising.  In more recent years, Reddit has been modernizing and undergoing a rapid evolution towards a more sophisticated digital ads and data-licensing platform.  Reddit also has nascent untapped opportunities in increasing engagement (via Chat and Answers) and finding new revenue sources (through a Patreon-like creator economy and affiliate ads-business).   Today, Reddit is considered a relatively contentious company among Internet sector analysts.  The bear case on Reddit centers on generic top-of-funnel Internet risk from AI, fears that the user base will top out due to onboarding frictions and lack of stickiness, as well as the perceived riskiness of the Google partnership.  I view these risks as overblown, and I think that Reddit’s market value is too low for the resiliency and unique growth opportunities that Reddit has. Reddit is currently run-rating at annualized $1.4B of revenue, $14.50 of annualized ARPU per DAU, and $300M of FCF before stock comp (c20% margin).  I expect that over the next 5 years, Reddit will grow revenue at a >25% CAGR  and FCF per diluted share at a >50% CAGR.  I expect >$12 of diluted FCF per share in 2030.  At a 20x exit multiple, this results in a >15% IRR from today’s share price of c.$118.  
Unique, resilient platform
Reddit launched in 2005 and its founding team was in the inaugural class of the startup accelerator YCombinator.  One of Reddit’s co-founders Steve Huffman is currently Reddit’s CEO.  Reddit is now the 9th-most visited website globally, but despite that it has a relatively small number of very highly engaged users i.e. 100M daily active users (DAUs).
Reddit has a rich and colourful history as an Internet destination, and it has survived and thrived despite historical monetization challenges, changes in ownership, significant management turnover and mutinies by its moderators e.g. the 2014/15 backlash against the firing of a popular mod and the 2023 subreddit blackouts after Reddit ended free access to its APIs.  I assume that VIC members generally have some familiarity with Reddit and if that is not the case, I think VIC members see the value and user attraction of text-based, BBS-like Internet forums where users can flock around common interests, hobbies or professions (and VIC is a unique example of one).  I personally enjoy using Reddit for my hobbies as well as for investment research, as there are many subreddits you can read to see the user and practitioner conversations in specific sub-industries.  E.g. I wrote-up Alcon (ALC) on VIC a few years ago and subreddits like r/contacts, r/optometry and r/ophthalmology are helpful for understanding that business.  I think many other VIC members probably do something similar.  And more generally, over the years, the r/SecurityAnalysis subreddit has also been a valuable resource to keep abreast of quarterly letters from investors.  Reddit has a bit of a learning curve e.g. new users often find that their posts get taken down by mods (“read the FAQ first before asking this question that countless others have asked before in this subreddit”, etc) but after you get over that hump, the platform is quite useful / enjoyable. 
Reddit’s founders sold the company to the publisher Conde Nast/Advance in 2006 and left the company soon after. Reddit started serving ads in 2009, but for the next few years the company still struggled to generate a profit and limit cash-burn.  In 2015, Huffman and co-founder Alexis Ohanian returned to the company.  They are credited with modernizing the business and markedly increasing the speed of Reddit’s new product evolution and experimentation.  They’ve hired several executives and PMs from META/FB and GOOG and significantly improved Reddit’s ad capabilities beyond traditional banner ads towards more sophisticated targeting.  Today Reddit earns $14.50 of annualized ARPU per DAU, which is in the same neighborhood as Pinterest and SNAP but it is dwarfed by that of META (>$50 per DAU), and that delta is even understated when you consider how global META now is vs how relatively US-centric Reddit currently is.   Overall, Reddit’s per-DAU profitability is around Facebook’s late 2013 level, right before Instagram began serving ads.  Reddit only recently started spitting out meaningful cash-flow and I believe the current financials are burdened by investments that will be bearing fruit in the future quarters.  
But it is important to manage expectations.  There are four solid reasons why Reddit won’t match META’s ARPU level anytime soon: (1) time spent on FB/IG platforms is almost always by logged-in users whereas lots of Reddit consumption is by people who either do not have a Reddit account or are not logged-in, and this significantly limits what Reddit knows about the user and thus the precision of ad targeting; only a portion of registered Reddit users post actively and create the content (UGC); (2) FB/IG are much better at ‘pushing’ content that you might like to see both due to the inherent nature of the format and being better at AI; Reddit historically is about ‘pull’, i.e. users initiate a visit to Reddit with a predetermined question / idea in mind and won’t always browse off to other subreddits; this contributes to the big difference in daily engaged minutes spent on the different platforms; (3) the scale of FB/IG is truly massive i.e. very global, very dense, and it has user bases in the billions - this is attractive to larger advertisers not only because the platforms can absorb more ad spend, but also because as the user base grows, the improvement in the platform’s ability to target effectively grows non-linearly, increasing ad ROI non-linearly; (4) IG Reels are well-suited to video and video has a higher monetization efficiency, and the horizontal (or vertical) ‘swipe’ motion to skip/ navigate away from a full-screen video ad on a mobile device is less taxing for the user and allows IG to increase ad-load in a way that avoids annoying the user (e.g. compare this to the aggravating unskippable Youtube ads).
All that said, Reddit has had some decent traction in ads, growing ad revenue from <$500M in 2021 (ARPU $9) to $1.4B currently (ARPU c.$14).  META and GOOG are still the gorillas in the market, drawing the vast majority (50-70%) of large digital advertisers’ spend, with the rest apportioned between Reddit, PINS, Snapchat, Applovin, and a smaller portion to the likes of X.  And Reddit has upside in ARPU not just from increased targeting sophistication and advertiser mindshare that comes with the growth in the size and engagement of its user-base, but also by increasing ad-load.  Ad-load on Reddit is below that of other platforms, especially IG and Youtube. There are several levers that Reddit management can pull to drive revenue but I like that they are being thoughtful, long-term oriented and gradual in pulling those levers.  Huffman is cognizant that users, mods and UGC are essential to the platform. 
Huffman shepherded the company through controversies like the website redesign and the 2023 API blocking.  The latter was a reasonable move by Reddit as it limits the ability of external AI to siphon Reddit’s UGC data for free.  To increase user stickiness and grow DAUs further, Reddit launched a group chat/group threads feature (currently barely promoted) and announced plans to introduce paywalled content.  The latter will effectively allow content creators to create and oversee their own subreddits that will be either entirely paywalled or have tiers of free and subscriber-only content, and earn a portion of the subscription - a logical move that is copying other platforms like Twitch and may siphon away some business from others like Patreon.  Reddit already has a paid user subscription product (Reddit Premium, f/ka Reddit Gold) that is ad-free and has cosmetic benefits like better avatars, but the revenue from this is so far immaterial.  
Perhaps the most consequential recent decisions made by Steve Huffman and RDDT’s management are the 2024 partnerships with Google and OpenAI.  The RDDT/GOOG partnership enables Google to access Reddit’s API and means that Reddit answers are more prominently featured in Google core searches and Google AI searches, e.g. example below.  
The RDDT/OpenAI partnership formalizes OAI’s access to Reddit APIs and makes it easier for OAI to train on / fetch Reddit data. It preserves an important tendency of ChatGPT answers to reference Reddit for user queries like “what are people saying about [X]?" e.g. "what are people saying about Assassin’s Creed’s Shadows?”.  Besides their strategic value, these partnerships generate revenue for RDDT in the ‘Other revenue’ business segment.  This revenue is less than 10% of RDDT’s consolidated revenue but it should grow in absolute $ value long-term significantly, and Reddit's management signalled future licensing deals are expected to be quite significant.  I am speculating, but a big, all-encompassing deal with META or Apple would be a long-term highly consequential and short-term market-moving event for Reddit, I believe.
What does AI mean for Reddit’s prospects specifically? I think it’s a long-term positive.  As the proportion of AI-generated content (some call it ‘slop’) on the Internet increases, I think the relative value of trusted UGC will increase.  I think the GOOG/OAI partnerships are an early signpost showing that Google and OAI have a similar expectation.  And, in a world where ‘the truth’ / our collective understanding /  the zeitgeist will be increasingly determined by what is spat out by AIs, any single person’s path to influencing it (and influencing the posterity’s perception of that person or of a particular topic important to that person) will be through UGC, and specifically UGC that is bound to be picked up and highly indexed/ranked by those AI algorithms.  This may end up being particularly important for businesses.  
Risks
Reddit’s current valuation of 17x TEV/revenue magnifies the risks.  Besides the AI and Google risks (discussed above; these are the ones that the analysts covering the company are laser-focused on), Reddit may underperform if management fails in continuing to grow its user base and user engagement, e.g. due to things like managerial missteps / redesigns that irreversibly alienate users, failures to adequately penetrate ex-US / non-English-speaking markets (e.g. Reddit’s AI translation initiatives there may fail), and/or competition.  Competition - this is related to the core problem that is faced by pretty much all of the ad/adtech companies other than META. And that problem, of course, is META.  The sophistication / ROI and reach of Meta’s ad business is in a league of its own.  That success allows Meta to be the employer of choice in adtech and ad-related data science (and they can also pay the most), which historically basically meant that most of the others (Reddit, Twitter/X, Pinterest, Snapchat, etc) were staffed by engineers/PMs less strong than those at Meta.  Another other key perceived risk around Reddit (and this is largely true for any social network / UGC platform) is NSFW content, but I think that risk might be overstated.  E.g. below is the organic traffic at Reddit total vs one of the largest NSFW subreddits.  NSFW subreddit organic traffic growth is lower than that of Reddit overall; I’ve also checked this against normal popular subreddits.  I think there's lots of limitations in using 3rd party research/estimation/'alt data' tools like Semrush and Alexa but at least directionally this gives more comfort than if the results showed the opposite.
Summary
Reddit is a good business that sits at an interesting point in its evolution where further growth in the user base, engagement and engagement-boosting ancillaries (e.g. easier onboarding, Chat, Answers, paywalls, creator economy) will result in a disproportionately good improvement in ad ROI and ad tool sophistication, driving strong top-line growth (>20%) and even better growth in dropdown to profits and FCF.   Reddit screens cheap on outer-year consensus estimates, highlighting the deep worries in the analyst / investor community about the AI question and the perceived risk of Google reliance for traffic.  I believe Reddit is actually in an enviable position to benefit from AI, and occupies an increasingly strategic position in the future of the Internet.   I expect share price outperformance as Reddit more-or-less delivers on the future sequence of consensus financial forecasts and the growth-rate decay in the outer years is less than expected, while the fears about the riskiness of the business model gradually become less acute. 
<|endoftext|>
