
2025	2026
Price:		6.90		EPS		0.27	0.27
Shares Out. (in M):		83		P/E		25.6	25.6
Market Cap (in $M):		577		P/FCF		20.2	19.0
Net Debt (in $M):		-5		EBIT		35	31
TEV (in $M):		572		TEV/EBIT		16.5	18.3

Summary investment thesis
Computer Modelling Group is a software and consulting business in the energy industry, traded on the Toronto Exchange (CMG.CA) with a CAD570m market cap. It is a leading provider of unconventional reservoir simulation software to major oil and energy companies, a crucial tool for predicting and optimizing oil and gas production. CMG boasts 65-70% recurring revenue with high gross margins and low capital intensity, leading to robust cash conversion. The Company operates in a market with two other major suppliers and significant barriers to entry due to strong scientific and technological foundations.
The core investment thesis hinges on CMG being a profitable business undergoing a significant transformation, with its investment case largely pillared on the deployment of excess capital for M&A. A pivotal element is the "total cultural change" driven by the significant influence of Constellation Software’s heritage through key board members and executives. This shift, pushed by the major shareholder Edgepoint Investment Group, aims for a more commercial, growth-oriented organization focused on Return on Invested Capital (ROIC), with management incentives tied to these metrics.
Recent acquisitions have already evolved CMG into a multi-product business spanning from seismic to reservoir to production simulation and have driven total revenue above CAD100m after a stagnant decade. The business suffered a setback in FY2025 given the declining oil prices and the dilutive effects of the acquired businesses. That led the stock down by 45%.
Short-term catalysts are successful post-deal integrations leading to increase of margins and an acceleration of the M&A flow.
I view the current weakness as a cyclical downturn, creating a favorable framework for the long-term owner, with the core business competitive moat expected to remain intact and the ongoing transformation that envisages the disciplined deployment of excess capital to pursue long-term consistent growth.
Computer Modelling Group (“CMG” or “Company”), last discussed on VIC in January 2024, is down by ca. 45% in the last 12 months.
CMG is a leading provider of reservoir simulation software to energy companies. The business involves using computer models to simulate the flow of fluids (oil, gas, water) through porous rock formations to help predict and optimize oil and gas production. This field is crucial for the oil and gas sector, helping companies make informed decisions about field development, reservoir management, and production forecasts. The reservoir software space currently consists of three major suppliers (including the Company) and a number of small ones. The customer base is made up of the largest oil and energy companies. CMG's leadership in the unconventional sector means that the companies at the forefront of tackling some of the most technologically challenging oil and gas plays in the world rely on CMG’s software to make critical, multi-million-dollar decisions. The tools provide the insight needed to turn these difficult resources into economically viable reserves.
The Company boasts 65-70% recurring revenue with high gross margin at low capital intensity translating into robust cash conversion.
Originally, CMG was established as a research institution within the university. Its software suite presents 40+ years of data and application history.
After a stagnant decade, in 2022 the Company announced the CMG 4.0 long-term transformation strategy aimed at (i) driving organic growth in the core business and (ii) allocating excess capital to acquisitions of businesses that may diversify and enlarge the products offering. The management thinks it is pivotal to shift the revenue mix of acquired businesses towards recurring software revenue as much as possible.
Competition
Key competitors in the field making the “big 3” with CMG are:
Schlumberger, a giant in the oilfield services sector, offers the industry-standard ECLIPSE and the next-generation INTERSECT simulators. These tools are deeply embedded in the workflows of many of the world's largest oil and gas companies.
Halliburton, another major oilfield service provider, offers its reservoir simulation solutions through its Landmark brand, with Nexus being its flagship product. Nexus is known for its capabilities in handling large and complex reservoir models.
While CMG is a pure-play software company, its main competitors, Schlumberger and Halliburton, are massive oilfield service conglomerates where software is just one part of a much larger portfolio.
CMG, while smaller than the two integrated giants, is a highly respected pure-play software company that holds a significant market share. Its suite of simulators, including IMEX, GEM, and STARS, are considered by many to be best-in-class for specific applications, particularly in enhanced oil recovery and the simulation of unconventional reservoirs.
Schlumberger, Halliburton, and CMG constitute the top tier of suppliers that command the majority of the market. Market size estimates of the global core reservoir simulation software fall within the range USD1.5-1.8bn. The seismic services market, recently entered by CMG via acquisitions, is significantly larger than the reservoir simulation software one.
Rock Flow Dynamics: while sometimes considered a "challenger," RFD's tNavigator has gained significant market share and is often cited alongside the other major players due to its speed and comprehensive features. RFD is a pure-play software and consulting company, similar in business model to CMG. According to some insights, it operates on a smaller scale.
Acquisitions
As far as M&A agenda is concerned, the Company targets businesses that may enhance and diversify the software solutions across the upstream energy workflow. CMG also intends to explore opportunities to diversify further within midstream and downstream energy and adjacent industries.
With the 2023 (Bluware - Headwave) and 2024 (Sharp Reflections) acquisitions in the adjacent market of seismic solutions, the Company started to evolve into a multi-product business spanning from seismic to reservoir to production simulation.
Bluware is an open-source software and service company specializing in cloud and interactive deep learning solutions for subsurface decision-making, including seismic interpretation. At acquisition, Bluware had got a sticky service-heavy revenue mix that funded the software development. According to the management, the strategic value of the acquisition is to furtherly accelerate the growth of the software part of the business. While CMG works with reservoir engineers, Bluware deals with seismic geoscientists: unlocking the relationships and cross-selling are two critical themes.
Sharp Reflections is a cloud-based seismic processing and interpretation platform. Built on modern advancements in high performance computing, it combines pre-stack seismic data visualization, processing, and interpretation.
What happened in the last 12 months
The organic business experienced a setback in correspondence with declining oil prices that pushed some customers to reduce the budget and overhaul the energy transition and renewables strategies.
FY2025 figures highlighted 19% surge in revenue driven by the consolidation of acquisitions while posting 1% organic decline. EBITDA margin plunged from 40% to 33%.
The management remains cautious on growth in FY2026 assuming the current framework still persists. Moreover, the management forecasts a 6-7m year-over-year decline in professional services revenue driven by the wind-down of a funded project development with Shell.
CMG recorded declining revenue up to 2023 but protected the margins and consistently recorded outstanding cash conversion rate. Margins declined in FY2024 and FY2025 given the dilutive effect of acquired businesses (seismic solution business highlights 14% EBITDA margin).
The impact of the new strategy is visible from FY2024. In the last couple of years, cash flow was allocated to execute acquisitions and that permitted to drive revenue above CAD100m.
The Company has historically distributed dividends. This is something that could change to support M&A.
CMG is fully equity funded. Return on Equity, steadily in the region of 40-50%, was down to 30% in FY2025 given the weakening performance (misleading ROIC figures up to 2020 as per the representation of leases).
nvestment considerations
This is a globally recognized brand in the reference field serving major energy companies. CMG is a leader in providing specialized tools to manage the complexities of unconventional reservoirs. The needed strong scientific and technological foundations are a huge barrier to entry.
Having distinguished in the segment of complex recovery should represent a strength in a scenario where incremental production is coming from areas that are harder to recover.
Management claims to have identified multiple growth levers. The asserted catalyst comes firstly from the shift to a more commercial organization committed to seek new market opportunities through dedicated commercial and marketing. The strategic objectives are (i) to keep generating high return on capital and (ii) to diversify by products and geography in order to seize growth. Secondly, in a small core market of reservoir simulation software, the investment case hinges on the M&A execution in adjacent segments. Thanks to the prevalent stable recurring business and predictable cash flows, the Company can self-fund the acquisitions. The goal is to optimize and accelerate market penetration of newly acquired businesses leveraging on the global reputation of CMG.
Weighty Constellation Software (CSI.CA) influence. It is a total cultural change for a Company originally built as a research unit. The transformation was pushed by the controlling shareholder, Edgepoint Investment Group (“EIG” - https://edgepointwealth.com/portfolio/edgepoint-canadian-portfolio/), retaining 28% of the share capital, whose Partner Andrew Pastor is a Board Member at Constellation Software. Mark Miller, key person at Constellation Software, since 2022 is Chair of the Board. He is the CEO of Volaris Group and Director and Chief Operating Officer of Constellation Software, the parent company of Volaris. Miller likely selected the new CEO in 2022, Pramod Jain. Another Director with Constellation Software background, Birgit Troy, comes from the M&A department of Lumine Group, an international software provider spun off from CSI. The private investor John Billowits, Board Member from 2021 to 2024, is a veteran at Constellation Software. Mohammad Khalaf, Head of Corporate Development since 2022, comes from M&A at one of the operating companies of Constellation Software.
From the standpoint of the long-term owner, it is highly beneficial the presence of a large controlling shareholder. EIG built its large position starting from 2020 (10%), doubled in 2022 and then increased year after year reaching 28%.
Management focuses on Return on Invested Capital and Free Cash Flow. Since 2022 incentives are tied to this, aligning the interests of management and shareholders. Executives share ownership completes the set of tools to drive management incentives (40% of annual bonus to be used for purchasing CMG’s shares).
Taking a short-term perspective, the market priced the organic growth “lost momentum”. This should be a cyclical downturn and may create the right framework for the long-term owner. The core business’ moat should be intact. Stock may react upon achievement of post-deal integration targets and accelerating M&A flow.
CMG, offering a 5% current yield in the midst of a cyclical setback, appears a strategic investment into a robust cash generative business whose management has started to execute a deep transformation strategy pillared on the disciplined deployment of excess capital.
Risks
Persistent weakness of oil prices will dampen the budget of energy companies. Also demand for seismic data is highly related to the commodity price. We saw the effects unfolding in FY2025.
Consolidation in the energy sector is a long-term threat and tends to reduce the market size. That assigns a massive value to the relationships (to strengthen the commercial side of the business).
Major energy companies may internalize certain tools and/or discontinue partnerships/projects (Coflow-Shell).
<|endoftext|>
