 Company Background 
The Company designs, manufactures and markets smartphones, personal computers, tablets, wearables and
accessories, and sells a variety of related services. The Company’s fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week
period that ends on the last Saturday of September.
 Products 
iPhone
iPhone ® is the Company’s line of smartphones based on its iOS operating system. The iPhone line
includes iPhone 15 Pro, iPhone 15, iPhone 14, iPhone 13 and iPhone SE ® .
Mac
Mac ® is the Company’s line of personal computers based on its macOS ® operating system. The Mac line
includes laptops MacBook Air ® and MacBook Pro ® , as well as desktops iMac ® , Mac mini ® , Mac
Studio ® and Mac Pro ® .
iPad
iPad ® is the Company’s line of multipurpose tablets based on its iPadOS ® operating system. The iPad
line includes iPad Pro ® , iPad Air ® , iPad and iPad mini ® .
Wearables, Home and Accessories
Wearables includes smartwatches and wireless headphones. The Company’s line of smartwatches, based on
its watchOS ® operating system, includes Apple Watch Ultra™ 2, Apple Watch ® Series 9 and Apple Watch
SE ® . The Company’s line of wireless headphones includes AirPods ® , AirPods Pro ® , AirPods Ma™
and Beats ® products.
Home includes Apple TV ® , the Company’s media streaming and gaming device based on its tvOS ®
operating system, and HomePod ® and HomePod mini ® , high-fidelity wireless smart speakers.
Accessories includes Apple-branded and third-party accessories.
 Services 
Advertising
The Company’s advertising services include third-party licensing arrangements and the Company’s own
advertising platforms.
AppleCare
The Company offers a portfolio of fee-based service and support products under the AppleCare ® brand.
The offerings provide priority access to Apple technical support, access to the global Apple
authorized service network for repair and replacement services, and in many cases additional coverage
for instances of accidental damage or theft and loss, depending on the country and type of product.
Cloud Services
The Company’s cloud services store and keep customers’ content up-to-date and available across
multiple Apple devices and Windows personal computers.
Digital Content
The Company operates various platforms, including the App Store ® , that allow customers to discover
and download applications and digital content, such as books, music, video, games and podcasts.
The Company also offers digital content through subscription-based services, including Apple Arcade ®
, a game subscription service; Apple Fitness+ SM , a personalized fitness service; Apple Music ® ,
which offers users a curated listening eperience with on-demand radio stations; Apple News+ ® , a
subscription news and magazine service; and Apple TV+ ® , which offers eclusive original content and
live sports.
Payment Services
The Company offers payment services, including Apple Card ® , a co-branded credit card, and Apple Pay
® , a cashless payment service.
 Segments 
The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable segments
consist of the Americas, Europe, Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific. Americas includes
both North and South America. Europe includes European countries, as well as India, the Middle East
and Africa. Greater China includes China mainland, Hong Kong and Taiwan. Rest of Asia Pacific
includes Australia and those Asian countries not included in the Company’s other reportable segments.
Although the reportable segments provide similar hardware and software products and similar services,
each one is managed separately to better align with the location of the Company’s customers and
distribution partners and the unique market dynamics of each geographic region.
 Markets and Distribution 
The Company’s customers are primarily in the consumer, small and mid-sized business, education,
enterprise and government markets. The Company sells its products and resells third-party products in
most of its major markets directly to customers through its retail and online stores and its direct
sales force. The Company also employs a variety of indirect distribution channels, such as third-
party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers and resellers. During 2023, the Company’s net
sales through its direct and indirect distribution channels accounted for 37% and 63%, respectively,
of total net sales.
 Competition 
The markets for the Company’s products and services are highly competitive, and are characterized by
aggressive price competition and resulting downward pressure on gross margins, frequent introduction
of new products and services, short product life cycles, evolving industry standards, continual
improvement in product price and performance characteristics, rapid adoption of technological
advancements by competitors, and price sensitivity on the part of consumers and businesses. Many of
the Company’s competitors seek to compete primarily through aggressive pricing and very low cost
structures, and by imitating the Company’s products and infringing on its intellectual property.
The Company’s ability to compete successfully depends heavily on ensuring the continuing and timely
introduction of innovative new products, services and technologies to the marketplace. The Company
designs and develops nearly the entire solution for its products, including the hardware, operating
system, numerous software applications and related services. Principal competitive factors important
to the Company include price, product and service features (including security features), relative
price and performance, product and service quality and reliability, design innovation, a strong
third-party software and accessories ecosystem, marketing and distribution capability, service and
support, and corporate reputation.
The Company is focused on epanding its market opportunities related to smartphones, personal
computers, tablets, wearables and accessories, and services. The Company faces substantial
competition in these markets from companies that have significant technical, marketing, distribution
and other resources, as well as established hardware, software, and service offerings with large
customer bases. In addition, some of the Company’s competitors have broader product lines, lower-
priced products and a larger installed base of active devices. Competition has been particularly
intense as competitors have aggressively cut prices and lowered product margins. Certain competitors
have the resources, eperience or cost structures to provide products at little or no profit or even
at a loss. The Company’s services compete with business models that provide content to users for free
and use illegitimate means to obtain third-party digital content and applications. The Company faces
significant competition as competitors imitate the Company’s product features and applications within
their products, or collaborate to offer integrated solutions that are more competitive than those
they currently offer.
 Supply of Components 
Although most components essential to the Company’s business are generally available from multiple
sources, certain components are currently obtained from single or limited sources. The Company also
competes for various components with other participants in the markets for smartphones, personal
computers, tablets, wearables and accessories. Therefore, many components used by the Company,
including those that are available from multiple sources, are at times subject to industry-wide
shortage and significant commodity pricing fluctuations.
The Company uses some custom components that are not commonly used by its competitors, and new
products introduced by the Company often utilize custom components available from only one source.
When a component or product uses new technologies, initial capacity constraints may eist until the
suppliers’ yields have matured or their manufacturing capacities have increased. The continued
availability of these components at acceptable prices, or at all, may be affected if suppliers decide
to concentrate on the production of common components instead of components customized to meet the
Company’s requirements.
The Company has entered into agreements for the supply of many components; however, there can be no
guarantee that the Company will be able to etend or renew these agreements on similar terms, or at
all.
 Research and Development 
Because the industries in which the Company competes are characterized by rapid technological
advances, the Company’s ability to compete successfully depends heavily upon its ability to ensure a
continual and timely flow of competitive products, services and technologies to the marketplace. The
Company continues to develop new technologies to enhance eisting products and services, and to
epand the range of its offerings through research and development (“R&D”), licensing of intellectual
property and acquisition of third-party businesses and technology.
 Intellectual Property 
The Company currently holds a broad collection of intellectual property rights relating to certain
aspects of its hardware devices, accessories, software and services. This includes patents, designs,
copyrights, trademarks and other forms of intellectual property rights in the U.S. and various
foreign countries. Although the Company believes the ownership of such intellectual property rights
is an important factor in differentiating its business and that its success does depend in part on
such ownership, the Company relies primarily on the innovative skills, technical competence and
marketing abilities of its personnel.
The Company regularly files patent, design, copyright and trademark applications to protect
innovations arising from its research, development, design and marketing, and is currently pursuing
thousands of applications around the world. Over time, the Company has accumulated a large portfolio
of issued and registered intellectual property rights around the world. No single intellectual
property right is solely responsible for protecting the Company’s products and services. The Company
believes the duration of its intellectual property rights is adequate relative to the epected lives
of its products and services.
In addition to Company-owned intellectual property, many of the Company’s products and services are
designed to include intellectual property owned by third parties. It may be necessary in the future
to seek or renew licenses relating to various aspects of the Company’s products, processes and
services. While the Company has generally been able to obtain such licenses on commercially
reasonable terms in the past, there is no guarantee that such licenses could be obtained in the
future on reasonable terms or at all.
 Business Seasonality and Product Introductions 
The Company has historically eperienced higher net sales in its first quarter compared to other
quarters in its fiscal year due in part to seasonal holiday demand. Additionally, new product and
service introductions can significantly impact net sales, cost of sales and operating epenses. The
timing of product introductions can also impact the Company’s net sales to its indirect distribution
channels as these channels are filled with new inventory following a product launch, and channel
inventory of an older product often declines as the launch of a newer product approaches. Net sales
can also be affected when consumers and distributors anticipate a product introduction.
 Human Capital 
The Company believes it has a talented, motivated and dedicated team, and works to create an
inclusive, safe and supportive environment for all of its team members. As of September 30, 2023, the
Company had approimately 161,000 full-time equivalent employees.
Workplace Practices and Policies
The Company is an equal opportunity employer committed to inclusion and diversity and to providing a
workplace free of harassment or discrimination.
Compensation and Benefits
The Company believes that compensation should be competitive and equitable, and should enable
employees to share in the Company’s success. The Company recognizes its people are most likely to
thrive when they have the resources to meet their needs and the time and support to succeed in their
professional and personal lives. In support of this, the Company offers a wide variety of benefits
for employees around the world and invests in tools and resources that are designed to support
employees’ individual growth and development.
Inclusion and Diversity
The Company is committed to its vision to build and sustain a more inclusive workforce that is
representative of the communities it serves. The Company continues to work to increase diverse
representation at every level, foster an inclusive culture, and support equitable pay and access to
opportunity for all employees.
Engagement
The Company believes that open and honest communication among team members, managers and leaders
helps create an open, collaborative work environment where everyone can contribute, grow and succeed.
Team members are encouraged to come to their managers with questions, feedback or concerns, and the
Company conducts surveys that gauge employee sentiment in areas like career development, manager
performance and inclusivity.
Health and Safety
The Company is committed to protecting its team members everywhere it operates. The Company
identifies potential workplace risks in order to develop measures to mitigate possible hazards. The
Company supports employees with general safety, security and crisis management training, and by
putting specific programs in place for those working in potentially high-hazard environments.
Additionally, the Company works to protect the safety and security of its team members, visitors and
customers through its global security team.
 Available Information 
8-K, and amendments to reports filed pursuant to Sections 13(a) and 15(d) of the Securities Echange
Act of 1934, as amended (the “Echange Act”), are filed with the U.S. Securities and Echange
Commission (the “SEC”). Such reports and other information filed by the Company with the SEC are
available free of charge at investor.apple.com/investor-relations/sec-filings/default.asp when such
reports are available on the SEC’s website. The Company periodically provides certain information for
investors on its corporate website, 
investor.apple.com. This includes press releases and other information about financial performance,
information on environmental, social and governance matters, and details related to the Company’s
10-K is not 
URLs are intended to be inactive tetual references only.
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ Item 1A. Risk Factors │
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
The Company’s business, reputation, results of operations, financial condition and stock price can be
affected by a number of factors, whether currently known or unknown, including those described below.
When any one or more of these risks materialize from time to time, the Company’s business,
reputation, results of operations, financial condition and stock price can be materially and
adversely affected.
Because of the following factors, as well as other factors affecting the Company’s results of
operations and financial condition, past financial performance should not be considered to be a
reliable indicator of future performance, and investors should not use historical trends to
anticipate results or trends in future periods. This discussion of risk factors contains forward-
looking statements.
This section should be read in conjunction with 
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and the consolidated financial statements
and accompanying notes in 
10-K.
 Macroeconomic and Industry Risks 
The Company’s operations and performance depend significantly on global and regional economic
conditions and adverse economic conditions can materially adversely affect the Company’s business,
results of operations and financial condition.
The Company has international operations with sales outside the U.S. representing a majority of the
Company’s total net sales. In addition, the Company’s global supply chain is large and comple and a
majority of the Company’s supplier facilities, including manufacturing and assembly sites, are
located outside the U.S. As a result, the Company’s operations and performance depend significantly
on global and regional economic conditions.
Adverse macroeconomic conditions, including slow growth or recession, high unemployment, inflation,
tighter credit, higher interest rates, and currency fluctuations, can adversely impact consumer
confidence and spending and materially adversely affect demand for the Company’s products and
services. In addition, consumer confidence and spending can be materially adversely affected in
response to changes in fiscal and monetary policy, financial market volatility, declines in income or
asset values, and other economic factors.
In addition to an adverse impact on demand for the Company’s products and services, uncertainty
about, or a decline in, global or regional economic conditions can have a significant impact on the
Company’s suppliers, contract manufacturers, logistics providers, distributors, cellular network
carriers and other channel partners, and developers. Potential outcomes include financial
instability; inability to obtain credit to finance business operations; and insolvency.
Adverse economic conditions can also lead to increased credit and collectibility risk on the
Company’s trade receivables; the failure of derivative counterparties and other financial
institutions; limitations on the Company’s ability to issue new debt; reduced liquidity; and declines
in the fair values of the Company’s financial instruments. These and other impacts can materially
adversely affect the Company’s business, results of operations, financial condition and stock price.
The Company’s business can be impacted by political events, trade and other international disputes,
war, terrorism, natural disasters, public health issues, industrial accidents and other business
interruptions.
Political events, trade and other international disputes, war, terrorism, natural disasters, public
health issues, industrial accidents and other business interruptions can harm or disrupt
international commerce and the global economy, and could have a material adverse effect on the
Company and its customers, suppliers, contract manufacturers, logistics providers, distributors,
cellular network carriers and other channel partners.
The Company has a large, global business with sales outside the U.S. representing a majority of the
Company’s total net sales, and the Company believes that it generally benefits from growth in
international trade. Substantially all of the Company’s manufacturing is performed in whole or in
part by outsourcing partners located primarily in China mainland, India, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan
and Vietnam. Restrictions on international trade, such as tariffs and other controls on imports or
eports of goods, technology or data, can materially adversely affect the Company’s operations and
supply chain and limit the Company’s ability to offer and distribute its products and services to
customers. The impact can be particularly significant if these restrictive measures apply to
countries and regions where the Company derives a significant portion of its revenues and/or has
significant supply chain operations. Restrictive measures can require the Company to take various
actions, including changing suppliers, restructuring business relationships, and ceasing to offer
third-party applications on its platforms. Changing the Company’s operations in accordance with new
or changed restrictions on international trade can be epensive, time-consuming and disruptive to the
Company’s operations. Such restrictions can be announced with little or no advance notice and the
Company may not be able to effectively mitigate all adverse impacts from such measures. For eample,
tensions between governments, including the U.S. and China, have in the past led to tariffs and other
restrictions being imposed on the Company’s business. If disputes and conflicts further escalate in
the future, actions by governments in response could be significantly more severe and restrictive and
could materially adversely affect the Company’s business. Political uncertainty surrounding trade and
other international disputes could also have a negative effect on consumer confidence and spending,
which could adversely affect the Company’s business.
Many of the Company’s operations and facilities, as well as critical business operations of the
Company’s suppliers and contract manufacturers, are in locations that are prone to earthquakes and
other natural disasters. In addition, such operations and facilities are subject to the risk of
interruption by fire, power shortages, nuclear power plant accidents and other industrial accidents,
terrorist attacks and other hostile acts, ransomware and other cybersecurity attacks, labor disputes,
public health issues, including pandemics such as the COVID-19 pandemic, and other events beyond the
Company’s control. Global climate change is resulting in certain types of natural disasters, such as
droughts, floods, hurricanes and wildfires, occurring more frequently or with more intense effects.
Such events can make it difficult or impossible for the Company to manufacture and deliver products
to its customers, create delays and inefficiencies in the Company’s supply and manufacturing chain,
and result in slowdowns and outages to the Company’s service offerings, and negatively impact
consumer spending and demand in affected areas. Following an interruption to its business, the
Company can require substantial recovery time, eperience significant ependitures to resume
operations, and lose significant sales. Because the Company relies on single or limited sources for
the supply and manufacture of many critical components, a business interruption affecting such
sources would eacerbate any negative consequences to the Company.
The Company’s operations are also subject to the risks of industrial accidents at its suppliers and
contract manufacturers. While the Company’s suppliers are required to maintain safe working
environments and operations, an industrial accident could occur and could result in serious injuries
or loss of life, disruption to the Company’s business, and harm to the Company’s reputation. Major
public health issues, including pandemics such as the COVID-19 pandemic, have adversely affected, and
could in the future materially adversely affect, the Company due to their impact on the global
economy and demand for consumer products; the imposition of protective public safety measures, such
as stringent employee travel restrictions and limitations on freight services and the movement of
products between regions; and disruptions in the Company’s operations, supply chain and sales and
distribution channels, resulting in interruptions to the supply of current products and offering of
eisting services, and delays in production ramps of new products and development of new services.
While the Company maintains insurance coverage for certain types of losses, such insurance coverage
may be insufficient to cover all losses that may arise.
Global markets for the Company’s products and services are highly competitive and subject to rapid
technological change, and the Company may be unable to compete effectively in these markets.
The Company’s products and services are offered in highly competitive global markets characterized by
aggressive price competition and resulting downward pressure on gross margins, frequent introduction
of new products and services, short product life cycles, evolving industry standards, continual
improvement in product price and performance characteristics, rapid adoption of technological
advancements by competitors, and price sensitivity on the part of consumers and businesses.
The Company’s ability to compete successfully depends heavily on ensuring the continuing and timely
introduction of innovative new products, services and technologies to the marketplace. The Company
designs and develops nearly the entire solution for its products, including the hardware, operating
system, numerous software applications and related services. As a result, the Company must make
significant investments in R&D. There can be no assurance these investments will achieve epected
returns, and the Company may not be able to develop and market new products and services
successfully.
The Company currently holds a significant number of patents, trademarks and copyrights and has
registered, and applied to register, additional patents, trademarks and copyrights. In contrast, many
of the Company’s competitors seek to compete primarily through aggressive pricing and very low cost
structures, and by imitating the Company’s products and infringing on its intellectual property.
Effective intellectual property protection is not consistently available in every country in which
the Company operates. If the Company is unable to continue to develop and sell innovative new
products with attractive margins or if competitors infringe on the Company’s intellectual property,
the Company’s ability to maintain a competitive advantage could be materially adversely affected.
The Company has a minority market share in the global smartphone, personal computer and tablet
markets. The Company faces substantial competition in these markets from companies that have
significant technical, marketing, distribution and other resources, as well as established hardware,
software and digital content supplier relationships. In addition, some of the Company’s competitors
have broader product lines, lower-priced products and a larger installed base of active devices.
Competition has been particularly intense as competitors have aggressively cut prices and lowered
product margins. Certain competitors have the resources, eperience or cost structures to provide
products at little or no profit or even at a loss. Some of the markets in which the Company competes
have from time to time eperienced little to no growth or contracted overall.
Additionally, the Company faces significant competition as competitors imitate the Company’s product
features and applications within their products or collaborate to offer solutions that are more
competitive than those they currently offer. The Company also epects competition to intensify as
competitors imitate the Company’s approach to providing components seamlessly within their offerings
or work collaboratively to offer integrated solutions.
The Company’s services also face substantial competition, including from companies that have
significant resources and eperience and have established service offerings with large customer
bases. The Company competes with business models that provide content to users for free. The Company
also competes with illegitimate means to obtain third-party digital content and applications.
The Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition depend substantially on the
Company’s ability to continually improve its products and services to maintain their functional and
design advantages. There can be no assurance the Company will be able to continue to provide products
and services that compete effectively.
 Business Risks 
To remain competitive and stimulate customer demand, the Company must successfully manage frequent
introductions and transitions of products and services.
Due to the highly volatile and competitive nature of the markets and industries in which the Company
competes, the Company must continually introduce new products, services and technologies, enhance
eisting products and services, effectively stimulate customer demand for new and upgraded products
and services, and successfully manage the transition to these new and upgraded products and services.
The success of new product and service introductions depends on a number of factors, including timely
and successful development, market acceptance, the Company’s ability to manage the risks associated
with new technologies and production ramp-up issues, the availability of application software for the
Company’s products, the effective management of purchase commitments and inventory levels in line
with anticipated product demand, the availability of products in appropriate quantities and at
epected costs to meet anticipated demand, and the risk that new products and services may have
quality or other defects or deficiencies. There can be no assurance the Company will successfully
manage future introductions and transitions of products and services.
The Company depends on component and product manufacturing and logistical services provided by
outsourcing partners, many of which are located outside of the U.S.
Substantially all of the Company’s manufacturing is performed in whole or in part by outsourcing
partners located primarily in China mainland, India, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and Vietnam, and a
significant concentration of this manufacturing is currently performed by a small number of
outsourcing partners, often in single locations. Changes or additions to the Company’s supply chain
require considerable time and resources and involve significant risks and uncertainties. The Company
has also outsourced much of its transportation and logistics management. While these arrangements can
lower operating costs, they also reduce the Company’s direct control over production and
distribution. Such diminished control has from time to time and may in the future have an adverse
effect on the quality or quantity of products manufactured or services provided, or adversely affect
the Company’s fleibility to respond to changing conditions. Although arrangements with these
partners may contain provisions for product defect epense reimbursement, the Company generally
remains responsible to the consumer for warranty and out-of-warranty service in the event of product
defects and eperiences unanticipated product defect liabilities from time to time. While the Company
relies on its partners to adhere to its supplier code of conduct, violations of the supplier code of
conduct occur from time to time and can materially adversely affect the Company’s business,
reputation, results of operations and financial condition.
The Company relies on single-source outsourcing partners in the U.S., Asia and Europe to supply and
manufacture many components, and on outsourcing partners primarily located in Asia, for final
assembly of substantially all of the Company’s hardware products. Any failure of these partners to
perform can have a negative impact on the Company’s cost or supply of components or finished goods.
In addition, manufacturing or logistics in these locations or transit to final destinations can be
disrupted for a variety of reasons, including natural and man-made disasters, information technology
system failures, commercial disputes, armed conflict, economic, business, labor, environmental,
public health or political issues, or international trade disputes.
The Company has invested in manufacturing process equipment, much of which is held at certain of its
outsourcing partners, and has made prepayments to certain of its suppliers associated with long-term
supply agreements. While these arrangements help ensure the supply of components and finished goods,
if these outsourcing partners or suppliers eperience severe financial problems or other disruptions
in their business, such continued supply can be reduced or terminated, and the recoverability of
manufacturing process equipment or prepayments can be negatively impacted.
Future operating results depend upon the Company’s ability to obtain components in sufficient
quantities on commercially reasonable terms.
Because the Company currently obtains certain components from single or limited sources, the Company
is subject to significant supply and pricing risks. Many components, including those that are
available from multiple sources, are at times subject to industry-wide shortages and significant
commodity pricing fluctuations that can materially adversely affect the Company’s business, results
of operations and financial condition. For eample, the global semiconductor industry has in the past
eperienced high demand and shortages of supply, which adversely affected the Company’s ability to
obtain sufficient quantities of components and products on commercially reasonable terms or at all.
Such disruptions could occur in the future. While the Company has entered into agreements for the
supply of many components, there can be no assurance the Company will be able to etend or renew
these agreements on similar terms, or at all. Component suppliers may suffer from poor financial
conditions, which can lead to business failure for the supplier or consolidation within a particular
industry, further limiting the Company’s ability to obtain sufficient quantities of components on
commercially reasonable terms or at all. The effects of global or regional economic conditions on the
Company’s suppliers, described in “ The Company’s operations and performance depend significantly on
global and regional economic conditions and adverse economic conditions can materially adversely
affect the Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition, ” above, can also
affect the Company’s ability to obtain components . Therefore, the Company remains subject to
significant risks of supply shortages and price increases that can materially adversely affect its
business, results of operations and financial condition.
The Company’s new products often utilize custom components available from only one source. When a
component or product uses new technologies, initial capacity constraints may eist until the
suppliers’ yields have matured or their manufacturing capacities have increased. The continued
availability of these components at acceptable prices, or at all, can be affected for any number of
reasons, including if suppliers decide to concentrate on the production of common components instead
of components customized to meet the Company’s requirements. When the Company’s supply of components
for a new or eisting product has been delayed or constrained, or when an outsourcing partner has
delayed shipments of completed products to the Company, the Company’s business, results of operations
and financial condition have been adversely affected and future delays or constraints could
materially adversely affect the Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition.
The Company’s business and financial performance could also be materially adversely affected
depending on the time required to obtain sufficient quantities from the source, or to identify and
obtain sufficient quantities from an alternative source.
The Company’s products and services may be affected from time to time by design and manufacturing
defects that could materially adversely affect the Company’s business and result in harm to the
Company’s reputation.
The Company offers comple hardware and software products and services that can be affected by design
and manufacturing defects. Sophisticated operating system software and applications, such as those
offered by the Company, often have issues that can unepectedly interfere with the intended operation
of hardware or software products and services. Defects can also eist in components and products the
Company purchases from third parties. Component defects could make the Company’s products unsafe and
create a risk of environmental or property damage and personal injury. These risks may increase as
the Company’s products are introduced into specialized applications, including health. In addition,
the Company’s service offerings can have quality issues and from time to time eperience outages,
service slowdowns or errors. As a result, from time to time the Company’s services have not performed
as anticipated and may not meet customer epectations. There can be no assurance the Company will be
able to detect and fi all issues and defects in the hardware, software and services it offers.
Failure to do so can result in widespread technical and performance issues affecting the Company’s
products and services. In addition, the Company can be eposed to product liability claims, recalls,
product replacements or modifications, write-offs of inventory, property, plant and equipment or
intangible assets, and significant warranty and other epenses, including litigation costs and
regulatory fines. Quality problems can also adversely affect the eperience for users of the
Company’s products and services, and result in harm to the Company’s reputation, loss of competitive
advantage, poor market acceptance, reduced demand for products and services, delay in new product and
service introductions and lost sales.
The Company is eposed to the risk of write-downs on the value of its inventory and other assets, in
addition to purchase commitment cancellation risk.
The Company records a write-down for product and component inventories that have become obsolete or
eceed anticipated demand, or for which cost eceeds net realizable value. The Company also accrues
necessary cancellation fee reserves for orders of ecess products and components. The Company reviews
long-lived assets, including capital assets held at its suppliers’ facilities and inventory
prepayments, for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate the assets may not be
recoverable. If the Company determines that an impairment has occurred, it records a write-down equal
to the amount by which the carrying value of the asset eceeds its fair value. Although the Company
believes its inventory, capital assets, inventory prepayments and other assets and purchase
commitments are currently recoverable, there can be no assurance the Company will not incur write-
downs, fees, impairments and other charges given the rapid and unpredictable pace of product
obsolescence in the industries in which the Company competes.
The Company orders components for its products and builds inventory in advance of product
announcements and shipments. Manufacturing purchase obligations cover the Company’s forecasted
component and manufacturing requirements, typically for periods up to 150 days. Because the Company’s
markets are volatile, competitive and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a risk
the Company will forecast incorrectly and order or produce ecess or insufficient amounts of
components or products, or not fully utilize firm purchase commitments.
The Company relies on access to third-party intellectual property, which may not be available to the
Company on commercially reasonable terms or at all.
The Company’s products and services are designed to include intellectual property owned by third
parties, which requires licenses from those third parties. In addition, because of technological
changes in the industries in which the Company currently competes or in the future may compete,
current etensive patent coverage and the rapid rate of issuance of new patents, the Company’s
products and services can unknowingly infringe eisting patents or intellectual property rights of
others. From time to time, the Company has been notified that it may be infringing certain patents or
other intellectual property rights of third parties. Based on eperience and industry practice, the
Company believes licenses to such third-party intellectual property can generally be obtained on
commercially reasonable terms. However, there can be no assurance the necessary licenses can be
obtained on commercially reasonable terms or at all. Failure to obtain the right to use third-party
intellectual property, or to use such intellectual property on commercially reasonable terms, can
preclude the Company from selling certain products or services, or otherwise have a material adverse
impact on the Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition.
The Company’s future performance depends in part on support from third-party software developers.
The Company believes decisions by customers to purchase its hardware products depend in part on the
availability of third-party software applications and services. There can be no assurance third-party
developers will continue to develop and maintain software applications and services for the Company’s
products. If third-party software applications and services cease to be developed and maintained for
the Company’s products, customers may choose not to buy the Company’s products.
The Company believes the availability of third-party software applications and services for its
products depends in part on the developers’ perception and analysis of the relative benefits of
developing, maintaining and upgrading such software and services for the Company’s products compared
to competitors’ platforms, such as Android for smartphones and tablets, Windows for personal
computers and tablets, and PlayStation, Nintendo and Xbo for gaming platforms. This analysis may be
based on factors such as the market position of the Company and its products, the anticipated revenue
that may be generated, epected future growth of product sales, and the costs of developing such
applications and services.
The Company’s minority market share in the global smartphone, personal computer and tablet markets
can make developers less inclined to develop or upgrade software for the Company’s products and more
inclined to devote their resources to developing and upgrading software for competitors’ products
with larger market share. When developers focus their efforts on these competing platforms, the
availability and quality of applications for the Company’s devices can suffer.
The Company relies on the continued availability and development of compelling and innovative
software applications for its products. The Company’s products and operating systems are subject to
rapid technological change, and when third-party developers are unable to or choose not to keep up
with this pace of change, their applications can fail to take advantage of these changes to deliver
improved customer eperiences, can operate incorrectly, and can result in dissatisfied customers and
lower customer demand for the Company’s products.
The Company distributes third-party applications for its products through the App Store. For the vast
majority of applications, developers keep all of the revenue they generate on the App Store. The
Company retains a commission from sales of applications and sales of digital services or goods
initiated within an application. From time to time, the Company has made changes to its App Store,
including actions taken in response to competition, market conditions and legal and regulatory
requirements. The Company epects to make further business changes in the future, including as a
result of legislative initiatives impacting the App Store, such as the European Union (“EU”) Digital
Markets Act, which the Company is required to comply with by March 2024. The Company is also subject
to litigation and investigations relating to the App Store, which have resulted in changes to the
Company’s business practices, and may in the future result in further changes. Changes have included
how developers communicate with consumers outside the App Store regarding alternative purchasing
mechanisms. Future changes could also affect what the Company charges developers for access to its
platforms, how it manages distribution of apps outside of the App Store, and how and to what etent
it allows developers to communicate with consumers inside the App Store regarding alternative
purchasing mechanisms. This could reduce the volume of sales, and the commission that the Company
earns on those sales, would decrease. If the rate of the commission that the Company retains on such
sales is reduced, or if it is otherwise narrowed in scope or eliminated, the Company’s business,
results of operations and financial condition could be materially adversely affected.
Failure to obtain or create digital content that appeals to the Company’s customers, or to make such
content available on commercially reasonable terms, could have a material adverse impact on the
Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition.
The Company contracts with numerous third parties to offer their digital content to customers. This
includes the right to sell, or offer subscriptions to, third-party content, as well as the right to
incorporate specific content into the Company’s own services. The licensing or other distribution
arrangements for this content can be for relatively short time periods and do not guarantee the
continuation or renewal of these arrangements on commercially reasonable terms, or at all. Some
third-party content providers and distributors currently or in the future may offer competing
products and services, and can take actions to make it difficult or impossible for the Company to
license or otherwise distribute their content. Other content owners, providers or distributors may
seek to limit the Company’s access to, or increase the cost of, such content. The Company may be
unable to continue to offer a wide variety of content at commercially reasonable prices with
acceptable usage rules.
The Company also produces its own digital content, which can be costly to produce due to intense and
increasing competition for talent, content and subscribers, and may fail to appeal to the Company’s
customers.
Some third-party digital content providers require the Company to provide digital rights management
and other security solutions. If requirements change, the Company may have to develop or license new
technology to provide these solutions. There can be no assurance the Company will be able to develop
or license such solutions at a reasonable cost and in a timely manner.
The Company’s success depends largely on the talents and efforts of its team members, the continued
service and availability of highly skilled employees, including key personnel, and the Company’s
ability to nurture its distinctive and inclusive culture.
Much of the Company’s future success depends on the talents and efforts of its team members and the
continued availability and service of key personnel, including its 
team and other highly skilled employees. Eperienced personnel in the technology industry are in high
demand and competition for their talents is intense, especially in Silicon Valley, where most of the
Company’s key personnel are located. In addition to intense competition for talent, workforce
dynamics are constantly evolving. If the Company does not manage changing workforce dynamics
effectively, it could materially adversely affect the Company’s culture, reputation and operational
fleibility.
The Company believes that its distinctive and inclusive culture is a significant driver of its
success. If the Company is unable to nurture its culture, it could materially adversely affect the
Company’s ability to recruit and retain the highly skilled employees who are critical to its success,
and could otherwise materially adversely affect the Company’s business, reputation, results of
operations and financial condition.
The Company depends on the performance of carriers, wholesalers, retailers and other resellers.
The Company distributes its products and certain of its services through cellular network carriers,
wholesalers, retailers and resellers, many of which distribute products and services from
competitors. The Company also sells its products and services and resells third-party products in
most of its major markets directly to consumers, small and mid-sized businesses, and education,
enterprise and government customers through its retail and online stores and its direct sales force.
Some carriers providing cellular network service for the Company’s products offer financing,
installment payment plans or subsidies for users’ purchases of the device. There can be no assurance
such offers will be continued at all or in the same amounts.
The Company has invested and will continue to invest in programs to enhance reseller sales, including
staffing selected resellers’ stores with Company employees and contractors, and improving product
placement displays. These programs can require a substantial investment while not assuring return or
incremental sales. The financial condition of these resellers could weaken, these resellers could
stop distributing the Company’s products, or uncertainty regarding demand for some or all of the
Company’s products could cause resellers to reduce their ordering and marketing of the Company’s
products.
The Company’s business and reputation are impacted by information technology system failures and
network disruptions.
The Company and its global supply chain are dependent on comple information technology systems and
are eposed to information technology system failures or network disruptions caused by natural
disasters, accidents, power disruptions, telecommunications failures, acts of terrorism or war,
computer viruses, physical or electronic break-ins, ransomware or other cybersecurity incidents, or
other events or disruptions. System upgrades, redundancy and other continuity measures may be
ineffective or inadequate, and the Company’s or its vendors’ business continuity and disaster
recovery planning may not be sufficient for all eventualities. Such failures or disruptions can
adversely impact the Company’s business by, among other things, preventing access to the Company’s
online services, interfering with customer transactions or impeding the manufacturing and shipping of
the Company’s products. These events could materially adversely affect the Company’s business,
reputation, results of operations and financial condition.
Losses or unauthorized access to or releases of confidential information, including personal
information, could subject the Company to significant reputational, financial, legal and operational
consequences.
The Company’s business requires it to use and store confidential information, including personal
information, with respect to the Company’s customers and employees. The Company devotes significant
resources to network and data security, including through the use of encryption and other security
measures intended to protect its systems and data. But these measures cannot provide absolute
security, and losses or unauthorized access to or releases of confidential information occur and
could materially adversely affect the Company’s business, reputation, results of operations and
financial condition.
The Company’s business also requires it to share confidential information with suppliers and other
third parties. The Company relies on global suppliers that are also eposed to ransomware and other
malicious attacks that can disrupt business operations. Although the Company takes steps to secure
confidential information that is provided to or accessible by third parties working on the Company’s
behalf, such measures are not always effective and losses or unauthorized access to, or releases of,
confidential information occur. Such incidents and other malicious attacks could materially adversely
affect the Company’s business, reputation, results of operations and financial condition.
The Company eperiences malicious attacks and other attempts to gain unauthorized access to its
systems on a regular basis. These attacks seek to compromise the confidentiality, integrity or
availability of confidential information or disrupt normal business operations, and can, among other
things, impair the Company’s ability to attract and retain customers for its products and services,
impact the Company’s stock price, materially damage commercial relationships, and epose the Company
to litigation or government investigations, which could result in penalties, fines or judgments
against the Company. Globally, attacks are epected to continue accelerating in both frequency and
sophistication with increasing use by actors of tools and techniques that are designed to circumvent
controls, avoid detection, and remove or obfuscate forensic evidence, all of which hinders the
Company’s ability to identify, investigate and recover from incidents. In addition, attacks against
the Company and its customers can escalate during periods of severe diplomatic or armed conflict.
Although malicious attacks perpetrated to gain access to confidential information, including personal
information, affect many companies across various industries, the Company is at a relatively greater
risk of being targeted because of its high profile and the value of the confidential information it
creates, owns, manages, stores and processes.
The Company has implemented systems and processes intended to secure its information technology
systems and prevent unauthorized access to or loss of sensitive data, and mitigate the impact of
unauthorized access, including through the use of encryption and authentication technologies. As with
all companies, these security measures may not be sufficient for all eventualities and may be
vulnerable to hacking, ransomware attacks, employee error, malfeasance, system error, faulty password
management or other irregularities. For eample, third parties can fraudulently induce the Company’s
or its vendors’ employees or customers into disclosing usernames, passwords or other sensitive
information, which can, in turn, be used for unauthorized access to the Company’s or its vendors’
systems and services. To help protect customers and the Company, the Company deploys and makes
available technologies like multifactor authentication, monitors its services and systems for unusual
activity and may freeze accounts under suspicious circumstances, which, among other things, can
result in the delay or loss of customer orders or impede customer access to the Company’s products
and services.
While the Company maintains insurance coverage that is intended to address certain aspects of data
security risks, such insurance coverage may be insufficient to cover all losses or all types of
claims that may arise.
Investment in new business strategies and acquisitions could disrupt the Company’s ongoing business,
present risks not originally contemplated and materially adversely affect the Company’s business,
reputation, results of operations and financial condition.
The Company has invested, and in the future may invest, in new business strategies or acquisitions.
Such endeavors may involve significant risks and uncertainties, including distraction of management
from current operations, greater-than-epected liabilities and epenses, economic, political, legal
and regulatory challenges associated with operating in new businesses, regions or countries,
inadequate return on capital, potential impairment of tangible and intangible assets, and significant
write-offs. Investment and acquisition transactions are eposed to additional risks, including
failing to obtain required regulatory approvals on a timely basis or at all, or the imposition of
onerous conditions that could delay or prevent the Company from completing a transaction or otherwise
limit the Company’s ability to fully realize the anticipated benefits of a transaction. These new
ventures are inherently risky and may not be successful. The failure of any significant investment
could materially adversely affect the Company’s business, reputation, results of operations and
financial condition.
The Company’s retail stores are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties.
The Company’s retail operations are subject to many factors that pose risks and uncertainties and
could adversely impact the Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition,
including macroeconomic factors that could have an adverse effect on general retail activity. Other
factors include the Company’s ability to: manage costs associated with retail store construction and
operation; manage relationships with eisting retail partners; manage costs associated with
fluctuations in the value of retail inventory; and obtain and renew leases in quality retail
locations at a reasonable cost.
 Legal and Regulatory Compliance Risks 
The Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition could be adversely impacted by
unfavorable results of legal proceedings or government investigations.
The Company is subject to various claims, legal proceedings and government investigations that have
arisen in the ordinary course of business and have not yet been fully resolved, and new matters may
arise in the future. In addition, agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include
indemnification provisions which can subject the Company to costs and damages in the event of a claim
against an indemnified third party. The number of claims, legal proceedings and government
investigations involving the Company, and the alleged magnitude of such claims, proceedings and
government investigations, has generally increased over time and may continue to increase.
The Company has faced and continues to face a significant number of patent claims relating to its
cellular-enabled products, and new claims may arise in the future, including as a result of new legal
or regulatory frameworks. For eample, technology and other patent-holding companies frequently
assert their patents and seek royalties and often enter into litigation based on allegations of
patent infringement or other violations of intellectual property rights. The Company is vigorously
defending infringement actions in courts in several U.S. jurisdictions, as well as internationally in
various countries. The plaintiffs in these actions frequently seek injunctions and substantial
damages.
Regardless of the merit of particular claims, defending against litigation or responding to
government investigations can be epensive, time-consuming and disruptive to the Company’s
operations. In recognition of these considerations, the Company may enter into agreements or other
arrangements to settle litigation and resolve such challenges. There can be no assurance such
agreements can be obtained on acceptable terms or that litigation will not occur. These agreements
can also significantly increase the Company’s cost of sales and operating epenses and require the
Company to change its business practices and limit the Company’s ability to offer certain products
and services.
“Commitments, Contingencies and Supply Concentrations” under the heading “Contingencies,” in the
opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred
a material loss, or a material loss greater than a recorded accrual, concerning loss contingencies
for asserted legal and other claims.
The outcome of litigation or government investigations is inherently uncertain. If one or more legal
matters were resolved against the Company or an indemnified third party in a reporting period for
amounts above management’s epectations, the Company’s results of operations and financial condition
for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Further, such an outcome can result
in significant compensatory, punitive or trebled monetary damages, disgorgement of revenue or
profits, remedial corporate measures or injunctive relief against the Company, and has from time to
time required, and can in the future require, the Company to change its business practices and limit
the Company’s ability to offer certain products and services, all of which could materially adversely
affect the Company’s business, reputation, results of operations and financial condition.
While the Company maintains insurance coverage for certain types of claims, such insurance coverage
may be insufficient to cover all losses or all types of claims that may arise.
The Company is subject to comple and changing laws and regulations worldwide, which eposes the
Company to potential liabilities, increased costs and other adverse effects on the Company’s
business.
The Company’s global operations are subject to comple and changing laws and regulations on subjects,
including antitrust; privacy, data security and data localization; consumer protection; advertising,
sales, billing and e-commerce; financial services and technology; product liability; intellectual
property ownership and infringement; digital platforms; machine learning and artificial intelligence;
internet, telecommunications and mobile communications; media, television, film and digital content;
availability of third-party software applications and services; labor and employment; anticorruption;
import, eport and trade; foreign echange controls and cash repatriation restrictions; antimoney
laundering; foreign ownership and investment; ta; and environmental, health and safety, including
electronic waste, recycling, product design and climate change.
Compliance with these laws and regulations is onerous and epensive. New and changing laws and
regulations can adversely affect the Company’s business by increasing the Company’s costs, limiting
the Company’s ability to offer a product, service or feature to customers, imposing changes to the
design of the Company’s products and services, impacting customer demand for the Company’s products
and services, and requiring changes to the Company’s supply chain and its business. New and changing
laws and regulations can also create uncertainty about how such laws and regulations will be
interpreted and applied. These risks and costs may increase as the Company’s products and services
are introduced into specialized applications, including health and financial services. The Company
has implemented policies and procedures designed to ensure compliance with applicable laws and
regulations, but there can be no assurance the Company’s employees, contractors or agents will not
violate such laws and regulations or the Company’s policies and procedures. If the Company is found
to have violated laws and regulations, it could materially adversely affect the Company’s business,
reputation, results of operations and financial condition. Regulatory changes and other actions that
materially adversely affect the Company’s business may be announced with little or no advance notice
and the Company may not be able to effectively mitigate all adverse impacts from such measures. For
eample, the Company is subject to changing regulations relating to the eport and import of its
products. Although the Company has programs, policies and procedures in place that are designed to
satisfy regulatory requirements, there can be no assurance that such policies and procedures will be
effective in preventing a violation or a claim of a violation. As a result, the Company’s products
could be banned, delayed or prohibited from importation, which could materially adversely affect the
Company’s business, reputation, results of operations and financial condition.
Epectations relating to environmental, social and governance considerations and related reporting
obligations epose the Company to potential liabilities, increased costs, reputational harm, and
other adverse effects on the Company’s business.
Many governments, regulators, investors, employees, customers and other stakeholders are increasingly
focused on environmental, social and governance considerations relating to businesses, including
climate change and greenhouse gas emissions, human and civil rights, and diversity, equity and
inclusion. In addition, the Company makes statements about its goals and initiatives through its
various non-financial reports, information provided on its website, press statements and other
communications. Responding to these environmental, social and governance considerations and
implementation of these goals and initiatives involves risks and uncertainties, requires investments,
and depends in part on third-party performance or data that is outside the Company’s control. The
Company cannot guarantee that it will achieve its announced environmental, social and governance
goals and initiatives. In addition, some stakeholders may disagree with the Company’s goals and
initiatives. Any failure, or perceived failure, by the Company to achieve its goals, further its
initiatives, adhere to its public statements, comply with federal, state or international
environmental, social and governance laws and regulations, or meet evolving and varied stakeholder
epectations and standards could result in legal and regulatory proceedings against the Company and
materially adversely affect the Company’s business, reputation, results of operations, financial
condition and stock price.
The technology industry, including, in some instances, the Company, is subject to intense media,
political and regulatory scrutiny, which eposes the Company to increasing regulation, government
investigations, legal actions and penalties.
From time to time, the Company has made changes to its App Store, including actions taken in response
to litigation, competition, market conditions and legal and regulatory requirements. The Company
epects to make further business changes in the future, including as a result of legislative
initiatives impacting the App Store, such as the EU Digital Markets Act, which the Company is
required to comply with by March 2024, or similar laws in other jurisdictions. Changes have included
how developers communicate with consumers outside the App Store regarding alternative purchasing
mechanisms. Future changes could also affect what the Company charges developers for access to its
platforms, how it manages distribution of apps outside of the App Store, and how and to what etent
it allows developers to communicate with consumers inside the App Store regarding alternative
purchasing mechanisms.
The Company is also currently subject to antitrust investigations in various jurisdictions around the
world, which can result in legal proceedings and claims against the Company that could, individually
or in the aggregate, have a materially adverse impact on the Company’s business, results of
operations and financial condition. For eample, the Company is the subject of investigations in
Europe and other jurisdictions relating to App Store terms and conditions. If such investigations
result in adverse findings against the Company, the Company could be eposed to significant fines and
may be required to make changes to its App Store business, all of which could materially adversely
affect the Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition. The Company is also
subject to litigation relating to the App Store, which has resulted in changes to the Company’s
business practices, and may in the future result in further changes.
Further, the Company has commercial relationships with other companies in the technology industry
that are or may become subject to investigations and litigation that, if resolved against those other
companies, could materially adversely affect the Company’s commercial relationships with those
business partners and materially adversely affect the Company’s business, results of operations and
financial condition. For eample, the Company earns revenue from licensing arrangements with other
companies to offer their search services on the Company’s platforms and applications, and certain of
these arrangements are currently subject to government investigations and legal proceedings.
There can be no assurance the Company’s business will not be materially adversely affected,
individually or in the aggregate, by the outcomes of such investigations, litigation or changes to
laws and regulations in the future. Changes to the Company’s business practices to comply with new
laws and regulations or in connection with other legal proceedings could negatively impact the
reputation of the Company’s products for privacy and security and otherwise adversely affect the
eperience for users of the Company’s products and services, and result in harm to the Company’s
reputation, loss of competitive advantage, poor market acceptance, reduced demand for products and
services, and lost sales.
The Company’s business is subject to a variety of U.S. and international laws, rules, policies and
other obligations regarding data protection.
The Company is subject to an increasing number of federal, state and international laws relating to
the collection, use, retention, security and transfer of various types of personal information. In
many cases, these laws apply not only to third-party transactions, but also restrict transfers of
personal information among the Company and its international subsidiaries. Several jurisdictions have
passed laws in this area, and additional jurisdictions are considering imposing additional
restrictions or have laws that are pending. These laws continue to develop and may be inconsistent
from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Complying with emerging and changing requirements causes the
Company to incur substantial costs and has required and may in the future require the Company to
change its business practices. Noncompliance could result in significant penalties or legal
liability.
The Company makes statements about its use and disclosure of personal information through its privacy
policy, information provided on its website, press statements and other privacy notices provided to
customers. Any failure by the Company to comply with these public statements or with other federal,
state or international privacy or data protection laws and regulations could result in inquiries or
proceedings against the Company by governmental entities or others. In addition to reputational
impacts, penalties could include ongoing audit requirements and significant legal liability.
In addition to the risks generally relating to the collection, use, retention, security and transfer
of personal information, the Company is also subject to specific obligations relating to information
considered sensitive under applicable laws, such as health data, financial data and biometric data.
Health data and financial data are subject to additional privacy, security and breach notification
requirements, and the Company is subject to audit by governmental authorities regarding the Company’s
compliance with these obligations. If the Company fails to adequately comply with these rules and
requirements, or if health data or financial data is handled in a manner not permitted by law or
under the Company’s agreements with healthcare or financial institutions, the Company can be subject
to litigation or government investigations, and can be liable for associated investigatory epenses,
and can also incur significant fees or fines.
Payment card data is also subject to additional requirements. Under payment card rules and
obligations, if cardholder information is potentially compromised, the Company can be liable for
associated investigatory epenses and can also incur significant fees or fines if the Company fails
to follow payment card industry data security standards. The Company could also eperience a
significant increase in payment card transaction costs or lose the ability to process payment cards
if it fails to follow payment card industry data security standards, which could materially adversely
affect the Company’s business, reputation, results of operations and financial condition.
 Financial Risks 
The Company epects its quarterly net sales and results of operations to fluctuate.
The Company’s profit margins vary across its products, services, geographic segments and distribution
channels. For eample, the gross margins on the Company’s products and services vary significantly
and can change over time. The Company’s gross margins are subject to volatility and downward pressure
due to a variety of factors, including: continued industry-wide global product pricing pressures and
product pricing actions that the Company may take in response to such pressures; increased
competition; the Company’s ability to effectively stimulate demand for certain of its products and
services; compressed product life cycles; supply shortages; potential increases in the cost of
components, outside manufacturing services, and developing, acquiring and delivering content for the
Company’s services; the Company’s ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively;
shifts in the mi of products and services, or in the geographic, currency or channel mi, including
to the etent that regulatory changes require the Company to modify its product and service
offerings; fluctuations in foreign echange rates; inflation and other macroeconomic pressures; and
the introduction of new products or services, including new products or services with higher cost
structures. These and other factors could have a materially adverse impact on the Company’s results
of operations and financial condition.
The Company has historically eperienced higher net sales in its first quarter compared to other
quarters in its fiscal year due in part to seasonal holiday demand. Additionally, new product and
service introductions can significantly impact net sales, cost of sales and operating epenses.
Further, the Company generates a significant portion of its net sales from a single product and a
decline in demand for that product could significantly impact quarterly net sales. The Company could
also be subject to unepected developments, such as lower-than-anticipated demand for the Company’s
products or services, issues with new product or service introductions, information technology system
failures or network disruptions, or failure of one of the Company’s logistics, components supply, or
manufacturing partners.
The Company’s financial performance is subject to risks associated with changes in the value of the
U.S. dollar relative to local currencies.
The Company’s primary eposure to movements in foreign echange rates relates to nonU.S.
dollardenominated sales, cost of sales and operating epenses worldwide. Gross margins on the
Company’s products in foreign countries and on products that include components obtained from foreign
suppliers have in the past been adversely affected and could in the future be materially adversely
affected by foreign echange rate fluctuations.
The weakening of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar adversely affects the U.S. dollar
value of the Company’s foreign currencydenominated sales and earnings, and generally leads the
Company to raise international pricing, potentially reducing demand for the Company’s products. In
some circumstances, for competitive or other reasons, the Company may decide not to raise
international pricing to offset the U.S. dollar’s strengthening, which would adversely affect the
U.S. dollar value of the gross margins the Company earns on foreign currencydenominated sales.
Conversely, a strengthening of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, while generally
beneficial to the Company’s foreign currencydenominated sales and earnings, could cause the Company
to reduce international pricing or incur losses on its foreign currency derivative instruments,
thereby limiting the benefit. Additionally, strengthening of foreign currencies may increase the
Company’s cost of product components denominated in those currencies, thus adversely affecting gross
margins.
The Company uses derivative instruments, such as foreign currency forward and option contracts, to
hedge certain eposures to fluctuations in foreign echange rates. The use of such hedging activities
may not be effective to offset any, or more than a portion, of the adverse financial effects of
unfavorable movements in foreign echange rates over the limited time the hedges are in place.
The Company is eposed to credit risk and fluctuations in the values of its investment portfolio.
The Company’s investments can be negatively affected by changes in liquidity, credit deterioration,
financial results, market and economic conditions, political risk, sovereign risk, interest rate
fluctuations or other factors. As a result, the value and liquidity of the Company’s cash, cash
equivalents and marketable securities may fluctuate substantially. Therefore, although the Company
has not realized any significant losses on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities,
future fluctuations in their value could result in significant losses and could have a material
adverse impact on the Company’s results of operations and financial condition.
The Company is eposed to credit risk on its trade accounts receivable, vendor non-trade receivables
and prepayments related to long-term supply agreements, and this risk is heightened during periods
when economic conditions worsen.
The Company distributes its products and certain of its services through third-party cellular network
carriers, wholesalers, retailers and resellers. The Company also sells its products and services
directly to small and mid-sized businesses and education, enterprise and government customers. A
substantial majority of the Company’s outstanding trade receivables are not covered by collateral,
third-party bank support or financing arrangements, or credit insurance, and a significant portion of
the Company’s trade receivables can be concentrated within cellular network carriers or other
resellers. The Company’s eposure to credit and collectibility risk on its trade receivables is
higher in certain international markets and its ability to mitigate such risks may be limited. The
Company also has unsecured vendor non-trade receivables resulting from purchases of components by
outsourcing partners and other vendors that manufacture subassemblies or assemble final products for
the Company. In addition, the Company has made prepayments associated with long-term supply
agreements to secure supply of inventory components. As of September 30, 2023, the Company’s vendor
non-trade receivables and prepayments related to long-term supply agreements were concentrated among
a few individual vendors located primarily in Asia. While the Company has procedures to monitor and
limit eposure to credit risk on its trade and vendor non-trade receivables, as well as long-term
prepayments, there can be no assurance such procedures will effectively limit its credit risk and
avoid losses.
The Company is subject to changes in ta rates, the adoption of new U.S. or international ta
legislation and eposure to additional ta liabilities.
The Company is subject to taes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions, including Ireland and
Singapore, where a number of the Company’s subsidiaries are organized. Due to economic and political
conditions, ta laws and ta rates for income taes and other non-income taes in various
jurisdictions may be subject to significant change. For eample, the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development continues to advance proposals for modernizing international ta rules,
including the introduction of global minimum ta standards. The Company’s effective ta rates are
affected by changes in the mi of earnings in countries with differing statutory ta rates, changes
in the valuation of deferred ta assets and liabilities, the introduction of new taes, and changes
in ta laws or their interpretation. The application of ta laws may be uncertain, require
significant judgment and be subject to differing interpretations.
The Company is also subject to the eamination of its ta returns and other ta matters by the U.S.
Internal Revenue Service and other ta authorities and governmental bodies. The Company regularly
assesses the likelihood of an adverse outcome resulting from these eaminations to determine the
adequacy of its provision for taes. There can be no assurance as to the outcome of these
eaminations. If the Company’s effective ta rates were to increase, or if the ultimate determination
of the Company’s taes owed is for an amount in ecess of amounts previously accrued, the Company’s
business, results of operations and financial condition could be materially adversely affected.
 General Risks 
The price of the Company’s stock is subject to volatility.
The Company’s stock has eperienced substantial price volatility in the past and may continue to do
so in the future. Additionally, the Company, the technology industry and the stock market as a whole
have, from time to time, eperienced etreme stock price and volume fluctuations that have affected
stock prices in ways that may have been unrelated to these companies’ operating performance. Price
volatility may cause the average price at which the Company repurchases its stock in a given period
to eceed the stock’s price at a given point in time. The Company believes the price of its stock
should reflect epectations of future growth and profitability. The Company also believes the price
of its stock should reflect epectations that its cash dividend will continue at current levels or
grow, and that its current share repurchase program will be fully consummated. Future dividends are
subject to declaration by the Company’s Board of 
program does not obligate it to acquire any specific number of shares. If the Company fails to meet
epectations related to future growth, profitability, dividends, share repurchases or other market
epectations, the price of the Company’s stock may decline significantly, which could have a material
adverse impact on investor confidence and employee retention.
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments │
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ Item 1C. Cybersecurity │
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ 
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
The Company’s headquarters is located in Cupertino, California. As of September 30, 2023, the Company
owned or leased facilities and land for corporate functions, R&D, data centers, retail and other
purposes at locations throughout the U.S. and in various places outside the U.S. The Company believes
its eisting facilities and equipment, which are used by all reportable segments, are in good
operating condition and are suitable for the conduct of its business.
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ 
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
Epic Games
Epic Games, Inc. (“Epic”) filed a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of
California (the “District Court”) against the Company alleging violations of federal and state
antitrust laws and California’s unfair competition law based upon the Company’s operation of its App
Store. On September 10, 2021, the District Court ruled in favor of the Company with respect to nine
out of the ten counts included in Epic’s claim. The District Court found that certain provisions of
the Company’s App Store Review Guidelines violate California’s unfair competition law and issued an
injunction enjoining the Company from prohibiting developers from including in their apps eternal
links that direct customers to purchasing mechanisms other than Apple in-app purchasing. The
injunction applies to apps on the U.S. storefront of the iOS and iPadOS App Store. On April 24, 2023,
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit (the “Circuit Court”) affirmed the District Court’s
ruling. On June 7, 2023, the Company and Epic filed petitions with the Circuit Court requesting
further review of the decision. On June 30, 2023, the Circuit Court denied both petitions. On July
17, 2023, the Circuit Court granted Apple’s motion to stay enforcement of the injunction pending
appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court. If the U.S. Supreme Court denies Apple’s petition, the stay of the
injunction will epire.
Masimo
Masimo Corporation and Cercacor Laboratories, Inc. (together, “Masimo”) filed a complaint before the
U.S. International Trade Commission (the “ITC”) alleging infringement by the Company of five patents
relating to the functionality of the blood oygen feature in Apple Watch Series 6 and 7. In its
complaint, Masimo sought a permanent eclusion order prohibiting importation to the United States of
certain Apple Watch models that include blood oygen sensing functionality. On October 26, 2023, the
ITC entered a limited eclusion order (the “Order”) prohibiting importation and sales in the United
States of Apple Watch models with blood oygen sensing functionality, which includes Apple Watch
Series 9 and Ultra 2. The Order will not go into effect until the end of the administrative review
period, which is currently epected to end on December 25, 2023. The Company intends to appeal the
Order and seek a stay pending the appeal.
Other Legal Proceedings
The Company is subject to other legal proceedings and claims that have not been fully resolved and
that have arisen in the ordinary course of business. The Company settled certain matters during the
fourth quarter of 2023 that did not individually or in the aggregate have a material impact on the
Company’s financial condition or operating results. The outcome of litigation is inherently
uncertain. If one or more legal matters were resolved against the Company in a reporting period for
amounts above management’s epectations, the Company’s financial condition and operating results for
that reporting period could be materially adversely affected.
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ 
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

╔═ § ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║ ║
║ PART II ║
║ ║
╚═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ 
│ of Equity Securities │
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
The Company’s common stock is traded on The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC under the symbol AAPL.
 Holders 
As of October 20, 2023, there were 23,763 shareholders of record.
Purchases of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers
Share repurchase activity during the three months ended September 30, 2023 was as follows (in
millions, ecept number of shares, which are reflected in thousands, and per-share amounts):
 Approimate 
 Total Number Dollar Value 
 of Shares of 
 Purchased as Shares That 
 Part of May Yet Be 
 Periods Publicly Purchased 
 July 2, 2023 Total Number Average Price Announced Under the 
 to August 5, of Shares Paid Per Plans or Plans or 
 2023: Purchased Share Programs Programs(1) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Open market 
 and 
 privately 33,864 $ 191.62 33,864 
 negotiated 
 purchases 
 August 6, 
 2023 to 
 September 2, 
 2023: 
 August 2023 22,085 -2 -2 22,085 -2 
 ASRs 
 Open market 
 and 
 privately 30,299 $ 178.99 30,299 
 negotiated 
 purchases 
 September 3, 
 2023 to 
 September 
 30, 2023: 
 Open market 
 and 
 privately 20,347 $ 176.31 20,347 
 negotiated 
 purchases 
 Total 106,595 $ 74,069 
(1) As of September 30, 2023, the Company was authorized by the Board of 
$90 billion of the Company’s common stock under a share repurchase program announced on May 4, 2023,
of which $15.9 billion had been utilized. During the fourth quarter of 2023, the Company also
utilized the final $4.6 billion under its previous repurchase program, which was most recently
authorized in April 2022. The programs do not obligate the Company to acquire a minimum amount of
shares. Under the programs, shares may be repurchased in privately negotiated or open market
transactions, including under plans complying with Rule 10b5-1 under the Echange Act.
(2) In August 2023, the Company entered into new accelerated share repurchase agreements (“ASRs”).
Under the terms of the ASRs, two financial institutions committed to deliver shares of the Company’s
common stock during the purchase periods in echange for up-front payments totaling $5.0 billion. The
total number of shares ultimately delivered under the ASRs, and therefore the average repurchase
price paid per share, is determined based on the volume-weighted average price of the Company’s
common stock during the ASRs’ purchase periods, which end in the first quarter of 2024.
 Company Stock Performance 
The following graph shows a comparison of five-year cumulative total shareholder return, calculated
on a dividend-reinvested basis, for the Company, the S&P 500 Inde and the Dow Jones U.S. Technology
Supersector Inde. The graph assumes $100 was invested in each of the Company’s common stock, the S&P
500 Inde and the Dow Jones U.S. Technology Supersector Inde as of the market close on September 28,
2018. Past stock price performance is not necessarily indicative of future stock price performance.
 Septemb… Septemb… Septemb… Septemb… Septemb… Septemb… 
 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Apple $ 100 $ 98 $ 204 $ 269 $ 277 $ 317 
 Inc. 
 S&P 500 $ 100 $ 104 $ 118 $ 161 $ 136 $ 160 
 Inde 
 Dow 
 Jones 
 U.S. $ 100 $ 105 $ 154 $ 227 $ 164 $ 226 
 Techno… 
 Supers… 
 Inde 
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ Item 6. [
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ 
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and
and 2022 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2023 and 2022. Discussions of 2021 items and
year-to-year comparisons between 2022 and 2021 are not included, and can be found in “Management’s
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in 
 Fiscal Period 
The Company’s fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period that ends on the last Saturday of September.
An additional week is included in the first fiscal quarter every five or si years to realign the
Company’s fiscal quarters with calendar quarters, which occurred in the first quarter of 2023. The
Company’s fiscal year 2023 spanned 53 weeks, whereas fiscal years 2022 and 2021 spanned 52 weeks
each.
 Fiscal Year Highlights 
The Company’s total net sales were $383.3 billion and net income was $97.0 billion during 2023.
The Company’s total net sales decreased 3% or $11.0 billion during 2023 compared to 2022. The
weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar accounted for more than the entire year-
over-year decrease in total net sales, which consisted primarily of lower net sales of Mac and
iPhone, partially offset by higher net sales of Services.
The Company announces new product, service and software offerings at various times during the year.
Significant announcements during fiscal year 2023 included the following:
First Quarter 2023:
 iPad and iPad Pro;
 Net-generation Apple TV 4K; and
 MLS Season Pass, a Major League Soccer subscription streaming service.
Second Quarter 2023:
 MacBook Pro 14”, MacBook Pro 16” and Mac mini; and
 Second-generation HomePod.
Third Quarter 2023:
 MacBook Air 15”, Mac Studio and Mac Pro;
 Apple Vision Pro™, the Company’s first spatial computer featuring its new visionOS™, epected to be
available in early calendar year 2024; and
 iOS 17, macOS Sonoma, iPadOS 17, tvOS 17 and watchOS 10, updates to the Company’s operating
systems.
Fourth Quarter 2023:
 iPhone 15, iPhone 15 Plus, iPhone 15 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro Ma; and
 Apple Watch Series 9 and Apple Watch Ultra 2.
In May 2023, the Company announced a new share repurchase program of up to $90 billion and raised its
quarterly dividend from $0.23 to $0.24 per share beginning in May 2023. During 2023, the Company
repurchased $76.6 billion of its common stock and paid dividends and dividend equivalents of $15.0
billion.
Macroeconomic Conditions
Macroeconomic conditions, including inflation, changes in interest rates, and currency fluctuations,
have directly and indirectly impacted, and could in the future materially impact, the Company’s
results of operations and financial condition.
 Segment Operating Performance 
The following table shows net sales by reportable segment for 2023, 2022 and 2021 (dollars in
millions):
 Net sales by reportable 
 segment: 2023 Change 2022 Change 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Americas $ 162,560 -4 % $ 169,658 11 % $ 153,306 
 Europe 94,294 -1 % 95,118 7 % 89,307 
 Greater China 72,559 -2 % 74,200 9 % 68,366 
 Japan 24,257 -7 % 25,977 -9 % 28,482 
 Rest of Asia Pacific 29,615 1 % 29,375 11 % 26,356 
 Total net sales $ 383,285 -3 % $ 394,328 8 % $ 365,817 
Americas
Americas net sales decreased 4% or $7.1 billion during 2023 compared to 2022 due to lower net sales
of iPhone and Mac, partially offset by higher net sales of Services.
Europe
Europe net sales decreased 1% or $824 million during 2023 compared to 2022. The weakness in foreign
currencies relative to the U.S. dollar accounted for more than the entire year-over-year decrease in
Europe net sales, which consisted primarily of lower net sales of Mac and Wearables, Home and
Accessories, partially offset by higher net sales of iPhone and Services.
Greater China
Greater China net sales decreased 2% or $1.6 billion during 2023 compared to 2022. The weakness in
the renminbi relative to the U.S. dollar accounted for more than the entire year-over-year decrease
in Greater China net sales, which consisted primarily of lower net sales of Mac and iPhone.
Japan
Japan net sales decreased 7% or $1.7 billion during 2023 compared to 2022. The weakness in the yen
relative to the U.S. dollar accounted for more than the entire year-over-year decrease in Japan net
sales, which consisted primarily of lower net sales of iPhone, Wearables, Home and Accessories and
Mac.
Rest of Asia Pacific
Rest of Asia Pacific net sales increased 1% or $240 million during 2023 compared to 2022. The
weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had a significantly unfavorable year-over-
year impact on Rest of Asia Pacific net sales. The net sales increase consisted of higher net sales
of iPhone and Services, partially offset by lower net sales of Mac and iPad.
 Products and Services Performance 
The following table shows net sales by category for 2023, 2022 and 2021 (dollars in millions):
 Net sales by category: 2023 Change 2022 Change 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 iPhone(1) $ 200,583 -2 % $ 205,489 7 % $ 191,973 
 Mac(1) 29,357 -27 % 40,177 14 % 35,190 
 iPad(1) 28,300 -3 % 29,292 -8 % 31,862 
 Wearables, Home and 39,845 -3 % 41,241 7 % 38,367 
 Accessories(1) 
 Services(2) 85,200 9 % 78,129 14 % 68,425 
 Total net sales $ 383,285 -3 % $ 394,328 8 % $ 365,817 
(1) Products net sales include amortization of the deferred value of unspecified software upgrade
rights, which are bundled in the sales price of the respective product.
(2) Services net sales include amortization of the deferred value of services bundled in the sales
price of certain products.
iPhone
iPhone net sales decreased 2% or $4.9 billion during 2023 compared to 2022 due to lower net sales of
non-Pro iPhone models, partially offset by higher net sales of Pro iPhone models.
Mac
Mac net sales decreased 27% or $10.8 billion during 2023 compared to 2022 due primarily to lower net
sales of laptops.
iPad
iPad net sales decreased 3% or $1.0 billion during 2023 compared to 2022 due primarily to lower net
sales of iPad mini and iPad Air, partially offset by the combined net sales of iPad 9th and 10th
generation.
Wearables, Home and Accessories
Wearables, Home and Accessories net sales decreased 3% or $1.4 billion during 2023 compared to 2022
due primarily to lower net sales of Wearables and Accessories.
Services
Services net sales increased 9% or $7.1 billion during 2023 compared to 2022 due to higher net sales
across all lines of business.
 Gross Margin 
Products and Services gross margin and gross margin percentage for 2023, 2022 and 2021 were as
follows (dollars in millions):
 Gross margin: 2023 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Products $ 108,803 $ 114,728 $ 105,126 
 Services 60,345 56,054 47,710 
 Total gross margin $ 169,148 $ 170,782 $ 152,836 
 Gross margin percentage: 
 Products 36.5 % 36.3 % 35.3 % 
 Services 70.8 % 71.7 % 69.7 % 
 Total gross margin percentage 44.1 % 43.3 % 41.8 % 
Products Gross Margin
Products gross margin decreased during 2023 compared to 2022 due to the weakness in foreign
currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and lower Products volume, partially offset by cost savings
and a different Products mi.
Products gross margin percentage increased during 2023 compared to 2022 due to cost savings and a
different Products mi, partially offset by the weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S.
dollar and decreased leverage.
Services Gross Margin
Services gross margin increased during 2023 compared to 2022 due primarily to higher Services net
sales, partially offset by the weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and higher
Services costs.
Services gross margin percentage decreased during 2023 compared to 2022 due to higher Services costs
and the weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by a different
Services mi.
The Company’s future gross margins can be impacted by a variety of factors, as discussed in Part I,
general, gross margins will be subject to volatility and downward pressure.
 Operating Epenses 
Operating epenses for 2023, 2022 and 2021 were as follows (dollars in millions):
 2023 Change 2022 Change 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Research and $ 29,915 14 % $ 26,251 20 % $ 21,914 
 development 
 Percentage of total net 8 % 7 % 6 % 
 sales 
 Selling, general and $ 24,932 -1 % $ 25,094 14 % $ 21,973 
 administrative 
 Percentage of total net 7 % 6 % 6 % 
 sales 
 Total operating $ 54,847 7 % $ 51,345 17 % $ 43,887 
 epenses 
 Percentage of total net 14 % 13 % 12 % 
 sales 
Research and Development
The year-over-year growth in R&D epense in 2023 was driven primarily by increases in headcount-
related epenses.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative epense was relatively flat in 2023 compared to 2022.
 Provision for Income Taes 
Provision for income taes, effective ta rate and statutory federal income ta rate for 2023, 2022
and 2021 were as follows (dollars in millions):
 2023 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Provision for income taes $ 16,741 $ 19,300 $ 14,527 
 Effective ta rate 14.7 % 16.2 % 13.3 % 
 Statutory federal income ta rate 21 % 21 % 21 % 
The Company’s effective ta rate for 2023 and 2022 was lower than the statutory federal income ta
rate due primarily to a lower effective ta rate on foreign earnings, the impact of the U.S. federal
R&D credit, and ta benefits from share-based compensation, partially offset by state income taes.
The Company’s effective ta rate for 2023 was lower compared to 2022 due primarily to a lower
effective ta rate on foreign earnings and the impact of U.S. foreign ta credit regulations issued
by the U.S. Department of the Treasury in 2022, partially offset by lower ta benefits from share-
based compensation.
 Liquidity and Capital Resources 
The Company believes its balances of cash, cash equivalents and unrestricted marketable securities,
which totaled $148.3 billion as of September 30, 2023, along with cash generated by ongoing
operations and continued access to debt markets, will be sufficient to satisfy its cash requirements
and capital return program over the net 12 months and beyond.
The Company’s material cash requirements include the following contractual obligations:
Debt
As of September 30, 2023, the Company had outstanding fied-rate notes with varying maturities for an
aggregate principal amount of $106.6 billion (collectively the “Notes”), with $9.9 billion payable
within 12 months. Future interest payments associated with the Notes total $41.1 billion, with $2.9
billion payable within 12 months.
The Company also issues unsecured short-term promissory notes pursuant to a commercial paper program.
As of September 30, 2023, the Company had $6.0 billion of commercial paper outstanding, all of which
was payable within 12 months.
Leases
The Company has lease arrangements for certain equipment and facilities, including corporate, data
center, manufacturing and retail space. As of September 30, 2023, the Company had fied lease payment
obligations of $15.8 billion, with $2.0 billion payable within 12 months.
Manufacturing Purchase Obligations
The Company utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture subassemblies for the Company’s
products and to perform final assembly and testing of finished products. The Company also obtains
individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. As of September
30, 2023, the Company had manufacturing purchase obligations of $53.1 billion, with $52.9 billion
payable within 12 months. The Company’s manufacturing purchase obligations are primarily
noncancelable.
Other Purchase Obligations
The Company’s other purchase obligations primarily consist of noncancelable obligations to acquire
capital assets, including assets related to product manufacturing, and noncancelable obligations
related to supplier arrangements, licensed intellectual property and content, and distribution
rights. As of September 30, 2023, the Company had other purchase obligations of $21.9 billion, with
$5.6 billion payable within 12 months.
Deemed Repatriation Ta Payable
As of September 30, 2023, the balance of the deemed repatriation ta payable imposed by the U.S. Ta
Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Act”) was $22.0 billion, with $6.5 billion epected to be paid within
12 months.
Capital Return Program
In addition to its contractual cash requirements, the Company has an authorized share repurchase
program. The program does not obligate the Company to acquire a minimum amount of shares. As of
September 30, 2023, the Company’s quarterly cash dividend was $0.24 per share. The Company intends to
increase its dividend on an annual basis, subject to declaration by the Board of 
 Critical Accounting Estimates 
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally
accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial
condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and
estimates that affect the amounts reported. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of
significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated
financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical eperience and on various other
assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis
for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
Uncertain Ta Positions
The Company is subject to income taes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. The evaluation
of the Company’s uncertain ta positions involves significant judgment in the interpretation and
application of GAAP and comple domestic and international ta laws, including the Act and matters
related to the allocation of international taation rights between countries. Although management
believes the Company’s reserves are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final outcome of
these uncertainties will not be different from that which is reflected in the Company’s reserves.
Reserves are adjusted considering changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a ta
eamination. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s
epectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results.
Legal and Other Contingencies
The Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of
business, the outcomes of which are inherently uncertain. The Company records a liability when it is
probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable, the determination of
which requires significant judgment. Resolution of legal matters in a manner inconsistent with
management’s epectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and
operating results.
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk │
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
The Company is eposed to economic risk from interest rates and foreign echange rates. The Company
uses various strategies to manage these risks; however, they may still impact the Company’s
consolidated financial statements.
 Interest Rate Risk 
The Company is primarily eposed to fluctuations in U.S. interest rates and their impact on the
Company’s investment portfolio and term debt. Increases in interest rates will negatively affect the
fair value of the Company’s investment portfolio and increase the interest epense on the Company’s
term debt. To protect against interest rate risk, the Company may use derivative instruments, offset
interest ratesensitive assets and liabilities, or control duration of the investment and term debt
portfolios.
The following table sets forth potential impacts on the Company’s investment portfolio and term debt,
including the effects of any associated derivatives, that would result from a hypothetical increase
in relevant interest rates as of September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022 (dollars in millions):
 Interest Rate Hypothetical Interest 
 Sensitive Instrument Rate Increase Potential Impact 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investment portfolio 100 basis points, all Decline in fair value $ 3,089 $ 4,022 
 tenors 
 Term debt 100 basis points, all Increase in annual $ 194 $ 201 
 tenors interest epense 
 Foreign Echange Rate Risk 
The Company’s eposure to foreign echange rate risk relates primarily to the Company being a net
receiver of currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Changes in echange rates, and in particular a
strengthening of the U.S. dollar, will negatively affect the Company’s net sales and gross margins as
epressed in U.S. dollars. Fluctuations in echange rates may also affect the fair values of certain
of the Company’s assets and liabilities. To protect against foreign echange rate risk, the Company
may use derivative instruments, offset eposures, or adjust local currency pricing of its products
and services. However, the Company may choose to not hedge certain foreign currency eposures for a
variety of reasons, including accounting considerations or prohibitive cost.
The Company applied a value-at-risk (“VAR”) model to its foreign currency derivative positions to
assess the potential impact of fluctuations in echange rates. The VAR model used a Monte Carlo
simulation. The VAR is the maimum epected loss in fair value, for a given confidence interval, to
the Company’s foreign currency derivative positions due to adverse movements in rates. Based on the
results of the model, the Company estimates, with 95% confidence, a maimum one-day loss in fair
value of $669 million and $1.0 billion as of September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022, respectively.
Changes in the Company’s underlying foreign currency eposures, which were ecluded from the
assessment, generally offset changes in the fair values of the Company’s foreign currency
derivatives.
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ 
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
 Inde to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended September 30, 2023, September 
 24, 2022 and September 25, 2021 Page 
 Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the years ended September 30, 2023, 28 
 September 24, 2022 and September 25, 2021 29 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consolidated Balance Sheets as of September 30, 30 
 2023 and September 24, 2022 
 Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity 
 for the years ended September 30, 2023, September 31 
 24, 2022 and September 25, 2021 
 Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the 
 years ended September 30, 2023, September 24, 2022 32 
 and September 25, 2021 
 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 33 
 Reports of Independent Registered Public 49 
 Accounting Firm 
All financial statement schedules have been omitted, since the required information is 
or is not present in amounts sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the
information required is included in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes.
 Apple Inc. 
 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS 
 (In millions, ecept number of shares, which are reflected in thousands, and per-share amounts) 
 Years ended 
 September 30, September 24, September 25, 
 2023 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net sales: 
 Products $ 298,085 $ 316,199 $ 297,392 
 Services 85,200 78,129 68,425 
 Total net sales 383,285 394,328 365,817 
 Cost of sales: 
 Products 189,282 201,471 192,266 
 Services 24,855 22,075 20,715 
 Total cost of sales 214,137 223,546 212,981 
 Gross margin 169,148 170,782 152,836 
 Operating epenses: 
 Research and development 29,915 26,251 21,914 
 Selling, general and administrative 24,932 25,094 21,973 
 Total operating epenses 54,847 51,345 43,887 
 Operating income 114,301 119,437 108,949 
 Other income/(epense), net -565 -334 258 
 Income before provision for income 113,736 119,103 109,207 
 taes 
 Provision for income taes 16,741 19,300 14,527 
 Net income $ 96,995 $ 99,803 $ 94,680 
 Earnings per share: 
 Basic $ 6.16 $ 6.15 $ 5.67 
 Diluted $ 6.13 $ 6.11 $ 5.61 
 Shares used in computing earnings per 
 share: 
 Basic 15,744,231 16,215,963 16,701,272 
 Diluted 15,812,547 16,325,819 16,864,919 
 See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
 Apple Inc. 
 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME 
 (In millions) 
 Years ended 
 September 30, September 24, September 25, 
 2023 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 96,995 $ 99,803 $ 94,680 
 Other comprehensive income/(loss): 
 Change in foreign currency 
 translation, -765 -1,511 501 
 net of ta 
 Change in unrealized gains/losses on 
 derivative instruments, net of ta: 
 Change in fair value of derivative 323 3,212 32 
 instruments 
 Adjustment for net (gains)/losses -1,717 -1,074 1,003 
 realized and included in net income 
 Total change in unrealized 
 gains/losses -1,394 2,138 1,035 
 on derivative instruments 
 Change in unrealized gains/losses on 
 marketable debt securities, net of 
 ta: 
 Change in fair value of marketable 
 debt 1,563 -12,104 -694 
 securities 
 Adjustment for net (gains)/losses 253 205 -273 
 realized and included in net income 
 Total change in unrealized 
 gains/losses 1,816 -11,899 -967 
 on marketable debt securities 
 Total other comprehensive -343 -11,272 569 
 income/(loss) 
 Total comprehensive income $ 96,652 $ 88,531 $ 95,249 
 See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
 Apple Inc. 
 CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS 
 (In millions, ecept number of shares, which are reflected in thousands, and par value) 
 September 30, September 24, 
 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 ASSETS: 
 Current assets: 
 Cash and cash equivalents $ 29,965 $ 23,646 
 Marketable securities 31,590 24,658 
 Accounts receivable, net 29,508 28,184 
 Vendor non-trade receivables 31,477 32,748 
 Inventories 6,331 4,946 
 Other current assets 14,695 21,223 
 Total current assets 143,566 135,405 
 Non-current assets: 
 Marketable securities 100,544 120,805 
 Property, plant and equipment, net 43,715 42,117 
 Other non-current assets 64,758 54,428 
 Total non-current assets 209,017 217,350 
 Total assets $ 352,583 $ 352,755 
 LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY: 
 Current liabilities: 
 Accounts payable $ 62,611 $ 64,115 
 Other current liabilities 58,829 60,845 
 Deferred revenue 8,061 7,912 
 Commercial paper 5,985 9,982 
 Term debt 9,822 11,128 
 Total current liabilities 145,308 153,982 
 Non-current liabilities: 
 Term debt 95,281 98,959 
 Other non-current liabilities 49,848 49,142 
 Total non-current liabilities 145,129 148,101 
 Total liabilities 290,437 302,083 
 Commitments and contingencies 
 Shareholders’ equity: 
 Common stock and additional paid-in 
 capital, $0.00001par value: 
 50,400,000shares 73,812 64,849 
 authorized;15,550,061and15,943,425shares 
 issued and outstanding, respectively 
 Accumulated deficit -214 -3,068 
 Accumulated other comprehensive loss -11,452 -11,109 
 Total shareholders’ equity 62,146 50,672 
 Total liabilities and shareholders’ $ 352,583 $ 352,755 
 equity 
 See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
 Apple Inc. 
 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY 
 (In millions, ecept per-share amounts) 
 Years ended 
 September 30, September 24, September 25, 
 2023 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total shareholders’ equity, beginning $ 50,672 $ 63,090 $ 65,339 
 balances 
 Common stock and additional paid-in 
 capital: 
 Beginning balances 64,849 57,365 50,779 
 Common stock issued 1,346 1,175 1,105 
 Common stock withheld related to net -3,521 -2,971 -2,627 
 share settlement of equity awards 
 Share-based compensation 11,138 9,280 8,108 
 Ending balances 73,812 64,849 57,365 
 Retained earnings/(Accumulated 
 deficit): 
 Beginning balances -3,068 5,562 14,966 
 Net income 96,995 99,803 94,680 
 Dividends and dividend equivalents -14,996 -14,793 -14,431 
 declared 
 Common stock withheld related to net -2,099 -3,454 -4,151 
 share settlement of equity awards 
 Common stock repurchased -77,046 -90,186 -85,502 
 Ending balances -214 -3,068 5,562 
 Accumulated other comprehensive 
 income/(loss): 
 Beginning balances -11,109 163 -406 
 Other comprehensive income/(loss) -343 -11,272 569 
 Ending balances -11,452 -11,109 163 
 Total shareholders’ equity, ending $ 62,146 $ 50,672 $ 63,090 
 balances 
 Dividends and dividend equivalents $ 0.94 $ 0.90 $ 0.85 
 declared per share or RSU 
 See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
 Apple Inc. 
 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS 
 (In millions) 
 Years ended 
 September 30, September 24, September 25, 
 2023 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash, cash equivalents and restricted $ 24,977 $ 35,929 $ 39,789 
 cash, beginning balances 
 Operating activities: 
 Net income 96,995 99,803 94,680 
 Adjustments to reconcile net income 
 to 
 cash generated by operating 
 activities: 
 Depreciation and amortization 11,519 11,104 11,284 
 Share-based compensation epense 10,833 9,038 7,906 
 Other -2,227 1,006 -4,921 
 Changes in operating assets and 
 liabilities: 
 Accounts receivable, net -1,688 -1,823 -10,125 
 Vendor non-trade receivables 1,271 -7,520 -3,903 
 Inventories -1,618 1,484 -2,642 
 Other current and non-current assets -5,684 -6,499 -8,042 
 Accounts payable -1,889 9,448 12,326 
 Other current and non-current 3,031 6,110 7,475 
 liabilities 
 Cash generated by operating 110,543 122,151 104,038 
 activities 
 Investing activities: 
 Purchases of marketable securities -29,513 -76,923 -109,558 
 Proceeds from maturities of 
 marketable 39,686 29,917 59,023 
 securities 
 Proceeds from sales of marketable 5,828 37,446 47,460 
 securities 
 Payments for acquisition of property, -10,959 -10,708 -11,085 
 plant and equipment 
 Other -1,337 -2,086 -385 
 Cash generated by/(used in) investing 3,705 -22,354 -14,545 
 activities 
 Financing activities: 
 Payments for taes related to net 
 share -5,431 -6,223 -6,556 
 settlement of equity awards 
 Payments for dividends and dividend -15,025 -14,841 -14,467 
 equivalents 
 Repurchases of common stock -77,550 -89,402 -85,971 
 Proceeds from issuance of term debt, 5,228 5,465 20,393 
 net 
 Repayments of term debt -11,151 -9,543 -8,750 
 Proceeds from/(Repayments of) 
 commercial -3,978 3,955 1,022 
 paper, net 
 Other -581 -160 976 
 Cash used in financing activities -108,488 -110,749 -93,353 
 Increase/(Decrease) in cash, cash 5,760 -10,952 -3,860 
 equivalents and restricted cash 
 Cash, cash equivalents and restricted $ 30,737 $ 24,977 $ 35,929 
 cash, ending balances 
 Supplemental cash flow disclosure: 
 Cash paid for income taes, net $ 18,679 $ 19,573 $ 25,385 
 Cash paid for interest $ 3,803 $ 2,865 $ 2,687 
 See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
 Apple Inc. 
 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
Note 1  Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation and Preparation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Apple Inc. and its wholly owned
subsidiaries. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes in
conformity with GAAP requires the use of management estimates. Certain prior period amounts in the
consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes have been reclassified to conform to the
current period’s presentation.
The Company’s fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period that ends on the last Saturday of September.
An additional week is included in the first fiscal quarter every five or si years to realign the
Company’s fiscal quarters with calendar quarters, which occurred in the first fiscal quarter of 2023.
The Company’s fiscal year 2023 spanned 53 weeks, whereas fiscal years 2022 and 2021 spanned 52 weeks
each. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months and periods refer to
the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters, months and periods of
those fiscal years.
Revenue
The Company records revenue net of taes collected from customers that are remitted to governmental
authorities.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company recognizes share-based compensation epense on a straight-line basis for its estimate of
equity awards that will ultimately vest.
Cash Equivalents
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less at the date of purchase are
treated as cash equivalents.
Marketable Securities
The cost of securities sold is determined using the specific identification method.
Inventories
Inventories are measured using the first-in, first-out method.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Depreciation on property, plant and equipment is recognized on a straight-line basis.
Derivative Instruments
The Company presents derivative assets and liabilities at their gross fair values in the Consolidated
Balance Sheets.
Income Taes
The Company records certain deferred ta assets and liabilities in connection with the minimum ta on
certain foreign earnings created by the Act.
Leases
The Company combines and accounts for lease and nonlease components as a single lease component for
leases of corporate, data center and retail facilities.
 Note 2  Revenue 
The Company recognizes revenue at the amount to which it epects to be entitled when control of the
products or services is transferred to its customers. Control is generally transferred when the
Company has a present right to payment and title and the significant risks and rewards of ownership
of products or services are transferred to its customers. For most of the Company’s Products net
sales, control transfers when products are shipped. For the Company’s Services net sales, control
transfers over time as services are delivered. Payment for Products and Services net sales is
collected within a short period following transfer of control or commencement of delivery of
services, as applicable.
The Company records reductions to Products net sales related to future product returns, price
protection and other customer incentive programs based on the Company’s epectations and historical
eperience.
For arrangements with multiple performance obligations, which represent promises within an
arrangement that are distinct, the Company allocates revenue to all distinct performance obligations
based on their relative stand-alone selling prices (“SSPs”). When available, the Company uses
observable prices to determine SSPs. When observable prices are not available, SSPs are established
that reflect the Company’s best estimates of what the selling prices of the performance obligations
would be if they were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. The Company’s process for estimating
SSPs without observable prices considers multiple factors that may vary depending upon the unique
facts and circumstances related to each performance obligation including, where applicable, prices
charged by the Company for similar offerings, market trends in the pricing for similar offerings,
product-specific business objectives and the estimated cost to provide the performance obligation.
The Company has identified up to threeperformance obligations regularly included in arrangements
involving the sale of iPhone, Mac, iPad and certain other products. The first performance obligation,
which represents the substantial portion of the allocated sales price, is the hardware and bundled
software delivered at the time of sale. The second performance obligation is the right to receive
certain product-related bundled services, which include iCloud ® , Siri ® and Maps. The third
performance obligation is the right to receive, on a when-and-if-available basis, future unspecified
software upgrades relating to the software bundled with each device. The Company allocates revenue
and any related discounts to these performance obligations based on their relative SSPs. Because the
Company lacks observable prices for the undelivered performance obligations, the allocation of
revenue is based on the Company’s estimated SSPs. Revenue allocated to the delivered hardware and
bundled software is recognized when control has transferred to the customer, which generally occurs
when the product is shipped. Revenue allocated to the product-related bundled services and
unspecified software upgrade rights is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the
estimated period they are epected to be provided.
For certain long-term service arrangements, the Company has performance obligations for services it
has not yet delivered. For these arrangements, the Company does not have a right to bill for the
undelivered services. The Company has determined that any unbilled consideration relates entirely to
the value of the undelivered services. Accordingly, the Company has not recognized revenue, and does
not disclose amounts, related to these undelivered services.
For the sale of third-party products where the Company obtains control of the product before
transferring it to the customer, the Company recognizes revenue based on the gross amount billed to
customers. The Company considers multiple factors when determining whether it obtains control of
third-party products, including evaluating if it can establish the price of the product, retains
inventory risk for tangible products or has the responsibility for ensuring acceptability of the
product. For third-party applications sold through the App Store, the Company does not obtain control
of the product before transferring it to the customer. Therefore, the Company accounts for all third-
party applicationrelated sales on a net basis by recognizing in Services net sales only the
commission it retains.
Net sales disaggregated by significant products and services for 2023, 2022 and 2021 were as follows
(in millions):
 2023 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 iPhone(1) $ 200,583 $ 205,489 $ 191,973 
 Mac(1) 29,357 40,177 35,190 
 iPad(1) 28,300 29,292 31,862 
 Wearables, Home and Accessories(1) 39,845 41,241 38,367 
 Services(2) 85,200 78,129 68,425 
 Total net sales $ 383,285 $ 394,328 $ 365,817 
(1) Products net sales include amortization of the deferred value of unspecified software upgrade
rights, which are bundled in the sales price of the respective product.
(2) Services net sales include amortization of the deferred value of services bundled in the sales
price of certain products.
Total net sales include $ 8.2billion of revenue recognized in 2023 that was included in deferred
revenue as of September 24, 2022, $ 7.5billion of revenue recognized in 2022 that was included in
deferred revenue as of September 25, 2021, and $ 6.7billion of revenue recognized in 2021 that was
included in deferred revenue as of September 26, 2020.
The Company’s proportion of net sales by disaggregated revenue source was generally consistent for
each reportable segment in Note 13, “Segment Information and Geographic Data” for 2023, 2022 and
2021, ecept in Greater China, where iPhone revenue represented a moderately higher proportion of net
sales.
As of September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022, the Company had total deferred revenue of $
12.1billion and $ 12.4billion, respectively. As of September 30, 2023, the Company epects 67% of
total deferred revenue to be realized in less than a year, 25% within one-to-two years, 7% within
two-to-three years and 1% in greater than three years.
 Note 3  Earnings Per Share 
The following table shows the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share for 2023, 2022 and
2021 (net income in millions and shares in thousands):
 Numerator: 2023 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 96,995 $ 99,803 $ 94,680 
 Denominator: 
 Weighted-average basic shares 15,744,231 16,215,963 16,701,272 
 outstanding 
 Effect of dilutive share-based awards 68,316 109,856 163,647 
 Weighted-average diluted shares 15,812,547 16,325,819 16,864,919 
 Basic earnings per share $ 6.16 $ 6.15 $ 5.67 
 Diluted earnings per share $ 6.13 $ 6.11 $ 5.61 
Approimately 24million restricted stock units (“RSUs”) were ecluded from the computation of diluted
earnings per share for 2023 because their effect would have been antidilutive.
 Note 4  Financial Instruments 
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Marketable Securities
The following tables show the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities by
significant investment category as of September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022 (in millions):
 Cash 
 2023 and Current Non-C… 
 Adjus… Unrea… Unrea… Fair Cash Market… Marke… 
 Cost Gains Losses Value Equiv… Securi… Secur… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash $ 28,359 $  $  $ 28,359 $ 28,359 $  $  
 Level 
 1: 
 Money 
 mark… 481   481 481   
 funds 
 Mutu… 
 funds 
 and 442 12 -26 428  428  
 equi… 
 secu… 
 Subt… 923 12 -26 909 481 428  
 Level 
 2(1): 
 U.S. 
 Trea… 19,406  -1,292 18,114 35 5,468 12,611 
 secu… 
 U.S. 
 agen… 5,736  -600 5,136 36 271 4,829 
 secu… 
 Non-… 
 gove… 17,533 6 -1,048 16,491  11,332 5,159 
 secu… 
 Cert… 
 of 
 depo… 1,354   1,354 1,034 320  
 and 
 time 
 depo… 
 Comm… 608   608  608  
 paper 
 Corp… 
 debt 76,840 6 -5,956 70,890 20 12,627 58,243 
 secu… 
 Muni… 628  -26 602  192 410 
 secu… 
 Mort… 
 and 22,365 6 -2,735 19,636  344 19,292 
 asse… 
 secu… 
 Subt… 144,4… 18 -11,6… 132,8… 1,125 31,162 100,5… 
 Tota… $ 173,7… $ 30 $ -11,6… $ 162,0… $ 29,965 $ 31,590 $ 100,5… 
 Cash 
 2022 and Current Non-C… 
 Adjus… Unrea… Unrea… Fair Cash Market… Marke… 
 Cost Gains Losses Value Equiv… Securi… Secur… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash $ 18,546 $  $  $ 18,546 $ 18,546 $  $  
 Level 
 1: 
 Money 
 mark… 2,929   2,929 2,929   
 funds 
 Mutu… 274  -47 227  227  
 funds 
 Subt… 3,203  -47 3,156 2,929 227  
 Level 
 2(1): 
 U.S. 
 Trea… 25,134  -1,725 23,409 338 5,091 17,980 
 secu… 
 U.S. 
 agen… 5,823  -655 5,168  240 4,928 
 secu… 
 Non-… 
 gove… 16,948 2 -1,201 15,749  8,806 6,943 
 secu… 
 Cert… 
 of 
 depo… 2,067   2,067 1,805 262  
 and 
 time 
 depo… 
 Comm… 718   718 28 690  
 paper 
 Corp… 
 debt 87,148 9 -7,707 79,450  9,023 70,427 
 secu… 
 Muni… 921  -35 886  266 620 
 secu… 
 Mort… 
 and 22,553  -2,593 19,960  53 19,907 
 asse… 
 secu… 
 Subt… 161,3… 11 -13,9… 147,4… 2,171 24,431 120,8… 
 Tota… $ 183,0… $ 11 $ -13,9… $ 169,1… $ 23,646 $ 24,658 $ 120,8… 
(1) The valuation techniques used to measure the fair values of the Company’s Level 2 financial
instruments, which generally have counterparties with high credit ratings, are based on quoted market
prices or model-driven valuations using significant inputs derived from or corroborated by observable
market data.
(2) As of September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022, total marketable securities included $
13.8billion and $ 12.7billion, respectively, that were restricted from general use, related to the
State Aid Decision (refer to Note 7, “Income Taes”) and other agreements.
The following table shows the fair value of the Company’s non-current marketable debt securities, by
contractual maturity, as of September 30, 2023 (in millions):
 Due after 1 year through 5 years $ 74,427 
 Due after 5 years through 10 years 9,964 
 Due after 10 years 16,153 
 Total fair value $ 100,544 
The Company’s investments in marketable debt securities have been classified and accounted for as
available-for-sale. The Company classifies marketable debt securities as either current or non-
current based solely on each instrument’s underlying contractual maturity date.
Derivative Instruments and Hedging
The Company may use derivative instruments to partially offset its business eposure to foreign
echange and interest rate risk. However, the Company may choose not to hedge certain eposures for a
variety of reasons including accounting considerations or the prohibitive economic cost of hedging
particular eposures. There can be no assurance the hedges will offset more than a portion of the
financial impact resulting from movements in foreign echange or interest rates.
The Company classifies cash flows related to derivative instruments in the same section of the
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows as the items being hedged, which are generally classified as
operating activities.
Foreign Echange Rate Risk
To protect gross margins from fluctuations in foreign echange rates, the Company may use forwards,
options or other instruments, and may designate these instruments as cash flow hedges. The Company
generally hedges portions of its forecasted foreign currency eposure associated with revenue and
inventory purchases, typically for up to 12months.
To protect the Company’s foreign currencydenominated term debt or marketable securities from
fluctuations in foreign echange rates, the Company may use forwards, cross-currency swaps or other
instruments. The Company designates these instruments as either cash flow or fair value hedges. As of
September 30, 2023, the maimum length of time over which the Company is hedging its eposure to the
variability in future cash flows for term debtrelated foreign currency transactions is 19years.
The Company may also use derivative instruments that are not designated as accounting hedges to
protect gross margins from certain fluctuations in foreign echange rates, as well as to offset a
portion of the foreign currency gains and losses generated by the remeasurement of certain assets and
liabilities denominated in non-functional currencies.
Interest Rate Risk
To protect the Company’s term debt or marketable securities from fluctuations in interest rates, the
Company may use interest rate swaps, options or other instruments. The Company designates these
instruments as either cash flow or fair value hedges.
The notional amounts of the Company’s outstanding derivative instruments as of September 30, 2023 and
September 24, 2022 were as follows (in millions):
 Derivative instruments designated as 
 accounting hedges: 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Foreign echange contracts $ 74,730 $ 102,670 
 Interest rate contracts $ 19,375 $ 20,125 
 Derivative instruments not designated as 
 accounting hedges: 
 Foreign echange contracts $ 104,777 $ 185,381 
The gross fair values of the Company’s derivative assets and liabilities as of September 24, 2022
were as follows (in millions):
 2022 Fair Value of 
 Fair Value of Derivatives Not 
 Derivatives Designated Designated Total 
 Derivative assets(1): as Accounting Hedges as Accounting Hedges Fair Value 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Foreign echange $ 4,317 $ 2,819 $ 7,136 
 contracts 
 Derivative 
 liabilities(2): 
 Foreign echange $ 2,205 $ 2,547 $ 4,752 
 contracts 
 Interest rate $ 1,367 $  $ 1,367 
 contracts 
(1) Derivative assets are measured using Level 2 fair value inputs and are included in other current
assets and other non-current assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(2) Derivative liabilities are measured using Level 2 fair value inputs and are included in other
current liabilities and other non-current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The derivative assets above represent the Company’s gross credit eposure if all counterparties
failed to perform. To mitigate credit risk, the Company generally uses collateral security
arrangements that provide for collateral to be received or posted when the net fair values of certain
derivatives fluctuate from contractually established thresholds. To further limit credit risk, the
Company generally uses master netting arrangements with the respective counterparties to the
Company’s derivative contracts, under which the Company is allowed to settle transactions with a
single net amount payable by one party to the other. As of September 24, 2022, the potential effects
of these rights of set-off associated with the Company’s derivative contracts, including the effects
of collateral, would be a reduction to both derivative assets and derivative liabilities of $
7.8billion, resulting in a net derivative asset of $ 412million.
The carrying amounts of the Company’s hedged items in fair value hedges as of September 30, 2023 and
September 24, 2022 were as follows (in millions):
 Hedged assets/(liabilities): 2023 2022 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Current and non-current marketable $ 14,433 $ 13,378 
 securities 
 Current and non-current term debt $ -18,247 $ -18,739 
Accounts Receivable
Trade Receivables
As of September 24, 2022, the Company had onecustomer that represented 10% or more of total trade
receivables, which accounted for 10%. The Company’s third-party cellular network carriers accounted
for 41% and 44% of total trade receivables as of September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022,
respectively. The Company requires third-party credit support or collateral from certain customers to
limit credit risk.
Vendor Non-Trade Receivables
The Company has non-trade receivables from certain of its manufacturing vendors resulting from the
sale of components to these vendors who manufacture subassemblies or assemble final products for the
Company. The Company purchases these components directly from suppliers. The Company does not reflect
the sale of these components in products net sales. Rather, the Company recognizes any gain on these
sales as a reduction of products cost of sales when the related final products are sold by the
Company. As of September 30, 2023, the Company had twovendors that individually represented 10% or
more of total vendor non-trade receivables, which accounted for 48% and 23%. As of September 24,
2022, the Company had twovendors that individually represented 10% or more of total vendor non-trade
receivables, which accounted for 54% and 13%.
 Note 5  Property, Plant and Equipment 
The following table shows the Company’s gross property, plant and equipment by major asset class and
accumulated depreciation as of September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022 (in millions):
 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Land and buildings $ 23,446 $ 22,126 
 Machinery, equipment and internal-use 78,314 81,060 
 software 
 Leasehold improvements 12,839 11,271 
 Gross property, plant and equipment 114,599 114,457 
 Accumulated depreciation -70,884 -72,340 
 Total property, plant and equipment, net $ 43,715 $ 42,117 
Depreciation epense on property, plant and equipment was $ 8.5billion, $ 8.7billion and $ 9.5billion
during 2023, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
 Note 6  Consolidated Financial Statement Details 
The following tables show the Company’s consolidated financial statement details as of September 30,
2023 and September 24, 2022 (in millions):
Other Non-Current Assets
 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Deferred ta assets $ 17,852 $ 15,375 
 Other non-current assets 46,906 39,053 
 Total other non-current assets $ 64,758 $ 54,428 
Other Current Liabilities
 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Income taes payable $ 8,819 $ 6,552 
 Other current liabilities 50,010 54,293 
 Total other current liabilities $ 58,829 $ 60,845 
Other Non-Current Liabilities
 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Long-term taes payable $ 15,457 $ 16,657 
 Other non-current liabilities 34,391 32,485 
 Total other non-current liabilities $ 49,848 $ 49,142 
Other Income/(Epense), Net
The following table shows the detail of other income/(epense), net for 2023, 2022 and 2021 (in
millions):
 2023 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest and dividend income $ 3,750 $ 2,825 $ 2,843 
 Interest epense -3,933 -2,931 -2,645 
 Other income/(epense), net -382 -228 60 
 Total other income/(epense), net $ -565 $ -334 $ 258 
 Note 7  Income Taes 
Provision for Income Taes and Effective Ta Rate
The provision for income taes for 2023, 2022 and 2021, consisted of the following (in millions):
 Federal: 2023 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Current $ 9,445 $ 7,890 $ 8,257 
 Deferred -3,644 -2,265 -7,176 
 Total 5,801 5,625 1,081 
 State: 
 Current 1,570 1,519 1,620 
 Deferred -49 84 -338 
 Total 1,521 1,603 1,282 
 Foreign: 
 Current 8,750 8,996 9,424 
 Deferred 669 3,076 2,740 
 Total 9,419 12,072 12,164 
 Provision for income taes $ 16,741 $ 19,300 $ 14,527 
The foreign provision for income taes is based on foreign preta earnings of $ 72.9billion, $
71.3billion and $ 68.7billion in 2023, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
A reconciliation of the provision for income taes to the amount computed by applying the statutory
federal income ta rate ( 21% in 2023, 2022 and 2021) to income before provision for income taes for
2023, 2022 and 2021, is as follows (dollars in millions):
 2023 2022 2021 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Computed epected ta $ 23,885 $ 25,012 $ 22,933 
 State taes, net of federal effect 1,124 1,518 1,151 
 Earnings of foreign subsidiaries -5,744 -4,366 -4,715 
 Research and development credit, net -1,212 -1,153 -1,033 
 Ecess ta benefits from equity awards -1,120 -1,871 -2,137 
 Foreign-derived intangible income  -296 -1,372 
 deduction 
 Other -192 456 -300 
 Provision for income taes $ 16,741 $ 19,300 $ 14,527 
 Effective ta rate 14.7 % 16.2 % 13.3 % 
Deferred Ta Assets and Liabilities
As of September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022, the significant components of the Company’s deferred
ta assets and liabilities were (in millions):
 Deferred ta assets: 2023 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Ta credit carryforwards $ 8,302 $ 6,962 
 Accrued liabilities and other reserves 6,365 6,515 
 Capitalized research and development 6,294 1,267 
 Deferred revenue 4,571 5,742 
 Unrealized losses 2,447 2,913 
 Lease liabilities 2,421 2,400 
 Other 2,343 3,407 
 Total deferred ta assets 32,743 29,206 
 Less: Valuation allowance -8,374 -7,530 
 Total deferred ta assets, net 24,369 21,676 
 Deferred ta liabilities: 
 Right-of-use assets 2,179 2,163 
 Depreciation 1,998 1,582 
 Minimum ta on foreign earnings 1,940 1,983 
 Unrealized gains 511 942 
 Other 490 469 
 Total deferred ta liabilities 7,118 7,139 
 Net deferred ta assets $ 17,251 $ 14,537 
As of September 30, 2023, the Company had $ 5.2billion in foreign ta credit carryforwards in Ireland
and $ 3.0billion in California R&D credit carryforwards, both of which can be carried forward
indefinitely. A valuation allowance has been recorded for the credit carryforwards and a portion of
other temporary differences.
Uncertain Ta Positions
As of September 30, 2023, the total amount of gross unrecognized ta benefits was $ 19.5billion, of
which $ 9.5billion, if recognized, would impact the Company’s effective ta rate. As of September 24,
2022, the total amount of gross unrecognized ta benefits was $ 16.8billion, of which $ 8.0billion,
if recognized, would have impacted the Company’s effective ta rate.
The aggregate change in the balance of gross unrecognized ta benefits, which ecludes interest and
penalties, for 2023, 2022 and 2021, is as follows (in millions):
 2023 2022 2021 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Beginning balances $ 16,758 $ 15,477 $ 16,475 
 Increases related to ta positions taken 2,044 2,284 816 
 during a prior year 
 Decreases related to ta positions taken -1,463 -1,982 -1,402 
 during a prior year 
 Increases related to ta positions taken 2,628 1,936 1,607 
 during the current year 
 Decreases related to settlements with -19 -28 -1,838 
 taing authorities 
 Decreases related to epiration of the -494 -929 -181 
 statute of limitations 
 Ending balances $ 19,454 $ 16,758 $ 15,477 
The Company is subject to taation and files income ta returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and
many state and foreign jurisd ictions. Ta years after 2017 for the U.S. federal jurisdiction, and
after 2014 in certain major foreign jurisdictions, remain subject to eamination. Altho ugh the
timing of resolution or closure of eaminations is not certain, the Company believes it is reasonably
possible that its gross unrecognized ta benefits could decrease in the net 12 months by as much as
$ 4.5billion.
European Commission State Aid Decision
On August 30, 2016, the European Commission announced its decision that Ireland granted state aid to
the Company by providing ta opinions in 1991 and 2007 concerning the ta allocation of profits of
the Irish branches of twosubsidiaries of the Company (the “State Aid Decision”). The State Aid
Decision ordered Ireland to calculate and recover additional taes from the Company for the period
June 2003 through December 2014. Irish legislative changes, effective as of January 2015, eliminated
the application of the ta opinions from that date forward. The recovery amount was calculated to be
€ 13.1billion, plus interest of € 1.2billion. The Company and Ireland appealed the State Aid Decision
to the General Court of the Court of Justice of the European Union (the “General Court”). On July 15,
2020, the General Court annulled the State Aid Decision. On September 25, 2020, the European
Commission appealed the General Court’s decision to the European Court of Justice (the “ECJ”) and a
hearing was held on May 23, 2023. A decision from the ECJ is epected in calendar year 2024. The
Company believes it would be eligible to claim a U.S. foreign ta credit for a portion of any
incremental Irish corporate income taes potentially due related to the State Aid Decision.
On an annual basis, the Company may request approval from the Irish Minister for Finance to reduce
the recovery amount for certain taes paid to other countries. As of September 30, 2023, the adjusted
recovery amount was € 12.7billion, ecluding interest. The adjusted recovery amount plus interest is
funded into escrow, where it will remain restricted from general use pending the conclusion of all
legal proceedings. Refer to the Cash, Cash Equivalents and Marketable Securities section of Note 4,
“Financial Instruments” for more information.
 Note 8  Leases 
The Company has lease arrangements for certain equipment and facilities, including corporate, data
center, manufacturing and retail space. These leases typically have original terms not eceeding
10years and generally contain multiyear renewal options, some of which are reasonably certain of
eercise.
Payments under the Company’s lease arrangements may be fied or variable, and variable lease payments
are primarily based on purchases of output of the underlying leased assets. Lease costs associated
with fied payments on the Company’s operating leases were $ 2.0billion, $ 1.9billion and $
1.7billion for 2023, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Lease costs associated with variable payments on
the Company’s leases were $ 13.9billion, $ 14.9billion and $ 12.9billion for 2023, 2022 and 2021,
respectively.
The Company made $ 1.9billion, $ 1.8billion and $ 1.4billion of fied cash payments related to
operating leases in 2023, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Noncash activities involving right-of-use
(“ROU”) assets obtained in echange for lease liabilities were $ 2.1billion, $ 2.8billion and $
3.3billion for 2023, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
The following table shows ROU assets and lease liabilities, and the associated financial statement
line items, as of September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022 (in millions):
 Lease-Related Assets and 
 Liabilities Financial Statement Line 
 Right-of-use assets: Items 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating leases Other non-current assets $ 10,661 $ 10,417 
 Finance leases Property, plant and equipment, net 1,015 952 
 Total right-of-use assets $ 11,676 $ 11,369 
 Lease liabilities: 
 Operating leases Other current liabilities $ 1,410 $ 1,534 
 Other non-current liabilities 10,408 9,936 
 Finance leases Other current liabilities 165 129 
 Other non-current liabilities 859 812 
 Total lease liabilities $ 12,842 $ 12,411 
Lease liability maturities as of September 30, 2023, are as follows (in millions):
 Operating Finance 
 Leases Leases Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2024 $ 1,719 $ 196 $ 1,915 
 2025 1,875 151 2,026 
 2026 1,732 120 1,852 
 2027 1,351 52 1,403 
 2028 1,181 34 1,215 
 Thereafter 5,983 872 6,855 
 Total undiscounted liabilities 13,841 1,425 15,266 
 Less: Imputed interest -2,023 -401 -2,424 
 Total lease liabilities $ 11,818 $ 1,024 $ 12,842 
The weighted-average remaining lease term related to the Company’s lease liabilities as of September
30, 2023 and September 24, 2022 was 10.6years and 10.1years, respectively. The discount rate related
to the Company’s lease liabilities as of September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022 was 3.0% and 2.3%,
respectively. The discount rates related to the Company’s lease liabilities are generally based on
estimates of the Company’s incremental borrowing rate, as the discount rates implicit in the
Company’s leases cannot be readily determined.
As of September 30, 2023, the Company had $ 544million of future payments under additional leases,
primarily for corporate facilities and retail space, that had not yet commenced. These leases will
commence between 2024 and 2026, with lease terms ranging from 1year to 21years.
 Note 9  Debt 
Commercial Paper
The Company issues unsecured short-term promissory notes pursuant to a commercial paper program. The
Company uses net proceeds from the commercial paper program for general corporate purposes, including
dividends and share repurchases. As of September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022, the Company had $
6.0billion and $ 10.0billion of commercial paper outstanding, respectively, with maturities generally
less than nine months. The weighted-average interest rate of the Company’s commercial paper was 5.28%
and 2.31% as of September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022, respectively. The following table provides
a summary of cash flows associated with the issuance and maturities of commercial paper for 2023,
2022 and 2021 (in millions):
 Maturities 90 days or less: 2023 2022 2021 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Proceeds from/(Repayments of) commercial $ -1,333 $ 5,264 $ -357 
 paper, net 
 Maturities greater than 90 days: 
 Proceeds from commercial paper  5,948 7,946 
 Repayments of commercial paper -2,645 -7,257 -6,567 
 Proceeds from/(Repayments of) commercial -2,645 -1,309 1,379 
 paper, net 
 Total proceeds from/(repayments of) $ -3,978 $ 3,955 $ 1,022 
 commercial paper, net 
Term Debt
The Company has outstanding Notes, which are senior unsecured obligations with interest payable in
arrears. The following table provides a summary of the Company’s term debt as of September 30, 2023
and September 24, 2022:
 Maturities 
 (calendar 
 year) 2023 2022 
 2013  2022 Amount Effective Amount Effective 
 debt (in Interest (in Interest 
 issuances: millions) Rate millions) Rate 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fied-rate… 
 4.650% 20242062 $ 101,322 0.03% 6.72% $ 111,824 0.03% 4.78% 
 notes 
 Third 
 quarter 
 2023 debt 
 issuance: 
 Fied-rate… 
 4.850% 20262053 5,250 4.04% 4.88%  
 notes 
 Total term 
 debt 106,572 111,824 
 principal 
 Unamortized 
 premium/(d… 
 and -356 -374 
 issuance 
 costs, net 
 Hedge 
 accounting -1,113 -1,363 
 fair value 
 adjustments 
 Total term 105,103 110,087 
 debt 
 Less: 
 Current -9,822 -11,128 
 portion of 
 term debt 
 Total 
 non-current $ 95,281 $ 98,959 
 portion of 
 term debt 
To manage interest rate risk on certain of its U.S. dollardenominated fied-rate notes, the Company
uses interest rate swaps to effectively convert the fied interest rates to floating interest rates
on a portion of these notes. Additionally, to manage foreign echange rate risk on certain of its
foreign currencydenominated notes, the Company uses cross-currency swaps to effectively convert
these notes to U.S. dollardenominated notes.
The effective interest rates for the Notes include the interest on the Notes, amortization of the
discount or premium and, if applicable, adjustments related to hedging. The Company recognized $
3.7billion, $ 2.8billion and $ 2.6billion of interest epense on its term debt for 2023, 2022 and
2021, respectively.
The future principal payments for the Company’s Notes as of September 30, 2023, are as follows (in
millions):
 2024 $ 9,943 
 2025 10,775 
 2026 12,265 
 2027 9,786 
 2028 7,800 
 Thereafter 56,003 
 Total term debt principal $ 106,572 
As of September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022, the fair value of the Company’s Notes, based on
Level 2 inputs, was $ 90.8billion and $ 98.8billion, respectively.
 Note 10  Shareholders’ Equity 
Share Repurchase Program
During 2023, the Company repurchased 471million shares of its common stock for $ 76.6billion,
ecluding ecise ta due under the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022. The Company’s share repurchase
programs do not obligate the Company to acquire a minimum amount of shares. Under the programs,
shares may be repurchased in privately negotiated or open market transactions, including under plans
complying with Rule 10b5-1 under the Echange Act.
The following table shows the changes in 
thousands):
 2023 2022 2021 
 Common stock outstanding, beginning 15,943,425 16,426,786 16,976,763 
 balances 
 Common stock repurchased -471,419 -568,589 -656,340 
 Common stock issued, net of shares 78,055 85,228 106,363 
 withheld for employee taes 
 Common stock outstanding, ending 15,550,061 15,943,425 16,426,786 
 balances 
 Note 11  Share-Based Compensation 
2022 Employee Stock Plan
The Apple Inc. 2022 Employee Stock Plan (the “2022 Plan”) is a shareholder-approved plan that
provides for broad-based equity grants to employees, including eecutive officers, and permits the
granting of RSUs, stock grants, performance-based awards, stock options and stock appreciation
rights. RSUs granted under the 2022 Plan generally vest over four years, based on continued
employment, and are settled upon vesting in shares of the Company’s common stock on a one-for-one
basis. All RSUs granted under the 2022 Plan have dividend equivalent rights, which entitle holders of
RSUs to the same dividend value per share as holders of common stock. A maimum of approimately
1.3billion shares were authorized for issuance pursuant to 2022 Plan awards at the time the plan was
approved on March 4, 2022.
2014 Employee Stock Plan
The Apple Inc. 2014 Employee Stock Plan (the “2014 Plan”) is a shareholder-approved plan that
provided for broad-based equity grants to employees, including eecutive officers. The 2014 Plan
permitted the granting of substantially the same types of equity awards with substantially the same
terms as the 2022 Plan. The 2014 Plan also permitted the granting of cash bonus awards. In the third
quarter of 2022, the Company terminated the authority to grant new awards under the 2014 Plan.
Restricted Stock Units
A summary of the Company’s RSU activity and related information for 2023, 2022 and 2021, is as
follows:
 Number of Weighted-Average Aggregate 
 RSUs Grant Date Fair Fair Value 
 (in thousands) Value Per RSU (in millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance as of September 26, 2020 310,778 $ 51.58 
 RSUs granted 89,363 $ 116.33 
 RSUs vested -145,766 $ 50.71 
 RSUs canceled -13,948 $ 68.95 
 Balance as of September 25, 2021 240,427 $ 75.16 
 RSUs granted 91,674 $ 150.70 
 RSUs vested -115,861 $ 72.12 
 RSUs canceled -14,739 $ 99.77 
 Balance as of September 24, 2022 201,501 $ 109.48 
 RSUs granted 88,768 $ 150.87 
 RSUs vested -101,878 $ 97.31 
 RSUs canceled -8,144 $ 127.98 
 Balance as of September 30, 2023 180,247 $ 135.91 $ 30,860 
The fair value as of the respective vesting dates of RSUs was $ 15.9billion, $ 18.2billion and $
19.0billion for 2023, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The majority of RSUs that vested in 2023, 2022 and
2021 were net share settled such that the Company withheld shares with a value equivalent to the
employees’ obligation for the applicable income and other employment taes, and remitted the cash to
the appropriate taing authorities. The total shares withheld were approimately 37million, 41million
and 53million for 2023, 2022 and 2021, respectively, and were based on the value of the RSUs on their
respective vesting dates as determined by the Company’s closing stock price. Total payments to taing
authorities for employees’ ta obligations were $ 5.6billion, $ 6.4billion and $ 6.8billion in 2023,
2022 and 2021, respectively.
Share-Based Compensation
The following table shows share-based compensation epense and the related income ta benefit
included in the Consolidated Statements of Operations for 2023, 2022 and 2021 (in millions):
 2023 2022 2021 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Share-based compensation epense $ 10,833 $ 9,038 $ 7,906 
 Income ta benefit related to $ -3,421 $ -4,002 $ -4,056 
 share-based compensation epense 
As of September 30, 2023, the total unrecognized compensation cost related to outstanding RSUs was $
18.6billion, which the Company epects to recognize over a weighted-average period of 2.5years.
Note 12  Commitments, Contingencies and Supply Concentrations
Unconditional Purchase Obligations
The Company has entered into certain offbalance sheet commitments that require the future purchase
of goods or services (“unconditional purchase obligations”). The Company’s unconditional purchase
obligations primarily consist of supplier arrangements, licensed intellectual property and content,
and distribution rights. Future payments under noncancelable unconditional purchase obligations with
a remaining term in ecess of one year as of September 30, 2023, are as follows (in millions):
 2024 $ 4,258 
 2025 2,674 
 2026 3,434 
 2027 1,277 
 2028 5,878 
 Thereafter 3,215 
 Total $ 20,736 
Contingencies
The Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that have arisen in the ordinary
course of business and that have not been fully resolved. The outcome of litigation is inherently
uncertain. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company
may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss greater than a recorded accrual, concerning
loss contingencies for asserted legal and other claims.
Concentrations in the Available Sources of Supply of Materials and Product
Although most components essential to the Company’s business are generally available from multiple
sources, certain components are currently obtained from single or limited sources. The Company also
competes for various components with other participants in the markets for smartphones, personal
computers, tablets, wearables and accessories. Therefore, many components used by the Company,
including those that are available from multiple sources, are at times subject to industry-wide
shortage and significant commodity pricing fluctuations.
The Company uses some custom components that are not commonly used by its competitors, and new
products introduced by the Company often utilize custom components available from only one source.
When a component or product uses new technologies, initial capacity constraints may eist until the
suppliers’ yields have matured or their manufacturing capacities have increased. The continued
availability of these components at acceptable prices, or at all, may be affected if suppliers decide
to concentrate on the production of common components instead of components customized to meet the
Company’s requirements.
Substantially all of the Company’s hardware products are manufactured by outsourcing partners that
are located primarily in China mainland, India, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and Vietnam.
 Note 13  Segment Information and Geographic Data 
The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable segments
consist of the Americas, Europe, Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific. Americas includes
both North and South America. Europe includes European countries, as well as India, the Middle East
and Africa. Greater China includes China mainland, Hong Kong and Taiwan. Rest of Asia Pacific
includes Australia and those Asian countries not included in the Company’s other reportable segments.
Although the reportable segments provide similar hardware and software products and similar services,
each one is managed separately to better align with the location of the Company’s customers and
distribution partners and the unique market dynamics of each geographic region.
The Company evaluates the performance of its reportable segments based on net sales and operating
income. Net sales for geographic segments are generally based on the location of customers and sales
through the Company’s retail stores located in those geographic locations. Operating income for each
segment consists of net sales to third parties, related cost of sales, and operating epenses
directly attributable to the segment. The information provided to the Company’s chief operating
decision maker for purposes of making decisions and assessing segment performance ecludes asset
information.
The following table shows information by reportable segment for 2023, 2022 and 2021 (in millions):
 Americas: 2023 2022 2021 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net sales $ 162,560 $ 169,658 $ 153,306 
 Operating income $ 60,508 $ 62,683 $ 53,382 
 Europe: 
 Net sales $ 94,294 $ 95,118 $ 89,307 
 Operating income $ 36,098 $ 35,233 $ 32,505 
 Greater China: 
 Net sales $ 72,559 $ 74,200 $ 68,366 
 Operating income $ 30,328 $ 31,153 $ 28,504 
 Japan: 
 Net sales $ 24,257 $ 25,977 $ 28,482 
 Operating income $ 11,888 $ 12,257 $ 12,798 
 Rest of Asia Pacific: 
 Net sales $ 29,615 $ 29,375 $ 26,356 
 Operating income $ 12,066 $ 11,569 $ 9,817 
A reconciliation of the Company’s segment operating income to the Consolidated Statements of
Operations for 2023, 2022 and 2021 is as follows (in millions):
 2023 2022 2021 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Segment operating income $ 150,888 $ 152,895 $ 137,006 
 Research and development epense -29,915 -26,251 -21,914 
 Other corporate epenses, net(1) -6,672 -7,207 -6,143 
 Total operating income $ 114,301 $ 119,437 $ 108,949 
(1) Includes corporate marketing epenses, certain share-based compensation epenses, various
nonrecurring charges, and other separately managed general and administrative costs.
The U.S. and China were the only countries that accounted for more than 10% of the Company’s net
sales in 2023, 2022 and 2021. Net sales for 2023, 2022 and 2021 and long-lived assets as of September
30, 2023 and September 24, 2022 were as follows (in millions):
 Net sales: 2023 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. $ 138,573 $ 147,859 $ 133,803 
 China(1) 72,559 74,200 68,366 
 Other countries 172,153 172,269 163,648 
 Total net sales $ 383,285 $ 394,328 $ 365,817 
 Long-lived assets: 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. $ 33,276 $ 31,119 
 China(1) 5,778 7,260 
 Other countries 4,661 3,738 
 Total long-lived assets $ 43,715 $ 42,117 
(1) China includes Hong Kong and Taiwan.
 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
To the Shareholders and the Board of 
 Opinion on the Financial Statements 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Apple Inc. as of September 30, 2023
and September 24, 2022, the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income,
shareholders’ equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended September 30,
2023, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “financial statements”). In our opinion,
the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Apple
Inc. at September 30, 2023 and September 24, 2022, and the results of its operations and its cash
flows for each of the three years in the period ended September 30, 2023, in conformity with U.S.
generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (the “PCAOB”), Apple Inc.’s internal control over financial reporting as of
September 30, 2023, based on criteria established in Internal Control  Integrated Framework issued
by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our
report dated November 2, 2023 epressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
These financial statements are the responsibility of Apple Inc.’s management. Our responsibility is
to epress an opinion on Apple Inc.’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public
accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to Apple
Inc. in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of
the U.S. Securities and Echange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements
are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing
procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included
eamining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial
statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 Critical Audit Matter 
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the
financial statements that was communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and
that: (1) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2)
involved our especially challenging, subjective, or comple judgments. The communication of the
critical audit matter does not alter in any way our opinion on the financial statements, taken as a
whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a separate opinion
on the critical audit matter or on the account or disclosure to which it relates.
 Uncertain Ta Positions 
 As discussed in Note 7 to the financial statements, Apple Inc. is 
 subject to taation and files income ta returns in the U.S. federal 
 jurisdiction and many state and foreign jurisdictions. As of 
 September 30, 2023, the total amount of gross unrecognized ta 
 benefits was $19.5billion, of which $9.5billion, if recognized, 
 would impact Apple Inc.’s effective ta rate. In accounting for some 
 Description of the Matter of the uncertain ta positions, Apple Inc. uses significant judgment 
 in the interpretation and application of comple domestic and 
 international ta laws. 
 Auditing management’s evaluation of whether an uncertain ta 
 position is more likely than not to be sustained and the measurement 
 of the benefit of various ta positions can be comple, involves 
 significant judgment, and is based on interpretations of ta laws 
 and legal rulings. 
 We tested controls relating to the evaluation of uncertain ta positions, 
 including controls over management’s assessment as to whether ta 
 positions are more likely than not to be sustained, management’s process 
 to measure the benefit of its ta positions, and the development of the 
 related disclosures. 
 To evaluate Apple Inc.’s assessment of which ta positions are more 
 likely than not to be sustained, our audit procedures included, among 
 others, reading and evaluating management’s assumptions and analysis, 
 How We Addressed the and, as applicable, Apple Inc.’s communications with taing authorities, 
 Matter in Our Audit that detailed the basis and technical merits of the uncertain ta 
 positions. We involved our ta subject matter resources in assessing the 
 technical merits of certain of Apple Inc.’s ta positions based on our 
 knowledge of relevant ta laws and eperience with related taing 
 authorities. For certain ta positions, we also received eternal legal 
 counsel confirmation letters and discussed the matters with eternal 
 advisors and Apple Inc. ta personnel. In addition, we evaluated Apple 
 Inc.’s disclosure in relation to these matters included in Note 7 to the 
 financial statements. 
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
We have served as Apple Inc.’s auditor since 2009.
San Jose, California
November 2, 2023
 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
To the Shareholders and the Board of 
 Opinion on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting 
We have audited Apple Inc.’s internal control over financial reporting as of September 30, 2023,
based on criteria established in Internal Control  Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) (the “COSO criteria”). In our
opinion, Apple Inc. maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial
reporting as of September 30, 2023, based on the COSO criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (the “PCAOB”), the consolidated balance sheets of Apple Inc. as of September
30, 2023 and September 24, 2022, the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive
income, shareholders’ equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended September
30, 2023, and the related notes and our report dated November 2, 2023 epressed an unqualified
opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
Apple Inc.’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial
reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
included in the accompanying Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.
Our responsibility is to epress an opinion on Apple Inc.’s internal control over financial reporting
based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be
independent with respect to Apple Inc. in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the
applicable rules and regulations of the U.S. Securities and Echange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing
the risk that a material weakness eists, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as
we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis
for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for eternal purposes in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1)
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance
with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and ependitures of the company
are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and 
(3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
San Jose, California
November 2, 2023
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ 
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ Item 9A. Controls and Procedures │
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
 Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures 
Based on an evaluation under the supervision and with the participation of the Company’s management,
the Company’s principal eecutive officer and 
Company’s disclosure controls and procedures as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the
Echange Act were effective as of September 30, 2023 to provide reasonable assurance that information
required to be disclosed by the Company in reports that it files or submits under the Echange Act is
(i) recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC rules
and forms and (ii) accumulated and communicated to the Company’s management, including its principal
eecutive officer and 
required disclosure.
 Inherent Limitations over Internal Controls 
The Company’s internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
eternal purposes in accordance with GAAP. The Company’s internal control over financial reporting
includes those policies and procedures that:
(i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect
the transactions and dispositions of the Company’s assets;
(ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation
of financial statements in accordance with GAAP, and that the Company’s receipts and ependitures are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of the Company’s management and 
(iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the Company’s assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
Management, including the Company’s 
epect that the Company’s internal controls will prevent or detect all errors and all fraud. A
control system, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute,
assurance that the objectives of the control system are met. Further, the design of a control system
must reflect the fact that there are resource constraints, and the benefits of controls must be
considered relative to their costs. Because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no
evaluation of internal controls can provide absolute assurance that all control issues and instances
of fraud, if any, have been detected. Also, any evaluation of the effectiveness of controls in future
periods are subject to the risk that those internal controls may become inadequate because of changes
in business conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may
deteriorate.
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
The Company’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control
over financial reporting (as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under the Echange Act). Management conducted
an assessment of the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based
on the criteria set forth in Internal Control  Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework). Based on the Company’s
assessment, management has concluded that its internal control over financial reporting was effective
as of September 30, 2023 to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting and the preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP. The Company’s
independent registered public accounting firm, Ernst & Young LLP, has issued an audit report on the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting, which appears in 
10-K.
 Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting 
There were no changes in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting during the fourth
quarter of 2023, which were identified in connection with management’s evaluation required by
paragraph (d) of Rules 13a-15 and 15d-15 under the Echange Act, that have materially affected, or
are reasonably likely to materially affect, the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ Item 9B. Other Information │
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
 Insider Trading Arrangements 
On August 30, 2023, Deirdre O’Brien, the Company’s 
the Company’s 
affirmative defense conditions of Rule 10b5-1(c) under the Echange Act. The plans provide for the
sale of all shares vested during the duration of the plans pursuant to certain equity awards granted
to Ms. O’Brien and Mr. Williams, respectively, ecluding any shares withheld by the Company to
satisfy income ta withholding and remittance obligations. Ms. O’Brien’s plan will epireon October
15, 2024, and Mr. Williams’ plan will epire on December 15, 2024, subject to early termination for
certain specified events set forth in the plans.
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections │
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

╔═ § ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║ ║
║ PART III ║
║ ║
╚═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ 
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
The information required by this Item will be included in the Company’s definitive proy statement to
be filed with the SEC within 120 days after September 30, 2023, in connection with the solicitation
of proies for the Company’s 2024 
incorporated herein by reference.
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ 
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
The information required by this Item will be included in the 2024 Proy Statement, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ 
│ Matters │
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
The information required by this Item will be included in the 2024 Proy Statement, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ 
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
The information required by this Item will be included in the 2024 Proy Statement, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ 
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
The information required by this Item will be included in the 2024 Proy Statement, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
╔═ § ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║ ║
║ PART IV ║
║ ║
╚═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ 
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
(a) Documents filed as part of this report
 (1) 
 All financial statements 
 Inde to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended September 30, 2023, September 
 24, 2022 and September 25, 2021 Page 
 Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the years ended September 30, 2023, 28 
 September 24, 2022 and September 25, 2021 29 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consolidated Balance Sheets as of September 30, 30 
 2023 and September 24, 2022 
 Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity 
 for the years ended September 30, 2023, September 31 
 24, 2022 and September 25, 2021 
 Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the 
 years ended September 30, 2023, September 24, 2022 32 
 and September 25, 2021 
 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 33 
 Reports of Independent Registered Public 49 
 Accounting Firm* 
* Ernst & Young LLP, PCAOB Firm ID No. 000 42.
 (2) 
 Financial Statement Schedules 
All financial statement schedules have been omitted, since the required information is 
or is not present in amounts sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the
information required is included in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes
(3) Ehibits required by Item 601 of Regulation S-K (1)
 Incorporated by 
 Reference 
 Ehibit Number Ehibit Description Form Ehibit Filing Date/ 
 Period End Date 
 Restated Articles of 
 3.1 Incorporation of the 8-K 3.1 8/7/20 
 Registrant filed on 
 August 3, 2020. 
 Amended and Restated 
 3.2 Bylaws of the 8-K 3.2 8/19/22 
 Registrant effective as 
 of August 17, 2022. 
 Description of 
 4.1** Securities of the 
 Registrant. 
 Indenture, dated as of 
 April 29, 2013, between 
 4.2 the Registrant and The S-3 4.1 4/29/13 
 Bank of New York Mellon 
 Trust Company, N.A., as 
 Trustee. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of May 3, 
 2013, including forms 
 of global notes 
 representing the 
 4.3 Floating Rate Notes due 8-K 4.1 5/3/13 
 2016, Floating Rate 
 Notes due 2018, 0.45% 
 Notes due 2016, 1.00% 
 Notes due 2018, 2.40% 
 Notes due 2023 and 
 3.85% Notes due 2043. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of May 6, 
 2014, including forms 
 of global notes 
 representing the 
 4.4 Floating Rate Notes due 8-K 4.1 5/6/14 
 2017, Floating Rate 
 Notes due 2019, 1.05% 
 Notes due 2017, 2.10% 
 Notes due 2019, 2.85% 
 Notes due 2021, 3.45% 
 Notes due 2024 and 
 4.45% Notes due 2044. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of November 
 4.5 10, 2014, including 8-K 4.1 11/10/14 
 forms of global notes 
 representing the 1.000% 
 Notes due 2022 and 
 1.625% Notes due 2026. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of February 9, 
 2015, including forms 
 of global notes 
 4.6 representing the 8-K 4.1 2/9/15 
 Floating Rate Notes due 
 2020, 1.55% Notes due 
 2020, 2.15% Notes due 
 2022, 2.50% Notes due 
 2025 and 3.45% Notes 
 due 2045. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of May 13, 
 2015, including forms 
 of global notes 
 representing the 
 4.7 Floating Rate Notes due 8-K 4.1 5/13/15 
 2017, Floating Rate 
 Notes due 2020, 0.900% 
 Notes due 2017, 2.000% 
 Notes due 2020, 2.700% 
 Notes due 2022, 3.200% 
 Notes due 2025, and 
 4.375% Notes due 2045. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of July 31, 
 4.8 2015, including forms 8-K 4.1 7/31/15 
 of global notes 
 representing the 3.05% 
 Notes due 2029 and 
 3.60% Notes due 2042. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of September 
 4.9 17, 2015, including 8-K 4.1 9/17/15 
 forms of global notes 
 representing the 1.375% 
 Notes due 2024 and 
 2.000% Notes due 2027. 
 Incorporated by 
 Reference 
 Ehibit Number Ehibit Description Form Ehibit Filing Date/ 
 Period End Date 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of February 
 23, 2016, including 
 forms of global notes 
 representing the 
 Floating Rate Notes due 
 4.10 2019, Floating Rate 8-K 4.1 2/23/16 
 Notes due 2021, 1.300% 
 Notes due 2018, 1.700% 
 Notes due 2019, 2.250% 
 Notes due 2021, 2.850% 
 Notes due 2023, 3.250% 
 Notes due 2026, 4.500% 
 Notes due 2036 and 
 4.650% Notes due 2046. 
 Supplement No. 1 to the 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 4.11 of the Registrant, 8-K 4.1 3/24/16 
 dated as of March 24, 
 2016. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of August 4, 
 2016, including forms 
 of global notes 
 4.12 representing the 8-K 4.1 8/4/16 
 Floating Rate Notes due 
 2019, 1.100% Notes due 
 2019, 1.550% Notes due 
 2021, 2.450% Notes due 
 2026 and 3.850% Notes 
 due 2046. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of February 9, 
 2017, including forms 
 of global notes 
 representing the 
 Floating Rate Notes due 
 2019, Floating Rate 
 4.13 Notes due 2020, 8-K 4.1 2/9/17 
 Floating Rate Notes due 
 2022, 1.550% Notes due 
 2019, 1.900% Notes due 
 2020, 2.500% Notes due 
 2022, 3.000% Notes due 
 2024, 3.350% Notes due 
 2027 and 4.250% Notes 
 due 2047. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of May 11, 
 2017, including forms 
 of global notes 
 representing the 
 4.14 Floating Rate Notes due 8-K 4.1 5/11/17 
 2020, Floating Rate 
 Notes due 2022, 1.800% 
 Notes due 2020, 2.300% 
 Notes due 2022, 2.850% 
 Notes due 2024 and 
 3.200% Notes due 2027. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of May 24, 
 4.15 2017, including forms 8-K 4.1 5/24/17 
 of global notes 
 representing the 0.875% 
 Notes due 2025 and 
 1.375% Notes due 2029. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of June 20, 
 4.16 2017, including form of 8-K 4.1 6/20/17 
 global note 
 representing the 3.000% 
 Notes due 2027. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of August 18, 
 4.17 2017, including form of 8-K 4.1 8/18/17 
 global note 
 representing the 2.513% 
 Notes due 2024. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of September 
 12, 2017, including 
 4.18 forms of global notes 8-K 4.1 9/12/17 
 representing the 1.500% 
 Notes due 2019, 2.100% 
 Notes due 2022, 2.900% 
 Notes due 2027 and 
 3.750% Notes due 2047. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of November 
 13, 2017, including 
 forms of global notes 
 4.19 representing the 1.800% 8-K 4.1 11/13/17 
 Notes due 2019, 2.000% 
 Notes due 2020, 2.400% 
 Notes due 2023, 2.750% 
 Notes due 2025, 3.000% 
 Notes due 2027 and 
 3.750% Notes due 2047. 
 Indenture, dated as of 
 November 5, 2018, 
 between the Registrant 
 4.20 and The Bank of New S-3 4.1 11/5/18 
 York Mellon Trust 
 Company, N.A., as 
 Trustee. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of September 
 11, 2019, including 
 forms of global notes 
 4.21 representing the 1.700% 8-K 4.1 9/11/19 
 Notes due 2022, 1.800% 
 Notes due 2024, 2.050% 
 Notes due 2026, 2.200% 
 Notes due 2029 and 
 2.950% Notes due 2049. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of November 
 4.22 15, 2019, including 8-K 4.1 11/15/19 
 forms of global notes 
 representing the 0.000% 
 Notes due 2025 and 
 0.500% Notes due 2031. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of May 11, 
 2020, including forms 
 4.23 of global notes 8-K 4.1 5/11/20 
 representing the 0.750% 
 Notes due 2023, 1.125% 
 Notes due 2025, 1.650% 
 Notes due 2030 and 
 2.650% Notes due 2050. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of August 20, 
 2020, including forms 
 4.24 of global notes 8-K 4.1 8/20/20 
 representing the 0.550% 
 Notes due 2025, 1.25% 
 Notes due 2030, 2.400% 
 Notes due 2050 and 
 2.550% Notes due 2060. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of February 8, 
 2021, including forms 
 of global notes 
 4.25 representing the 0.700% 8-K 4.1 2/8/21 
 Notes due 2026, 1.200% 
 Notes due 2028, 1.650% 
 Notes due 2031, 2.375% 
 Notes due 2041, 2.650% 
 Notes due 2051 and 
 2.800% Notes due 2061. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of August 5, 
 2021, including forms 
 4.26 of global notes 8-K 4.1 8/5/21 
 representing the 1.400% 
 Notes due 2028, 1.700% 
 Notes due 2031, 2.700% 
 Notes due 2051 and 
 2.850% Notes due 2061. 
 Indenture, dated as of 
 October 28, 2021, 
 between the Registrant 
 4.27 and The Bank of New S-3 4.1 10/29/21 
 York Mellon Trust 
 Company, N.A., as 
 Trustee. 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of August 8, 
 2022, including forms 
 4.28 of global notes 8-K 4.1 8/8/22 
 representing the 3.250% 
 Notes due 2029, 3.350% 
 Notes due 2032, 3.950% 
 Notes due 2052 and 
 4.100% Notes due 2062. 
 Incorporated by 
 Reference 
 Ehibit Number Ehibit Description Form Ehibit Filing Date/ 
 Period End Date 
 Officer’s Certificate 
 of the Registrant, 
 dated as of May 10, 
 2023, including forms 
 of global notes 
 4.29 representing the 4.421% 8-K 4.1 5/10/23 
 Notes due 2026, 4.000% 
 Notes due 2028, 4.150% 
 Notes due 2030, 4.300% 
 Notes due 2033 and 
 4.850% Notes due 2053. 
 4.30* Apple Inc. Deferred S-8 4.1 8/23/18 
 Compensation Plan. 
 Apple Inc. Employee 
 10.1* Stock Purchase Plan, as 8-K 10.1 3/13/15 
 amended and restated as 
 of March 10, 2015. 
 Form of Indemnification 
 Agreement between the 
 10.2* Registrant and each 10-Q 10.2 6/27/09 
 officer of the 
 Registrant. 
 Apple Inc. Non-Employee 
 10.3* 
 amended November 9, 
 2021. 
 Apple Inc. 2014 
 10.4* Employee Stock Plan, as 10-K 10.8 9/30/17 
 amended and restated as 
 of October 1, 2017. 
 Form of Restricted 
 Stock Unit Award 
 10.5* Agreement under 2014 10-K 10.20 9/30/17 
 Employee Stock Plan 
 effective as of 
 September 26, 2017. 
 Form of Restricted 
 Stock Unit Award 
 10.6* Agreement under 10-Q 10.2 3/31/18 
 Non-Employee 
 Stock Plan effective as 
 of February 13, 2018. 
 Form of Restricted 
 Stock Unit Award 
 10.7* Agreement under 2014 10-K 10.17 9/29/18 
 Employee Stock Plan 
 effective as of August 
 21, 2018. 
 Form of Performance 
 Award Agreement under 
 10.8* 2014 Employee Stock 10-K 10.18 9/29/18 
 Plan effective as of 
 August 21, 2018. 
 Form of Restricted 
 Stock Unit Award 
 10.9* Agreement under 2014 10-K 10.15 9/28/19 
 Employee Stock Plan 
 effective as of 
 September 29, 2019. 
 Form of Performance 
 Award Agreement under 
 10.10* 2014 Employee Stock 10-K 10.16 9/28/19 
 Plan effective as of 
 September 29, 2019. 
 Form of Restricted 
 Stock Unit Award 
 10.11* Agreement under 2014 10-K 10.16 9/26/20 
 Employee Stock Plan 
 effective as of August 
 18, 2020. 
 Form of Performance 
 Award Agreement under 
 10.12* 2014 Employee Stock 10-K 10.17 9/26/20 
 Plan effective as of 
 August 18, 2020. 
 Form of CEO Restricted 
 Stock Unit Award 
 10.13* Agreement under 2014 10-Q 10.1 12/26/20 
 Employee Stock Plan 
 effective as of 
 September 27, 2020. 
 Form of CEO Performance 
 Award Agreement under 
 10.14* 2014 Employee Stock 10-Q 10.2 12/26/20 
 Plan effective as of 
 September 27, 2020. 
 10.15* Apple Inc. 2022 8-K 10.1 3/4/22 
 Employee Stock Plan. 
 Form of Restricted 
 Stock Unit Award 
 10.16* Agreement under 2022 8-K 10.2 3/4/22 
 Employee Stock Plan 
 effective as of March 
 4, 2022. 
 Form of Performance 
 Award Agreement under 
 10.17* 2022 Employee Stock 8-K 10.3 3/4/22 
 Plan effective as of 
 March 4, 2022. 
 10.18* Apple Inc. Eecutive 8-K 10.1 8/19/22 
 Cash Incentive Plan. 
 Form of CEO Restricted 
 Stock Unit Award 
 10.19* Agreement under 2022 10-Q 10.1 12/31/22 
 Employee Stock Plan 
 effective as of 
 September 25, 2022. 
 Form of CEO Performance 
 Award Agreement under 
 10.20* 2022 Employee Stock 10-Q 10.2 12/31/22 
 Plan effective as of 
 September 25, 2022. 
 21.1** Subsidiaries of the 
 Registrant. 
 Consent of Independent 
 23.1** Registered Public 
 Accounting Firm. 
 (included on the 
 24.1** 
 Annual Report on Form 
 10-K). 
 Rule 13a-14(a) / 
 31.1** 15d-14(a) Certification 
 of Chief Eecutive 
 Officer. 
 Rule 13a-14(a) / 
 31.2** 15d-14(a) Certification 
 of Chief Financial 
 Officer. 
 Section 1350 
 Certifications of Chief 
 32.1*** Eecutive Officer and 
 Chief Financial 
 Officer. 
 Set for the 
 consolidated financial 
 statements and 
 101** accompanying notes in 
 “Financial Statements 
 and Supplementary Data” 
 of this Annual Report 
 Incorporated by 
 Reference 
 Ehibit Number Ehibit Description Form Ehibit Filing Date/ 
 Period End Date 
 cover page of this 
 104** Annual Report on Form 
 10-K, included in the 
 Ehibit 101 
 Document Set. 
* Indicates 
** 
*** 
(1) Certain instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt securities of the Registrant
are omitted pursuant to Item 601(b)(4)(iii) of Regulation S-K. The Registrant hereby undertakes to
furnish to the SEC, upon request, copies of any such instruments.
╭─  ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ │
│ │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

Registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized.
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Luca Maestri 
appoints Timothy D. Cook and Luca Maestri, 
connection therewith, with the Securities and Echange Commission, 
all that each of said 
by virtue hereof.
below by the following persons 
indicated:
 Title 
 Name 
 /s/ Timothy D. Cook (Principal Eecutive Officer) November 2, 2023 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 TIMOTHY D. COOK 
 /s/ Luca Maestri 
 (
 LUCA MAESTRI 
 /s/ Chris Kondo Senior 
 (
 CHRIS KONDO 
 /s/ James A. Bell 
 JAMES A. BELL 
 /s/ Al Gore 
 AL GORE 
 /s/ Ale Gorsky 
 ALEX GORSKY 
 /s/ Andrea Jung 
 ANDREA JUNG 
 /s/ Arthur D. Levinson 
 ARTHUR D. LEVINSON 
 /s/ Monica Lozano 
 MONICA LOZANO 
 /s/ Ronald D. Sugar 
 RONALD D. SUGAR 
 /s/ Susan L. Wagner 
 SUSAN L. WAGNER