UNITED STATES 
 SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
 Washington, D.C. 20549 
 FORM 10-K 
 (Mark One) 
 ☑ ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES 
 EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021 
 or 
 ☐TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES 
 EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 For the transition period from to 
 Commission file number: 
 1-6523 
 Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter: 
 Bank of America Corporation 
 State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization: 
 Delaware 
 IRS Employer Identification No.: 
 56-0906609 
 Address of principal executive offices: 
 Bank of America Corporate Center 
 100 N. Tryon Street 
 Charlotte, North Carolina 28255 
 Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: 
 ( 704) 386-5681 
 Securities registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the Act: 
 Title of each class Trading Symbol(s) Name of each exchange on which 
 registered 
 Common Stock, par value $0.01 per BAC New York Stock Exchange 
 share 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrE New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of Floating Rate Non-Cumulative 
 Preferred Stock, Series E 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrB New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 6.000% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series GG 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrK New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 5.875% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series HH 
 7.25% Non-Cumulative Perpetual 
 Convertible Preferred Stock, Series BAC PrL New York Stock Exchange 
 L 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BML PrG New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,200th interest in a share 
 of Bank of America Corporation 
 Floating 
 Rate 
 Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 Series 1 
 Title of each class Trading Symbol(s) Name of each exchange on which 
 registered 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BML PrH New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,200th interest in a share 
 of Bank of America Corporation 
 Floating 
 Rate 
 Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 Series 2 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BML PrJ New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,200th interest in a share 
 of Bank of America Corporation 
 Floating 
 Rate 
 Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 Series 4 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BML PrL New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,200th interest in a share 
 of Bank of America Corporation 
 Floating 
 Rate 
 Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 Series 5 
 Floating Rate Preferred Hybrid 
 Income BAC/PF New York Stock Exchange 
 Term Securities of BAC Capital 
 Trust XIII (and the guarantee 
 related 
 thereto) 
 5.63% Fixed to Floating Rate 
 Preferred BAC/PG New York Stock Exchange 
 Hybrid Income Term Securities 
 of BAC Capital Trust XIV (and the 
 guarantee related thereto) 
 Income Capital Obligation Notes MER PrK New York Stock Exchange 
 initially due December 15, 2066 of 
 Bank of America Corporation 
 Senior Medium-Term Notes, Series A, 
 Step BAC/31B New York Stock Exchange 
 Up Callable Notes, due 
 November 28, 2031 of BofA Finance 
 LLC 
 (and the guarantee 
 of the Registrant with respect 
 thereto) 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrM New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 5.375% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series KK 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrN New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 5.000% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series LL 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrO New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 4.375% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series NN 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrP New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 4.125% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series PP 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrQ New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 4.250% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series QQ 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrS New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 4.750% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series SS 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of
the Securities Act. Yes ☑ No ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or
Section 15(d) of the Act. Yes ☐ No ☑
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant: (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for
such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject
to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes ☑ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data
File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter)
during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit
such files). Yes ☑ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company or an emerging growth company. See the definitions
of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company” and “emerging growth
company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
 Large Accelerated Non-accelerated Smaller 
 accelerated ☑ filer ☐ filer ☐ reporting ☐ 
 filer company 
Emerging growth company ☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the
extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards
provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its
management's assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting under
Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm
that prepared or issued its audit report. ☑
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Act). Yes ☐ No ☑
As of June 30, 2021, the aggregate market value of the registrant’s common stock (“Common Stock”)
held by non-affiliates was approximately $ 349,925,254,902. At February 18, 2022, there were
8,069,801,301shares of Common Stock outstanding.
Documents incorporated by reference: Portions of the definitive proxy statement relating to the
registrant’s 2022 annual meeting of shareholders are incorporated by reference in this Form 10-K in
response to Items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 of Part III.
 Table of Contents 
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
 Part I Page 
 Item 1. Business 2 
 Item 1A. Risk Factors 7 
 Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments 24 
 Item 2. Properties 24 
 Item 3. Legal Proceedings 24 
 Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures 24 
 Part II 
 Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer 24 
 Purchases of Equity Securities 
 Item 6. [Reserved] 25 
 Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of 25 
 Operations 
 Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk 86 
 Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 86 
 Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial 171 
 Disclosure 
 Item 9A. Controls and Procedures 171 
 Item 9B. Other Information 171 
 Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictionsthat PreventInspections 172 
 Part III 
 Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance 172 
 Item 11. Executive Compensation 173 
 Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related 173 
 Stockholder Matters 
 Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence 173 
 Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services 173 
 Part IV 
 Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules 174 
 Item 16. Form 10-K Summary 177 
 1Bank of America 
║ Part I ║
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 1. BusinessBank of America Corporation is a Delaware corporation, a bank holding company │
│ (BHC) and a financial holding company. When used in this report, “the Corporation,” “we,” “us” │
│ and “our” may refer to Bank of America Corporation individually, Bank of America Corporation │
│ and its subsidiaries, or certain of Bank of America Corporation’s subsidiaries or affiliates. │
│ As part of our efforts to streamline the Corporation’s organizational structure and reduce │
│ complexity and costs, the Corporation has reduced and intends to continue to reduce the number │
│ of its corporate subsidiaries, including through intercompany mergers.Bank of America is one of │
│ the world’s largest financial institutions, serving individual consumers, small- and │
│ middle-market businesses, institutional investors, large corporations and governments with a │
│ full range of banking, investing, asset management and other financial and risk management │
│ products and services. Our principal executive offices are located in the Bank of America │
│ Corporate Center, 100 North Tryon Street, Charlotte, North Carolina 28255.Bank of America’s │
│ website is www.bankofamerica.com, and the Investor Relations portion of our website is │
│ http://investor.bankofamerica.com. We use our website to distribute company information, │
│ including as a means of disclosing material, non-public information and for complying with our │
│ disclosure obligations under Regulation FD. We routinely post and make accessible financial and │
│ other information, including environmental, social and governance (ESG) information, regarding │
│ the Corporation on our website. Investors should monitor the Investor Relations portion of our │
│ website, in addition to our press releases, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) │
│ filings, public conference calls and webcasts. Our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly │
│ Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K and amendments to those reports filed or │
│ furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (Exchange │
│ Act) are available on the Investor Relations portion of our website as soon as reasonably │
│ practicable after we electronically file such reports with, or furnish them to, the SEC and at │
│ the SEC’s website, www.sec.gov. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the information contained on our │
│ website as referenced in this paragraph, or otherwise in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, is │
│ not incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Also, we make available on │
│ the Investor Relations portion of our website: (i) our Code of Conduct; (ii) our Corporate │
│ Governance Guidelines; and (iii) the charter of each active committee of our Board of Directors │
│ (the Board). Our Code of Conduct constitutes a “code of ethics” and a “code of business conduct │
│ and ethics” that applies to the required individuals associated with the Corporation for │
│ purposes of the respective rules of the SEC and the New York Stock Exchange. We also intend to │
│ disclose any amendments to our Code of Conduct and waivers of our Code of Conduct required to │
│ be disclosed by the rules of the SEC and the New York Stock Exchange on the Investor Relations │
│ portion of our website. All of these corporate governance materials are also available free of │
│ charge in print to shareholders who request them in writing to: Bank of America Corporation, │
│ Attention: Office of the Corporate Secretary, Bank of America Corporate Center, 100 North Tryon │
│ Street, NC1-007-56-06, Charlotte, North Carolina 28255. │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ SegmentsThrough our various bank and nonbank subsidiaries throughout the U.S. and in │
│ international markets, we provide a diversified range of banking and nonbank financial services │
│ and products through four business segments:Consumer Banking,Global Wealth & Investment │
│ Management (GWIM),Global BankingandGlobal Markets, with the remaining operations recorded inAll │
│ Other. Additional information related to our business segments and the products and services │
│ they provide is included in the information set forth on pages 36 through 46 of Item 7. │
│ Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) │
│ andNote 23 – Business Segment Informationto the Consolidated Financial Statements.CompetitionWe │
│ operate in a highly competitive environment. Our competitors include banks, thrifts, credit │
│ unions, investment banking firms, investment advisory firms, brokerage firms, investment │
│ companies, insurance companies, mortgage banking companies, credit card issuers, mutual fund │
│ companies, hedge funds, private equity firms, and e-commerce and other internet-based │
│ companies. We compete with some of these competitors globally and with others on a regional or │
│ product-specific basis.Competition is based on a number of factors including, among others, │
│ customer service, quality and range of products and services offered, technology, price, fees, │
│ reputation, interest rates on loans and deposits, lending limits, customer convenience and │
│ experience and relationships in relevant markets. Our ability to continue to compete │
│ effectively also depends in large part on our ability to attract new employees and retain and │
│ motivate our existing employees, while managing compensation and other costs.Human Capital │
│ ResourcesWe strive to make Bank of America a great place to work for our employees. We value │
│ our employees and seek to establish and maintain human resource policies that are consistent │
│ with our core values and that help realize the power of our people. Our Board and its │
│ Compensation and Human Capital Committee provide oversight of our human capital management │
│ strategies, programs and practices. The Corporation’s senior management provides regular │
│ briefings on human capital matters to the Board and its Committees to facilitate the Board’s │
│ oversight.At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation employed approximately 208,000 and │
│ 213,000 employees, of which 80 percent and 82 percent were located in the U.S., respectively. │
│ None of our U.S. employees are subject to a collective bargaining agreement. Additionally, in │
│ 2021 and 2020, the Corporation’s compensation and benefits expense was $36.1 billion and $32.7 │
│ billion, or 61 percent and 59 percent, of total noninterest expense.Diversity and InclusionThe │
│ Corporation’s commitment to diversity and inclusion starts at the top with oversight from our │
│ Board and CEO. The Corporation’s senior management sets the diversity and inclusion goals, and │
│ the Chief Human Resources Officer and Chief Diversity & Inclusion Officer partner with our CEO │
│ and senior management to drive our diversity and inclusion strategy, programs, initiatives and │
│ policies. The Global Diversity and Inclusion Council, which consists of senior executives from │
│ every line of business and region, is chaired by our CEO and has │
 Bank of America2 
been in place for over 20 years. The Council
sponsors and supports business, operating unit
and regional diversity and inclusion councils to
ensure alignment with enterprise diversity
strategies and goals.
Our practices and policies have resulted in
strong representation across the Corporation
where our broad employee population mirrors the
clients and communities we serve. We have a Board
and senior management team that are 50 percent
and 55 percent racially, ethnically and gender
diverse. As of December 31, 2021, of global
employees who self-identified, 50 percent of
employees were women, and, among U.S.-based
employees who self-identified, 49 percent were
people of color, including 13 percent who were
Asian, 14 percent who were Black/African American
and 19 percent who were Hispanic/Latino. As of
December 31, 2021, the Corporation’s top three
management levels in relation to the CEO were
composed of more than 42 percent women globally
and 24 percent people of color in the U.S.,
including eight percent who were Asian, nine
percent who were Black/African American and six
percent who were Hispanic/Latino. Additionally,
as of December 31, 2021, the Corporation’s
managers at all levels were composed of 42
percent women globally and 41 percent people of
color in the U.S., including 13 percent who were
Asian, 10 percent who were Black/African American
and 16 percent who were Hispanic/Latino. These
workforce diversity metrics are reported
regularly to the senior management team and to
the Board.
We invest in our talent by offering a range of
development programs and resources that allow
employees to develop and progress in their
careers. We reinforce our commitment to diversity
and inclusion by investing internally in our
employee networks and by facilitating enterprise-
wide learning and conversations about various
diversity and inclusion topics and issues.
Further, we partner with various external
organizations, which focus on advancing diverse
talent. We also have practices in place for
attracting and retaining diverse talent,
including campus recruitment. For example, in
2021, 46 percent of our global campus hires were
women, and, in the U.S., 53 percent were people
of color.
 Employee Engagement and Talent Retention 
As part of our ongoing efforts to make the
Corporation a great place to work, we have
conducted a confidential annual Employee
Engagement Survey (Survey) for nearly two
decades. The Survey results are reviewed by the
Board and senior management and used to assist in
reviewing the Corporation’s human capital
strategies, programs and practices. In 2021, 89
percent of the Corporation’s employees
participated in the Survey, and our Employee
Engagement Index, an overall measure of employee
satisfaction with the Corporation, was 88
percent. Our turnover among employees was 12
percent in 2021 and seven percent in 2020. Our
pre-pandemic levels of turnover in 2019 and 2018
were 11 percent and 12 percent.
Additionally, the Corporation provides a variety
of resources to help employees grow in their
current roles and build new skills, including
resources to help employees find new
opportunities, re-skill and seek leadership
positions. The learning and development strategy
is grounded in the development of horizontal
skills delivered throughout the organization.
Senior leaders, managers and teammates are
onboarded and build horizontal skills, as well as
role-specific skills, to drive high performance.
This approach also facilitates internal mobility
and promotion of talent to build a bench of
qualified managers and leaders. In 2021, more
than 26,000 employees found new roles within the
Corporation and we
delivered more than 10 million hours of training
and development to our teammates through the
Corporation’s training academy.
 Fair and Equitable Compensation 
The Corporation is committed to racial and gender
pay equity by striving to compensate all of our
employees fairly and equitably. We maintain
robust policies and practices that reinforce our
commitment, including reviews conducted by a
third-party consultant with oversight from our
Board and senior management. In 2021, our review
covered our regional hubs (U.S., U.K., France,
Ireland, Hong Kong and Singapore) and India and
showed that compensation received by women, on
average, was greater than 99 percent of that
received by men in comparable positions and, in
the U.S., compensation received by people of
color was, on average, greater than 99 percent of
that received by teammates who are not people of
color in comparable positions.
We also strive to pay our employees fairly based
on market rates for their roles, experience and
how they perform. We regularly benchmark against
other companies both within and outside our
industry to help ensure our pay is competitive.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we raised our
minimum hourly wage for U.S. employees to $21 per
hour, which is above all governmental minimum
wage levels in all jurisdictions in which we
operate in the U.S., and announced plans to
increase to $25 per hour by 2025.
 Health and Wellness – 2021 Focus 
The Corporation also is committed to supporting
employees’ physical, emotional and financial
wellness by offering flexible and competitive
benefits, including comprehensive health and
insurance benefits and wellness resources. In
2021, we continued efforts to support our
employees through the ongoing health crisis
resulting from the Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic (the pandemic). We continued
to monitor guidance from the U.S. Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, medical boards
and health authorities and prioritized sharing
such guidance with our teammates. Other benefits
and resources related to the pandemic included
offering no-cost COVID-19 testing, paid time off
to allow teammates to get vaccinated for
COVID-19, providing teammates with incentives for
getting the vaccine and booster, hosting a
medical expert education series and providing on-
site COVID-19 vaccine and booster clinics.
We continued our efforts around providing
affordable access to healthcare, including
offering no-cost, 24/7 access to virtual general
medical and behavioral health resources to help
our enrolled U.S. teammates stay healthy, both
physically and emotionally. We kept U.S. health
insurance premiums unchanged for teammates
earning less than $50,000 for the ninth year in a
row, and had nominal premium increases for
teammates earning from $50,000 to $100,000 for
the fifth year in a row. We also provided
preventative care medications at no cost for U.S.
teammates enrolled in the Bank’s medical plan.
We have expanded our child and adult care
solutions for eligible U.S. teammates to help
better support their families and dependents,
including providing up to 50 days of backup care
for both adults and children and expanding access
to our reimbursement program to help employees
manage child care expenses. Additional support to
working parents includes parental leave and time
off from work to care for and bond with a newborn
or adopted child (16 weeks paid plus 10 weeks
unpaid for a total of up to 26 weeks).
 3Bank of America 
For more information about our human capital
management, see the Corporation’s website and
2021 Annual Report to shareholders that will be
available on the Investor Relations portion of
our website in March 2022 (the content of which
is not incorporated by reference into this Annual
Report on Form 10-K).
 Government Supervision and Regulation 
The following discussion describes, among other
things, elements of an extensive regulatory
framework applicable to BHCs, financial holding
companies, banks and broker-dealers, including
specific information about Bank of America.
We are subject to an extensive regulatory
framework applicable to BHCs, financial holding
companies and banks and other financial services
entities. U.S. federal regulation of banks, BHCs
and financial holding companies is intended
primarily for the protection of depositors and
the Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF) rather than for
the protection of shareholders and creditors.
As a registered financial holding company and
BHC, the Corporation is subject to the
supervision of, and regular inspection by, the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(Federal Reserve). Our U.S. bank subsidiaries
(the Banks), organized as national banking
associations, are subject to regulation,
supervision and examination by the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the
Federal Reserve. In addition, the Federal Reserve
and the OCC have adopted guidelines that
establish minimum standards for the design,
implementation and board oversight of BHCs’ and
national banks’ risk governance frameworks. U.S.
financial holding companies, and the companies
under their control, are permitted to engage in
activities considered “financial in nature” as
defined by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and related
Federal Reserve interpretations. The
Corporation's status as a financial holding
company is conditioned upon maintaining certain
eligibility requirements for both the Corporation
and its U.S. depository institution subsidiaries,
including minimum capital ratios, supervisory
ratings and, in the case of the depository
institutions, at least satisfactory Community
Reinvestment Act ratings. Failure to be an
eligible financial holding company could result
in the Federal Reserve limiting Bank of America's
activities, including potential acquisitions.
The scope of the laws and regulations and the
intensity of the supervision to which we are
subject have increased over the past several
years, beginning with the response to the
financial crisis, as well as other factors such
as technological and market changes. In addition,
the banking and financial services sector is
subject to substantial regulatory enforcement and
fines. Many of these changes have occurred as a
result of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform
and Consumer Protection Act (the Financial Reform
Act). We cannot assess whether there will be any
additional major changes in the regulatory
environment and expect that our business will
remain subject to continuing and extensive
regulation and supervision.
We are also subject to various other laws and
regulations, as well as supervision and
examination by other regulatory agencies, all of
which directly or indirectly affect our entities,
management and ability to make distributions to
shareholders. For instance, our broker-dealer
subsidiaries are subject to both U.S. and
international regulation, including supervision
by the SEC, Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority and New York Stock Exchange, among
others; our futures commission merchant
subsidiaries supporting commodities and
derivatives businesses in the U.S. are subject to
regulation by and
supervision of the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading
Commission (CFTC), National Futures Association,
the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, and in the case
of the Banks, certain banking regulators; our
insurance activities are subject to licensing and
regulation by state insurance regulatory
agencies; and our consumer financial products and
services are regulated by the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau (CFPB).
Our non-U.S. businesses are also subject to
extensive regulation by various non-U.S.
regulators, including governments, securities
exchanges, prudential regulators, central banks
and other regulatory bodies, in the jurisdictions
in which those businesses operate. For example,
our financial services entities in the United
Kingdom (U.K.), Ireland and France are subject to
regulation by the Prudential Regulatory Authority
and Financial Conduct Authority, the European
Central Bank and Central Bank of Ireland, and the
Autorité de Contrôle Prudentiel et de Résolution
and Autorité des Marchés Financiers,
respectively.
 Source of Strength 
Under the Financial Reform Act and Federal
Reserve policy, BHCs are expected to act as a
source of financial strength to each subsidiary
bank and to commit resources to support each such
subsidiary. Similarly, under the cross-guarantee
provisions of the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA), in
the event of a loss suffered or anticipated by
the FDIC, either as a result of default of a bank
subsidiary or related to FDIC assistance provided
to such a subsidiary in danger of default, the
affiliate banks of such a subsidiary may be
assessed for the FDIC’s loss, subject to certain
exceptions.
 Transactions with Affiliates 
Pursuant to Section 23A and 23B of the Federal
Reserve Act, as implemented by the Federal
Reserve’s Regulation W, the Banks are subject to
restrictions that limit certain types of
transactions between the Banks and their nonbank
affiliates. In general, U.S. banks are subject to
quantitative and qualitative limits on extensions
of credit, purchases of assets and certain other
transactions involving their nonbank affiliates.
Additionally, transactions between U.S. banks and
their nonbank affiliates are required to be on
arm’s length terms and must be consistent with
standards of safety and soundness.
 Deposit Insurance 
Deposits placed at U.S. domiciled banks are
insured by the FDIC, subject to limits and
conditions of applicable law and the FDIC’s
regulations. Pursuant to the Financial Reform
Act, FDIC insurance coverage limits are $250,000
per depositor, per insured bank for each account
ownership category. All insured depository
institutions are required to pay assessments to
the FDIC in order to fund the DIF.
The FDIC is required to maintain at least a
designated minimum ratio of the DIF to insured
deposits in the U.S. The FDIC adopted regulations
that establish a long-term target DIF ratio of
greater than two percent. As of the date of this
report, the DIF ratio is below this required
target, and the FDIC has adopted a restoration
plan that may result in increased deposit
insurance assessments. Deposit insurance
assessment rates are subject to change by the
FDIC and will be impacted by the overall economy
and the stability of the banking industry as a
whole. For more information regarding deposit
insurance, see Item 1A. Risk Factors –
Regulatory, Compliance and Legal on page 18.
 Bank of America4 
 Capital, Liquidity and Operational Requirements 
As a financial holding company, we and our bank
subsidiaries are subject to the regulatory
capital and liquidity rules issued by the Federal
Reserve and other U.S. banking regulators,
including the OCC and the FDIC. These rules are
complex and are evolving as U.S. and
international regulatory authorities propose and
enact amendments to these rules. The Corporation
seeks to manage its capital position to maintain
sufficient capital to satisfy these regulatory
rules and to support our business activities.
These continually evolving rules are likely to
influence our planning processes and may require
additional regulatory capital and liquidity, as
well as impose additional operational and
compliance costs on the Corporation.
For more information on regulatory capital rules,
capital composition and pending or proposed
regulatory capital changes, see Capital
Management on page 49, and Note 16 – Regulatory
Requirements and Restrictions to the Consolidated
Financial Statements, which are incorporated by
reference in this Item 1.
 Distributions 
We are subject to various regulatory policies and
requirements relating to capital actions,
including payment of dividends and common stock
repurchases. For instance, Federal Reserve
regulations require major U.S. BHCs to submit a
capital plan as part of an annual Comprehensive
Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR).
Our ability to pay dividends and make common
stock repurchases depends in part on our ability
to maintain regulatory capital levels above
minimum requirements plus buffers and non-capital
standards established under the FDICIA. To the
extent that the Federal Reserve increases our
stress capital buffer (SCB), global systemically
important bank (G-SIB) surcharge or
countercyclical capital buffer, our returns of
capital to shareholders could decrease. As part
of its CCAR, the Federal Reserve conducts stress
testing on parts of our business using
hypothetical economic scenarios prepared by the
Federal Reserve. Those scenarios may affect our
CCAR stress test results, which may impact the
level of our SCB. Additionally, the Federal
Reserve may impose limitations or prohibitions on
taking capital actions such as paying or
increasing common stock dividends or repurchasing
common stock. For example, as a result of the
economic uncertainty resulting from the pandemic,
in the second half of 2020 the Federal Reserve
introduced certain limitations to capital
distributions for all large banks, including the
Corporation, which were removed effective July 1,
2021.
If the Federal Reserve finds that any of our
Banks are not “well-capitalized” or “well-
managed,” we would be required to enter into an
agreement with the Federal Reserve to comply with
all applicable capital and management
requirements, which may contain additional
limitations or conditions relating to our
activities. Additionally, the applicable federal
regulatory authority is authorized to determine,
under certain circumstances relating to the
financial condition of a bank or BHC, that the
payment of dividends would be an unsafe or
unsound practice and to prohibit payment thereof.
For more information regarding the requirements
relating to the payment of dividends, including
the minimum capital requirements, see Note 13 –
Shareholders’ Equity and Note 16 – Regulatory
Requirements and Restrictions to the Consolidated
Financial Statements.
Many of our subsidiaries, including our bank and
broker-dealer subsidiaries, are subject to laws
that restrict dividend payments, or authorize
regulatory bodies to block or reduce the
flow of funds from those subsidiaries to the
parent company or other subsidiaries. The rights
of the Corporation, our shareholders and our
creditors to participate in any distribution of
the assets or earnings of our subsidiaries are
further subject to the prior claims of creditors
of the respective subsidiaries.
 Resolution Planning 
As a BHC with greater than $250 billion of
assets, the Corporation is required by the
Federal Reserve and the FDIC to periodically
submit a plan for a rapid and orderly resolution
in the event of material financial distress or
failure.
Such resolution plan is intended to be a detailed
roadmap for the orderly resolution of the BHC,
including the continued operations or solvent
wind down of its material entities, pursuant to
the U.S. Bankruptcy Code under one or more
hypothetical scenarios assuming no extraordinary
government assistance.
If both the Federal Reserve and the FDIC
determine that the BHC’s plan is not credible,
the Federal Reserve and the FDIC may jointly
impose more stringent capital, leverage or
liquidity requirements or restrictions on growth,
activities or operations. A summary of our plan
is available on the Federal Reserve and FDIC
websites.
The FDIC also requires the submission of a
resolution plan for Bank of America, National
Association (BANA), which must describe how the
insured depository institution would be resolved
under the bank resolution provisions of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Act. A description of
this plan is available on the FDIC’s website.
We continue to make substantial progress to
enhance our resolvability, which includes
continued improvements to our preparedness
capabilities to implement our resolution plan,
both from a financial and operational standpoint.
Across international jurisdictions, resolution
planning is the responsibility of national
resolution authorities (RA). Among those, the
jurisdictions with the greatest impact to the
Corporation’s subsidiaries are the U.K., Ireland
and France, where rules have been issued
requiring the submission of significant
information about locally incorporated
subsidiaries as well as the Corporation’s banking
branches located in those jurisdictions that are
deemed to be material for resolution planning
purposes. As a result of the RA's review of the
submitted information, we could be required to
take certain actions over the next several years
that could increase operating costs and
potentially result in the restructuring of
certain businesses and subsidiaries.
For more information regarding our resolution
plan, see Item 1A. Risk Factors – Liquidity on
page 10.
 Insolvency and the Orderly Liquidation Authority 
Under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, the FDIC
may be appointed receiver of an insured
depository institution if it is insolvent or in
certain other circumstances. In addition, under
the Financial Reform Act, when a systemically
important financial institution (SIFI) such as
the Corporation is in default or danger of
default, the FDIC may be appointed receiver in
order to conduct an orderly liquidation of such
institution. In the event of such appointment,
the FDIC could, among other things, invoke the
orderly liquidation authority, instead of the
U.S. Bankruptcy Code, if the Secretary of the
Treasury makes certain financial distress and
systemic risk determinations. The orderly
liquidation authority is modeled in part on the
Federal Deposit Insurance Act, but also adopts
certain concepts from the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
 5Bank of America 
The orderly liquidation authority contains
certain differences from the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code. For example, in certain circumstances, the
FDIC could permit payment of obligations it
determines to be systemically significant (e.g.,
short-term creditors or operating creditors) in
lieu of paying other obligations (e.g., long-term
creditors) without the need to obtain creditors’
consent or prior court review. The insolvency and
resolution process could also lead to a large
reduction or total elimination of the value of a
BHC’s outstanding equity, as well as impairment
or elimination of certain debt.
Under the FDIC’s “single point of entry” strategy
for resolving SIFIs, the FDIC could replace a
distressed BHC with a bridge holding company,
which could continue operations and result in an
orderly resolution of the underlying bank, but
whose equity is held solely for the benefit of
creditors of the original BHC.
Furthermore, the Federal Reserve requires that
BHCs maintain minimum levels of long-term debt
required to provide adequate loss absorbing
capacity in the event of a resolution.
For more information regarding our resolution,
see Item 1A. Risk Factors – Liquidity on page 10.
 Limitations on Acquisitions 
The Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching
Efficiency Act of 1994 permits a BHC to acquire
banks located in states other than its home state
without regard to state law, subject to certain
conditions, including the condition that the BHC,
after and as a result of the acquisition,
controls no more than 10 percent of the total
amount of deposits of insured depository
institutions in the U.S. and no more than 30
percent or such lesser or greater amount set by
state law of such deposits in that state. At June
30, 2021, we held greater than 10 percent of the
total amount of deposits of insured depository
institutions in the U.S.
In addition, the Financial Reform Act restricts
acquisitions by a financial institution if, as a
result of the acquisition, the total liabilities
of the financial institution would exceed 10
percent of the total liabilities of all financial
institutions in the U.S. At June 30, 2021, our
liabilities did not exceed 10 percent of the
total liabilities of all financial institutions
in the U.S.
 The Volcker Rule 
The Volcker Rule prohibits insured depository
institutions and companies affiliated with
insured depository institutions (collectively,
banking entities) from engaging in short-term
proprietary trading of certain securities,
derivatives, commodity futures and options for
their own account. The Volcker Rule also imposes
limits on banking entities’ investments in, and
other relationships with, hedge funds and private
equity funds. The Volcker Rule provides
exemptions for certain activities, including
market making, underwriting, hedging, trading in
government obligations, insurance company
activities and organizing and offering hedge
funds and private equity funds. The Volcker Rule
also clarifies that certain activities are not
prohibited, including acting as agent, broker or
custodian. A banking entity with significant
trading operations, such as the Corporation, is
required to maintain a detailed compliance
program to comply with the restrictions of the
Volcker Rule.
 Derivatives 
Our derivatives operations are subject to
extensive regulation globally. These operations
are subject to regulation under the Financial
Reform Act, the European Union (EU) Markets in
Financial Instruments Directive and Regulation,
the European Market Infrastructure Regulation,
analogous U.K. regulatory regimes and similar
regulatory regimes in other jurisdictions that
regulate or will regulate the derivatives markets
in which we
operate by, among other things: requiring
clearing and exchange trading of certain
derivatives; enforcing existing or imposing new
capital, margin, reporting, registration and
business conduct requirements for certain market
participants; imposing position limits on certain
over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives; and imposing
derivatives trading transparency requirements.
These regulations are already in effect in many
markets in which we operate.
In addition, many G-20 jurisdictions, including
the U.S., U.K., and Japan, have adopted
resolution stay regulations to address concerns
that the close-out of derivatives and other
financial contracts in resolution could impede
orderly resolution of G-SIBs, and additional
jurisdictions are expected to follow suit. In
addition, the EU has implemented EU-wide
resolution stay requirements. Generally, these
resolution stay regulations require amendment of
certain financial contracts to provide for
contractual recognition of stays of termination
rights under various statutory resolution regimes
and a stay on the exercise of cross-default
rights based on an affiliate’s entry into
insolvency proceedings. As resolution stay
regulations of a particular jurisdiction
applicable to us go into effect, we amend
impacted financial contracts in compliance with
such regulations either as a regulated entity or
as a counterparty facing a regulated entity in
such jurisdiction.
 Consumer Regulations 
Our consumer businesses are subject to extensive
regulation and oversight by federal and state
regulators. Certain federal consumer finance laws
to which we are subject, including the Equal
Credit Opportunity Act, Home Mortgage Disclosure
Act, Electronic Fund Transfer Act, Fair Credit
Reporting Act, Real Estate Settlement Procedures
Act, unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or
practices (UDAAP), Truth in Lending Act and Truth
in Savings Act, are enforced by the CFPB. Other
federal consumer finance laws, such as the
Servicemembers Civil Relief Act, are enforced by
the OCC.
 Privacy and Information Security 
We are subject to many U.S. federal, state and
international laws and regulations governing
requirements for maintaining policies and
procedures regarding the disclosure, use and
protection of the non-public confidential
information of our customers and employees. The
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act requires us to
periodically disclose Bank of America’s privacy
policies and practices relating to sharing such
information and enables retail customers to opt
out of our ability to share information with
unaffiliated third parties, under certain
circumstances. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and
other laws also require us to implement a
comprehensive information security program that
includes administrative, technical and physical
safeguards to provide the security and
confidentiality of customer records and
information. Security and privacy policies and
procedures for the protection of personal and
confidential information are in effect across all
businesses and geographic locations.
Other laws and regulations, at the international,
federal and state level, impact our ability to
share certain information with affiliates and
non-affiliates for marketing and/or non-marketing
purposes, or contact customers with marketing
offers and establish certain rights of consumers
in connection with their personal information.
For example, California’s Consumer Privacy Act
(CCPA), which went into effect in January 2020,
as modified by the California Privacy Rights Act
(CPRA), provides consumers with the right to know
what personal data is being collected, know
whether their personal data is sold or disclosed
and to whom and opt out of the sale of their
personal data,
 Bank of America6 
among other rights. In addition, in the EU, the
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
replaced the Data Protection Directive and
related implementing national laws in its member
states. The CCPA's, CPRA's and GDPR’s impact on
the Corporation was assessed and addressed
through comprehensive compliance implementation
programs. These existing and evolving legal
requirements in the U.S. and abroad, as well as
court proceedings and changing guidance from
regulatory bodies with respect to the validity of
cross-border data transfer mechanisms from the
EU, continue to lend uncertainty to privacy
compliance globally.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 1A. Risk Factors │
The discussion below addresses the Corporation’s
material risk factors of which we are aware. Any
risk factor, either by itself or together with
other risk factors, could materially and
adversely affect our businesses, results of
operations, cash flows and/or financial
condition. The considerations and risks that
follow are organized within relevant headings but
may be relevant to other headings as well. Other
factors not currently known to us or that we
currently deem immaterial could also adversely
affect our businesses, results of operations,
cash flows and/or financial condition. Therefore,
the risk factors below should not be considered
all of the potential risks that we may face. For
more information on how we manage risks, see
Managing Risk in the MD&A on page 46. For more
information about the risks contained in the Risk
Factors section, see Item 1. Business on page 2,
MD&A on page 26 and Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements on page 94.
 Summary of Risk Factors 
 Coronavirus Disease 
● The impacts of the pandemic have adversely
affected, and may continue to adversely affect
us, and the pandemic’s duration and future
impacts remain uncertain.
 Market 
● Our business and results of operations may be
adversely affected by the financial markets,
fiscal, monetary, and regulatory policies, and
economic conditions generally.
● Increased market volatility and adverse changes
in financial or capital market conditions may
increase our market risk.
● We may incur losses if asset values decline,
including due to changes in interest rates and
prepayment speeds.
 Liquidity 
● If we are unable to access the capital markets
or continue to maintain deposits, or our
borrowing costs increase, our liquidity and
competitive position will be negatively affected.
● Reduction in our credit ratings could
significantly limit our access to funding or the
capital markets, increase borrowing costs or
trigger additional collateral or funding
requirements.
● Bank of America Corporation is a holding
company, is dependent on its subsidiaries for
liquidity and may be restricted from transferring
funds from subsidiaries.
● Our liquidity and financial condition, and the
ability to pay dividends to shareholders and to
pay obligations could be materially adversely
affected in the event of a resolution.
 Credit 
● Economic or market disruptions and insufficient
credit loss reserves may result in a higher
provision for credit losses.
● Our concentrations of credit risk could
adversely affect our credit losses, results of
operations and financial condition.
● We may be adversely affected if the U.S.
housing market weakens or home prices decline.
● Our derivatives businesses may expose us to
unexpected risks and potential losses.
 Geopolitical 
● We are subject to numerous political, economic,
market, reputational, operational, compliance,
legal, regulatory and other risks in the
jurisdictions in which we operate.
 Business Operations 
● A failure in or breach of our operational or
security systems or infrastructure or business
continuity plans, or those of third parties or
the financial services industry, could disrupt
our critical business operations and customer
services, result in additional risk exposures,
and adversely impact our results of operations
and financial condition, and cause legal or
reputational harm.
● A cyberattack, information or security breach,
or a technology failure of ours or of a third
party could adversely affect our ability to
conduct our business, manage our exposure to
risk, result in the disclosure and/or misuse of
information and/or fraudulent activity, and
increase our operational and security systems and
critical infrastructure costs.
● Failure to satisfy our obligations as servicer
for residential mortgage securitizations, loans
owned by other entities and other losses we could
incur as servicer, could adversely impact our
reputation, servicing costs or results of
operations.
● Changes in the structure of and relationship
among the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs)
could adversely impact our business.
● Our risk management framework may not be
effective in mitigating risk and reducing the
potential for losses.
 Regulatory, Compliance and Legal 
● We are subject to comprehensive government
legislation and regulations and certain
settlements, orders and agreements with
government authorities from time to time.
● We are subject to significant financial and
reputational risks from potential liability
arising from lawsuits and regulatory and
government action.
● U.S. federal banking agencies may require us to
increase our regulatory capital, total loss-
absorbing capacity (TLAC), long-term debt or
liquidity requirements.
● Changes in accounting standards or assumptions
in applying accounting policies could adversely
affect us.
● We may be adversely affected by changes in U.S.
and non-U.S. tax laws and regulations.
 Reputation 
● Damage to our reputation could harm our
businesses, including our competitive position
and business prospects.
 Other 
● Reforms to and replacement of Interbank Offered
Rates (IBORs) and certain other rates or indices
may adversely affect our reputation, business,
financial condition and results of operations.
● We face significant and increasing competition
in the financial services industry.
● Our inability to adapt our business strategies,
products and services could harm our business.
● We could suffer operational, reputational and
financial harm if our models and strategies fail
to properly anticipate and
 7Bank of America 
manage risk.
● Failure to properly manage data may result in
our inability to manage risk and business needs,
errors in our day-to-day operations, critical
reporting and strategic decision-making,
inaccurate reporting and non-compliance with
laws, rules and regulations.
● Our operations, businesses and customers could
be materially adversely affected by the impacts
related to climate change.
● Our ability to attract and retain qualified
employees is critical to our success, business
prospects and competitive position.
The above summary is qualified in its entirety to
the more detailed discussion of the Corporation’s
material risk factors set forth below.
Coronavirus Disease The impacts of the pandemic
have adversely affected, and may continue to
adversely affect us, and the pandemic’s duration
and future impacts remain uncertain.
Since the onset of the pandemic, the negative
economic conditions and disruptions arising from
it have adversely impacted our financial results
to varying degrees and in various respects,
including as a result of periods of increased
allowance for credit losses followed by
subsequent declines, and continued elevated
noninterest expense. The pandemic’s impact on
economic conditions and activity remains
uncertain and will continue to evolve by region,
country and state, and it is possible that new or
evolving variants of COVID-19 could result in
increased business disruptions and contribute to
a potential economic downturn. In recent months,
the U.S. and other regions of the world have
experienced supply chain disruptions and labor
shortages, and the global economy and supply
chains remain vulnerable. Pandemic developments
and certain responses have also resulted in
inflationary pressure and ultimately may
contribute to the development of a prolonged,
disruptive period of high inflation in the U.S.
and globally.
The economic impact of the pandemic may continue
to adversely affect certain of our businesses and
our results of operations, including decreased
demand for and use of our products and services;
lower fees, including asset management fees;
lower sales and trading revenue due to decreased
market liquidity resulting from heightened
volatility; higher levels of uncollectible
reversed charges in our merchant services
business; increased noninterest expense,
including operational losses; and increased
credit losses due to a deterioration in the
financial condition of our consumer and
commercial borrowers, which could result in their
inability to fulfill contractual obligations, may
vary by region, sector or industry and could be
exacerbated by the expiration of government
assistance. Additionally, our liquidity and/or
regulatory capital could be adversely impacted by
customers’ withdrawal of deposits, inability to
repay loans and reduced usage of banking
products, volatility and disruptions in the
capital and credit markets, changes in the value
of securities, derivatives and other financial
instruments resulting in increased margin
requirements, volatility in foreign exchange
rates and customer draws on lines of credit.
Adverse macroeconomic conditions could also
result in potential downgrades to our credit
ratings, negative impacts to regulatory capital
and liquidity and reinstated restrictions on
dividends and/or common stock repurchases.
We continue to execute business continuity plans
in connection with the pandemic. If we become
unable to operate
our businesses from remote locations including,
for example, because of an internal or external
failure of our information technology
infrastructure, we experience increased rates of
employee illness or unavailability, or
governmental restrictions are placed on our
employees or operations, our business continuity
plans could be adversely affected and result in
disruption to our businesses. Additionally, we
continue to rely on third parties who could
experience business interruptions as a result of
the pandemic, which could increase our risks and
adversely impact our businesses.
In connection with the pandemic, various
governmental fiscal and monetary relief programs
were implemented in an effort to stimulate the
global economy and avert negative economic or
market conditions. Our participation in such
programs could result in reputational harm and
government actions and proceedings, and has
resulted in, and may continue to result in,
litigation, including class actions. Such actions
may result in judgments, orders, settlements,
penalties, and fines. Our participation in such
programs has also resulted and will continue to
result in losses, including from the Paycheck
Protection Program (PPP) and the processing of
unemployment benefits for California and certain
other states.
We continue to closely monitor the pandemic and
related risks as they evolve globally and in the
U.S. The magnitude and duration of the pandemic
and its future direct and indirect effects on
global health, the global economy and our
businesses, results of operations and financial
condition are uncertain and depend on future
developments that cannot be predicted, including
the likelihood of future surges of COVID-19 cases
and the spread of more easily communicable and/or
dangerous variants of COVID-19, the availability,
usage and acceptance of effective medical
treatments and vaccines (including additional
doses of vaccines) in the U.S. and globally and
future public response and government actions,
including travel bans and restrictions,
limitations on business activity, vaccine
mandates and additional stimulus legislation. The
pandemic may cause setbacks to the global or
national economic recovery or longer lasting
effects on economic conditions than are currently
anticipated, changes in financial markets,
changes in fiscal, monetary and tax regulatory
environments, and changes in client preferences
and behavior, which could have a material adverse
effect on our businesses, results of operations
and financial condition.
Market
Our business and results of operations may be
adversely affected by the financial markets,
fiscal, monetary, and regulatory policies, and
economic conditions generally.
General economic, political, social and health
conditions in the U.S. and in one or more
countries abroad affect markets in the U.S. and
abroad and our business. In particular, markets
in the U.S. or abroad may be affected by the
level and volatility of interest rates,
availability and market conditions of financing,
unexpected changes in gross domestic product
(GDP), economic growth or its sustainability,
inflation, supply chain disruptions, consumer
spending, employment levels, labor shortages,
wage stagnation, federal government shutdowns,
developments related to the U.S. federal debt
ceiling, energy prices, home prices, commercial
property values, bankruptcies, a default by a
significant market participant or class of
counterparties, fluctuations or other significant
changes in both debt and equity capital markets
and currencies, liquidity of the global financial
markets, the growth of global trade and commerce,
trade policies, the availability and cost of
capital and credit, disruption of communication,
transportation or energy infrastructure and
 Bank of America8 
investor sentiment and confidence. Additionally,
global markets, including energy and commodity
markets, may be adversely affected by the current
or anticipated impact of climate change, extreme
weather events or natural disasters, the
emergence or continuation of widespread health
emergencies or pandemics, cyberattacks or
campaigns, military conflict, including
escalating military tension between Russia and
Ukraine, terrorism or other geopolitical events.
Market fluctuations may impact our margin
requirements and affect our business liquidity.
Also, any sudden or prolonged market downturn in
the U.S. or abroad, as a result of the above
factors or otherwise, could result in a decline
in net interest income and noninterest income and
adversely affect our results of operations and
financial condition, including capital and
liquidity levels. For example, global
developments in connection with the ongoing
pandemic, including supply chain disruptions,
high inflation, changes to industries such as
commercial real estate, the emergence of new
variants and significant restrictions on
households and businesses in certain countries,
have adversely impacted and may continue to
adversely impact financial markets and
macroeconomic conditions and could result in
additional market volatility and disruptions
globally.
Actions taken by the Federal Reserve, including
changes in its target funds rate, balance sheet
management, and lending facilities, and other
central banks are beyond our control and
difficult to predict. These actions can affect
interest rates and the value of financial
instruments and other assets and liabilities and
can impact our borrowers. Sudden changes in
monetary policy, for example in response to high
inflation, could lead to financial market
volatility, increases in market interest rates,
and a flattening or inversion of the yield curve.
The continued protracted period of lower interest
rates has resulted in lower revenue through lower
net interest income, which has adversely affected
our results of operations. Continued low U.S.
interest rates, potentially resulting from a
further extended period of accommodative monetary
policy and/or an economic downturn could have a
further adverse impact on us, including our net
interest income and results of operations.
Changes to existing U.S. laws and regulatory
policies and evolving priorities, including those
related to financial regulation, taxation,
international trade, fiscal policy, climate
change (including required reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions) and healthcare, may
adversely impact U.S. or global economic activity
and our customers', our counterparties' and our
earnings and operations. For example, the
expiration of pandemic-related government
assistance in the U.S. could result in a
reduction in economic activity and lead to a
deterioration in households’ finances,
particularly if consumers also continue to face
high inflation. A slowdown in consumer demand
could limit the ability of firms to pass on fast-
rising costs for labor and other inputs, weighing
on earnings and potentially leading to an equity
market downturn. Significant fiscal policy
changes and/or initiatives may also raise the
federal debt, affect businesses and household
after-tax incomes and increase uncertainty
surrounding the formulation and direction of U.S.
monetary policy and volatility of interest rates.
A rise in U.S. interest rates could increase the
likelihood of a more volatile and appreciating
U.S. dollar. Changes, or proposed changes, to
certain U.S. trade and international investment
policies, particularly with important trading
partners (including China and the EU) have in
recent years negatively impacted financial
markets. An escalation of tensions could lead to
further measures that adversely affect financial
markets, disrupt world trade and commerce and
lead to trade retaliation, including through the
use of tariffs, foreign exchange measures
or the large-scale sale of U.S. Treasury Bonds.
Actions taken by other countries, particularly
China, to restrict the activities of businesses,
could also negatively affect financial markets.
Any of these developments could adversely affect
our consumer and commercial businesses, our
customers, our securities and derivatives
portfolios, including the risk of lower re-
investment rates within those portfolios, our
level of charge-offs and provision for credit
losses, the carrying value of our deferred tax
assets, our capital levels, our liquidity and our
results of operations. Additionally, the
transition from IBORs and other benchmark rates
to alternative reference rates (ARRs) could
negatively impact markets globally and our
business, and/or magnify any negative impact of
the above referenced factors on our business,
customers and results of operations.
Increased market volatility and adverse changes
in financial or capital market conditions may
increase our market risk.
Our liquidity, competitive position, business,
results of operations and financial condition are
affected by market risks such as changes in
interest and currency exchange rates,
fluctuations (significant or otherwise) in equity
and futures prices, lower trading volumes and
prices of securitized products, the implied
volatility of interest rates and credit spreads
and other economic and business factors. These
market risks may adversely affect, among other
things, the value of our securities, trading
assets and other financial instruments, the cost
of debt capital and our access to credit markets,
the value of assets under management (AUM), fee
income relating to AUM, customer allocation of
capital among investment alternatives, the volume
of client activity in our trading operations,
investment banking fees, the general
profitability and risk level of the transactions
in which we engage and our competitiveness with
respect to deposit pricing. For example, the
value of certain of our assets is sensitive to
changes in market interest rates. If the Federal
Reserve or a non-U.S. central bank changes or
signals a change in monetary policy, market
interest rates or credit spreads could be
affected, which could adversely impact the value
of such assets. Changes to fiscal policy,
including expansion of U.S. federal deficit
spending and resultant debt issuance, could also
affect market interest rates. In addition,
although some interest rates have begun to rise
and elevated inflation could lead to further
increases, the continued low interest rate
environment has had and could continue to have a
negative impact on our results of operations,
including on future revenue and earnings growth.
A flattening or inversion of the yield curve
could also negatively impact our results of
operations, including revenue and earnings.
We use various models and strategies to assess
and control our market risk exposures, but those
are subject to inherent limitations. In times of
market stress or other unforeseen circumstances,
previously uncorrelated indicators may become
correlated and vice versa. These types of market
movements may limit the effectiveness of our
hedging strategies and cause us to incur
significant losses. These changes in correlation
can be exacerbated where other market
participants are using risk or trading models
with assumptions or algorithms similar to ours.
In these and other cases, it may be difficult to
reduce our risk positions due to activity of
other market participants or widespread market
dislocations, including circumstances where asset
values are declining significantly or no market
exists for certain assets. To the extent that we
own securities that do not have an established
liquid trading market or are otherwise subject to
restrictions on sale or hedging, we may not be
able to reduce our positions and therefore reduce
our risk associated with such positions.
 9Bank of America 
We may incur losses if asset values decline,
including due to changes in interest rates and
prepayment speeds.
We have a large portfolio of financial
instruments, including loans and loan
commitments, securities financing agreements,
asset-backed secured financings, derivative
assets and liabilities, debt securities,
marketable equity securities and certain other
assets and liabilities that we measure at fair
value that are subject to valuation and
impairment assessments. We determine these values
based on applicable accounting guidance, which,
for financial instruments measured at fair value,
requires an entity to base fair value on exit
price and to maximize the use of observable
inputs and minimize the use of unobservable
inputs in fair value measurements. The fair
values of these financial instruments include
adjustments for market liquidity, credit quality,
funding impact on certain derivatives and other
transaction-specific factors, where appropriate.
Gains or losses on these instruments can have a
direct impact on our results of operations,
unless we have effectively hedged our exposures.
Increases in interest rates may result in a
decrease in residential mortgage loan
originations and could impact the origination of
corporate debt. In addition, increases in
interest rates or changes in spreads may
adversely impact the fair value of debt
securities and, accordingly, for debt securities
classified as available for sale, may adversely
affect accumulated other comprehensive income
and, thus, capital levels. These market moves
also may adversely impact the value of debt
securities we hold to meet regulatory liquidity
requirements. Decreases in interest rates may
increase prepayment speeds of certain assets,
and, therefore, may adversely affect net interest
income.
Fair values may be impacted by declining values
of the underlying assets or the prices at which
observable market transactions occur and the
continued availability of these transactions or
indices. The financial strength of
counterparties, with whom we have economically
hedged some of our exposure to these assets, also
will affect the fair value of these assets.
Sudden declines and volatility in the prices of
assets may curtail or eliminate trading
activities in these assets, which may make it
difficult to sell, hedge or value these assets.
The inability to sell or effectively hedge assets
reduces our ability to limit losses in such
positions, and the difficulty in valuing assets
may increase our risk-weighted assets (RWA),
which requires us to maintain additional capital
and increases our funding costs. Values of AUM
also impact revenues in our wealth management and
related advisory businesses for asset-based
management and performance fees. Declines in
values of AUM can result in lower fees earned for
managing such assets.
 Liquidity 
If we are unable to access the capital markets or
continue to maintain deposits, or our borrowing
costs increase, our liquidity and competitive
position will be negatively affected.
Liquidity is essential to our businesses. We fund
our assets primarily with globally sourced
deposits in our bank entities, as well as secured
and unsecured liabilities transacted in the
capital markets. We rely on certain secured
funding sources, such as repo markets, which are
typically short-term and credit-sensitive. We
also engage in asset securitization transactions,
including with the GSEs, to fund consumer lending
activities. Our liquidity could be adversely
affected by any inability to access the capital
markets, illiquidity or volatility in the capital
markets, the decrease in value of eligible
collateral or increased collateral requirements
(including as a result of credit concerns for
short-term borrowing), changes to our
relationships with our funding providers based on
real or perceived changes in our risk
profile, prolonged federal government shutdowns,
or changes in regulations, guidance or GSE status
that impact our funding avenues or ability to
access certain funding sources. Additionally, our
liquidity may be negatively impacted by the
unwillingness or inability of the Federal Reserve
to act as lender of last resort, unexpected
simultaneous draws on lines of credit, slower
customer payment rates, restricted access to the
assets of prime brokerage clients, the withdrawal
of or failure to attract customer deposits or
invested funds (which could result from customer
attrition for higher yields, the desire for more
conservative alternatives, changes in customer
behavior or our customers’ increased need for
cash), increased regulatory liquidity, capital
and margin requirements for our U.S. or
international banks and their nonbank
subsidiaries, which could result in the inability
to transfer liquidity internally and inefficient
funding, changes in patterns of intraday
liquidity usage resulting from a counterparty or
technology failure or other idiosyncratic event
or failure or default by a significant market
participant or third party (including clearing
agents, custodians, central banks or central
counterparties (CCPs)). These factors also have
the potential to increase our borrowing costs and
negatively impact our liquidity.
Several of these factors may arise due to
circumstances beyond our control, such as general
market volatility, disruption, shock or stress,
the emergence or continuation of widespread
health emergencies or pandemics, Federal Reserve
policy decisions (including fluctuations in
interest rates or Federal Reserve balance sheet
composition), negative views or loss of
confidence about the Corporation (including
short- and long-term business prospects) or the
financial services industry generally or due to a
specific news event, changes in the regulatory
environment or governmental fiscal or monetary
policies, actions by credit rating agencies or an
operational problem that affects third parties or
us. The impact of these events, whether within
our control or not, could include an inability to
sell assets or redeem investments, unforeseen
outflows of cash, the need to draw on liquidity
facilities, the reduction of financing balances
and the loss of equity secured funding, debt
repurchases to support the secondary market or
meet client requests, the need for additional
funding for commitments and contingencies and
unexpected collateral calls, among other things,
the result of which could be increased costs, a
liquidity shortfall and/or impact on our
liquidity coverage ratio.
Our liquidity and cost of obtaining funding is
directly related to prevailing market conditions,
including changes in interest and currency
exchange rates, significant fluctuations in
equity and futures prices, lower trading volumes
and prices of securitized products and our credit
spreads. Credit spreads reflect the published
credit ratings, or other assessments of credit
risk and relative value by market participants,
of the Corporation and represent the risk
premiums that our funding providers demand in
excess of a benchmark interest rate, for example,
U.S. Treasury securities rates. Increases in
interest rates and our credit spreads can
increase the cost of our funding and result in
mark-to-market or credit valuation adjustment
exposures. Changes in our credit spreads are
market-driven and may be influenced by market
perceptions of our creditworthiness, including
changes in our credit ratings. Changes to
interest rates and our credit spreads occur
continuously and may be unpredictable and highly
volatile. We may also experience spread
compression as a result of offering higher than
expected deposit rates in order to attract and
maintain deposits due to increased marketplace
rate competition. Additionally, concentrations
within our funding
 Bank of America10 
profile, such as maturities, currencies or
counterparties, can reduce our funding
efficiency.
Reduction in our credit ratings could
significantly limit our access to funding or the
capital markets, increase borrowing costs or
trigger additional collateral or funding
requirements.
Our borrowing costs and ability to raise funds
are directly impacted by our credit ratings. In
addition, credit ratings may be important to
customers or counterparties when we compete in
certain markets and seek to engage in certain
transactions, including OTC derivatives. Credit
ratings and outlooks are opinions expressed by
rating agencies on our creditworthiness and that
of our obligations or securities, including long-
term debt, short-term borrowings, preferred stock
and asset securitizations. Our credit ratings are
subject to ongoing review by rating agencies,
which consider a number of factors, including our
financial strength, performance, prospects and
operations and factors not under our control,
such as the macroeconomic and geopolitical
environment, including any continued
macroeconomic stress caused by the pandemic, or
changes the rating agencies may make to the
methodologies they use to determine our ratings.
Rating agencies could make adjustments to our
credit ratings at any time, and there can be no
assurance as to whether or when any downgrades
could occur. A reduction in certain of our credit
ratings could result in a wider credit spread and
negatively affect our liquidity, access to credit
markets, the related cost of funds, our
businesses and certain trading revenues,
particularly in those businesses where
counterparty creditworthiness is critical. If the
short-term credit ratings of our parent company,
or bank or broker-dealer subsidiaries, were
downgraded by one or more levels, we may
experience loss of access to short-term funding
sources such as repo financing, and/or incur
increased cost of funds and increased collateral
requirements. Under the terms of certain OTC
derivative contracts and other trading
agreements, if our or our subsidiaries’ credit
ratings are downgraded, the counterparties may
require additional collateral or terminate these
contracts or agreements.
While certain potential impacts are contractual
and quantifiable, the full consequences of a
credit rating downgrade to a financial
institution are inherently uncertain, as they
depend upon numerous dynamic, complex and inter-
related factors and assumptions, including
whether any downgrade of a firm’s long-term
credit ratings precipitates downgrades to its
short-term credit ratings, and assumptions about
the potential behaviors of various customers,
investors and counterparties.
Bank of America Corporation is a holding company,
is dependent on its subsidiaries for liquidity
and may be restricted from transferring funds
from subsidiaries.
Bank of America Corporation, as the parent
company, is a separate and distinct legal entity
from our bank and nonbank subsidiaries. We
evaluate and manage liquidity on a legal entity
basis. Legal entity liquidity is an important
consideration as there are legal, regulatory,
contractual and other limitations on our ability
to utilize liquidity from one legal entity to
satisfy the liquidity requirements of another,
including the parent company, which could result
in adverse liquidity events. The parent company
depends on dividends, distributions, loans and
other payments from our bank and nonbank
subsidiaries to fund dividend payments on our
common stock and preferred stock and to fund all
payments on our other obligations, including debt
obligations. Any inability of our subsidiaries to
pay dividends or make payments to us may
adversely affect our cash flow and financial
condition.
Many of our subsidiaries, including our bank and
broker-dealer subsidiaries, are subject to laws
that restrict dividend payments, or authorize
regulatory bodies to block or reduce the flow of
funds from those subsidiaries to the parent
company or other subsidiaries. Our bank and
broker-dealer subsidiaries are subject to
restrictions on their ability to lend or transact
with affiliates, minimum regulatory capital and
liquidity requirements and restrictions on their
ability to use funds deposited with them in bank
or brokerage accounts to fund their businesses.
Intercompany arrangements we entered into in
connection with our resolution planning
submissions could restrict the amount of funding
available to the parent company from our
subsidiaries under certain adverse conditions.
Additional restrictions on related party
transactions, increased capital and liquidity
requirements and additional limitations on the
use of funds on deposit in bank or brokerage
accounts, as well as lower earnings, can reduce
the amount of funds available to meet the
obligations of the parent company and even
require the parent company to provide additional
funding to such subsidiaries. Also, regulatory
action that requires additional liquidity at each
of our subsidiaries could impede access to funds
we need to pay our obligations or pay dividends.
In addition, our right to participate in a
distribution of assets upon a subsidiary’s
liquidation or reorganization is subject to prior
claims of the subsidiary’s creditors.
Our liquidity and financial condition, and the
ability to pay dividends to shareholders and to
pay obligations could be materially adversely
affected in the event of a resolution.
Bank of America Corporation, our parent holding
company, is required to periodically submit a
plan to the FDIC and Federal Reserve describing
its resolution strategy under the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code in the event of material financial distress
or failure. In the current plan, Bank of America
Corporation’s preferred resolution strategy is a
“single point of entry” strategy. This strategy
provides that only the parent holding company
would file for bankruptcy under the U.S.
Bankruptcy Code and contemplates providing
certain key operating subsidiaries with
sufficient capital and liquidity to operate
through severe stress and to enable such
subsidiaries to continue operating or be wound
down in a solvent manner following a bankruptcy
of the parent holding company. Bank of America
Corporation has entered into intercompany
arrangements resulting in the contribution of
most of its capital and liquidity to key
subsidiaries. Pursuant to these arrangements, if
Bank of America Corporation’s liquidity resources
deteriorate so severely that resolution becomes
imminent, Bank of America Corporation will no
longer be able to draw liquidity from its key
subsidiaries, and will be required to contribute
its remaining financial assets to a wholly-owned
holding company subsidiary, which could
materially and adversely affect our liquidity and
financial condition and the ability to return
capital to shareholders, including through the
payment of dividends and repurchase of the
Corporation’s common stock, and meet our payment
obligations.
If the FDIC and Federal Reserve jointly determine
that Bank of America Corporation’s resolution
plan is not credible, they could impose more
stringent capital, leverage or liquidity
requirements or restrictions on our growth,
activities or operations. We could also be
required to take certain actions that could
impose operating costs and could potentially
result in the divestiture of certain assets or
restructuring of businesses and subsidiaries.
Additionally, under the Financial Reform Act,
when a G-SIB such as Bank of America Corporation
is in default or danger of default, the FDIC may
be appointed receiver in order to conduct
 11Bank of America 
an orderly liquidation of such institution. In
the event of such appointment, the FDIC could,
among other things, invoke the orderly
liquidation authority, instead of the U.S.
Bankruptcy Code, if the Secretary of the Treasury
makes certain financial distress and systemic
risk determinations. In 2013, the FDIC issued a
notice describing its preferred “single point of
entry” strategy for resolving a G-SIB. Under this
approach, the FDIC could replace Bank of America
Corporation with a bridge holding company, which
could continue operations and result in an
orderly resolution of the underlying bank, but
whose equity would be held solely for the benefit
of our creditors. The FDIC’s “single point of
entry” strategy may result in our security
holders suffering greater losses than would have
been the case under a bankruptcy proceeding or a
different resolution strategy.
To the extent that the Corporation is resolved
under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code or the FDIC’s
orderly liquidation authority, third-party
creditors of the Corporation’s subsidiaries may
receive significant or full recoveries on their
claims while security holders of Bank of America
Corporation could face significant or complete
losses.
Credit
Economic or market disruptions and insufficient
credit loss reserves may result in a higher
provision for credit losses.
A number of our products expose us to credit
risk, including loans, letters of credit,
derivatives, debt securities, trading account
assets and assets held-for-sale. Deterioration in
the financial condition of our consumer and
commercial borrowers, counterparties or
underlying collateral could adversely affect our
financial condition and results of operations.
Our credit portfolios may be impacted by global
and U.S. macroeconomic and market conditions,
events and disruptions, including declines in
GDP, consumer spending or property values, asset
price corrections, increasing consumer and
corporate leverage, increases in corporate bond
spreads, rising or elevated unemployment levels,
rising or elevated inflation, fluctuations in
foreign exchange or interest rates, as well as
widespread health emergencies or pandemics,
extreme weather events and the impacts of climate
change and domestic and global efforts to
transition to a low-carbon economy. Significant
economic or market stresses and disruptions
typically have a negative impact on the business
environment and financial markets, which could
impact the underlying credit quality of our
borrowers, counterparties and assets. Property
value declines or asset price corrections could
increase the risk of borrowers or counterparties
defaulting or becoming delinquent in their
obligations to us, and could decrease the value
of the collateral we hold, which could increase
credit losses. Credit risk could also be
magnified by lending to leveraged borrowers or
declining asset prices, including property or
collateral values, unrelated to macroeconomic
stress. Simultaneous drawdowns on lines of credit
and/or an increase in a borrower’s leverage in a
weakening economic environment could result in
deterioration in our credit portfolio, should
borrowers be unable to fulfill competing
financial obligations. Increased delinquency and
default rates could adversely affect our credit
portfolios, including consumer credit card, home
equity and residential mortgage portfolios
through increased charge-offs and provisions for
credit losses.
Although macroeconomic conditions have improved
during 2021 in comparison to 2020, the pandemic
and the related impacts of inflationary
conditions, high input costs and supply chain
disruptions, unemployment or labor shortages and
the expiration of pandemic-related government
benefits and programs could negatively impact the
ability of consumer and
commercial borrowers or counterparties to meet
their financial obligations. Additionally, the
pandemic continues to impact the economy and
certain sectors remain at risk (e.g., travel and
entertainment, as well as commercial real estate
office exposure). To the extent the pandemic
worsens, as a result of new variants or
otherwise, resulting in restrictions on economic
activity or other negative impacts on the
macroeconomic environment, our credit portfolio
and allowance for credit losses could be
adversely impacted.
We establish an allowance for credit losses,
which includes the allowance for loan and lease
losses and the reserve for unfunded lending
commitments, based on management's best estimate
of lifetime expected credit losses inherent in
our relevant financial assets. The process to
determine the allowance for credit losses uses
models and assumptions that require us to make
difficult and complex judgments that are often
interrelated. This includes forecasting how
borrowers or counterparties will perform in
changing and unprecedented economic conditions,
such as predicting developments in public health
and fiscal policy related to the pandemic. The
ability of our borrowers or counterparties to
repay their obligations will likely be impacted
by changes in future economic conditions, which
in turn could impact the accuracy of our loss
forecasts and allowance estimates. There is also
the possibility that we have failed or will fail
to accurately identify the appropriate economic
indicators or accurately estimate their impacts
to our borrowers or counterparties, which
similarly could impact the accuracy of our loss
forecasts and allowance estimates.
If the models, estimates and assumptions we use
to establish reserves or the judgments we make in
extending credit to our borrowers or
counterparties, which are more sensitive due to
the current macroeconomic environment, including
as a result of the uncertainty regarding the
magnitude and duration of the pandemic, prove
inaccurate in predicting future events, we may
suffer unexpected losses. In addition, changes to
external factors can negatively impact our
recognition of credit losses in our portfolios
and allowance for credit losses.
The allowance for credit losses is our best
estimate of expected credit losses; however,
there is no guarantee that it will be sufficient
to address credit losses, particularly if the
economic outlook deteriorates significantly and
quickly. In such an event, we may increase our
allowance which would reduce our earnings.
Additionally, to the extent that economic
conditions worsen as a result of COVID-19 or
otherwise, impacting our consumer and commercial
borrowers, counterparties or underlying
collateral, and credit losses are worse than
expected, we may increase our provision for
credit losses, which could have an adverse effect
on our results of operations and could negatively
impact our financial condition.
Our concentrations of credit risk could adversely
affect our credit losses, results of operations
and financial condition.
In the ordinary course of our business, we may be
subject to concentrations of credit risk because
of a common characteristic or common sensitivity
to economic, financial, public health or business
developments. For example, concentrations of
credit risk may reside in a particular industry,
geography, product, asset class, counterparty or
within any pool of exposures with a common risk
characteristic. A deterioration in the financial
condition or prospects of a particular industry,
geographic location, product or asset class, or a
failure or downgrade of, or default by, any
particular entity or group of entities could
negatively affect our businesses, and it is
possible our limits and credit monitoring
exposure controls will not function as
anticipated.
 Bank of America12 
While our activities expose us to many different
industries and counterparties, we routinely
execute a high volume of transactions with
counterparties in the financial services
industry, predominantly comprised of broker-
dealers, commercial banks, investment banks,
insurers, mutual funds, hedge funds, central
clearing counterparties and other institutional
clients, resulting in significant credit
concentration with respect to these industries.
Financial services institutions and other
counterparties are inter-related because of
trading, funding, clearing or other
relationships. As a result, defaults by one or
more counterparties, or market uncertainty about
the financial stability of one or more financial
services institutions, or the financial services
industry generally, could lead to market-wide
liquidity disruptions, losses and defaults.
Many of these transactions expose us to credit
risk and, in some cases, disputes and litigation
in the event of default of a counterparty. In
addition, our credit risk may be heightened by
market risk when the collateral held by us cannot
be liquidated or is liquidated at prices not
sufficient to recover the full amount of the loan
or derivatives exposure due to us, which may
occur as a result of events that impact the value
of the collateral, such as an asset price
correction or fraud. Further, disputes with
obligors as to the valuation of collateral could
increase in times of significant market stress,
volatility or illiquidity, and we could suffer
losses during such periods if we are unable to
realize the fair value of the collateral or
manage declines in the value of collateral.
Our commercial portfolios include exposures to
certain industries, including asset managers and
funds, real estate, finance companies and capital
goods. Economic weaknesses, sustained elevated
inflation, adverse business conditions, market
disruptions, rising interest or capitalization
rates, the collapse of speculative bubbles,
greater volatility in areas where we have
concentrated credit risk or deterioration in real
estate values or household incomes may cause us
to experience a decrease in cash flow and higher
credit losses in either our consumer or
commercial portfolios or cause us to write down
the value of certain assets. Additionally, we
could experience continued and long-term negative
impacts to our commercial credit exposure and an
increase in credit losses within those industries
that continue to be disproportionately impacted
by COVID-19 or are permanently impacted by a
change in consumer preferences resulting from
COVID-19 (e.g., travel and entertainment, as well
as commercial real estate office exposure) or
other industry disruptions.
Furthermore, we have concentrations of credit
risk with respect to our consumer real estate,
auto, consumer credit card and commercial real
estate portfolios, which represent a significant
percentage of our overall credit portfolio. The
U.S. has experienced a meaningful increase in
property prices over the past year and a decrease
in home price valuations or commercial real
estate valuations in certain markets where we
have large concentrations, as well as more
broadly within the U.S. or globally, could result
in increased servicing expenses, defaults,
delinquencies or credit losses. In particular,
the impact of climate change, such as rising
average global temperatures and rising sea
levels, and the increasing frequency and severity
of extreme weather events and natural disasters
such as droughts, floods, wildfires and
hurricanes could negatively impact collateral,
the valuations of home prices or commercial real
estate or our customers’ ability and/or
willingness to pay fees, outstanding loans or
afford new products. This could also cause
insurability risk and/or increased insurance
costs to customers.
We also enter into transactions with sovereign
nations, U.S. states and municipalities.
Unfavorable economic or political conditions,
disruptions to capital markets, currency
fluctuations, changes in oil prices, social
instability and changes in government or monetary
policies could adversely impact the operating
budgets or credit ratings of these government
entities and expose us to credit and liquidity
risk.
Liquidity disruptions in the financial markets
may result in our inability to sell, syndicate or
realize the value of our positions, leading to
increased concentrations, which could increase
the credit and market risk associated with our
positions, as well as increase our RWA.
We may be adversely affected if the U.S. housing
market weakens or home prices decline.
Although the U.S. has experienced a meaningful
increase in home prices in 2021, we remain
conscious of geographic markets where housing
price growth has increased significantly that
could be vulnerable to declines in future periods
and may negatively impact the demand and
underlying collateral for many of our products.
Additionally, our mortgage loan production volume
is generally influenced by the rate of growth in
residential mortgage debt outstanding and the
size of the residential mortgage market, both of
which may be adversely affected by rising
interest rates. Any downturn in the condition of
the U.S. housing market, similar to the 2008
financial crisis or otherwise, could result in
both significant write-downs of asset values in
several asset classes, notably mortgage-backed
securities, and exposure to monolines. If the
U.S. housing market were to weaken, the value of
real estate could decline, which could result in
increased credit losses and delinquent servicing
expenses, negatively affect our representations
and warranties exposures, and adversely affect
our financial condition and results of
operations.
Our derivatives businesses may expose us to
unexpected risks and potential losses.
We are party to a large number of derivatives
transactions that may expose us to unexpected
market, credit and operational risks that could
cause us to suffer unexpected losses. Severe
declines in asset values, unanticipated credit
events or unforeseen circumstances that may cause
previously uncorrelated factors to become
correlated and vice versa, may create losses
resulting from risks not appropriately taken into
account or anticipated in the development,
structuring or pricing of a derivative
instrument. Certain OTC derivative contracts and
other trading agreements provide that upon the
occurrence of certain specified events, such as a
change in the credit rating of the Corporation or
one or more of its affiliates, we may be required
to provide additional collateral or take other
remedial actions and could experience increased
difficulty obtaining funding or hedging risks. In
some cases our counterparties may have the right
to terminate or otherwise diminish our rights
under these contracts or agreements.
We are also a member of various central
counterparties (CCPs), in part due to regulatory
requirements for mandatory clearing of derivative
transactions, which potentially increases our
credit risk exposures to CCPs. In the event that
one or more members of the CCP defaults on its
obligations, we may be required to pay a portion
of any losses incurred by the CCP as a result of
that default. A CCP may modify, in its
discretion, the margin we are required to post,
which could mean unexpected and increased
exposure to the CCP. As a clearing member, we are
exposed to the risk of non-performance by our
clients for which we clear transactions, which
may not be covered by
 13Bank of America 
available collateral. Additionally, default by a
significant market participant may result in
further risk and potential losses.
 Geopolitical 
We are subject to numerous political, economic,
market, reputational, operational, compliance,
legal, regulatory and other risks in the
jurisdictions in which we operate.
We do business throughout the world, including in
emerging markets. Economic or geopolitical stress
in one or more countries could have a negative
impact regionally or globally, resulting in,
among other things, market volatility, reduced
market value and economic output. Our liquidity
and credit risk could be adversely impacted by
and our businesses and revenues derived from
non-U.S. jurisdictions are subject to risk of
loss from financial, social or judicial
instability, changes in government leadership,
including as a result of electoral outcomes or
otherwise, changes in governmental policies or
policies of central banks, expropriation,
nationalization and/or confiscation of assets,
price controls, high inflation, natural
disasters, the emergence or continuation of
widespread health emergencies or pandemics,
capital controls, currency re-denomination risk
from a country exiting the EU or otherwise,
currency fluctuations, foreign exchange controls
or movements (caused by devaluation or de-
pegging), unfavorable political and diplomatic
developments, oil price fluctuations and changes
in legislation. These risks are especially
elevated in emerging markets. Additionally,
continued tensions between the U.S. and important
trading partners, particularly China, may result
in sanctions, further tariff increases or other
restrictive actions on cross-border trade,
investment, and transfer of information
technology that weigh on trade volumes, raise
costs for producers, and adversely affect our
businesses and revenues, as well as our customers
and counterparties.
A number of non-U.S. jurisdictions in which we do
business have been or may be negatively impacted
by slowing growth or recessionary conditions,
market volatility and/or political or civil
unrest. The ongoing pandemic had a severe
negative impact on global GDP, and despite
significant progress in 2021, it appears that the
global economy faces an uncertain and uneven
recovery ahead. While the U.S. and numerous other
countries have recovered to pre-pandemic levels
of output, many countries and areas within
countries are recovering more slowly. Economic
weakness may prove persistent in many countries
and regions, including certain regions of Europe,
Japan and numerous emerging markets. Moreover,
economic activity remains vulnerable to ongoing
public health uncertainties with respect to the
pandemic, and a number of countries are still
imposing significant restrictions on residents
and businesses. Global supply chain disruptions,
labor shortages, wage pressures and elevated
inflation in many countries pose further
challenges, especially in the form of volatility
in financial markets. Additionally, foreign
exchange rates against the U.S. dollar are at
risk of significant depreciation as the Federal
Reserve raises interest rates.
We also invest or trade in the securities of
corporations and governments located in non-U.S.
jurisdictions, including emerging markets.
Revenues from the trading of non-U.S. securities
may be subject to negative fluctuations as a
result of the above factors. Furthermore, the
impact of these fluctuations could be magnified
because non-U.S. trading markets, particularly in
emerging markets, are generally smaller, less
liquid and more volatile than U.S. trading
markets. Risks in one nation can limit our
opportunities for portfolio growth and negatively
affect our operations in other nations, including
our U.S. operations. Market and economic
disruptions of all types
may affect consumer confidence levels and
spending, corporate investment and job creation,
bankruptcy rates, levels of incurrence and
default on consumer and corporate debt, economic
growth rates and asset values, among other
factors. Any such unfavorable conditions or
developments could adversely impact us.
As a result of the pandemic and fiscal policy
responses to it, including the increased purchase
of government bonds and other financial assets by
central banks, government debt levels have
increased significantly raising the risk of
volatility, significant valuation changes,
political tensions among EU members regarding
fiscal policy or defaults on or devaluation of
sovereign debt, which could expose us to
substantial losses.
Our non-U.S. businesses are also subject to
extensive regulation by governments, securities
exchanges and regulators, central banks and other
regulatory bodies. In many countries, the laws
and regulations applicable to the financial
services and securities industries are uncertain
and evolving, and it may be difficult for us to
determine the exact requirements of local laws in
every market or manage our relationships with
multiple regulators in various jurisdictions. Our
potential inability to remain in compliance with
local laws in a particular market and manage our
relationships with regulators could result in
increased expenses and changes to our
organizational structure and adversely affect our
businesses and results of operations in that
market, as well as our reputation in general.
In connection with the U.K.’s exit from the EU,
we are now subject to different laws and
regulations, which are expected to diverge
further over time, and are subject to the
oversight of additional regulatory authorities.
As political and regulatory environments evolve,
further changes to the legal and regulatory
framework under which our subsidiaries provide
products and services in the U.K. and in the EU
may result in additional compliance costs and
have negative tax consequences or an adverse
impact on our results of operations.
In addition to non-U.S. legislation, our
international operations are also subject to U.S.
legal requirements, which subjects us to
operational and compliance costs and risks. For
example, our operations are subject to U.S. and
non-U.S. laws and regulations relating to bribery
and corruption, anti-money laundering, and
economic sanctions, which can vary by
jurisdiction. The increasing speed and novel ways
in which funds circulate could make it more
challenging to track the movement of funds and
heighten financial crimes risk. Our ability to
comply with these legal requirements depends on
our ability to continually improve surveillance,
detection and reporting and analytic
capabilities.
In the U.S., debt ceiling and budget deficit
concerns, which have increased the possibility of
U.S. government defaults on its debt and/or
downgrades to its credit ratings, and prolonged
government shutdowns could weaken the U.S.
dollar, cause market volatility, negatively
impact the global economy and banking system and
adversely affect our financial condition,
including our liquidity. Additionally, changes in
fiscal, monetary or regulatory policy, including
as a result of labor shortages, wage pressures,
supply chain disruptions and higher inflation,
could increase our compliance costs and adversely
affect our business operations, organizational
structure and results of operations. We are also
subject to geopolitical risks, including economic
sanctions, acts or threats of international or
domestic terrorism, actions taken by the U.S. or
other governments in response thereto, state-
sponsored cyberattacks or campaigns, civil unrest
and/or military conflicts, which could adversely
affect business and economic conditions abroad
and in the U.S. For example, escalating military
tensions between Russia and Ukraine could result
in regional instability and adversely impact
 Bank of America14 
commodity and other financial markets as well as
economic conditions, especially in Europe.
Additionally, this could magnify inflationary
pressure resulting from the pandemic and extend
any prolonged period of higher inflation.
 Business Operations 
A failure in or breach of our operational or
security systems or infrastructure or business
continuity plans, or those of third parties or
the financial services industry, could disrupt
our critical business operations and customer
services, result in additional risk exposures,
and adversely impact our results of operations
and financial condition, and cause legal or
reputational harm.
The potential for operational risk exposure
exists throughout our organization and as a
result of our interactions with, and reliance on,
third parties (including their downstream service
providers) and the financial services industry
infrastructure. Our operational and security
systems infrastructure, including our computer
systems, emerging technologies, data management
and internal processes, as well as those of third
parties, are integral to our performance. We also
rely on our employees and third parties
(including downstream service providers) in our
day-to-day and ongoing operations, who may, as a
result of human error, misconduct (including
errors in judgment, malice, fraudulent activity
and/or engaging in violations of applicable
policies, laws, rules or procedures), malfeasance
or a failure or breach of systems or
infrastructure cause disruptions to our
organization and expose us to operational losses,
regulatory risk and reputational harm. The
Corporation’s and third parties’ inability to
properly introduce, deploy and manage changes to
internal financial and governance processes,
existing products, services and technology, as
well as new product innovations and technology
could also result in additional operational and
regulatory risk.
Additionally, our financial, accounting, data
processing and transmission, storage, backup or
other operating or security systems and
infrastructure, or those of third parties with
whom we interact or upon whom we rely, may be
ineffective or fail to operate properly or become
disabled or damaged as a result of a number of
factors including events that are wholly or
partially beyond our or such third party’s
control, which could adversely affect our ability
to process transactions or provide services. We
could also experience prolonged computer and
network outages resulting in disruptions to our
critical business operations and customer
services, including abuse or failure of our
electronic trading and algorithmic platforms. We
may experience sudden increases in customer
transaction volume or electrical,
telecommunications or other major physical
infrastructure outages, newly identified
vulnerabilities in key hardware or software,
failure of aging infrastructure and technology
project implementation challenges, which could
result in prolonged operational outages. Climate
change is increasing the frequency and severity
of natural disasters, such as earthquakes,
wildfires, tornadoes, hurricanes and floods,
which could result in increased exposure to
operational risks, including outages.
Additionally, events arising from local or larger
scale political or social matters, including
civil unrest and terrorist acts, could result in
operational disruptions and prolonged operational
outages.
We continue to execute our business continuity
plans due to the pandemic and will likely
continue to be subject to heightened operational
risks to the extent that the pandemic persists.
We also continue to have greater reliance on
remote access tools and technology and employees’
personal systems and increased data utilization
and be increasingly dependent upon our
information technology infrastructure to operate
our
businesses remotely due to the increased number
of employees who work from home and evolving
customer preferences, including increased
reliance on digital banking and other digital
services provided by our businesses. Effective
management of our business continuity depends on
the security, reliability and adequacy of such
systems. We also continue to be at risk of
business disruptions due to illness and
unavailability as the pandemic persists,
including from the emergence of new variants,
particularly if they are more transmissible
and/or severe.
Regardless of the measures we have taken to
implement training, procedures, backup systems
and other safeguards to support our operations
and bolster our operational resilience, our
ability to conduct business may be adversely
affected by any significant disruptions to us or
to third parties (including their downstream
service providers) with whom we interact or upon
whom we rely, including systemic cyber events
that result in system outages and unavailability
of part or all of the internet, cloud services
and/or the financial services industry
infrastructure (including critical banking
activities). Our ability to implement backup
systems and other safeguards with respect to
third-party systems and the financial services
industry infrastructure is more limited than with
respect to our own systems.
Furthermore, to the extent that backup systems
are available and utilized, they may not process
data as quickly as our primary systems and some
data might not have been backed up. We regularly
update the systems on which we rely to support
our operations and growth and to remain compliant
with all applicable laws, rules and regulations
globally. This updating entails significant costs
and creates risks associated with implementing
new systems and integrating them with existing
ones, including business interruptions.
A failure or breach of our operational or
security systems or infrastructure or business
continuity plans resulting in disruption to our
critical business operations and customer
services and/or failure to identify and
effectively respond to operational risks in a
timely manner could expose us to market abuse,
regulatory, market, privacy and liquidity risk,
and adversely impact our results of operations
and financial condition, as well as cause legal
or reputational harm.
A cyberattack, information or security breach, or
a technology failure of ours or of a third party
could adversely affect our ability to conduct our
business, manage our exposure to risk, result in
the disclosure and/or misuse of information
and/or fraudulent activity and increase our
operational and security systems and critical
infrastructure costs.
Our business is highly dependent on the security,
controls and efficacy of our infrastructure,
computer and data management systems, as well as
those of our customers, suppliers, counterparties
and other third parties (including their
downstream service providers) the financial
services industry and financial data aggregators,
with whom we interact, on whom we rely or who
have access to our customers' personal or account
information. Our business relies on effective
access management and the secure collection,
processing, transmission, storage and retrieval
of confidential, proprietary, personally
identifiable and other information in our
computer and data management systems and
networks, and in the computer and data management
systems and networks of third parties. In
addition, to remotely access our network,
products and services, our employees, customers,
suppliers, counterparties and other third parties
increasingly use personal mobile devices or
computing devices that are outside of our
 15Bank of America 
network and control environments and are subject
to their own cybersecurity risks.
We, our employees, customers, regulators and
third parties (including providers of products
and services) are regularly the target of an
increasing number of cyber threats and attacks
and will continue to be. Cyber threats and
techniques used in cyberattacks are pervasive,
sophisticated, rapidly evolving, difficult to
prevent and include computer viruses, malicious
or destructive code (such as ransomware), social
engineering (including phishing, vishing and
smishing), denial of service or information or
other security breach tactics that could result
in disruptions to our businesses and operations,
the loss of funds of the Corporation and/or its
clients and the unauthorized release, gathering,
monitoring, misuse, loss or destruction or theft
of confidential, proprietary and other
information, including intellectual property, of
ours, our employees, our customers or of third
parties. Cybersecurity risks have also
significantly increased in recent years in part
due to the growing number and increasingly
sophisticated activities of malicious cyber
actors, including organized crime groups,
hackers, terrorist organizations, extremist
parties, hostile foreign governments and state-
sponsored actors, in some instances acting to
promote political ends responding to policies
and/or actions of the U.S. government. We are
also subject to cyberattacks by disgruntled
employees, activists and other third parties,
including those involved in corporate espionage.
Our cybersecurity risk and exposure remains
heightened because of, among other things, the
evolving nature and pervasiveness of cyber
threats, our prominent size and scale, our high-
profile brand, our geographic footprint and
international presence and our role in the
financial services industry and the broader
economy. The financial services industry,
including the Corporation, is particularly at
risk because of the use of and reliance on
digital banking and other digital services,
including mobile banking products, such as mobile
payments, and other web- and cloud-based products
and applications and the development of
additional remote connectivity solutions, which
increase cybersecurity risks and exposure.
Acceptance and use of such digital banking
products and services has substantially increased
since the onset of the pandemic. Additionally,
the proliferation of third-party financial data
aggregators and emerging technologies, including
our use of automation, artificial intelligence
(AI) and robotics, increase our cybersecurity
risks and exposure.
We continue to execute our business continuity
plans due to the pandemic. Accordingly, our risk
and exposure to cyberattacks and security
breaches remain magnified due to our continued
reliance on remote access tools and technology,
resulting in increased reliance on
virtual/digital interactions and a larger number
of access points to our networks that must be
secured. This increased risk of unauthorized
access to our networks results in greater amounts
of information being available for access,
including from employees’ personal devices over
which we do not have the same controls as we do
when a larger employee population is working from
our offices. Greater demand on our information
technology infrastructure and security tools and
processes will likely continue as the pandemic
persists and may be experienced permanently.
We also face indirect technology, cybersecurity
and operational risks relating to the customers,
clients and other third parties (including their
downstream service providers) and the financial
services industry with whom we do business, upon
whom we rely to facilitate or enable our business
activities or upon whom our customers rely. Other
indirect risks relate to providers of products
and/or services, financial counterparties,
financial data aggregators, financial
intermediaries, such as clearing agents,
exchanges and clearing houses, regulators,
providers of critical infrastructure, such as
internet access and electrical power, and
retailers for whom we process transactions. We
are also at additional risk resulting from
critical third-party information security and
open-source software vulnerabilities.
Additionally, we have exposure to cyber threats
as a result of our continuous transmission of
sensitive information to, and storage of such
information by, third parties, including
providers of products and/or services, and
regulators, the outsourcing of some of our
business operations, and system and customer
account updates and conversions. Further, any
such event may not be disclosed to us in a timely
manner. Similarly, any failure, cyberattack or
other information or security breach that
significantly degrades, deletes or compromises
our systems or data could adversely impact third
parties, counterparties and the critical
infrastructure of the financial services
industry.
As a result of increasing consolidation,
interdependence and complexity of financial
entities and technology systems, a technology
failure, cyberattack or other information or
security vulnerability, failure or breach that
significantly exposes, degrades, deletes or
compromises the systems or data of one or more
financial entities or third parties (or their
downstream service providers) could have a
material impact on us, our counterparties or
other market participants and ultimately have an
adverse impact on financial stability in the U.S.
and/or globally. This consolidation,
interconnectivity and complexity increases the
risk of operational failure, on both individual
and industry-wide bases, as disparate systems
need to be integrated, often on an accelerated
basis.
Cyber threats and the techniques used in
cyberattacks change rapidly. Despite substantial
efforts to protect the integrity and resilience
of our systems and implement controls, processes,
policies and other protective measures, we may
not be able to anticipate or detect cyberattacks
or information or security breaches and implement
effective preventive or defensive measures to
address or mitigate such attacks or breaches.
Even the most advanced internal control
environment is vulnerable to compromise. Internal
access management failures could result in the
compromise or unauthorized exposure of
confidential data.
Cyberattacks or security breaches could persist
for an extended period of time before being
detected. It could take considerable additional
time for us to determine the scope, extent,
amount, and type of information compromised, at
which time the impact on the Corporation and
measures to recover and restore to a business-as-
usual state may be difficult to assess. As cyber
threats continue to evolve, we may be required to
expend significant additional money and resources
to modify or enhance our protective measures,
investigate and remediate any information
security, software or network vulnerabilities or
incidents whether specific to us, a third party,
the industry or businesses in general, and
develop our capabilities to respond and recover.
As a result, increasing resources to develop and
enhance our controls, processes and practices
designed to protect our systems, workstations,
intellectual property and proprietary
information, software, data and networks from
attack, damage or unauthorized access, remains a
critical priority.
Although to date we have not experienced any
material losses or other material consequences
relating to technology failure, cyberattacks or
other information or security breaches, whether
directed at us or third parties, there can be no
assurance that our controls and procedures in
place to monitor
 Bank of America16 
and mitigate the risks of cyber threats,
including the remediation of critical information
security and software vulnerabilities, will be
sufficient and/or timely and that we will not
suffer material losses or consequences in the
future. Successful penetration or circumvention
of system security could result in negative
consequences, including loss of customers and
business opportunities, the withdrawal of
customer deposits, misappropriation or
destruction of our intellectual property,
proprietary information or confidential
information and/or the confidential, proprietary
or personally identifiable information of certain
parties, such as our employees, customers,
providers of products and services,
counterparties and other third parties, or damage
to their computers or systems. Also, any
technology failure, cyberattack, successful
penetration or circumvention of our networks and
systems or other information or security breach,
termination or constraint of any third party
(including their downstream service providers),
the financial services industry infrastructure or
financial data aggregators, could, among other
things, adversely affect our ability to conduct
day-to-day business activities, effect
transactions, service our clients, manage our
exposure to risk or expand our businesses, result
in fraudulent or unauthorized transactions or
cause prolonged computer and network outages
resulting in material disruptions to our or our
customers’ or other third parties’ network access
or critical business operations and customer
services, in the U.S. and/or globally.
Cyberattacks or other information or security
breaches, whether directed at us or third
parties, may result in significant lost revenue,
give rise to losses and claims brought by third
parties, litigation exposure, government fines,
penalties or intervention and other negative
consequences. Furthermore, the public perception
that a cyberattack on our systems has been
successful, whether or not this perception is
correct, may damage our reputation with customers
and third parties with whom we do business and/or
result in the loss of confidence in our security
measures. Additionally, our failure to
communicate cyber incidents appropriately to
relevant parties could result in regulatory,
privacy, operational and reputational risk.
Although we maintain cyber insurance, there can
be no assurance that liabilities or losses we may
incur will be covered under such policies or that
the amount of insurance will be adequate.
Cyberattacks or other information or security
breaches could also result in a violation of
applicable privacy and other laws in the U.S. and
abroad, reimbursement or other compensatory
costs, additional compliance costs, and our
internal controls or disclosure controls being
rendered ineffective. The occurrence of any of
these events could adversely impact our results
of operations, liquidity and financial condition.
Failure to satisfy our obligations as servicer
for residential mortgage securitizations, loans
owned by other entities and other losses we could
incur as servicer, could adversely impact our
reputation, servicing costs or results of
operations.
We and our legacy companies service mortgage
loans on behalf of third-party securitization
vehicles and other investors. If we commit a
material breach of our obligations as servicer or
master servicer, we may be subject to termination
if the breach is not cured within a specified
period of time following notice, which could
cause us to lose servicing income. In addition,
we may have liability for any failure by us, as a
servicer or master servicer, for any act or
omission on our part that involves willful
misfeasance, bad faith, gross negligence or
reckless disregard of our duties. If any such
breach was found to have occurred, it may harm
our reputation, increase our servicing costs,
result in litigation or regulatory action or
adversely impact our results of
operations. Additionally, with respect to
foreclosures, we may incur costs or losses due to
irregularities in the underlying documentation,
or if the validity of a foreclosure action is
challenged by a borrower or overturned by a court
because of errors or deficiencies in the
foreclosure process. We may also incur costs or
losses relating to delays or alleged deficiencies
in processing documents necessary to comply with
state law governing foreclosure.
Changes in the structure of and relationship
among the GSEs could adversely impact our
business.
During 2021, we sold approximately $3.2 billion
of loans to GSEs, primarily Freddie Mac (FHLMC).
FHLMC and Fannie Mae (FNMA) are currently in
conservatorship with their primary regulator, the
Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) acting as
conservator. In September 2019, the Treasury
Department published a proposal to recapitalize
FHLMC and FNMA and remove them from
conservatorship as well as reduce their role in
the marketplace. Consistent with this proposal,
in January 2021, the Treasury Department further
amended the agreement that governs the
conservatorship of FHLMC and FNMA and delineated
the continued objective to remove the GSEs from
conservatorship. However, we cannot predict the
future prospects of the GSEs, timing of the
recapitalization or release from conservatorship,
or content of legislative or rulemaking proposals
regarding the future status of the GSEs in the
housing market. Additionally, if the GSEs were to
take a reduced role in the marketplace, including
by limiting the mortgage products they offer, we
could be required to seek alternative funding
sources, retain additional loans on our balance
sheet, secure funding through the Federal Home
Loan Bank system, or securitize the loans through
Private Label Securitization. Accordingly,
uncertainty regarding their future and the
mortgage-backed securities they guarantee
continues to exist for the foreseeable future.
Any of these developments could adversely affect
the value of our securities portfolios, capital
levels, liquidity and results of operations.
Our risk management framework may not be
effective in mitigating risk and reducing the
potential for losses.
Our risk management framework is designed to
minimize risk and loss to us. We seek to
effectively and consistently identify, measure,
monitor, report and control the types of risk to
which we are subject, including strategic,
credit, legal, climate, market, liquidity,
compliance, operational and reputational risks.
While we employ a broad and diversified set of
controls and risk mitigation techniques,
including modeling and forecasting, hedging
strategies and techniques that seek to balance
our ability to profit from trading positions with
our exposure to potential losses, our ability to
control and mitigate risks that result in losses
is inherently limited by our ability to identify
all risks, including emerging and unknown risks,
anticipate the timing of risks, apply effective
hedging strategies, make correct assumptions,
manage and aggregate data correctly and
efficiently, and develop risk management models
to assess and control risk.
Our ability to manage risk is dependent on our
ability to consistently execute all elements of
our risk management program and develop and
maintain a culture of managing risk well
throughout the Corporation and manage risks
associated with third parties (including their
downstream service providers), including
providers of products and/or services, to enable
effective risk management and ensure that risks
are appropriately considered, evaluated and
responded to in a timely manner. Uncertain
economic conditions, heightened
 17Bank of America 
legislative and regulatory scrutiny of and change
within the financial services industry, the pace
of technological changes, accounting and market
developments, the failure of employees to comply
with our policies and Risk Framework and the
overall complexity of our operations, among other
developments, may result in a heightened level of
risk for us. We have experienced increased
operational, reputational and compliance risk as
a result of the need to rapidly implement
multiple and varying pandemic relief programs,
such as PPP and the processing of unemployment
benefits for California and certain other states,
which have resulted and will continue to result
in losses, in addition to the continued execution
of our business continuity plans due to the
pandemic. Our failure to manage evolving risks or
properly anticipate, manage, control or mitigate
risks could result in additional losses.
 Regulatory, Compliance and Legal 
We are subject to comprehensive government
legislation and regulations and certain
settlements, orders and agreements with
government authorities from time to time.
We are subject to comprehensive regulation under
federal and state laws in the U.S. and the laws
of the various jurisdictions in which we operate,
including increasing and complex economic
sanctions regimes. These laws and regulations
significantly affect and have the potential to
restrict the scope of our existing businesses,
limit our ability to pursue certain business
opportunities, including the products and
services we offer, reduce certain fees and rates
or make our products and services more expensive
for our clients. Additionally, we are required to
file various financial and non-financial
regulatory reports to comply with laws and rules
in the jurisdictions in which we operate.
We continue to adjust our business and
operations, legal entity structure and our
policies, processes, procedures and controls,
including with regard to capital and liquidity
management, risk management and data management,
to comply with currently effective laws and
regulations, as well as final rulemaking,
guidance and interpretation by regulatory
authorities, including the Department of Treasury
(including the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)),
Federal Reserve, OCC, CFPB, Financial Stability
Oversight Council, FDIC, Department of Labor, SEC
and CFTC in the U.S. and foreign regulators and
other government authorities. Further, we could
become subject to future legislation and
regulatory requirements beyond those currently
proposed, adopted or contemplated in the U.S. or
abroad, including policies and rulemaking related
to the Financial Reform Act, the pandemic,
emerging technologies and climate change. The
cumulative effect of all of the legislation and
regulations on our business, operations and
profitability remains uncertain. This uncertainty
necessitates that in our business planning we
make certain assumptions with respect to the
scope and requirements of prospective and
proposed rules. If these assumptions prove
incorrect, we could be subject to increased
regulatory and compliance risks and costs as well
as potential reputational harm. In addition, U.S.
and international regulatory initiatives may
overlap, and non-U.S. regulations and initiatives
may be inconsistent or may conflict with current
or proposed U.S. regulations, which could lead to
compliance risks and increased costs.
Our regulators’ prudential and supervisory
authority gives them broad power and discretion
to direct our actions, and they have assumed an
active oversight, inspection and investigatory
role across the financial services industry.
Regulatory focus is not limited to laws and
regulations applicable to the financial services
industry, but extends to other significant laws
and
regulations that apply across industries and
jurisdictions, including those related to data
management and privacy, anti-money laundering,
anti-corruption and economic sanctions.
We are also subject to laws, rules and
regulations in the U.S. and abroad, including
GDPR, CCPA and CPRA, and a number of additional
jurisdictions enacting or considering similar
laws, regarding compliance with our privacy
policies and the disclosure, collection, use,
sharing and safeguarding of personally
identifiable information of certain parties, such
as our employees, customers, suppliers,
counterparties and other third parties, the
violation of which could result in litigation,
regulatory fines and enforcement actions. The
complexity and risk of compliance has been
magnified by the collection of employee health
information in response to the pandemic.
Additionally, we will likely be subject to new
and evolving data privacy laws in the U.S. and
abroad, which could result in additional costs of
compliance, litigation, regulatory fines and
enforcement actions. In particular, there is
increased complexity and uncertainty, including
potential suspension or prohibition, regarding
the standards used by the Corporation for cross-
border flows and transfers of personal data from
the European Economic Area (EEA) to the U.S. and
other jurisdictions outside of the EEA resulting
from a decision of the Court of Justice of the EU
and guidance from the European Data Protection
Board. Additionally, the European Commission has
published new standards of personal data
transfer, and China and the U.K. have commenced
consultation efforts to establish standards for
personal data transfers. If cross-border personal
data transfers are suspended or restricted or we
are required to implement distinct processes for
each jurisdiction’s standards, this could result
in operational disruptions to our businesses,
additional costs, increased enforcement activity,
new contract negotiations with third parties,
and/or modification of our cross-border data
management.
As part of their enforcement authority, our
regulators and other government authorities have
the authority to, among other things, conduct
investigations and assess significant civil or
criminal monetary penalties or restitution and
issue cease and desist orders and initiate
injunctive actions. The amounts paid by us and
other financial institutions to settle
proceedings or investigations have, in some
instances, been substantial and may increase. In
some cases, governmental authorities have
required criminal pleas or other extraordinary
terms as part of such resolutions, which could
have significant consequences, including
reputational harm, loss of customers,
restrictions on the ability to access capital
markets, and the inability to operate certain
businesses or offer certain products for a period
of time.
The Corporation and the conduct of its employees
and representatives, including conduct that could
harm clients, customers, employees or the
integrity of the markets, are subject to
regulatory scrutiny across jurisdictions. The
complexity of the federal and state regulatory
and enforcement regimes in the U.S., coupled with
the global scope of our operations and the
regulatory environment worldwide, also means that
a single event or practice or a series of related
events or practices may give rise to a
significant number of overlapping investigations
and regulatory proceedings, either by multiple
federal and state agencies in the U.S. or by
multiple regulators and other governmental
entities in different jurisdictions.
Additionally, actions by other members of the
financial services industry related to business
activities in which we participate may result in
investigations by regulators or other government
authorities. Responding to inquiries,
investigations, lawsuits and proceedings is time-
consuming and expensive and can divert senior
management attention from our business. The
 Bank of America18 
outcome of such proceedings, which may last a
number of years, may be difficult to predict or
estimate.
We are and may become subject to the terms of
settlements, orders and agreements that we have
entered into with government entities and
regulatory authorities, which impose, or could
impose, significant operational and compliance
costs on us as they typically require us to
enhance our procedures and controls, expand our
risk and control functions within our lines of
business, invest in technology and hire
significant numbers of additional risk, control
and compliance personnel. Moreover, if we fail to
meet the requirements of the regulatory
settlements, orders or agreements to which we are
subject, or, more generally, fail to maintain
risk and control procedures and processes that
meet the heightened standards established by our
regulators and other government authorities, we
could be required to enter into further
settlements, orders or agreements and pay
additional fines, penalties or judgments, or
accept material regulatory restrictions on our
businesses.
While we believe that we have adopted appropriate
risk management and compliance programs to
identify, assess, monitor and report on employees
conduct, applicable laws, policies and
procedures, compliance risks will continue to
exist, particularly as we adapt to new and
evolving laws, rules and regulations.
Additionally, changing U.S. fiscal, monetary and
regulatory policies, and evolving priorities, may
result in ongoing regulatory uncertainties. There
is no guarantee that our risk management and
compliance programs will be consistently executed
to successfully manage compliance risk. We also
rely upon third parties who may expose us to
compliance and legal risk. Future legislative or
regulatory actions, and any required changes to
our business or operations, or those of third
parties (including their downstream providers)
upon whom we rely, resulting from such
developments and actions could result in a
significant loss of revenue, impose additional
compliance and other costs or otherwise reduce
our profitability, limit the products and
services that we offer or our ability to pursue
certain business opportunities, require us to
dispose of or curtail certain businesses, affect
the value of assets that we hold, require us to
increase our prices and therefore reduce demand
for our products, or otherwise adversely affect
our businesses. In addition, investigations,
legal and regulatory proceedings and other
contingencies will arise from time to time that
may result in fines, regulatory sanctions,
penalties, equitable relief and changes to our
business practices. As a result, we are and will
continue to be subject to heightened compliance
and operating costs that could adversely affect
our results of operations.
We are subject to significant financial and
reputational risks from potential liability
arising from lawsuits and regulatory and
government action.
We continue to face significant legal risks in
our business, with a high volume of claims
against us and other financial institutions. The
amount of damages, penalties and fines that
litigants and regulators seek from us and other
financial institutions continues to be high. This
includes disputes with consumers, customers and
other counterparties.
Financial institutions, including us, continue to
be the subject of claims alleging anti-
competitive conduct with respect to various
products and markets, including U.S. antitrust
class actions claiming joint and several
liability for treble damages. As disclosed in
Note 12 — Commitments and Contingencies to the
Consolidated Financial Statements, we also face
contractual indemnification and loan-repurchase
claims arising from alleged breaches of
representations and warranties in the sale of
residential mortgages by legacy companies, which
may result in a requirement that we repurchase
the mortgage loans, or otherwise make whole or
provide other remedies to counterparties.
In addition, regulatory authorities have had a
supervisory focus on enforcement, including in
connection with customer complaints, alleged
violations of law and customer harm. For example,
U.S. regulators and government agencies have
pursued claims against financial institutions
under the Financial Institutions Reform,
Recovery, and Enforcement Act, the False Claims
Act, fair lending laws and regulations (including
the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair
Housing Act), antitrust laws, and consumer
protection laws and regulations, including
prohibitions on unfair, deceptive, and/or abusive
acts and practices under the Consumer Financial
Protection Act and the Federal Trade Commission
Act. Such claims may carry significant and, in
certain cases, treble damages. T here is also an
increased focus on compliance with global laws,
rules and regulations related to the collection,
use, sharing and safeguarding of personally
identifiable information and corporate data.
Additionally, misconduct by the Corporation’s
employees and representatives, including
unethical, fraudulent, improper or illegal
conduct, or other unfair, deceptive, abusive or
discriminatory business practices, can result in
litigation and/or government investigations and
enforcement actions, and cause significant
reputational harm. There is also increased
scrutiny of climate change-related policies,
goals and disclosure, which could result in
litigation and regulatory investigations and
actions.
The global environment of extensive
investigations, regulation, regulatory compliance
burdens, litigation and regulatory enforcement,
combined with uncertainty related to the
continually evolving regulatory environment, have
affected and will likely continue to affect
operational and compliance costs and risks,
including the limitation or cessation of our
ability or feasibility to continue providing
certain products and services. Lawsuits and
regulatory actions have resulted in and will
likely continue to result in judgments, orders
settlements, penalties and fines adverse to us.
Further, the Corporation's participation in
implementing government relief measures related
to the pandemic and other federal and state
government assistance programs, including the
processing of unemployment benefits for
California and certain other states, may lead to
additional such judgments, orders, settlements,
penalties and fines. Litigation and investigation
costs, substantial legal liability or significant
regulatory or government action against us could
have material adverse effects on our business,
financial condition, including liquidity, and
results of operations, and/or cause significant
reputational harm to us.
U.S. federal banking agencies may require us to
increase our regulatory capital, total loss-
absorbing capacity (TLAC), long-term debt or
liquidity requirements.
We are subject to U.S. regulatory capital and
liquidity rules. These rules, among other things,
establish minimum requirements to qualify as a
well-capitalized institution. If any of our
subsidiary insured depository institutions fails
to maintain its status as well capitalized under
the applicable regulatory capital rules, the
Federal Reserve will require us to agree to bring
the insured depository institution back to well-
capitalized status. For the duration of such an
agreement, the Federal Reserve may impose
restrictions on our activities. If we were to
fail to enter into or comply with such an
agreement, or fail to comply with the terms of
such agreement, the Federal Reserve may impose
more severe restrictions on our activities,
including
 19Bank of America 
requiring us to cease and desist activities
permitted under the Bank Holding Company Act of
1956.
Capital and liquidity requirements are frequently
introduced and amended. It is possible that
regulators may increase regulatory capital
requirements including TLAC and long-term debt
requirements, change how regulatory capital is
calculated or increase liquidity requirements.
Our ability to return capital to our shareholders
depends in part on our ability to maintain
regulatory capital levels above minimum
requirements plus buffers. To the extent that
increases occur in our SCB, G-SIB surcharge or
countercyclical capital buffer, our returns of
capital to shareholders could decrease. For
example, our G-SIB surcharge is expected to
increase by 50 basis points to 3.0 percent on
January 1, 2024.
As part of its CCAR, the Federal Reserve conducts
stress testing on parts of our business using
hypothetical economic scenarios prepared by the
Federal Reserve. Those scenarios may affect our
CCAR stress test results, which may impact the
level of our SCB requiring us to hold additional
capital. Additionally, the Federal Reserve could
reinstitute limitations or prohibitions on taking
capital actions, such as paying or increasing
dividends or repurchasing common stock as a
result of the economic impact of the ongoing
pandemic or otherwise impose such limitations in
connection with other economic disruptions or
events.
A significant component of regulatory capital
ratios is calculating our RWA and our leverage
exposure, which may increase. The Basel Committee
on Banking Supervision has also revised several
key methodologies for measuring RWA that have not
yet been implemented in the U.S., including a
standardized approach for operational risk,
revised market risk requirements and constraints
on the use of internal models, as well as a
capital floor based on the revised standardized
approaches. U.S. banking regulators may update
the U.S. Basel 3 rules to incorporate the Basel
Committee revisions. Banks have experienced an
increase in balance sheets, increasing leverage
exposures and causing leverage-based ratios to
overtake risk-based capital ratios.
Changes to and compliance with the regulatory
capital and liquidity requirements may impact our
operations by requiring us to liquidate assets,
increase borrowings, issue additional equity or
other securities, cease or alter certain
operations or hold highly liquid assets, which
may adversely affect our results of operations.
Changes in accounting standards or assumptions in
applying accounting policies could adversely
affect us.
Our accounting policies and methods are
fundamental to how we record and report our
financial condition and results of operations.
Some of these policies require use of estimates
and assumptions that may affect the reported
value of our assets or liabilities and results of
operations and are critical because they require
management to make difficult, subjective and
complex judgments about matters that are
inherently uncertain. If those assumptions,
estimates or judgments were misapplied, we could
be required to correct and restate prior-period
financial statements. Accounting standard-setters
and those who interpret the accounting standards,
including the SEC, banking regulators and our
independent registered public accounting firm may
also amend or even reverse their previous
interpretations or positions on how various
standards should be applied. These changes may be
difficult to predict and could impact how we
prepare and report our financial statements. In
some cases, we could be required to apply a new
or revised
standard retrospectively, resulting in us
revising prior-period financial statements.
We may be adversely affected by changes in U.S.
and non-U.S. tax laws and regulations.
It is possible that governmental authorities in
the U.S. and/or other countries could further
amend or repeal tax laws in a way that would
materially adversely affect us, including the
possibility that aspects of the 2017 Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act could be amended in the future. Any
future change in tax laws and regulations or
interpretations of current or future tax laws and
regulations could materially adversely affect our
results of operations. Additionally, U.S. and
foreign tax laws are complex and our judgments,
interpretations or applications of such tax laws
could differ from that of the relevant
governmental authority. This could result in
additional tax liabilities and interest,
penalties, the reduction of certain tax benefits
and/or the requirement to make adjustments to
amounts recorded, which could be material.
In addition, we have U.K. net deferred tax assets
(DTA) which consist primarily of net operating
losses that are expected to be realized by
certain subsidiaries over an extended number of
years. Adverse developments with respect to tax
laws or to other material factors, such as
prolonged worsening of Europe’s capital markets
or changes in the ability of our U.K.
subsidiaries to conduct business in the EU, could
lead our management to reassess and/or change its
current conclusion that no valuation allowance is
necessary with respect to our U.K. net DTA.
 Reputation 
Damage to our reputation could harm our
businesses, including our competitive position
and business prospects.
Our ability to attract and retain customers,
clients, investors and employees is impacted by
our reputation. Harm to our reputation can arise
from various sources, including officer, director
and/or employee activities, such as fraud,
misconduct and unethical behavior (such as
employees’ sales practices), security breaches,
litigation or regulatory matters and their
outcomes, compensation practices, lending
practices, the suitability or reasonableness of
recommending particular trading or investment
strategies, including the reliability of our
research and models and prohibiting clients from
engaging in certain transactions.
Additionally, our reputation may be harmed by
failing to deliver the products and standards of
service and quality expected by our customers,
clients and the community, the failure to
recognize and address customer complaints,
compliance failures, the inability to manage
technology change or maintain effective data
management, cyber incidents, prolonged or
repeated system outages, internal and external
fraud, inadequacy of responsiveness to internal
controls, unintended disclosure of personal,
proprietary or confidential information,
conflicts of interest and breach of fiduciary
obligations, the handling of health emergencies
or pandemics, and the activities of our clients,
customers, counterparties and third parties,
including providers of products and/or services.
For example, our reputation may be harmed in
connection with our implementation of government
programs to provide relief to address the
economic impact of the pandemic and other federal
and state government assistance programs,
including the processing of unemployment benefits
for California and certain other states, as well
as how we handle employee matters related to the
pandemic. Our reputation may also be negatively
impacted by our ESG practices and disclosures,
our businesses
 Bank of America20 
and our customers, including practices and
disclosures related to climate change.
Actions by the financial services industry
generally or by certain members or individuals in
the industry also can adversely affect our
reputation. Also, adverse publicity or negative
information posted on social media by employees,
the media or otherwise, whether or not factually
correct, may adversely impact our business
prospects or financial results.
We are subject to complex and evolving laws and
regulations regarding privacy, fair lending
activity, UDAAP, electronic funds transfers,
know-your-customer requirements, data protection,
including the GDPR, CCPA and CPRA, cross-border
data movement and other matters. Principles
concerning the appropriate scope of consumer and
commercial privacy vary considerably in different
jurisdictions, and regulatory and public
expectations regarding the definition and scope
of consumer and commercial privacy may remain
fluid. It is possible that these laws may be
interpreted and applied by various jurisdictions
in a manner inconsistent with our current or
future practices, or that is inconsistent with
one another. If personal, confidential or
proprietary information of customers or clients
in our possession, or in the possession of third
parties (including their downstream service
providers) or financial data aggregators, is
mishandled, misused or mismanaged, or if we do
not timely or adequately address such
information, we may face regulatory, reputational
and operational risks which could adversely
affect our financial condition and results of
operations.
We could suffer reputational harm if we fail to
properly identify and manage potential conflicts
of interest. Management of potential conflicts of
interest has become increasingly complex as we
expand our business activities through more
numerous transactions, obligations and interests
with and among our clients. The failure to
adequately address, or the perceived failure to
adequately address, conflicts of interest could
affect the willingness of clients to use our
products and services, or give rise to litigation
or enforcement actions, which could adversely
affect our business.
Our actual or perceived failure to address these
and other issues, such as operational risks,
gives rise to reputational risk that could harm
us and our business prospects. Failure to
appropriately address any of these issues could
also give rise to additional regulatory
restrictions, legal risks and reputational harm,
which could, among other consequences, increase
the size and number of litigation claims and
damages asserted or subject us to enforcement
actions, fines and penalties, and cause us to
incur related costs and expenses.
 Other 
Reforms to and replacement of IBORs and certain
other rates or indices may adversely affect our
reputation, business, financial condition and
results of operations.
There continues to be a major transition in
progress in the global financial markets with
respect to the replacement of IBORs, including
the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), and
certain other rates or indices that serve as
“benchmarks.” Such benchmarks have been used
extensively across the global financial markets
and in our business. In particular, LIBOR has
historically been used in many of our products
and contracts, including derivatives, consumer
and commercial loans, mortgages, floating-rate
notes and other adjustable-rate products and
financial instruments. The aggregate notional
amount of these products and contracts
referencing LIBOR or other IBORs remains material
to our business. At the end of 2021, the global
financial markets generally transitioned away
from the use of all LIBOR settings (except for
certain U.S. dollar (USD) LIBOR settings).
However, there continue to be risks and
challenges associated with the transition from
IBORs that may result in consequences that cannot
be fully anticipated, which expose us to various
financial, operational, supervisory, conduct and
legal risks, which we continue to monitor
closely.
Through a multi-year effort by the industry and
regulators, ARRs have been identified and/or
developed and are being used to replace LIBOR and
other IBORs. However, market and client adoption
of ARRs, may vary across or within categories of
contracts, products and services, resulting in
market fragmentation, decreased trading volumes
and liquidity, increased complexity and modeling
and operational risks. ARRs have compositions and
characteristics that differ from the benchmarks
they replace, in some cases have limited history,
and may demonstrate less predictable performance
over time than the benchmarks they replace. For
example, certain ARRs are calculated on a
compounded or weighted-average basis and, unlike
IBORs, do not reflect bank credit risk and
therefore typically require a spread adjustment.
There are important differences between the
fallbacks, triggers and calculation methodologies
being implemented in cash and derivatives markets
(including within cash markets). Any mismatch
between the adoption of ARRs in loans, securities
and derivatives markets may impact hedging or
other financial arrangements we have implemented,
and as a result we may experience unanticipated
market exposures. Changes resulting from
transition to successor or alternative rates may
adversely affect the yield on loans or securities
held by us, amounts paid on securities we have
issued, amounts received and paid on derivatives
we have entered into, the value of such loans,
securities or derivative instruments, the trading
market for such products and contracts, and our
ability to effectively use hedging instruments to
manage risk. There can be no assurance that
existing assets and liabilities based on or
linked to IBORs that have not already
transitioned to ARRs will successfully
transition.
Given the continuation of certain USD LIBOR
settings until June 30, 2023, IBOR-based products
and contracts (IBOR Products) linked to these
LIBOR settings will still have to be transitioned
by such time. Although a significant majority of
the aggregate notional amount of our IBOR-based
products maturing after 2021 include or have been
updated to include fallbacks to ARRs, the
transitioning of certain IBOR Products that do
not include fallback provisions or adequate
fallback mechanisms will require additional
efforts to modify their terms. Some outstanding
IBOR Products are particularly challenging to
modify due to the requirement that all impacted
parties consent to such modification. To address
such challenges in IBOR Products, legislation has
been adopted in various jurisdictions, including
the EU, U.K. and New York State, and federal
legislation is pending in the U.S. Congress.
Litigation, disputes or other action may occur as
a result of the interpretation or application of
legislation, in particular, if there is an
overlap between laws in different jurisdictions.
Some of our IBOR Products, in particular LIBOR-
based products and contracts, may contain
language giving the calculation agent (which may
be us) discretion to determine the successor rate
(including the ARR and/or the applicable spread
adjustment) to the existing benchmark. We may
face a risk of litigation, disputes or other
actions from clients, counterparties, customers,
investors or others based on various claims, for
example that the Corporation incorrectly
interpreted or enforced IBOR-based contract
provisions, failed to appropriately communicate
the effect that the transition to ARRs will have
on
 21Bank of America 
existing and future products, treated affected
parties unfairly or made inappropriate product
recommendations to or investments on behalf of
its clients, or engaged in anti-competitive
behavior or unlawfully manipulated markets or
benchmarks.
We have launched, and expect to continue to
develop, launch and support, ARR-based products
and services. There is no guarantee that
liquidity in ARR-based products will develop, and
it is possible that ARR-based products, including
products using credit sensitive rates, will
perform differently to IBOR Products during times
of economic stress, adverse or volatile market
conditions and across the credit and economic
cycle, which may impact the value, return on and
profitability of our ARR-based assets. New
financial products linked to ARRs may have
additional legal, financial, tax, operational,
market, compliance, reputational, competitive or
other risks to us, our clients and other market
participants. In particular, banking regulators
in the U.S. and globally have increased
regulatory scrutiny and intensified supervisory
focus of financial institution LIBOR transition
plans, preparations and readiness, including the
Corporation’s use of credit-sensitive rates like
the Bloomberg Short-Term Bank Yield Index, which
could result in a regulatory action, litigation
and/or the need to change the products offered by
our businesses.
Failure to meet industry-wide IBOR transition
milestones and to cease issuance of IBOR Products
by relevant cessation dates may, subject to
certain regulatory exceptions, result in
supervisory enforcement by applicable regulators,
increase our cost of, and access to, capital and
other consequences.
The market transition may also alter our risk
profile and risk management strategies, including
derivatives and hedging strategies, modeling and
analytics, valuation tools, product design and
systems, controls, procedures and operational
infrastructure. This may prove challenging given
the limited history of many of the proposed ARRs
and may increase the costs and risks related to
potential regulatory compliance, requirements or
inquiries. Among other risks, various IBOR
Products transition to ARRs at different times or
in different manners, with the result that we may
face significant unexpected interest rate,
pricing or other exposures across business or
product lines. Continuing reforms to market
transition and other factors may adversely affect
our business, including the ability to serve
customers and maintain market share, financial
condition or results of operations and could
result in reputational harm to us.
We face significant and increasing competition in
the financial services industry.
We operate in a highly competitive environment
and experience intense competition from local and
global financial institutions as well as new
entrants, in both domestic and foreign markets,
in which we compete on the basis of a number of
factors, including customer service, quality and
range of products and services offered,
technology, price, fees, reputation, interest
rates on loans and deposits, lending limits,
customer convenience and experience and
relationships in relevant markets. Additionally,
the changing regulatory environment may create
competitive disadvantages for us given geography-
driven capital and liquidity requirements.
In addition, emerging technologies and advances
and the growth of e-commerce have lowered
geographic and monetary barriers of other
financial institutions, made it easier for non-
depository institutions to offer products and
services that traditionally were banking products
and allowed non-traditional
financial service providers and technology
companies to
compete with traditional financial service
companies in providing electronic and internet-
based financial solutions and services, including
electronic securities trading with low or no fees
and commissions, marketplace lending, financial
data aggregation and payment processing,
including real-time payment platforms. Further,
clients may choose to conduct business with other
market participants who engage in business or
offer products in areas we deem speculative or
risky. Increased competition may negatively
affect our earnings by creating pressure to lower
prices, fees, commissions or credit standards on
our products and services, requiring additional
investment to improve the quality and delivery of
our technology and/or reducing our market share,
or affecting the willingness of our clients to do
business with us.
Our inability to adapt our business strategies,
products and services could harm our business.
Our business model is based on a diversified mix
of businesses that provide a broad range of
financial products and services, delivered
through multiple distribution channels. Our
success depends on our, and our third-party
providers of products and services’ ability to
adapt and develop our business strategies,
products, services and technology to rapidly
evolving industry standards and consumer
preferences. In particular, the emergence of the
pandemic has resulted in increased reliance on
digital banking and other digital services
provided by the Corporation’s businesses. There
is increasing pressure by competitors to provide
products and services on more attractive terms,
including lower fees and higher interest rates on
deposits, and offer lower cost investment
strategies, which may impact our ability to grow
revenue and/or effectively compete. Additionally,
legislative and regulatory developments may
affect the competitive landscape and impact the
products and services that we can offer. Further,
we may be impacted by the growth of non-
depository institutions that offer traditional
banking products at higher rates or with low or
no fees, or otherwise offer alternative products.
This can reduce our net interest margin and
revenues from our fee-based products and
services, either from a decrease in the volume of
transactions or through a compression of spreads.
The widespread adoption and rapid evolution of
new technologies, including analytic
capabilities, self-service digital trading
platforms, internet services, distributed
ledgers, such as the blockchain system,
cryptocurrencies, Central Bank Digital Currencies
(CBDCs) and payment systems, could require
substantial expenditures to modify or adapt our
existing products and services as we grow and
develop our online and mobile banking channel
strategies in addition to remote connectivity
solutions. As CBDC initiatives evolve and mature,
our businesses and results of operations could be
adversely impacted, including as a result of the
introduction of new competitors to the payment
ecosystem and increased volatility in deposits
and/or significant long-term reduction in
deposits (i.e., financial disintermediation).
Also, we may not be as timely or successful in
developing or introducing new products and
services, integrating new products or services
into our existing offerings, responding, managing
or adapting to changes in consumer behavior,
preferences, spending, investing and/or saving
habits, achieving market acceptance of our
products and services, reducing costs in response
to pressures to deliver products and services at
lower prices or sufficiently developing and
maintaining loyal customers. The Corporation’s or
its third-party providers of products and
services’ inability or resistance to timely
innovate or adapt its operations, products and
services
 Bank of America22 
to evolving industry standards and consumer
preferences could result in service disruptions
and harm our business and adversely affect our
results of operations and reputation.
We could suffer operational, reputational and
financial harm if our models and strategies fail
to properly anticipate and manage risk.
We use models and strategies extensively to
forecast losses, project revenue, measure and
assess capital and liquidity requirements for
credit, market, operational and strategic risks,
assist in capital planning and assess and control
our operations and financial condition. Model
Risk Management is a dedicated and independent
risk function that defines model risk governance,
policy and guidelines for the Corporation based
on laws, rules and regulations, as well as
internal requirements. Under our Enterprise Model
Risk Policy, Model Risk Management is required to
perform model oversight, including independent
validation before initial use, ongoing monitoring
reviews through outcomes analysis and
benchmarking, and periodic revalidation. Models
are subject to inherent limitations due to the
use of simplifying assumptions, uncertainty
regarding economic and financial outcomes, and
emerging risks from the use of applications that
rely on AI.
Our models and strategies may not be sufficiently
predictive of future results due to limited
historical patterns, extreme or unanticipated
market movements or customer behavior and
liquidity, especially during severe market
downturns or stress events, which could limit
their effectiveness and require timely
recalibration. The models that we use to assess
and control our market risk exposures also
reflect assumptions about the degree of
correlation among prices of various asset classes
or other market indicators, which may not be
representative of the next downturn and would
magnify the limitations inherent in using
historical data to manage risk. Our models may be
adversely impacted as a result of human error and
may not be effective if we fail to properly
oversee and review them at regular intervals and
detect their flaws during our review and
monitoring processes, they contain erroneous
data, assumptions, valuations, formulas or
algorithms or our applications running the models
do not perform as expected. Regardless of the
steps we take to ensure effective controls,
governance, monitoring and testing, and implement
new technology and automated processes, we could
suffer operational, reputational and financial
harm if models and strategies fail to properly
anticipate and manage current and evolving risks.
Failure to properly manage data may result in our
inability to manage risk and business needs,
errors in our day-to-day operations, critical
reporting and strategic decision-making,
inaccurate reporting and non-compliance with
laws, rules and regulations.
Our ability to obtain, create, report and
maintain information, including the data
associated with it, during our normal course of
business is a foundational component of our
business and of managing relationships with
customers. Additionally, we rely on our ability
to manage data in an accurate, timely and
complete manner, including the capture,
transport, aggregation, validation, processing,
quality, interpretation, protection, maintenance,
retention, external transmission and use. Our
policies, programs, processes and practices
govern how data risk is managed globally. While
we continuously update our policies, programs,
processes and practices and implement emerging
technologies, such as automation, AI and
robotics, our data management processes may not
be effective and are subject to weaknesses and
failures, including human error, data
limitations, process delays, system failure or
failed controls.
Failure to properly manage data effectively in an
accurate, timely and complete manner may impact
its quality and reliability and our ability to
manage current and emerging risk, produce
accurate financial, regulatory and operational
reporting, detect or surveil potential misconduct
or non-compliance with laws, rules and
regulations, as well as to manage changing
business needs, strategic decision-making and
day-to-day operations. The failure to establish
and maintain effective, efficient and controlled
data management could adversely impact our
ability to develop our products and relationships
with our customers, increase regulatory risk and
operational losses, and damage our reputation.
Our operations, businesses and customers could be
materially adversely affected by the impacts
related to climate change.
There is an increasing concern over the risks of
climate change and related environmental
sustainability matters, which present short-term
and an increasing amount of long-term risks to
us. The physical risks of climate change include
rising average global temperatures, rising sea
levels and an increase in the frequency and
severity of extreme weather events and natural
disasters, including floods, wildfires,
hurricanes and tornados. Such disasters could
disrupt our operations or the operations of
customers or third parties on which we rely. Such
disasters could result in market volatility or
negatively impact our customers’ ability to repay
outstanding loans, result in rapid deposit
outflows, cause supply chain and/or distribution
network disruptions, damage collateral or result
in the deterioration of the value of collateral
or insurance shortfalls.
Additionally, climate change concerns could
result in transition risk. Changes in consumer
preferences or technology and additional
legislation, regulatory and legal requirements,
including those associated with the transition to
a low-carbon economy, could restrict the scope of
our existing businesses, limit our ability to
pursue certain business activities and offer
certain products and services, amplify credit and
market risks, negatively impact asset values,
increase expenses, including as a result of
strategic planning and technology and market
changes, and/or otherwise adversely impact us,
our businesses or our customers. Our response to
climate change, our climate change strategies,
policies, goals, commitments and disclosure,
and/or our ability to achieve our climate-related
goals and commitments (which are subject to risks
and uncertainties, many of which are outside of
our control) could result in reputational harm as
a result of negative public sentiment, regulatory
scrutiny, litigation and reduced investor and
stakeholder confidence.
Our ability to attract and retain qualified
employees is critical to our success, business
prospects and competitive position.
Our performance and competitive position is
heavily dependent on the talents and efforts of
highly skilled individuals. Competition for
qualified personnel within the financial services
industry and from businesses outside the
financial services industry is intense.
Our competitors include global institutions and
institutions subject to different compensation
and hiring regulations than those imposed on U.S.
institutions and financial institutions. Also,
our ability to attract and retain employees could
be impacted by the pandemic, including changing
workforce concerns, expectations, practices and
preferences (including remote work), and
increasing labor shortages and competition for
labor, which could increase labor costs.
In order to attract and retain qualified
personnel, we must provide market-level
compensation. As a large financial and banking
institution, we are and may become subject to
 23Bank of America 
additional limitations on compensation practices,
which may or may not affect our competitors, by
the Federal Reserve, the OCC, the FDIC and other
regulators around the world. EU and U.K. rules
limit and subject to clawback certain forms of
variable compensation for senior employees.
Furthermore, a substantial portion of our annual
incentive compensation paid to our senior
employees, as well as certain periodic awards to
both senior and broad-based groups of employees,
consist of long-term equity-based awards, the
value of which is based on the price of our
common stock when the awards vest. Our business
prospects and competitive position could be
adversely affected if we cannot attract and
retain qualified individuals.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments │
None
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 2. Properties │
As of December 31, 2021, certain principal offices and other materially important properties
consisted of the following:
 General Primary Property 
 Facility Location Character of Business Property Square 
 Name the Physical Segment Status Feet(1) 
 Property 
 Bank of Principal 
 America Charlotte, NC 60 Story Executive Owned 1,212,177 
 Corporate Building Offices 
 Center 
 Bank of GWIM, Global 
 America New York, NY 55 Story Bankingand Leased(2) 1,836,575 
 Tower at One Building Global 
 Bryant Park Markets 
 Bank of Global 
 America London, UK 4 Building BankingandGl… Leased 566,920 
 Financial Campus Markets 
 Centre 
 Cheung Kong 62 Story Global 
 Center Hong Kong Building BankingandGl… Leased 149,790 
 Markets 
(1) For leased properties, property square feet
represents the square footage occupied by the
Corporation.
(2) The Corporation has a 49.9 percent joint
venture interest in this property.
We own or lease approximately 71.8 million square
feet in over 20,000 facilities and ATM locations
globally, including approximately 66.8 million
square feet in the U.S. (all 50 states and the
District of Columbia, the U.S. Virgin Islands,
Puerto Rico and Guam) and approximately 5.0
million square feet in approximately 35
countries.
We believe our owned and leased properties are
adequate for our business needs and are well
maintained. We continue to evaluate our owned and
leased real estate and may determine from time to
time that certain of our premises and facilities,
or ownership structures, are no longer necessary
for our
operations. In connection therewith, we regularly
evaluate the sale or sale/leaseback of certain
properties, and we may incur costs in connection
with any such transactions.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 3. Legal Proceedings │
See Litigation and Regulatory Matters in Note 12
– Commitments and Contingencies to the
Consolidated Financial Statements, which is
incorporated herein by reference.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures │
None
║ Part II ║
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases │
│ of Equity Securities │
The principal market on which our common stock is
traded is the New York Stock Exchange under the
symbol “BAC.” As of February 18, 2022, there were
148,551 registered shareholders of common stock.
The table below presents share repurchase
activity for the three months ended December 31,
2021. The primary source of funds for cash
distributions by the Corporation to its
shareholders is dividends received from its bank
subsidiaries.
Each of the bank subsidiaries is subject to
various regulatory policies and requirements
relating to the payment of dividends, including
requirements to maintain capital above regulatory
minimums. All of the Corporation’s preferred
stock outstanding has preference over the
Corporation’s common stock with respect to
payment of dividends.
 (Dollars in 
 millions, 
 except per Total Shares 
 share Purchased as Remaining 
 information; Total Common Part of Publicly Buyback 
 shares in Shares Weighted-Avera… Announced Authority 
 thousands) Purchased(1,2) Per Share Price Programs(2) Amounts(3) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 October 1 - 61,395 $ 45.53 61,390 $ 23,850 
 31, 2021 
 November 1 - 71,187 47.27 71,186 20,624 
 30, 2021 
 December 1 - 30,895 44.45 30,894 19,311 
 31, 2021 
 Three months 
 ended December 163,477 46.08 163,470 
 31, 2021 
(1) Includes shares of the Corporation's common stock acquired by the Corporation in connection with
satisfaction of tax withholding obligations on vested restricted stock or restricted stock units and
certain forfeitures and terminations of employment-related awards and for potential re-issuance to
certain employees under equity incentive plans.
(2) On October 20, 2021, the Corporation announced its Board of Directors (Board) authorized the
repurchase of up to $25 billion of common stock over time (October Authorization). The Board also
authorized repurchases to offset shares awarded under equity-based compensation plans. This October
Authorization replaced the April 15, 2021 authorization for repurchases of up to $25 billion of
common stock (April Authorization, and together with the October Authorization, the Board
Authorizations). During the three months ended December 31, 2021, pursuant to the Board
Authorizations, the Corporation repurchased approximately 163 million shares, or $7.5 billion, of its
common stock, including to offset shares awarded under equity-based compensation plans. For more
information, see Capital Management - CCAR and Capital Planning in the MD&A on page 49 and Note 13 –
Shareholders’ Equity to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(3) Remaining Buyback Authority Amounts represents the remaining buyback authority of the October
Authorization. At the time the April Authorization was replaced with the October Authorization, the
Corporation had $9.4 billion of remaining buyback authority available under the April Authorization.
Such remaining buyback authority was canceled in the October Authorization. Excludes repurchases to
offset shares awarded under equity-based compensation plans.
The Corporation did not have any unregistered sales of equity securities during the three months
ended December 31, 2021.
 Bank of America24 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 6. [Reserved] │
 Item 7. Bank of America Corporation and 
 Subsidiaries 
 Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial 
 Condition and Results of Operations 
 Table of Contents 
 Page 
 Executive Summary 26 
 Recent Developments 27 
 Financial Highlights 28 
 Balance Sheet Overview 30 
 Supplemental Financial Data 31 
 Business Segment Operations 36 
 Consumer Banking 37 
 Global Wealth & Investment Management 40 
 Global Banking 42 
 Global Markets 44 
 All Other 45 
 Managing Risk 46 
 Strategic Risk Management 49 
 Capital Management 49 
 Liquidity Risk 54 
 Credit Risk Management 59 
 Consumer Portfolio Credit Risk Management 60 
 Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management 65 
 Non-U.S. Portfolio 71 
 Loan and Lease Contractual Maturities 72 
 Allowance for Credit Losses 73 
 Market Risk Management 75 
 Trading Risk Management 76 
 Interest Rate Risk Management for the Banking Book 79 
 Mortgage Banking Risk Management 80 
 Compliance and Operational Risk Management 80 
 Reputational Risk Management 81 
 Climate Risk Management 81 
 Complex Accounting Estimates 82 
 Non-GAAP Reconciliations 85 
 25Bank of America 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations
Bank of America Corporation (the “Corporation”)
and its management may make certain statements
that constitute “forward-looking statements”
within the meaning of the Private Securities
Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements
can be identified by the fact that they do not
relate strictly to historical or current facts.
Forward-looking statements often use words such
as “anticipates,” “targets,” “expects,” “hopes,”
“estimates,” “intends,” “plans,” “goals,”
“believes,” “continue” and other similar
expressions or future or conditional verbs such
as “will,” “may,” “might,” “should,” “would” and
“could.” Forward-looking statements represent the
Corporation’s current expectations, plans or
forecasts of its future results, revenues,
provision for credit losses, expenses, efficiency
ratio, capital measures, strategy and future
business and economic conditions more generally,
and other future matters. These statements are
not guarantees of future results or performance
and involve certain known and unknown risks,
uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult
to predict and are often beyond the Corporation’s
control. Actual outcomes and results may differ
materially from those expressed in, or implied
by, any of these forward-looking statements.
You should not place undue reliance on any
forward-looking statement and should consider the
following uncertainties and risks, as well as the
risks and uncertainties more fully discussed
under Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report
on Form 10-K : and in any of the Corporation’s
subsequent Securities and Exchange Commission
Filings: the Corporation’s potential judgments,
orders, settlements, penalties, fines and
reputational damage resulting from pending or
future litigation and regulatory investigations,
proceedings and enforcement actions, including as
a result of our participation in and execution of
government programs related to the Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, such as the
processing of unemployment benefits for
California and certain other states; the
possibility that the Corporation’s future
liabilities may be in excess of its recorded
liability and estimated range of possible loss
for litigation, and regulatory and government
actions; the possibility that the Corporation
could face increased claims from one or more
parties involved in mortgage securitizations; the
Corporation’s ability to resolve representations
and warranties repurchase and related claims; the
risks related to the discontinuation of the
London Interbank Offered Rate and other reference
rates, including increased expenses and
litigation and the effectiveness of hedging
strategies; uncertainties about the financial
stability and growth rates of non-U.S.
jurisdictions, the risk that those jurisdictions
may face difficulties servicing their sovereign
debt, and related stresses on financial markets,
currencies and trade, and the Corporation’s
exposures to such risks, including direct,
indirect and operational; the impact of U.S. and
global interest rates, inflation, currency
exchange rates, economic conditions, trade
policies and tensions, including tariffs, and
potential geopolitical instability; the impact of
the interest rate and inflationary environment on
the Corporation’s business, financial condition
and results of operations; the possibility that
future credit losses may be higher than currently
expected due to changes in economic assumptions,
customer behavior, adverse developments with
respect to U.S. or global economic conditions and
other uncertainties, including the impact of
supply chain disruptions, inflationary pressures
and labor shortages on the economic recovery and
our business; the Corporation's concentration of
credit risk; the Corporation’s ability to achieve
its expense targets and expectations regarding
revenue, net interest income, provision for
credit losses, net charge-offs, effective tax
rate, loan growth or other projections; adverse
changes to the Corporation’s credit ratings from
the major credit rating agencies; an inability to
access capital markets or maintain deposits or
borrowing costs; estimates of the fair value and
other accounting values, subject to impairment
assessments, of certain of the Corporation’s
assets and liabilities; the estimated or actual
impact of changes in accounting standards or
assumptions in applying those standards;
uncertainty regarding the content, timing and
impact of regulatory capital and liquidity
requirements; the impact of adverse changes to
total loss-absorbing capacity requirements,
stress capital buffer requirements and/or global
systemically important bank surcharges; the
potential impact of actions of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System on the
Corporation’s capital plans; the effect of
changes in or interpretations of income tax laws
and regulations; the impact of implementation and
compliance with U.S. and international laws,
regulations and regulatory interpretations,
including, but not limited to, recovery and
resolution planning requirements, Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation assessments, the Volcker
Rule, fiduciary standards, derivatives
regulations and the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security Act and any similar or related
rules and regulations; a failure or disruption in
or breach of the Corporation’s operational or
security systems or infrastructure, or those of
third parties, including as a result of
cyberattacks or campaigns; the transition and
physical impacts of climate change; our ability
to achieve environmental, social and governance
goals and commitments or the impact of any
changes in the Corporation’s sustainability
strategy or commitments generally; the impact of
any future federal government shutdown and
uncertainty regarding the federal government’s
debt limit or changes in fiscal, monetary or
regulatory policy; the emergence of widespread
health emergencies or pandemics, including the
magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic
and its impact on the U.S. and/or global,
financial market conditions and our business,
results of operations, financial condition and
prospects; the impact of natural disasters,
extreme weather events, military conflict,
terrorism or other geopolitical events; and other
matters.
Forward-looking statements speak only as of the
date they are made, and the Corporation
undertakes no obligation to update any forward-
looking statement to reflect the impact of
circumstances or events that arise after the date
the forward-looking statement was made.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
referred to in the Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations (MD&A) are incorporated by reference
into the MD&A. Certain prior-year amounts have
been reclassified to conform to current-year
presentation. Throughout the MD&A, the
Corporation uses certain acronyms and
abbreviations which are defined in the Glossary.
 Executive Summary 
 Business Overview 
The Corporation is a Delaware corporation, a bank
holding company (BHC) and a financial holding
company. When used in this report, “the
Corporation,” “we,” “us” and “our” may refer to
Bank of America Corporation individually, Bank of
America Corporation and its subsidiaries, or
certain of Bank of America Corporation’s
subsidiaries or affiliates. Our principal
executive offices are located in Charlotte, North
Carolina. Through our various bank and nonbank
subsidiaries throughout the U.S. and in
international markets, we provide a diversified
range of
 Bank of America26 
banking and nonbank financial services and
products through four business segments: Consumer
Banking , Global Wealth & Investment Management
(GWIM) , Global Banking and Global Markets , with
the remaining operations recorded in All Other .
We operate our banking activities primarily under
the Bank of America, National Association (Bank
of America, N.A. or BANA) charter. At December
31, 2021, the Corporation had $3.2 trillion in
assets and a headcount of approximately 208,000
employees.
As of December 31, 2021, we served clients
through operations across the U.S., its
territories and approximately 35 countries. Our
retail banking footprint covers all major markets
in the U.S., and we serve approximately 67
million consumer and small business clients with
approximately 4,200 retail financial centers,
approximately 16,000 ATMs, and leading digital
banking platforms (www.bankofamerica.com) with
approximately 41 million active users, including
approximately 33 million active mobile users. We
offer industry-leading support to approximately
three million small business households. Our GWIM
businesses, with client balances of $3.8
trillion, provide tailored solutions to meet
client needs through a full set of investment
management, brokerage, banking, trust and
retirement products. We are a global leader in
corporate and investment banking and trading
across a broad range of asset classes serving
corporations, governments, institutions and
individuals around the world.
 Recent Developments 
 Capital Management 
On February 2, 2022, the Corporation announced
that the Board of Directors declared a quarterly
cash common stock dividend of $0.21 per share,
payable on March 25, 2022 to shareholders of
record as of March 4, 2022.
For more information on our capital resources and
regulatory developments, see Capital Management
on page 49.
 COVID-19 Pandemic 
The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic
(the pandemic) has impacted the Corporation and
may continue to do so, as uncertainty remains
about the duration of the pandemic and the timing
and strength of the global economic recovery. As
the pandemic continues to evolve, we regularly
evaluate protocols and processes in place to
execute our business continuity plans. In
conjunction with our efforts to support clients
affected by the pandemic, we have cumulatively
originated $35.4 billion in loans under the
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) with amounts
outstanding of $4.7 billion and $22.7 billion at
December 31, 2021 and 2020. For more information
on PPP loans, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant
Accounting Principles to the Consolidated
Financial Statements.
The future direct and indirect impact of the
pandemic on our businesses, results of operations
and financial condition remains uncertain. Should
current economic conditions deteriorate or if the
pandemic worsens due to various factors,
including through the spread of more easily
communicable variants of COVID-19, such
conditions could have an adverse effect on our
businesses and results of operations and could
adversely affect our financial condition.
For more information on how the risks related to
the pandemic adversely affect our businesses,
results of operations and financial condition,
see Part 1. Item 1A. Risk Factors on page 8.
 LIBOR and Other Benchmark Rates 
Subject to the continued publication of certain
non-representative London Interbank Offered Rate
(LIBOR) benchmark settings based on a modified
calculation (i.e., on a “synthetic” basis),
British Pound Sterling, Euro, Swiss Franc and
Japanese Yen LIBOR settings and one-week and two-
month U.S. dollar (USD) LIBOR settings ceased or
became no longer representative of the underlying
market the rates seek to measure (i.e., non-
representative) immediately after December 31,
2021, and the remaining USD LIBOR settings (i.e.,
overnight, one month, three month, six month and
12 month) will cease or become non-representative
immediately after June 30, 2023. Separately, the
Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency (OCC) and the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (FDIC) issued supervisory
guidance encouraging banks to cease entering into
new contracts that use USD LIBOR as a reference
rate by December 31, 2021 subject to certain
regulatory-approved exceptions (USD LIBOR
Guidance).
As a result, a major transition has been and
continues to be in progress in the global
financial markets with respect to the replacement
of Interbank Offered Rates (IBORs). This is a
complex process impacting a variety of our
businesses and operations. IBORs have
historically been used in many of the
Corporation’s products and contracts, including
derivatives, consumer and commercial loans,
mortgages, floating-rate notes and other
adjustable-rate products and financial
instruments. In response, the Corporation
established an enterprise-wide IBOR transition
program, with active involvement of senior
management and regular reports to the Management
Risk Committee (MRC) and Enterprise Risk
Committee (ERC). The program continues to drive
the Corporation's industry and regulatory
engagement, client and financial contract
changes, internal and external communications,
technology and operations modifications,
including updates to its operational models,
systems and processes, introduction of new
products, migration of existing clients, and
program strategy and governance.
As of December 31, 2021, the Corporation has
transitioned or otherwise addressed IBOR-based
products and contracts referencing the rates that
ceased or became non-representative after
December 31, 2021, including LIBOR-linked
commercial loans, LIBOR-based adjustable-rate
consumer mortgages, LIBOR-linked derivatives and
interdealer trading of certain USD LIBOR and
other interest rate swaps, and related hedging
 27Bank of America 
arrangements. Additionally, in accordance with
the USD LIBOR Guidance, the Corporation has
ceased entering into new contracts that use USD
LIBOR as a reference rate, subject to certain
regulatory-approved exceptions. The Corporation
launched capabilities and services to support the
issuance and trading in products indexed to
various alternative reference rates (ARRs) and
developed employee training programs as well as
other internal and external sources of
information on the various challenges and
opportunities that the replacement of IBORs has
presented and continues to present. The
Corporation continues to monitor a variety of
market scenarios as part of its transition
efforts, including risks associated with
insufficient preparation by individual market
participants or the overall market ecosystem,
ability of market participants to meet regulatory
and industry-wide recommended milestones and
access and demand by clients and market
participants to liquidity in certain products,
including LIBOR products. With respect to the
transition of LIBOR products referencing USD
LIBOR settings ceasing or becoming non-
representative as of June 30, 2023, a significant
majority of the Corporation’s notional
contractual exposure to such LIBOR currencies, of
which the significant majority is derivatives
contracts, have been remediated (i.e., updated to
include fallback provisions to ARRs based on
market driven protocols, regulatory guidance and
industry-recommended fallback provisions and
related mechanisms) and the Corporation is
continuing to remediate the remaining USD LIBOR
exposure. The remaining exposure, a majority of
which is made up of derivatives and commercial
loans and which represents a small minority of
outstanding USD LIBOR notional contractual
exposure of the Corporation, will require active
dialogue with clients to modify the contracts.
For any residual exposures after June 2023 that
continue to have no fallback provisions, the
Corporation is assessing and planning to leverage
relevant contractual and statutory solutions,
including relevant state legislation and any
future federal legislation, to transition such
exposure to ARRs. The Corporation has implemented
regulatory, tax and accounting changes and
continues to monitor current and potential
impacts of the transition, including Internal
Revenue Service tax regulations and guidance and
Financial Accounting Standards Board guidance. In
addition, the Corporation has engaged impacted
clients in connection with the transition by
providing ARRs education and the timing of
transition events. The Corporation is also
working actively with global regulators, industry
working groups and trade associations. For more
information on the expected replacement of LIBOR
and other benchmark rates, see Item 1A. Risk
Factors – Other on page 21. Changes to Overdraft
Services In January 2022, the Corporation
announced changes to its overdraft services for
consumer and small business clients, which
include eliminating non-sufficient funds (NSF)
fees beginning in February 2022 and reducing
overdraft fees from $35 to $10 beginning in May
2022. Fees from overdraft services were
approximately $1 billion in 2021 and recorded in
Consumer Banking as service charges in the
Consolidated Statement of Income. Due to the
policy changes, in 2022 the Corporation expects a
significant reduction in NSF and overdraft fees.
Financial Highlights
 Table 1 
 (Dollars in millions, 
 except per share Summary Income Statement and 
 information) Selected 
 Income statement Financial Data 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net interest income $ 42,934 $ 43,360 
 Noninterest income 46,179 42,168 
 Total revenue, net of 89,113 85,528 
 interest expense 
 Provision for credit losses -4,594 11,320 
 Noninterest expense 59,731 55,213 
 Income before income taxes 33,976 18,995 
 Income tax expense 1,998 1,101 
 Net income 31,978 17,894 
 Preferred stock dividends 1,421 1,421 
 Net income applicable to 
 common $ 30,557 $ 16,473 
 shareholders 
 Per common share 
 information 
 Earnings $ 3.60 $ 1.88 
 Diluted earnings 3.57 1.87 
 Dividends paid 0.78 0.72 
 Performance ratios 
 Return on average assets(1) 1.05 % 0.67 % 
 Return on average common 
 shareholders’ 12.23 6.76 
 equity(1) 
 Return on average tangible 
 common 17.02 9.48 
 shareholders’ equity(2) 
 Efficiency ratio(1) 67.03 64.55 
 Balance sheet at year end 
 Total loans and leases $ 979,124 $ 927,861 
 Total assets 3,169,495 2,819,627 
 Total deposits 2,064,446 1,795,480 
 Total liabilities 2,899,429 2,546,703 
 Total common shareholders’ 245,358 248,414 
 equity 
 Total shareholders’ equity 270,066 272,924 
(1) For definitions, see Key Metrics on page 169.
(2) Return on average tangible common
shareholders’ equity is a non-GAAP financial
measure. For more information and a corresponding
reconciliation to the most closely related
financial measures defined by accounting
principles generally accepted in the United
States of America (GAAP), see Non-GAAP
Reconciliations on page 85. Net income was $32.0
billion or $3.57 per diluted share in 2021
compared to $17.9 billion or $1.87 per diluted
share in 2020. The increase in net income was due
to improvement in the provision for credit losses
and higher revenue, partially offset by higher
noninterest expense. For discussion and analysis
of our consolidated and business segment results
of operations for 2020 compared to 2019, see the
Financial Highlights and Business Segment
Operations sections in the MD&A of the
Corporation's 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Net Interest Income Net interest income decreased
$426 million to $42.9 billion in 2021 compared to
2020. Net interest yield on a fully taxable-
equivalent (FTE) basis decreased 24 basis points
(bps) to 1.66 percent for 2021. The decrease in
net interest income was primarily driven by lower
interest rates and average loan balances,
partially offset by higher average balances of
debt securities. For more information on net
interest yield and the FTE basis, see
Supplemental Financial Data on page 31, and for
more information on interest rate risk
management, see Interest Rate Risk Management for
the Banking Book on page 79.
 Bank of America28 
Noninterest Income
 Table 2 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Fees and commissions: Noninterest Income 2021 2020 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Card income $ 6,218 $ 5,656 
 Service charges 7,504 7,141 
 Investment and brokerage services 16,690 14,574 
 Investment banking fees 8,887 7,180 
 Total fees and commissions 39,299 34,551 
 Market making and similar activities 8,691 8,355 
 Other income -1,811 -738 
 Total noninterest income $ 46,179 $ 42,168 
Noninterest income increased $4.0 billion to
$46.2 billion in 2021 compared to 2020. The
following highlights the significant changes. ●
Card income increased $562 million primarily
driven by increased client activity and merchant
services revenue. ● Service charges increased
$363 million primarily due to higher treasury and
credit service charges and increased client
activity. ● Investment and brokerage services
increased $2.1 billion primarily driven by higher
market valuations and assets under management
(AUM) flows, partially offset by declines in AUM
pricing. ● Investment banking fees increased $1.7
billion primarily due to higher advisory fees as
well as higher debt and equity issuance fees. ●
Market making and similar activities increased
$336 million primarily driven by strong sales and
trading performance in Equities, partially offset
by a weaker performance in Fixed Income,
Currencies and Commodities (FICC), which
benefited from a more favorable market
environment in 2020. ● Other income decreased
$1.1 billion primarily due to a $704 million gain
on sales of certain mortgage loans in the prior
year, as well as higher partnership losses on tax
credit investments. Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses improved $15.9
billion to a benefit of $4.6 billion in 2021
compared to 2020. The benefit was primarily due
to improvements in the macroeconomic outlook and
credit quality. For more information on the
provision for credit losses, see Allowance for
Credit Losses on page 73.
Noninterest Expense
 Table 3 
 (Dollars in millions) Noninterest Expense 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Compensation and benefits $ 36,140 $ 32,725 
 Occupancy and equipment 7,138 7,141 
 Information processing and 5,769 5,222 
 communications 
 Product delivery and transaction related 3,881 3,433 
 Marketing 1,939 1,701 
 Professional fees 1,775 1,694 
 Other general operating 3,089 3,297 
 Total noninterest expense $ 59,731 $ 55,213 
Noninterest expense increased $4.5 billion to
$59.7 billion in 2021 compared to 2020. The
increase was primarily due to higher compensation
and benefits expense, higher costs associated
with processing transactional card claims related
to state unemployment benefits, a contribution to
the Bank of America Foundation and an impairment
charge for real estate rationalization. Income
Tax Expense
 Table 4 
 (Dollars in millions) Income Tax Expense 2021 2020 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Income before income taxes $ 33,976 $ 18,995 
 Income tax expense 1,998 1,101 
 Effective tax rate 5.9 % 5.8 % 
Income tax expense was $2.0 billion for 2021
compared to $1.1 billion in 2020, resulting in an
effective tax rate of 5.9 percent compared to 5.8
percent. The effective tax rates for 2021 and
2020 were driven by the impact of our recurring
tax preference benefits and positive income tax
adjustments from the impact of U.K. tax law
changes discussed below. Our recurring tax
preference benefits primarily consist of tax
credits from environmental, social and governance
(ESG) investments in affordable housing and
renewable energy, aligning with our responsible
growth strategy to address global sustainability
challenges. Absent these tax credits, the impact
of the U.K. tax law changes and other discrete
items, the effective tax rates would have been
approximately 25 percent and 26 percent for 2021
and 2020. In June 2021, the U.K. enacted the 2021
Finance Act, which included an increase in the
U.K. corporation income tax rate to 25 percent
from 19 percent. This change is effective April
1, 2023 and unfavorably affects income tax
expense on future U.K. earnings. In addition, in
July 2020, the U.K. enacted a repeal of the final
two percent of scheduled decreases in the U.K.
corporation income tax rate. As a result, in 2021
and 2020, the Corporation recorded write-ups of
U.K. net deferred tax assets of approximately
$2.0 billion and $700 million, with corresponding
positive income tax adjustments. These write-ups
were reversals of previously recorded write-downs
of net deferred tax assets for prior changes in
the U.K. corporation income tax rate.
 29Bank of America 
 Balance Sheet Overview 
 Table 5 
 (Dollars in Selected 
 millions) Balance December 31 
 Assets Sheet Data 2021 2020 $ Change % Change 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and cash $ 348,221 $ 380,463 $ -32,242 -8 % 
 equivalents 
 Federal funds 
 sold and 
 securities 
 borrowed or 250,720 304,058 -53,338 -18 
 purchased 
 under 
 agreements 
 to resell 
 Trading 247,080 198,854 48,226 24 
 account assets 
 Debt 982,627 684,850 297,777 43 
 securities 
 Loans and 979,124 927,861 51,263 6 
 leases 
 Allowance for 
 loan and lease -12,387 -18,802 6,415 -34 
 losses 
 All other 374,110 342,343 31,767 9 
 assets 
 Total assets $ 3,169,495 $ 2,819,627 $ 349,868 12 
 Liabilities 
 Deposits $ 2,064,446 $ 1,795,480 $ 268,966 15 
 Federal funds 
 purchased and 
 securities 
 loaned or sold 192,329 170,323 22,006 13 
 under 
 agreements to 
 repurchase 
 Trading 
 account 100,690 71,320 29,370 41 
 liabilities 
 Short-term 23,753 19,321 4,432 23 
 borrowings 
 Long-term debt 280,117 262,934 17,183 7 
 All other 238,094 227,325 10,769 5 
 liabilities 
 Total 2,899,429 2,546,703 352,726 14 
 liabilities 
 Shareholders’ 270,066 272,924 -2,858 -1 
 equity 
 Total 
 liabilities 
 and $ 3,169,495 $ 2,819,627 $ 349,868 12 
 shareholders’ 
 equity 
 Assets 
At December 31, 2021, total assets were
approximately $3.2 trillion, up $349.9 billion
from December 31, 2020. The increase in assets
was primarily due to higher debt securities that
were primarily funded by deposit growth, an
increase in loans and leases and higher trading
account assets, partially offset by lower federal
funds sold and securities borrowed or purchased
under agreements to resell and cash and cash
equivalents.
 Cash and Cash Equivalents 
Cash and cash equivalents decreased $32.2 billion
primarily driven by higher investments in debt
securities .
Federal Funds Sold and Securities Borrowed or
Purchased Under Agreements to Resell
Federal funds transactions involve lending
reserve balances on a short-term basis.
Securities borrowed or purchased under agreements
to resell are collateralized lending transactions
utilized to accommodate customer transactions,
earn interest rate spreads and obtain securities
for settlement and for collateral. Federal funds
sold and securities borrowed or purchased under
agreements to resell decreased $53.3 billion
primarily due to the investment of excess cash
into debt securities.
 Trading Account Assets 
Trading account assets consist primarily of long
positions in equity and fixed-income securities
including U.S. government and agency securities,
corporate securities and non-U.S. sovereign debt.
Trading account assets increased $48.2 billion
primarily due to an increase in inventory within
Global Markets .
 Debt Securities 
Debt securities primarily include U.S. Treasury
and agency securities, mortgage-backed securities
(MBS), principally agency MBS, non-U.S. bonds,
corporate bonds and municipal debt. We use the
debt securities portfolio primarily to manage
interest rate and liquidity risk and to leverage
market conditions that create economically
attractive returns on these investments. Debt
securities increased $297.8 billion primarily
driven by the deployment of deposit inflows. For
more information on debt
securities, see Note 4 – Securities to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Loans and Leases 
Loans and leases increased $51.3 billion
primarily driven by growth in commercial loans
and higher securities-based lending within
consumer loans. For more information on the loan
portfolio, see Credit Risk Management on page 59.
 Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses 
The allowance for loan and lease losses decreased
$6.4 billion primarily due to improvements in the
macroeconomic outlook and credit quality. For
more information, see Allowance for Credit Losses
on page 73.
 All Other Assets 
All other assets increased $31.8 billion
primarily driven by higher margin loans and loans
held-for-sale (LHFS).
 Liabilities 
At December 31, 2021, total liabilities were
approximately $2.9 trillion, up $352.7 billion
from December 31, 2020, primarily due to deposit
growth.
 Deposits 
Deposits increased $269.0 billion primarily due
to an increase in retail and wholesale deposits.
Federal Funds Purchased and Securities Loaned or
Sold Under Agreements to Repurchase
Federal funds transactions involve borrowing
reserve balances on a short-term basis.
Securities loaned or sold under agreements to
repurchase are collateralized borrowing
transactions utilized to accommodate customer
transactions, earn interest rate spreads and
finance assets on the balance sheet. Federal
funds purchased and securities loaned or sold
under agreements to repurchase increased $22.0
billion primarily driven by client activity
within Global Markets .
 Trading Account Liabilities 
Trading account liabilities consist primarily of
short positions in equity and fixed-income
securities including U.S. Treasury and agency
securities, corporate securities and non-U.S.
sovereign
 Bank of America30 
debt. Trading account liabilities increased $29.4
billion primarily due to higher levels of short
positions within Global Markets .
 Short-term Borrowings 
Short-term borrowings provide an additional
funding source and primarily consist of Federal
Home Loan Bank (FHLB) short-term borrowings,
notes payable and various other borrowings that
generally have maturities of one year or less.
Short-term borrowings increased $4.4 billion
primarily due to an increase in short-term
commercial paper issuances to manage liquidity
needs. For more information on short-term
borrowings, see Note 10 – Securities Financing
Agreements, Short-term Borrowings and Restricted
Cash to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Long-term Debt 
Long-term debt increased $17.2 billion primarily
due to debt issuances, partially offset by
maturities, redemptions and valuation
adjustments. For more information on long-term
debt, see Note 11 – Long-term Debt to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Shareholders’ Equity 
Shareholders’ equity decreased $2.9 billion
primarily due to returns of capital to
shareholders through common stock repurchases and
common and preferred stock dividends, market
value decreases on derivatives and debt
securities and the redemption of preferred stock,
partially offset by net income.
 Cash Flows Overview 
The Corporation’s operating assets and
liabilities support our global markets and
lending activities. We believe that cash flows
from operations, available cash balances and our
ability to generate cash through short- and long-
term debt are sufficient to fund our operating
liquidity needs. Our investing activities
primarily include the debt securities portfolio
and loans and leases. Our financing activities
reflect cash flows primarily related to customer
deposits, securities financing agreements, long-
term debt and common and preferred stock. For
more information on liquidity, see Liquidity Risk
on page 54.
 Supplemental Financial Data 
 Non-GAAP Financial Measures 
In this Form 10-K, we present certain non-GAAP
financial measures. Non-GAAP financial measures
exclude certain items or otherwise include
components that differ from the most directly
comparable measures calculated in accordance with
GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures are provided as
additional useful information to assess our
financial condition, results of operations
(including period-to-period operating
performance) or compliance with prospective
regulatory requirements. These non-GAAP financial
measures are not intended as a substitute for
GAAP financial measures and may not be defined or
calculated the same way as non-GAAP financial
measures used by other companies.
We view net interest income and related ratios
and analyses on an FTE basis, which when
presented on a consolidated basis are non-GAAP
financial measures. To derive the FTE basis, net
interest income is adjusted to reflect tax-exempt
income on an equivalent before-tax basis with a
corresponding increase in income tax expense. For
purposes of this calculation, we use the federal
statutory tax rate of 21 percent and a
representative state tax rate. Net interest
yield, which measures the basis points we earn
over the cost of funds, utilizes net interest
income on an FTE basis. We believe that
presentation of these items on an FTE basis
allows for comparison of amounts from
both taxable and tax-exempt sources and is
consistent with industry practices.
We may present certain key performance indicators
and ratios excluding certain items (e.g., debit
valuation adjustment (DVA) gains (losses)) which
result in non-GAAP financial measures. We believe
that the presentation of measures that exclude
these items is useful because such measures
provide additional information to assess the
underlying operational performance and trends of
our businesses and to allow better comparison of
period-to-period operating performance.
We also evaluate our business based on certain
ratios that utilize tangible equity, a non-GAAP
financial measure. Tangible equity represents
shareholders’ equity or common shareholders’
equity reduced by goodwill and intangible assets
(excluding mortgage servicing rights (MSRs)), net
of related deferred tax liabilities (“adjusted”
shareholders’ equity or common shareholders’
equity). These measures are used to evaluate our
use of equity. In addition, profitability,
relationship and investment models use both
return on average tangible common shareholders’
equity and return on average tangible
shareholders’ equity as key measures to support
our overall growth objectives. These ratios are
as follows:
● Return on average tangible common shareholders’
equity measures our net income applicable to
common shareholders as a percentage of adjusted
average common shareholders’ equity. The tangible
common equity ratio represents adjusted ending
common shareholders’ equity divided by total
tangible assets.
● Return on average tangible shareholders’ equity
measures our net income as a percentage of
adjusted average total shareholders’ equity. The
tangible equity ratio represents adjusted ending
shareholders’ equity divided by total tangible
assets.
● Tangible book value per common share represents
adjusted ending common shareholders’ equity
divided by ending common shares outstanding.
We believe ratios utilizing tangible equity
provide additional useful information because
they present measures of those assets that can
generate income. Tangible book value per common
share provides additional useful information
about the level of tangible assets in relation to
outstanding shares of common stock.
The aforementioned supplemental data and
performance measures are presented in Tables 6
and 7.
For more information on the reconciliation of
these non-GAAP financial measures to the
corresponding GAAP financial measures, see Non-
GAAP Reconciliations on page 85.
 Key Performance Indicators 
We present certain key financial and nonfinancial
performance indicators (key performance
indicators) that management uses when assessing
our consolidated and/or segment results. We
believe they are useful to investors because they
provide additional information about our
underlying operational performance and trends.
These key performance indicators (KPIs) may not
be defined or calculated in the same way as
similar KPIs used by other companies. For
information on how these metrics are defined, see
Key Metrics on page 169.
Our consolidated key performance indicators,
which include various equity and credit metrics,
are presented in Table 1 on page 28, Table 6 on
page 32 and Table 7 on page 33.
For information on key segment performance
metrics, see Business Segment Operations on page
36.
 31Bank of America 
 Table 6 
 (In millions, except 
 per share 
 information) Selected Annual 
 Income statement Financial Data 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net interest income $ 42,934 $ 43,360 $ 48,891 
 Noninterest income 46,179 42,168 42,353 
 Total revenue, net of 89,113 85,528 91,244 
 interest expense 
 Provision for credit -4,594 11,320 3,590 
 losses 
 Noninterest expense 59,731 55,213 54,900 
 Income before income 33,976 18,995 32,754 
 taxes 
 Income tax expense 1,998 1,101 5,324 
 Net income 31,978 17,894 27,430 
 Net income applicable 
 to common 30,557 16,473 25,998 
 shareholders 
 Average common shares 
 issued and 8,493.3 8,753.2 9,390.5 
 outstanding 
 Average diluted 
 common shares issued 8,558.4 8,796.9 9,442.9 
 and 
 outstanding 
 Performance ratios 
 Return on average 1.05 % 0.67 % 1.14 % 
 assets(1) 
 Return on average 
 common shareholders’ 12.23 6.76 10.62 
 equity(1) 
 Return on average 
 tangible common 17.02 9.48 14.86 
 shareholders’ 
 equity(1, 2) 
 Return on average 
 shareholders’ 11.68 6.69 10.24 
 equity(1) 
 Return on average 
 tangible 15.71 9.07 13.85 
 shareholders’ 
 equity(1, 2) 
 Total ending equity 
 to total ending 8.52 9.68 10.88 
 assets 
 Total average equity 
 to total average 9.02 9.96 11.14 
 assets 
 Dividend payout(1) 21.51 38.18 23.65 
 Per common share data 
 Earnings $ 3.60 $ 1.88 $ 2.77 
 Diluted earnings 3.57 1.87 2.75 
 Dividends paid 0.78 0.72 0.66 
 Book value(1) 30.37 28.72 27.32 
 Tangible book 21.68 20.60 19.41 
 value(2) 
 Market capitalization $ 359,383 $ 262,206 $ 311,209 
 Average balance sheet 
 Total loans and $ 920,401 $ 982,467 $ 958,416 
 leases 
 Total assets 3,034,623 2,683,122 2,405,830 
 Total deposits 1,914,286 1,632,998 1,380,326 
 Long-term debt 237,703 220,440 201,623 
 Common shareholders’ 249,787 243,685 244,853 
 equity 
 Total shareholders’ 273,757 267,309 267,889 
 equity 
 Asset quality 
 Allowance for credit $ 13,843 $ 20,680 $ 10,229 
 losses(3) 
 Nonperforming loans, 
 leases and 4,697 5,116 3,837 
 foreclosed 
 properties(4) 
 Allowance for loan 
 and lease losses as a 
 percentage of total 1.28 % 2.04 % 0.97 % 
 loans and leases 
 outstanding(4) 
 Allowance for loan 
 and lease losses as a 
 percentage of total 271 380 265 
 nonperforming loans 
 and leases(4) 
 Net charge-offs $ 2,243 $ 4,121 $ 3,648 
 Net charge-offs as a 
 percentage of 0.25 % 0.42 % 0.38 % 
 average loans and 
 leases outstanding(4) 
 Capital ratios at 
 year end(5) 
 Common equity tier 1 10.6 % 11.9 % 11.2 % 
 capital 
 Tier 1 capital 12.1 13.5 12.6 
 Total capital 14.1 16.1 14.7 
 Tier 1 leverage 6.4 7.4 7.9 
 Supplementary 5.5 7.2 6.4 
 leverage ratio 
 Tangible equity(2) 6.4 7.4 8.2 
 Tangible common 5.7 6.5 7.3 
 equity(2) 
(1) For definition, see Key Metrics on page 169.
(2) Tangible equity ratios and tangible book value per share of common stock are non-GAAP financial
measures. For more information on these ratios and corresponding reconciliations to GAAP financial
measures, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 31 and Non-GAAP Reconciliations on page 85.
(3) Includes the allowance for loan and leases losses and the reserve for unfunded lending
commitments.
(4) Balances and ratios do not include loans accounted for under the fair value option. For
additional exclusions from nonperforming loans, leases and foreclosed properties, see Consumer
Portfolio Credit Risk Management – Nonperforming Consumer Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties
Activity on page 64 and corresponding Table 27 and Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management –
Nonperforming Commercial Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties Activity on page 68 and
corresponding Table 34.
(5) For more information, including which approach is used to assess capital adequacy, see Capital
Management on page 49.
 Bank of America32 
 … 
 … … … 
 … … … 
 … … T… … F… … T… … F… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 $ … $ 1… $ … $ 1… $ … $ 1… $ … $ 1… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 2… … 2… … 2… … 2… 
 … -… … -… … 1… … 4… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 8… … 9… … 4… … 4… 
 … 1… … 1… … -… … 5… 
 … 7… … 8… … 4… … 4… 
 … 7… … 7… … 4… … 3… 
 … 8… … 8… … 8… … 8… 
 … 8… … 8… … 8… … 8… 
 … % 0… % … % 1… % … % 0… % … % 0… % 
 … 1… … 0… … 0… … 0… 
 … 1… … 1… … 7… … 5… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 8… 
 … 1… … 1… … 7… … 6… 
 … 1… … 1… … 9… … 8… 
 … 8… … 9… … 9… … 1… 
 … 8… … 9… … 9… … 1… 
 … 2… … 2… … 3… … 4… 
 $ … $ 0… $ … $ 0… $ … $ 0… $ … $ 0… 
 … 0… … 0… … 0… … 0… 
 … 0… … 0… … 0… … 0… 
 … 3… … 2… … 2… … 2… 
 … 2… … 2… … 2… … 1… 
 $ … $ 3… $ … $ 3… $ … $ 2… $ … $ 1… 
 $ … $ 9… $ … $ 9… $ … $ 9… $ … $ 9… 
 … 3… … 2… … 2… … 2… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 2… … 2… … 2… … 2… 
 … 2… … 2… … 2… … 2… 
 … 2… … 2… … 2… … 2… 
 $ … $ 1… $ … $ 1… $ … $ 2… $ … $ 1… 
 … 4… … 5… … 4… … 4… 
 … % 1… % … % 1… % … % 2… % … % 1… % 
 … 2… … 3… … 4… … 3… 
 $ … $ 4… $ … $ 8… $ … $ 9… $ … $ 1… 
 … % 0… % … % 0… % … % 0… % … % 0… % 
 … % 1… % … % 1… % … % 1… % … % 1… % 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 6… … 7… … 7… … 7… 
 … 5… … 7… … 6… … 6… 
 … 6… … 7… … 7… … 7… 
 … 5… … 6… … 6… … 6… 
 … % 2… % … % 2… % … % 2… % … % 2… % 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 6… … 6… … 6… … 6… 
(1) For definitions, see Key Metrics on page 169.
(2) Calculated as total net income for four consecutive quarters divided by annualized average assets
for four consecutive quarters.
(3) Tangible equity ratios and tangible book value per share of common stock are non-GAAP financial
measures. For more information on these ratios and corresponding reconciliations to GAAP financial
measures, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 31 and Non-GAAP Reconciliations on page 85.
(4) Includes the allowance for loan and lease losses and the reserve for unfunded lending
commitments.
(5) Balances and ratios do not include loans accounted for under the fair value option. For
additional exclusions from nonperforming loans, leases and foreclosed properties, see Consumer
Portfolio Credit Risk Management – Nonperforming Consumer Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties
Activity on page 64 and corresponding Table 27 and Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management –
Nonperforming Commercial Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties Activity on page 68 and
corresponding Table 34.
(6) For more information, including which approach is used to assess capital adequacy, see Capital
Management on page 49.
 33Bank of America 
 Av… 
 T… Ba… 
 8 and 
 (… In… 
 in Ra… 
 m… - Av… Av… Av… 
 E… FTE Ba… Yi… Ba… Y… Ba… Yi… 
 a… Ba… 20… In… Ra… 20… In… R… 20… I… Ra… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 I… 
 d… 
 w… 
 t… 
 F… 
 R… 
 n… $ 25… $ 172 0.… % $ 25… $ 359 0… % $ 12… $ 1… 1.… % 
 U… 
 c… 
 b… 
 a… 
 o… 
 b… 
 T… 
 d… 
 p… 
 a… 7,… 15 0.… 8,… 29 0… 9,… 2… 2.… 
 o… 
 s… 
 i… 
 F… 
 f… 
 s… 
 a… 
 s… 
 b… 26… -90 -0… 30… 903 0… 27… 4… 1.… 
 or 
 p… 
 u… 
 a… 
 to 
 r… 
 T… 
 a… 14… 3,… 2.… 14… 4,… 2… 14… 5… 3.… 
 a… 
 D… 90… 12… 1.… 53… 9,… 1… 45… 1… 2.… 
 s… 
 L… 
 a… 
 l… 
 R… 21… 5,… 2.… 23… 7,… 3… 22… 7… 3.… 
 m… 
 H… 31… 1,… 3.… 38… 1,… 3… 44… 2… 4.… 
 e… 
 C… 75… 7,… 10… 85… 8,… 1… 94… 1… 10… 
 c… 
 D… 
 a… 96… 2,… 2.… 89… 2,… 2… 90… 3… 3.… 
 o… 
 c… 
 T… 41… 17… 4.… 44… 19… 4… 45… 2… 5.… 
 c… 
 U… 32… 8,… 2.… 34… 9,… 2… 32… 1… 4.… 
 c… 
 N… 99… 1,… 1.… 10… 2,… 2… 10… 3… 3.… 
 c… 
 C… 
 r… 60… 1,… 2.… 63… 1,… 2… 62… 2… 4.… 
 e… 
 C… 
 l… 15… 462 2.… 18… 559 3… 20… 7… 3.… 
 f… 
 T… 50… 12… 2.… 53… 14… 2… 50… 2… 3.… 
 c… 
 T… 
 l… 92… 29… 3.… 98… 34… 3… 95… 4… 4.… 
 a… 
 l… 
 O… 
 e… 11… 2,… 2.… 83… 2,… 3… 69… 4… 6.… 
 a… 
 T… 
 e… 2,… 48… 1.… 2,… 52… 2… 2,… 7… 3.… 
 a… 
 C… 
 a… 
 d… 31… 31… 26… 
 f… 
 b… 
 O… 
 a… 
 l… 
 a… 
 f… 38… 33… 33… 
 l… 
 a… 
 l… 
 l… 
 T… $ 3,… $ 2,… $ 2,… 
 a… 
 I… 
 l… 
 U… 
 i… 
 d… 
 D… 
 a… 
 m… $ 92… $ 314 0.… % $ 82… $ 977 0… % $ 74… $ 4… 0.… % 
 m… 
 d… 
 T… 
 a… 16… 170 0.… 17… 734 0… 16… 1… 1.… 
 s… 
 d… 
 T… 
 U… 1,… 484 0.… 1,… 1,… 0… 90… 6… 0.… 
 i… 
 d… 
 N… 
 i… 82… 53 0.… 77… 232 0… 71… 8… 1.… 
 d… 
 T… 
 i… 1,… 537 0.… 1,… 1,… 0… 97… 7… 0.… 
 d… 
 F… 
 f… 
 p… 
 a… 
 s… 
 l… 21… 461 0.… 18… 1,… 0… 19… 4… 2.… 
 or 
 s… 
 u… 
 a… 
 to 
 r… 
 S… 
 b… 
 a… 
 o… 10… -8… -0… 10… -2… -… 77… 2… 3.… 
 i… 
 b… 
 l… 
 T… 
 a… 54… 1,… 2.… 41… 974 2… 45… 1… 2.… 
 l… 
 L… 23… 3,… 1.… 22… 4,… 1… 20… 6… 3.… 
 d… 
 T… 
 i… 1,… 4,… 0.… 1,… 8,… 0… 1,… 2… 1.… 
 l… 
 N… 
 s… 
 N… 74… 55… 40… 
 d… 
 O… 23… 22… 23… 
 l… 
 S… 27… 26… 26… 
 e… 
 T… 
 l… 
 a… $ 3,… $ 2,… $ 2,… 
 s… 
 e… 
 N… 
 i… 1.… % 1… % 2.… % 
 s… 
 I… 
 of 0.… 0… 0.… 
 n… 
 s… 
 N… 
 i… 
 i… $ 43… 1.… % $ 43… 1… % $ 4… 2.… % 
 on 
 e… 
 a… 
(1) Includes the impact of interest rate risk management contracts. For more information, see
Interest Rate Risk Management for the Banking Book on page 79.
(2) For more information on negative interest, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(3) Nonperforming loans are included in the respective average loan balances. Income on these
nonperforming loans is generally recognized on a cost recovery basis.
(4) Includes U.S. commercial real estate loans of $56.5 billion, $59.8 billion and $57.3 billion, and
non-U.S. commercial real estate loans of $3.8 billion, $3.6 billion and $4.7 billion for 2021, 2020
and 2019, respectively.
(5) Certain prior-period amounts have been reclassified to conform to current period presentation.
(6) Includes $30.4 billion, $34.3 billion and $35.5 billion of structured notes and liabilities for
2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(7) Net interest income includes FTE adjustments of $427 million, $499 million and $595 million for
2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
 Bank of America34 
 Ta… Ana… 
 9 of Due 
 (D… Cha… to Due 
 in in Chan… to 
 mi… Net in(1) Chan… 
 In… Int… Volu… in(1) 
 (d… Inc… From From 
 in - 2020 2019 
 in… FTE to Net to Net 
 in… Bas… 2021 Rate Chan… Vol… 2020 Rate Chan… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 In… 
 de… 
 wi… 
 the 
 Fe… 
 Re… $ -1 $ -186 $ -187 $ 1,849 $ -3,… $ -1,4… 
 no… 
 ce… 
 ba… 
 and 
 ot… 
 ba… 
 Ti… 
 de… 
 pl… 
 and -4 -10 -14 -13 -165 -178 
 ot… 
 sh… 
 in… 
 Fe… 
 fu… 
 so… 
 and 
 se… 
 bo… -128 -865 -993 519 -4,… -3,9… 
 or 
 pu… 
 un… 
 ag… 
 to 
 re… 
 Tr… 
 ac… — -362 -362 3 -1,… -1,0… 
 as… 
 De… 7,059 -4,… 2,565 2,188 -4,… -2,0… 
 se… 
 Lo… 
 and 
 le… 
 Re… -612 -731 -1,3… 563 -876 -313 
 mo… 
 Ho… -245 21 -224 -312 -592 -904 
 eq… 
 Cr… -994 7 -987 -1,0… -389 -1,4… 
 ca… 
 Di… 
 and 185 -454 -269 -22 -694 -716 
 ot… 
 co… 
 To… -2,8… -3,3… 
 co… 
 U.… -553 -553 -1,1… 912 -4,… -3,4… 
 co… 
 No… -147 -309 -456 80 -1,… -1,1… 
 co… 
 Co… 
 re… -89 -205 -294 63 -1,… -951 
 es… 
 Co… 
 le… -80 -17 -97 -76 -83 -159 
 fi… 
 To… -1,9… -5,7… 
 co… 
 To… 
 lo… -4,7… -9,0… 
 and 
 le… 
 Ot… 
 ea… 904 -1,… -218 905 -2,… -1,9… 
 as… 
 Net 
 de… 
 in $ -3,9… $ -19,… 
 in… 
 in… 
 In… 
 (d… 
 in 
 in… 
 ex… 
 U.… 
 in… 
 de… 
 De… 
 and 
 mo… $ 134 $ -797 $ -663 $ 507 $ -4,… $ -3,4… 
 ma… 
 de… 
 ac… 
 Ti… 
 and -39 -525 -564 46 -1,… -1,1… 
 sa… 
 de… 
 To… 
 U.… -1,2… -4,6… 
 in… 
 de… 
 No… 
 in… 16 -195 -179 67 -669 -602 
 de… 
 To… 
 in… -1,4… -5,2… 
 de… 
 Fe… 
 fu… 
 pu… 
 and 
 se… 
 lo… 142 -910 -768 -219 -2,… -3,1… 
 or 
 so… 
 un… 
 ag… 
 to 
 re… 
 Sh… 
 bo… 
 and 
 ot… -4 -573 -577 974 -4,… -3,0… 
 in… 
 be… 
 li… 
 Tr… 
 ac… 298 -144 154 -111 -164 -275 
 li… 
 Lo… 338 -1,… -890 619 -2,… -2,3… 
 de… 
 Net 
 de… 
 in -3,4… -14,… 
 in… 
 ex… 
 Net 
 de… 
 in $ -498 $ -5,6… 
 net 
 in… 
 in… 
(1) The changes for each category of interest income and expense are divided between the portion of
change attributable to the variance in volume and the portion of change attributable to the variance
in rate for that category. The unallocated change in rate or volume variance is allocated between the
rate and volume variances.
(2) Certain prior-period amounts have been reclassified to conform to current-period presentation.
(3) Includes changes in FTE basis adjustments of a $72 million decrease from 2020 to 2021 and a $96
million decrease from 2019 to 2020.
 35Bank of America 
 Business Segment Operations 
 Segment Description and Basis of Presentation 
We report our results of operations through the
following four business segments: Consumer
Banking, GWIM, Global Banking and Global Markets
, with the remaining operations recorded in All
Other . We manage our segments and report their
results on an FTE basis. The primary activities,
products and businesses of the business segments
and All Other are shown below.
We periodically review capital allocated to our
businesses and allocate capital annually during
the strategic and capital planning processes. We
utilize a methodology that considers the effect
of regulatory capital requirements in addition to
internal risk-based capital models. Our internal
risk-based capital models use a risk-adjusted
methodology incorporating each segment’s credit,
market, interest rate, business and operational
risk components. For more information on the
nature of these risks, see Managing Risk on page
46. The capital allocated to the business
segments is referred to as allocated capital.
Allocated equity in the reporting units is
comprised of allocated capital plus capital for
the portion of goodwill and intangibles
specifically assigned to the reporting unit. For
more information, including the definition of a
reporting unit, see Note 7 – Goodwill and
Intangible Assets to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
For information on our presentation of financial
information on an FTE basis, see Supplemental
Financial Data on page 31,
and for reconciliations to consolidated total
revenue, net income and year-end total assets,
see Note 23 – Business Segment Information to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Effective October 1, 2021, a business activity
previously included in Global Markets is being
reported as a liquidating business in All Other ,
consistent with a realignment in performance
reporting to senior management. The activity was
not material to Global Markets’ results of
operations and historical results have not been
restated. For more information, see Note 23 –
Business Segment Information to the Consolidated
Financial Statements.
 Key Performance Indicators 
We present certain key financial and nonfinancial
performance indicators that management uses when
evaluating segment results. We believe they are
useful to investors because they provide
additional information about our segments’
operational performance, customer trends and
business growth.
 Bank of America36 
 Consumer Banking 
 Tot… 
 (Do… Con… Con… 
 in Depo… Len… Ban… % 
 mil… 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 Cha… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net 
 int… $ 14,3… $ 13,7… $ 10,… $ 10,9… $ 24,… $ 24,6… 1 % 
 inc… 
 Non… 
 inc… 
 Card -28 -20 5,2… 4,693 5,1… 4,673 11 
 inc… 
 Ser… 3,535 3,416 3 1 3,5… 3,417 4 
 cha… 
 All 
 oth… 223 310 143 164 366 474 -23 
 inc… 
 Tot… 
 non… 3,730 3,706 5,3… 4,858 9,0… 8,564 6 
 inc… 
 Tot… 
 rev… 
 net 18,0… 17,4… 15,… 15,8… 34,… 33,2… 2 
 of 
 int… 
 exp… 
 Pro… 
 for 240 379 -1,… 5,386 -1,… 5,765 -118 
 cre… 
 los… 
 Non… 11,6… 11,5… 7,6… 7,374 19,… 18,8… 2 
 exp… 
 Inc… 
 bef… 6,198 5,558 9,5… 3,057 15,… 8,615 83 
 inc… 
 tax… 
 Inc… 
 tax 1,519 1,362 2,3… 749 3,8… 2,111 83 
 exp… 
 Net $ 4,679 $ 4,196 $ 7,2… $ 2,308 $ 11,… $ 6,504 83 
 inc… 
 Eff… 
 tax 24.5 % 24.5 % 
 rat… 
 Net 
 int… 1.48 % 1.69 % 3.77 % 3.53 % 2.45 2.88 
 yie… 
 Ret… 
 on 
 ave… 39 35 27 9 31 17 
 all… 
 cap… 
 Eff… 64.41 65.97 48.… 46.62 56.… 56.77 
 rat… 
 Bal… 
 She… 
 Ave… 
 Tot… 
 loa… $ 4,431 $ 5,144 $ 279… $ 310,… $ 284… $ 315,… -10 % 
 and 
 lea… 
 Tot… 
 ear… 973,… 813,… 280… 310,… 1,0… 858,… 18 
 ass… 
 Tot… 1,00… 849,… 285… 314,… 1,0… 898,… 18 
 ass… 
 Tot… 976,… 816,… 6,9… 6,698 983… 823,… 19 
 dep… 
 All… 12,0… 12,0… 26,… 26,5… 38,… 38,5… — 
 cap… 
 Year 
 end 
 Tot… 
 loa… $ 4,206 $ 4,673 $ 282… $ 295,… $ 286… $ 299,… -4 % 
 and 
 lea… 
 Tot… 
 ear… 1,04… 899,… 282… 295,… 1,0… 945,… 15 
 ass… 
 Tot… 1,08… 939,… 289… 299,… 1,1… 988,… 14 
 ass… 
 Tot… 1,04… 906,… 5,9… 6,560 1,0… 912,… 16 
 dep… 
(1) Estimated at the segment level only.
(2) In segments and businesses where the total of
liabilities and equity exceeds assets, we
allocate assets from All Other to match the
segments’ and businesses’ liabilities and
allocated shareholders’ equity. As a result,
total earning assets and total assets of the
businesses may not equal total Consumer Banking .
Consumer Banking, comprised of Deposits and
Consumer Lending, offers a diversified range of
credit, banking and investment products and
services to consumers and small businesses.
Deposits and Consumer Lending include the net
impact of migrating customers and their related
deposit, brokerage asset and loan balances
between Deposits, Consumer Lending and GWIM , as
well as other client-managed businesses. Our
customers and clients have access to a coast-to-
coast network including financial centers in 38
states and the District of Columbia. As of
December 31, 2021, our network includes
approximately 4,200 financial centers,
approximately 16,000 ATMs, nationwide call
centers and leading digital banking platforms
with more than 41 million active users, including
approximately 33 million active mobile users .
 Consumer Banking Results 
Net income for Consumer Banking increased $5.4
billion to $11.9 billion primarily due to
improvement in the provision for credit losses
and higher revenue, partially offset by higher
noninterest expense. Net interest income
increased $231 million to $24.9 billion primarily
due to the benefit of higher
deposit balances and the acceleration of net
capitalized loan fees due to PPP loan
forgiveness, partially offset by lower interest
rates and loan balances. Noninterest income
increased $512 million to $9.1 billion primarily
driven by higher card income and service charges
due to increased client activity, partially
offset by the allocation of asset and liability
management (ALM) results.
The provision for credit losses improved $6.8
billion to a benefit of $1.0 billion primarily
driven by reserve releases due to improvements in
the macroeconomic outlook and credit quality.
Noninterest expense increased $408 million to
$19.3 billion primarily driven by an impairment
charge for real estate rationalization, the
contribution to the Bank of America Foundation,
cost of increased client activity and continued
investments for business growth, including the
merchant services platform, partially offset by
lower COVID-19 related costs.
The return on average allocated capital was 31
percent, up from 17 percent, driven by higher net
income. For more information on capital allocated
to the business segments, see Business Segment
Operations on page 36.
 37Bank of America 
Deposits Deposits includes the results of
consumer deposit activities that consist of a
comprehensive range of products provided to
consumers and small businesses. Our deposit
products include noninterest- and interest-
bearing checking accounts, money market savings
accounts, traditional savings accounts, CDs and
IRAs, as well as investment accounts and
products. Net interest income is allocated to the
deposit products using our funds transfer pricing
process that matches assets and liabilities with
similar interest rate sensitivity and maturity
characteristics. Deposits generates fees such as
account service fees, non-sufficient funds fees,
overdraft charges and ATM fees, as well as
investment and brokerage fees from Consumer
Investment accounts. Consumer Investments serves
investment client relationships through the
Merrill Edge integrated investing and banking
service platform, providing investment advice and
guidance, client brokerage asset services, self-
directed online investing and key banking
capabilities including access to the
Corporation’s network of financial centers and
ATMs. Net income for Deposits increased $483
million to $4.7 billion due to higher revenue and
lower provision for credit losses, partially
offset by higher noninterest expense. Net
interest income increased $619 million to $14.4
billion primarily due to the benefit of higher
deposit balances. Noninterest income increased
$24 million to $3.7 billion primarily driven by
higher service charges and investment and
brokerage fees, largely offset by the allocation
of ALM results. The provision for credit losses
decreased $139 million to $240 million due to an
improved macroeconomic outlook. Noninterest
expense increased $142 million to $11.7 billion
primarily driven by an impairment charge for real
estate rationalization, and the cost of increased
client activity and continued investments for
business growth, partially offset by lower
COVID-19 related costs. Average deposits
increased $159.1 billion to $976.1 billion
primarily due to net inflows of $90.4 billion in
checking and time deposits and $68.0 billion in
traditional savings and money market savings
driven by strong organic growth and government
stimulus measures.
The table below provides key performance
indicators for Deposits. Management uses these
metrics, and we believe they are useful to
investors because they provide additional
information to evaluate our deposit profitability
and digital/mobile trends.
 Key Statistics – Deposits 
 Total deposit spreads (excludes noninterest costs)(1) 
 Year End 2021 1.69% 2020 1.94% 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer investment assets (in $ 368,831 $ 306,104 
 millions)(2) 
 Active digital banking users (in 41,365 39,315 
 thousands)(3) 
 Active mobile banking users (in 32,980 30,783 
 thousands)(4) 
 Financial centers 4,173 4,312 
 ATMs 16,209 16,904 
(1) Includes deposits held in Consumer Lending.
(2) Includes client brokerage assets, deposit
sweep balances and AUM in Consumer Banking . (3)
Represents mobile and/or online active users over
the past 90 days. (4) Represents mobile active
users over the past 90 days. Consumer investment
assets increased $62.7 billion to $368.8 billion
driven by market performance and client flows.
Active mobile banking users increased
approximately two million, reflecting continuing
changes in our customers’ banking preferences. We
had a net decrease of 139 financial centers as we
continue to optimize our consumer banking
network. Consumer Lending Consumer Lending offers
products to consumers and small businesses across
the U.S. The products offered include debit and
credit cards, residential mortgages and home
equity loans, and direct and indirect loans such
as automotive, recreational vehicle and consumer
personal loans. In addition to earning net
interest spread revenue on its lending
activities, Consumer Lending generates
interchange revenue from debit and credit card
transactions, late fees, cash advance fees,
annual credit card fees, mortgage banking fee
income and other miscellaneous fees. Consumer
Lending products are available to our customers
through our retail network, direct telephone, and
online and mobile channels. Consumer Lending
results also include the impact of servicing
residential mortgages and home equity loans,
including loans held on the balance sheet of
Consumer Lending and loans serviced for others.
 Bank of America38 
Net income for Consumer Lending was $7.2 billion,
an increase of $4.9 billion, primarily due to
improvement in the provision for credit losses.
Net interest income declined $388 million to
$10.6 billion primarily due to lower interest
rates and loan balances. Noninterest income
increased $488 million to $5.3 billion primarily
driven by higher card income due to increased
client activity. The provision for credit losses
improved $6.7 billion to a benefit of $1.3
billion primarily driven by reserve releases due
to improvements in the macroeconomic outlook and
credit quality. Noninterest expense increased
$266 million to $7.6 billion primarily driven by
continued investments for business growth,
partially offset by lower COVID-19 related costs.
Average loans decreased $30.8 billion to $279.6
billion primarily driven by a decline in
residential mortgage and credit card loans. The
table below provides key performance indicators
for Consumer Lending. Management uses these
metrics, and we believe they are useful to
investors because they provide additional
information about loan growth and profitability.
 Key Statistics – Consumer Lending 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 
 Total credit card(1) 
 Gross interest yield(2) 10.17 % 10.27 % 
 Risk-adjusted margin(3) 10.17 9.16 
 New accounts (in thousands) 3,594 2,505 
 Purchase volumes $ 311,571 $ 251,599 
 Debit card purchase volumes $ 473,770 $ 384,503 
(1) Includes GWIM's credit card portfolio. (2)
Calculated as the effective annual percentage
rate divided by average loans. (3) Calculated as
the difference between total revenue, net of
interest expense, and net credit losses divided
by average loans.
During 2021, the total risk-adjusted margin
increased 101 bps primarily driven by lower net
credit losses, higher fee income and higher net
interest margin. Total credit card purchase
volumes increased $60.0 billion to $311.6 billion
as spending continued to recover, with
improvements across all categories. Debit card
purchase volumes increased $89.3 billion to
$473.8 billion due to continued retail growth
from the pandemic recovery, as well as the impact
of government stimulus measures, and tax refunds.
 Key Statistics – Loan Production(1) 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Consumer Banking: 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 First mortgage $ 45,976 $ 43,197 
 Home equity 3,996 6,930 
 Total(2): 
 First mortgage $ 79,692 $ 69,086 
 Home equity 4,895 8,160 
(1) The loan production amounts represent the
unpaid principal balance of loans and, in the
case of home equity, the principal amount of the
total line of credit. (2) In addition to loan
production in Consumer Banking , there is also
first mortgage and home equity loan production in
GWIM. First mortgage loan originations for
Consumer Banking and the total Corporation
increased $2.8 billion and $10.6 billion during
2021 primarily driven by higher demand. Home
equity production in Consumer Banking and the
total Corporation decreased $2.9 billion and $3.3
billion during 2021 primarily driven by lower
demand due to increased borrower liquidity.
 39Bank of America 
 Global Wealth & Investment Management 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 % Change 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net interest income $ 5,664 $ 5,468 4 % 
 Noninterest income: 
 Investment and brokerage services 14,312 12,270 17 
 All other income 772 846 -9 
 Total noninterest income 15,084 13,116 15 
 Total revenue, net of interest expense 20,748 18,584 12 
 Provision for credit losses -241 357 n/m 
 Noninterest expense 15,258 14,160 8 
 Income before income taxes 5,731 4,067 41 
 Income tax expense 1,404 996 41 
 Net income $ 4,327 $ 3,071 41 
 Effective tax rate 24.5 % 24.5 % 
 Net interest yield 1.51 1.73 
 Return on average allocated capital 26 21 
 Efficiency ratio 73.54 76.19 
 Balance Sheet 
 Average 
 Total loans and leases $ 196,899 $ 183,402 7 % 
 Total earning assets 374,273 316,008 18 
 Total assets 386,918 328,384 18 
 Total deposits 340,124 287,123 18 
 Allocated capital 16,500 15,000 10 
 Year end 
 Total loans and leases $ 208,971 $ 188,562 11 % 
 Total earning assets 425,112 356,873 19 
 Total assets 438,275 369,736 19 
 Total deposits 390,143 322,157 21 
n/m = not meaningful
GWIM consists of two primary businesses: Merrill
Wealth Management (MWM) and Bank of America
Private Bank.
MWM's advisory business provides a high-touch
client experience through a network of financial
advisors focused on clients with over $250,000 in
total investable assets. MWM provides tailored
solutions to meet clients' needs through a full
set of investment management, brokerage, banking
and retirement products.
Bank of America Private Bank, together with MWM's
Private Wealth Management business, provides
comprehensive wealth management solutions
targeted to high net worth and ultra high net
worth clients, as well as customized solutions to
meet clients' wealth structuring, investment
management, trust and banking needs, including
specialty asset management services.
Net income for GWIM increased $1.3 billion to
$4.3 billion driven by higher revenue and
improvement in the provision for credit losses,
partially offset by higher noninterest expense.
The operating margin was 28 percent compared to
22 percent a year ago.
Net interest income increased $196 million to
$5.7 billion due to the benefits of loan and
deposit growth, partially offset by lower
interest rates.
Noninterest income, which primarily includes
investment and brokerage services income,
increased $2.0 billion to $15.1
billion primarily due to higher market valuations
and positive AUM flows, partially offset by
declines in AUM pricing.
The provision for credit losses improved $598
million to a benefit of $241 million primarily
due to improvements in the macroeconomic outlook
and credit quality. Noninterest expense increased
$1.1 billion to $15.3 billion primarily driven by
higher revenue-related incentives.
The return on average allocated capital was 26
percent, up from 21 percent, due to higher net
income, partially offset by an increase in
allocated capital. For more information on
capital allocated to the business segments, see
Business Segment Operations on page 36.
Average loans increased $13.5 billion to $196.9
billion primarily driven by securities-based
lending, custom lending and residential mortgage.
Average deposits increased $53.0 billion to
$340.1 billion primarily driven by inflows from
new accounts and client responses to market
volatility.
MWM revenue of $17.4 billion increased 14 percent
primarily driven by the benefits of higher market
valuations, positive AUM flows and loan and
deposit growth.
Bank of America Private Bank revenue of $3.3
billion remained relatively flat with the
benefits of higher market valuations, AUM flows,
and loan and deposit growth mostly offset by the
realignment of certain business results to MWM.
 Bank of America40 
 Key Indicators and Metrics 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Revenue by Business 2021 2020 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Merrill Wealth Management $ 17,448 $ 15,292 
 Bank of America Private Bank 3,300 3,292 
 Total revenue, net of interest expense $ 20,748 $ 18,584 
 Client Balances by Business, at period 
 end 
 Merrill Wealth Management $ 3,214,881 $ 2,808,340 
 Bank of America Private Bank 625,453 541,464 
 Total client balances $ 3,840,334 $ 3,349,804 
 Client Balances by Type, at period end 
 Assets under management $ 1,638,782 $ 1,408,465 
 Brokerage and other assets 1,655,021 1,479,614 
 Deposits 390,143 322,157 
 Loans and leases(1) 212,251 191,124 
 Less: Managed deposits in assets under -55,863 -51,556 
 management 
 Total client balances $ 3,840,334 $ 3,349,804 
 Assets Under Management Rollforward 
 Assets under management, beginning of $ 1,408,465 $ 1,275,555 
 period 
 Net client flows 66,250 19,596 
 Market valuation/other 164,067 113,314 
 Total assets under management, end of $ 1,638,782 $ 1,408,465 
 period 
 Total wealth advisors, at period end(2) 18,846 20,103 
(1) Includes margin receivables which are
classified in customer and other receivables on
the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(2) Includes advisors across all wealth
management businesses in GWIM and Consumer
Banking. Prior period has been revised to conform
to current-period presentation.
Client Balances
Client balances managed under advisory and/or
discretion of GWIM are AUM and are typically held
in diversified portfolios. Fees earned on AUM are
calculated as a percentage of clients’ AUM
balances. The asset management fees charged to
clients per year depend on various factors, but
are commonly driven by the breadth of the
client’s relationship. The net client AUM flows
represent the net change in clients’ AUM balances
over a specified period of time, excluding market
appreciation/depreciation and other adjustments.
Client balances increased $490.5 billion, or 15
percent, to $3.8 trillion at December 31, 2021
compared to December 31, 2020. The increase in
client balances was primarily due to higher
market valuations and positive client flows.
 41Bank of America 
 Global Banking 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 % Change 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net interest income $ 8,511 $ 9,013 -6 % 
 Noninterest income: 
 Service charges 3,523 3,238 9 
 Investment banking fees 5,107 4,010 27 
 All other income 3,734 2,726 37 
 Total noninterest income 12,364 9,974 24 
 Total revenue, net of interest expense 20,875 18,987 10 
 Provision for credit losses -3,201 4,897 n/m 
 Noninterest expense 10,632 9,342 14 
 Income before income taxes 13,444 4,748 n/m 
 Income tax expense 3,630 1,282 n/m 
 Net income $ 9,814 $ 3,466 n/m 
 Effective tax rate 27.0 % 27.0 % 
 Net interest yield 1.55 1.86 
 Return on average allocated capital 23 8 
 Efficiency ratio 50.93 49.20 
 Balance Sheet 
 Average 
 Total loans and leases $ 329,655 $ 382,264 -14 % 
 Total earning assets 549,749 485,688 13 
 Total assets 611,304 542,302 13 
 Total deposits 522,790 456,562 15 
 Allocated capital 42,500 42,500 — 
 Year end 
 Total loans and leases $ 352,933 $ 339,649 4 % 
 Total earning assets 574,583 522,650 10 
 Total assets 638,131 580,561 10 
 Total deposits 551,752 493,748 12 
n/m = not meaningful
Global Banking , which includes Global Corporate
Banking, Global Commercial Banking, Business
Banking and Global Investment Banking, provides a
wide range of lending-related products and
services, integrated working capital management
and treasury solutions, and underwriting and
advisory services through our network of offices
and client relationship teams. Our lending
products and services include commercial loans,
leases, commitment facilities, trade finance,
commercial real estate lending and asset-based
lending. Our treasury solutions business includes
treasury management, foreign exchange, short-term
investing options and merchant services. We also
provide investment banking products to our
clients such as debt and equity underwriting and
distribution, and merger-related and other
advisory services. Underwriting debt and equity
issuances, fixed-income and equity research, and
certain market-based activities are executed
through our global broker-dealer affiliates,
which are our primary dealers in several
countries. Within Global Banking , Global
Corporate Banking clients generally include large
global corporations, financial institutions and
leasing clients. Global Commercial Banking
clients generally include middle-market
companies, commercial real estate firms and not-
for-profit companies. Business Banking clients
include mid-sized U.S.-based businesses requiring
customized and integrated financial advice and
solutions.
Net income for Global Banking increased $6.3
billion to $9.8 billion driven by improvement in
the provision for credit losses and higher
revenue, partially offset by higher noninterest
expense.
Net interest income decreased $502 million to
$8.5 billion
primarily due to the impact of lower average loan
balances and deposit spreads, partially offset by
the benefits of higher deposit balances and
credit spreads.
Noninterest income increased $2.4 billion to
$12.4 billion driven by higher investment banking
fees, higher valuation-driven adjustments on the
fair value loan portfolio, debt securities and
leveraged loans, higher income from ESG
investment activities, as well as higher treasury
and credit service charges.
The provision for credit losses improved $8.1
billion to a benefit of $3.2 billion primarily
driven by reserve releases due to improvements in
the macroeconomic outlook and credit quality.
Noninterest expense increased $1.3 billion to
$10.6 billion, primarily due to higher revenue-
related incentives and higher operating costs.
The return on average allocated capital was 23
percent, up from eight percent, due to higher net
income. For more information on capital allocated
to the business segments, see Business Segment
Operations on page 36.
 Global Corporate, Global Commercial and Business Banking 
Global Corporate, Global Commercial and Business
Banking each include Business Lending and Global
Transaction Services activities. Business Lending
includes various lending-related products and
services, and related hedging activities,
including commercial loans, leases, commitment
facilities, trade finance, real estate lending
and asset-based lending. Global Transaction
Services includes deposits, treasury management,
credit card, foreign exchange and short-term
investment products.
 Bank of America42 
The table below and following discussion present a summary of the results, which exclude certain
investment banking, merchant services and PPP activities in Global Banking.
 Glo… 
 Cor… 
 Glo… 
 Com… 
 and 
 Bus… 
 Ban… 
 (Do… Glob… Glo… 
 in Corp… Com… Bus… 
 mil… Bank… Ban… Ban… Tot… 
 Rev… 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Bus… $ 3,725 $ 3,552 $ 3,6… $ 3,743 $ 225 $ 261 $ 7,6… $ 7,556 
 Len… 
 Glo… 
 Tra… 3,127 2,986 3,2… 3,169 889 893 7,2… 7,048 
 Ser… 
 Tot… 
 rev… 
 net $ 6,852 $ 6,538 $ 6,8… $ 6,912 $ 1,1… $ 1,154 $ 14,… $ 14,6… 
 of 
 int… 
 exp… 
 Bal… 
 She… 
 Ave… 
 Tot… 
 loa… $ 150,… $ 179,… $ 161… $ 182,… $ 12,… $ 14,4… $ 323… $ 376,… 
 and 
 lea… 
 Tot… 251,… 216,… 213… 191,… 56,… 48,2… 521… 456,… 
 dep… 
 Year 
 end 
 Tot… 
 loa… $ 163,… $ 153,… $ 175… $ 164,… $ 12,… $ 13,2… $ 351… $ 331,… 
 and 
 lea… 
 Tot… 259,… 233,… 232… 207,… 57,… 52,1… 549… 493,… 
 dep… 
Business Lending revenue increased $70 million in
2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to higher
credit spreads and income from ESG investment
activities, partially offset by the impact of
lower average loan balances. Global Transaction
Services revenue increased $177 million in 2021
compared to 2020 driven by the benefit of higher
deposit balances and treasury service charges,
partially offset by lower deposit spreads.
Average loans and leases decreased 14 percent in
2021 compared to 2020 driven by client paydowns
and lower demand. Average deposits increased 14
percent primarily driven by elevated balances
from prior-year inflows on client responses to
market volatility and government stimulus
measures. Global Investment Banking Client teams
and product specialists underwrite and distribute
debt, equity and loan products, and provide
advisory services and tailored risk management
solutions. The economics of certain investment
banking and underwriting activities are shared
primarily between Global Banking and Global
Markets under an internal revenue-sharing
arrangement. Global Banking originates certain
deal-related transactions with our corporate and
commercial clients that are executed and
distributed by
Global Markets . To provide a complete discussion
of our consolidated investment banking fees, the
following table presents total Corporation
investment banking fees and the portion
attributable to Global Banking.
 Investment Banking 
 Fees 
 (Dollars in 
 millions) Total Corporation 
 Products Global Banking 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Advisory $ 2,139 $ 1,458 $ 2,311 $ 1,621 
 Debt issuance 1,736 1,555 4,015 3,443 
 Equity issuance 1,232 997 2,784 2,328 
 Gross investment 5,107 4,010 9,110 7,392 
 banking fees 
 Self-led deals -93 -93 -223 -212 
 Total investment $ 5,014 $ 3,917 $ 8,887 $ 7,180 
 banking fees 
Total Corporation investment banking fees,
excluding self-led deals, of $8.9 billion, which
are primarily included within Global Banking and
Global Ma rkets, increased 24 percent primarily
driven by higher advisory fees as well as higher
debt issuance and equity issuance fees.
 43Bank of America 
 Global Markets 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 % Change 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net interest income $ 4,011 $ 4,646 -14 % 
 Noninterest income: 
 Investment and brokerage services 1,979 1,973 — 
 Investment banking fees 3,616 2,991 21 
 Market making and similar activities 8,760 8,471 3 
 All other income 889 684 30 
 Total noninterest income 15,244 14,119 8 
 Total revenue, net of interest expense 19,255 18,765 3 
 Provision for credit losses 65 251 -74 
 Noninterest expense 13,032 11,417 14 
 Income before income taxes 6,158 7,097 -13 
 Income tax expense 1,601 1,845 -13 
 Net income $ 4,557 $ 5,252 -13 
 Effective tax rate 26.0 % 26.0 % 
 Return on average allocated capital 12 15 
 Efficiency ratio 67.68 60.84 
 Balance Sheet 
 Average 
 Trading-related assets: 
 Trading account securities $ 291,505 $ 243,519 20 % 
 Reverse repurchases 113,989 104,697 9 
 Securities borrowed 100,292 87,125 15 
 Derivative assets 43,582 47,655 -9 
 Total trading-related assets 549,368 482,996 14 
 Total loans and leases 91,339 73,062 25 
 Total earning assets 541,391 482,171 12 
 Total assets 785,998 685,047 15 
 Total deposits 51,833 47,400 9 
 Allocated capital 38,000 36,000 6 
 Year end 
 Total trading-related assets $ 491,160 $ 421,698 16 % 
 Total loans and leases 114,846 78,415 46 
 Total earning assets 561,135 447,350 25 
 Total assets 747,794 616,609 21 
 Total deposits 46,374 53,925 -14 
Global Markets offers sales and trading services
and research services to institutional clients
across fixed-income, credit, currency, commodity
and equity businesses. Global Markets product
coverage includes securities and derivative
products in both the primary and secondary
markets. Global Markets provides market-making,
financing, securities clearing, settlement and
custody services globally to our institutional
investor clients in support of their investing
and trading activities. We also work with our
commercial and corporate clients to provide risk
management products using interest rate, equity,
credit, currency and commodity derivatives,
foreign exchange, fixed-income and mortgage-
related products. As a result of our market-
making activities in these products, we may be
required to manage risk in a broad range of
financial products including government
securities, equity and equity-linked securities,
high-grade and high-yield corporate debt
securities, syndicated loans, MBS, commodities
and asset-backed securities. The economics of
certain investment banking and underwriting
activities are shared primarily between Global
Markets and Global Banking under an internal
revenue-sharing arrangement. Global Banking
originates certain deal-related transactions with
our corporate and commercial clients that are
executed and distributed by Global Markets . For
information on
investment banking fees on a consolidated basis,
see page 43.
The following explanations for year-over-year
changes for Global Markets , including those
disclosed under Sales and Trading Revenue, are
the same for amounts including and excluding net
DVA. Amounts excluding net DVA are a non-GAAP
financial measure. For more information on net
DVA, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 31.
Net income for Global Markets decreased $695
million to $4.6 billion. Net DVA losses were $54
million compared to losses of $133 million in
2020. Excluding net DVA, net income decreased
$755 million to $4.6 billion. These decreases
were primarily driven by higher noninterest
expense, partially offset by higher revenue and
lower provision for credit losses.
Revenue increased $490 million to $19.3 billion
primarily driven by higher investment banking
fees and sales and trading revenue. Sales and
trading revenue increased $172 million, and
excluding net DVA, increased $93 million. These
increases were driven by higher revenue in
Equities, partially offset by lower revenue in
FICC.
The provision for credit losses decreased $186
million primarily due to an improved
macroeconomic outlook.
Noninterest expense increased $1.6 billion to
$13.0 billion primarily driven by higher revenue-
related expenses for sales and trading as well as
costs associated with processing
 Bank of America44 
transactional card claims related to state
unemployment benefits. Average total assets
increased $101.0 billion to $786.0 billion. Year-
end total assets increased $131.2 billion to
$747.8 billion. Both increases were primarily due
to higher client balances in Equities and higher
levels of inventory and loan growth in FICC. The
return on average allocated capital was 12
percent, down from 15 percent, reflecting lower
net income and an increase in allocated capital.
For more information on capital allocated to the
business segments, see Business Segment
Operations on page 36. Sales and Trading Revenue
Sales and trading revenue includes unrealized and
realized gains and losses on trading and other
assets which are included in market making and
similar activities, net interest income, and fees
primarily from commissions on equity securities.
Sales and trading revenue is segregated into
fixed-income (government debt obligations,
investment and non-investment grade corporate
debt obligations, commercial MBS, residential
mortgage-backed securities, collateralized loan
obligations, interest rate and credit derivative
contracts), currencies (interest rate and foreign
exchange contracts), commodities (primarily
futures, forwards, swaps and options) and
equities (equity-linked derivatives and cash
equity activity). The following table and related
discussion present sales and trading revenue,
substantially all of which is in Global Markets,
with the remainder in Global Banking . In
addition, the following table and related
discussion present sales and trading revenue,
excluding net DVA, which is a non-GAAP financial
measure. For more information on net DVA, see
Supplemental Financial Data on page 31.
 Sales and Trading Revenue(1, 2, 3) 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Sales and trading revenue 2021 2020 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fixed income, currencies and commodities $ 8,761 $ 9,595 
 Equities 6,428 5,422 
 Total sales and trading revenue $ 15,189 $ 15,017 
 Sales and trading revenue, excluding net 
 DVA(4) 
 Fixed income, currencies and commodities $ 8,810 $ 9,725 
 Equities 6,433 5,425 
 Total sales and trading revenue, $ 15,243 $ 15,150 
 excluding net DVA 
(1) For more information on sales and trading
revenue, see Note 3 – Derivatives to the
Consolidated Financial Statements. (2) Includes
FTE adjustments of $421 million and $196 million
for 2021 and 2020. (3) Includes Global Banking
sales and trading revenue of $510 million and
$479 million for 2021 and 2020. (4) FICC and
Equities sales and trading revenue, excluding net
DVA, is a non-GAAP financial measure. FICC net
DVA losses were $49 million and $130 million for
2021 and 2020. Equities net DVA losses were $5
million and $3 million for 2021 and 2020. FICC
revenue decreased $915 million driven by reduced
activity in macro products, partially offset by
stronger performance in credit and municipal
products, and gains in commodities (partially
offset by related losses in another segment) from
market volatility driven by a weather-related
event in the first quarter of 2021. Equities
revenue increased $1.0 billion driven by growth
in client financing activities, a stronger
trading performance and increased client
activity.
 All Other 
 (Dollars 
 in 
 million… 2021 2020 % Change 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net 
 interest $ 246 $ 34 n/m 
 income 
 Noninte… 
 income -5,589 -3,605 55 % 
 (loss) 
 Total 
 revenue, 
 net of -5,343 -3,571 50 
 interest 
 expense 
 Provisi… 
 for -182 50 n/m 
 credit 
 losses 
 Noninte… 1,519 1,412 8 
 expense 
 Loss 
 before -6,680 -5,033 33 
 income 
 taxes 
 Income 
 tax -8,069 -4,634 74 
 benefit 
 Net 
 income $ 1,389 $ -399 n/m 
 (loss) 
 Balance 
 Sheet 
 Year 
 Ended 
 December 
 31 
 Average 2021 2020 % Change 
 Total 
 loans $ 18,447 $ 28,159 -34 % 
 and 
 leases 
 Total 191,831 228,783 -16 
 assets(… 
 Total 16,512 18,247 -10 
 deposits 
 December December 
 Year end 31 31 % Change 
 2021 2020 
 Total 
 loans $ 15,863 $ 21,301 -26 % 
 and 
 leases 
 Total 214,153 264,141 -19 
 assets(… 
 Total 21,182 12,998 63 
 deposits 
(1) In segments where the total of liabilities
and equity exceeds assets, which are generally
deposit-taking segments, we allocate assets from
All Other to those segments to match liabilities
(i.e., deposits) and allocated shareholders’
equity. Average allocated assets were $1.1
trillion and $763.1 billion for 2021 and 2020,
and year-end allocated assets were $1.2 trillion
and $977.7 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
n/m = not meaningful
All Other primarily consists of ALM activities,
liquidating businesses and certain expenses not
otherwise allocated to a business segment. ALM
activities encompass interest rate and foreign
currency risk management activities for which
substantially all of the results are allocated to
our business segments. For more information on
our ALM activities, see Note 23 – Business
Segment Information to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
Net income increased $1.8 billion to $1.4 billion
primarily due to a higher income tax benefit and
improvement in the provision for credit losses,
partially offset by lower revenue.
Revenue decreased $1.8 billion primarily due to
higher partnership losses for ESG investments and
a $704 million gain on sales of certain mortgage
loans in the prior year.
 45Bank of America 
The provision for credit losses improved $232
million to a benefit of $182 million primarily
due to an improved macroeconomic outlook.
Noninterest expense increased $107 million
primarily due to higher technology costs and the
realignment of a liquidating business activity
from Global Markets to All Other in the fourth
quarter of 2021, partially offset by lower
litigation expense. For more information on
realignment of the business activity, see Note 23
– Business Segment Information to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
The income tax benefit was $8.1 billion in 2021
compared to a benefit of $4.6 billion in 2020.
The increase in the tax benefit was primarily
driven by the impact of U.K. tax law changes and
increased income tax credits in 2021. For more
information on U.K. tax law changes, see
Financial Highlights – Income Tax Expense on page
29. Both years included income tax benefit
adjustments to eliminate the FTE treatment of
certain tax credits recorded in Global Banking .
 Managing Risk 
Risk is inherent in all our business activities.
Sound risk management enables us to serve our
customers and deliver for our shareholders. If
not managed well, risk can result in financial
loss, regulatory sanctions and penalties, and
damage to our reputation, each of which may
adversely impact our ability to execute our
business strategies. We take a comprehensive
approach to risk management with a defined Risk
Framework and an articulated Risk Appetite
Statement, which are approved annually by the ERC
and the Board.
The seven key types of risk faced by the
Corporation are strategic, credit, market,
liquidity, compliance, operational and
reputational.
● Strategic risk is the risk to current or
projected financial condition arising from
incorrect assumptions about external or internal
factors, inappropriate business plans,
ineffective business strategy execution or
failure to respond in a timely manner to changes
in the regulatory, macroeconomic or competitive
environments in the geographic locations in which
we operate.
● Credit risk is the risk of loss arising from
the inability or failure of a borrower or
counterparty to meet its obligations.
● Market risk is the risk that changes in market
conditions adversely impact the value of assets
or liabilities or otherwise negatively impact
earnings. Market risk is composed of price risk
and interest rate risk.
● Liquidity risk is the inability to meet
expected or unexpected cash flow and collateral
needs while continuing to support our businesses
and customers under a range of economic
conditions.
● Compliance risk is the risk of legal or
regulatory sanctions, material financial loss or
damage to the reputation of the Corporation
arising from the failure of the Corporation to
comply with the requirements of applicable laws,
rules and regulations and our internal policies
and procedures.
● Operational risk is the risk of loss resulting
from inadequate or failed internal processes or
systems, people or external events.
● Reputational risk is the risk that negative
perception of the Corporation may adversely
impact profitability or operations.
The following sections address in more detail the
specific procedures, measures and analyses of the
major categories of risk. This discussion of
managing risk focuses on the current
Risk Framework that, as part of its annual review
process, was approved by the ERC and the Board.
As set forth in our Risk Framework, a culture of
managing risk well is fundamental to our values
and our purpose, and how we drive Responsible
Growth. It requires us to focus on risk in all
activities and encourages the necessary mindset
and behavior to enable effective risk management
and promote sound risk-taking within our risk
appetite. Sustaining a culture of managing risk
well throughout the organization is critical to
the success of the Corporation and is a clear
expectation of our executive management team and
the Board.
Our Risk Framework serves as the foundation for
the consistent and effective management of risks
facing the Corporation. The Risk Framework sets
forth roles and responsibilities for the
management of risk and provides a blueprint for
how the Board, through delegation of authority to
committees and executive officers, establishes
risk appetite and associated limits for our
activities.
Executive management assesses, with Board
oversight, the risk-adjusted returns of each
business. Management reviews and approves the
strategic and financial operating plans, as well
as the capital plan and Risk Appetite Statement,
and recommends them annually to the Board for
approval. Our strategic plan takes into
consideration return objectives and financial
resources, which must align with risk capacity
and risk appetite. Management sets financial
objectives for each business by allocating
capital and setting a target for return on
capital for each business. Capital allocations
and operating limits are regularly evaluated as
part of our overall governance processes as the
businesses and the economic environment in which
we operate continue to evolve. For more
information regarding capital allocations, see
Business Segment Operations on page 36.
The Corporation’s risk appetite indicates the
amount of capital, earnings or liquidity we are
willing to put at risk to achieve our strategic
objectives and business plans, consistent with
applicable regulatory requirements. Our risk
appetite provides a common set of measures for
senior management and the Board to clearly
indicate the level of risk we are willing to take
in alignment with our strategic and capital plans
and ensure that the Corporation’s risk profile
remains aligned with our risk appetite. Our risk
appetite is formally articulated in the Risk
Appetite Statement, which includes both
qualitative components and quantitative limits.
Our overall capacity to take risk is limited;
therefore, we prioritize the risks we take in
order to maintain a strong and flexible financial
position so we can withstand challenging economic
conditions and take advantage of organic growth
opportunities. Therefore, we set objectives and
targets for capital and liquidity that are
intended to permit us to continue to operate in a
safe and sound manner, including during periods
of stress.
Our lines of business operate with risk limits
(which may include credit, market and/or
operational limits, as applicable) that align
with the Corporation’s risk appetite. Executive
management is responsible for tracking and
reporting performance measurements as well as any
exceptions to guidelines or limits. The Board,
and its committees when appropriate, oversee
financial performance, execution of the strategic
and financial operating plans, adherence to risk
appetite limits and the adequacy of internal
controls.
For a more detailed discussion of our risk
management activities, see the discussion below
and pages 49 through 82.
For more information about the Corporation's
risks related to the pandemic, see Item 1A. Risk
Factors on page 8. These
 Bank of America46 
COVID-19 related risks are being managed within
our Risk Framework and supporting risk management
programs.
 Risk Management Governance 
The Risk Framework describes delegations of
authority whereby the Board and its committees
may delegate authority to management-level
committees or executive officers. Such
delegations may authorize certain decision-making
and approval
functions, which may be evidenced in documents
such as committee charters, job descriptions,
meeting minutes and resolutions.
The chart below illustrates the interrelationship
among the Board, Board committees and management
committees that have the majority of risk
oversight responsibilities for the Corporation.
 Board of Directors and Board Committees 
The Board is composed of 16 directors, all but
one of whom are independent. The Board authorizes
management to maintain an effective Risk
Framework and oversees compliance with safe and
sound banking practices. In addition, the Board
or its committees conduct inquiries of, and
receive reports from management on, risk-related
matters to assess scope or resource limitations
that could impede the ability of Global Risk
Management (GRM) and/or Corporate Audit to
execute its responsibilities. The Board
committees discussed below have the principal
responsibility for enterprise-wide oversight of
our risk management activities. Through these
activities, the Board and applicable committees
are provided with information on our risk profile
and oversee executive management addressing key
risks we face. Other Board committees, as
described below, provide additional oversight of
specific risks.
Each of the committees shown on the above chart
regularly reports to the Board on risk-related
matters within the committee’s responsibilities,
which is intended to collectively provide the
Board with integrated insight about our
management of enterprise-wide risks.
 Audit Committee 
The Audit Committee oversees the qualifications,
performance and independence of the Independent
Registered Public Accounting Firm, the
performance of our corporate audit function, the
integrity of our consolidated financial
statements, our compliance with legal and
regulatory requirements, and makes inquiries of
management or the Chief Audit Executive (CAE) to
determine whether there are scope or resource
limitations that impede the ability of Corporate
Audit to execute its responsibilities. The Audit
Committee is also responsible for overseeing
compliance risks pursuant to the New York Stock
Exchange listing standards.
 Enterprise Risk Committee 
The ERC has primary responsibility for oversight
of the Risk Framework and key risks we face and
of the Corporation’s
overall risk appetite. It approves the Risk
Framework and the Risk Appetite Statement and
further recommends these documents to the Board
for approval. The ERC oversees senior
management’s responsibilities for the
identification, measurement, monitoring and
control of key risks we face. The ERC may consult
with other Board committees on risk-related
matters.
 Other Board Committees 
Our Corporate Governance, ESG, and Sustainability
Committee oversees our Board’s governance
processes, identifies and reviews the
qualifications of potential Board members,
recommends nominees for election to our Board,
recommends committee appointments for Board
approval and reviews our ESG and stockholder
engagement activities.
Our Compensation and Human Capital Committee
oversees establishing, maintaining and
administering our compensation programs and
employee benefit plans, including approving and
recommending our Chief Executive Officer’s (CEO)
compensation to our Board for further approval by
all independent directors; reviewing and
approving our executive officers’ compensation,
as well as compensation for non-management
directors; and reviewing certain other human
capital management topics.
 Management Committees 
Management committees receive their authority
from the Board, a Board committee, another
management committee or from one or more
executive officers. Our primary management risk
committee is the MRC. Subject to Board oversight,
the MRC is responsible for management oversight
of key risks facing the Corporation, including an
integrated evaluation of risk, earnings, capital
and liquidity.
 Lines of Defense 
We have clear ownership and accountability for
managing risk across three lines of defense:
Front Line Units (FLUs), GRM and Corporate Audit.
We also have control functions outside of FLUs
and GRM (e.g., Legal and Global Human Resources).
The three
 47Bank of America 
lines of defense are integrated into our
management-level governance structure. Each of
these functional roles is further described in
this section.
 Executive Officers 
Executive officers lead various functions
representing the functional roles. Authority for
functional roles may be delegated to executive
officers from the Board, Board committees or
management-level committees. Executive officers,
in turn, may further delegate responsibilities,
as appropriate, to management-level committees,
management routines or individuals. Executive
officers review our activities for consistency
with our Risk Framework, risk appetite, and
applicable strategic, capital and financial
operating plans, as well as applicable policies
and standards. Executive officers and other
employees make decisions individually on a day-
to-day basis, consistent with the authority they
have been delegated. Executive officers and other
employees may also serve on committees and
participate in committee decisions.
 Front Line Units 
FLUs, which include the lines of business as well
as Global Technology and Global Operations, are
responsible for appropriately assessing and
effectively managing all of the risks associated
with their activities.
Three organizational units that include FLU
activities and control function activities, but
are not part of GRM are first, the Chief
Financial Officer (CFO) Group; second, the Chief
Administrative Officer (CAO) Group; and third,
Global Strategy and Enterprise Platforms (GSEP).
 Global Risk Management 
GRM is part of our control functions and operates
as our independent risk management function. GRM,
led by the Chief Risk Officer (CRO), is
responsible for independently assessing and
overseeing risks within FLUs and other control
functions. GRM establishes written enterprise
policies and procedures outlining how aggregate
risks are identified, measured, monitored and
controlled.
The CRO has the stature, authority and
independence needed to develop and implement a
meaningful risk management framework and
practices to guide the Corporation in managing
risk. The CRO has unrestricted access to the
Board and reports directly to both the ERC and
the CEO. GRM is organized into horizontal risk
teams that cover a specific risk area and
vertical CRO teams that cover a particular FLU or
control function. These teams work
collaboratively in executing their respective
duties.
 Corporate Audit 
Corporate Audit and the CAE maintain their
independence from the FLUs, GRM and other control
functions by reporting directly to the Audit
Committee. The CAE administratively reports to
the CEO. Corporate Audit provides independent
assessment and validation through testing of key
processes and controls across the Corporation.
Corporate Audit includes Credit Review, which
provides an independent assessment of credit
lending decisions and the effectiveness of credit
processes across the Corporation’s credit
platform through examinations and monitoring.
 Risk Management Processes 
The Risk Framework requires that strong risk
management practices are integrated in key
strategic, capital and financial planning
processes and in day-to-day business processes
across the Corporation, thereby ensuring risks
are appropriately
considered, evaluated and responded to in a
timely manner. We employ an effective risk
management process, referred to as Identify,
Measure, Monitor and Control, as part of our
daily activities.
Identify – To be effectively managed, risks must
be proactively identified and well understood.
Proper risk identification focuses on recognizing
and understanding key risks inherent in our
business activities or key risks that may arise
from external factors. Each employee is expected
to identify and escalate risks promptly. Risk
identification is an ongoing process that
incorporates input from FLUs and control
functions. It is designed to be forward-looking
and to capture relevant risk factors across all
of our lines of business.
Measure – Once a risk is identified, it must be
prioritized and accurately measured through a
systematic process including quantitative and
qualitative components. Risk is measured at
various levels, including, but not limited to,
risk type, FLU and legal entity, and also on an
aggregate basis. This risk measurement process
helps to capture changes in our risk profile due
to changes in strategic direction,
concentrations, portfolio quality and the overall
economic environment. Senior management considers
how risk exposures might evolve under a variety
of stress scenarios.
Monitor – We monitor risk levels regularly to
track adherence to risk appetite, policies and
standards. We also regularly update risk
assessments and review risk exposures. Through
our monitoring, we know our level of risk
relative to limits and can take action in a
timely manner. We also know when risk limits are
breached and have processes to appropriately
report and escalate exceptions. This includes
timely requests for approval to managers and
alerts to executive management, management-level
committees or the Board (directly or through an
appropriate committee).
Control – We establish and communicate risk
limits and controls through policies, standards,
procedures and processes. The limits and controls
can be adjusted by the Board or management when
conditions or risk tolerances warrant. These
limits may be absolute (e.g., loan amount,
trading volume, operational loss) or relative
(e.g., percentage of loan book in higher-risk
categories). Our FLUs are held accountable for
performing within the established limits.
The formal processes used to manage risk
represent a part of our overall risk management
process. We instill a strong and comprehensive
culture of managing risk well through
communications, training, policies, procedures
and organizational roles and responsibilities.
Establishing a culture reflective of our purpose
to help make our customers’ financial lives
better and delivering on Responsible Growth is
also critical to effective risk management. We
are committed to the highest principles of
ethical and professional conduct. Conduct risk is
the risk of improper actions, behaviors or
practices that are illegal, unethical and/or
contrary to our core values that could result in
harm to the Corporation, our shareholders or our
customers, damage the integrity of the financial
markets, or negatively impact our reputation. We
have established protocols and structures so that
conduct risk is governed and reported across the
Corporation appropriately. All employees are held
accountable for adhering to the Code of Conduct,
operating within our risk appetite and managing
risk in their daily business activities. In
addition, our performance management and
compensation practices encourage responsible
risk-taking that is consistent with our Risk
Framework and risk appetite.
 Bank of America48 
 Corporation-wide Stress Testing 
Integral to our Capital Planning, Financial
Planning and Strategic Planning processes, we
conduct capital scenario management and stress
forecasting on a periodic basis to better
understand balance sheet, earnings and capital
sensitivities to certain economic and business
scenarios, including economic and market
conditions that are more severe than anticipated.
These stress forecasts provide an understanding
of the potential impacts from our risk profile on
the balance sheet, earnings and capital, and
serve as a key component of our capital and risk
management practices. The intent of stress
testing is to develop a comprehensive
understanding of potential impacts of on- and
off-balance sheet risks at the Corporation and
certain subsidiaries and how they impact
financial resiliency, which provides confidence
to management, regulators and our investors.
 Contingency Planning 
We have developed and maintain contingency plans
that are designed to prepare us in advance to
respond in the event of potential adverse
economic, financial or market stress. These
contingency plans include our Capital Contingency
Plan and Financial Contingency and Recovery Plan,
which provide monitoring, escalation, actions and
routines designed to enable us to increase
capital, access funding sources and reduce risk
through consideration of potential options that
include asset sales, business sales, capital or
debt issuances, or other de-risking strategies.
We also maintain a Resolution Plan to limit
adverse systemic impacts that could be associated
with a potential resolution of Bank of America.
 Strategic Risk Management 
Strategic risk is embedded in every business and
is one of the major risk categories along with
credit, market, liquidity, compliance,
operational and reputational risks. This risk
results from incorrect assumptions about external
or internal factors, inappropriate business
plans, ineffective business strategy execution,
or failure to respond in a timely manner to
changes in the regulatory, macroeconomic or
competitive environments in the geographic
locations in which we operate, such as competitor
actions, changing customer preferences, product
obsolescence and technology developments. Our
strategic plan is consistent with our risk
appetite, capital plan and liquidity
requirements, and specifically addresses
strategic risks.
On an annual basis, the Board reviews and
approves the strategic plan, capital plan,
financial operating plan and Risk Appetite
Statement. With oversight by the Board, executive
management directs the lines of business to
execute our strategic plan consistent with our
core operating principles and risk appetite. The
executive management team monitors business
performance throughout the year and provides the
Board with regular progress reports on whether
strategic objectives and timelines are being met,
including reports on strategic risks and if
additional or alternative actions need to be
considered or implemented. The regular executive
reviews focus on assessing forecasted earnings
and returns on capital, the current risk profile,
current capital and liquidity requirements,
staffing levels and changes required to support
the strategic plan, stress testing results, and
other qualitative factors such as market growth
rates and peer analysis.
Significant strategic actions, such as capital
actions, material acquisitions or divestitures,
and resolution plans are reviewed and approved by
the Board. At the business level, processes are
in place to discuss the strategic risk
implications of new, expanded or modified
businesses, products or services
and other strategic initiatives, and to provide
formal review and approval where required. With
oversight by the Board and the ERC, executive
management performs similar analyses throughout
the year, and evaluates changes to the financial
forecast or the risk, capital or liquidity
positions as deemed appropriate to balance and
optimize achieving the targeted risk appetite,
shareholder returns and maintaining the targeted
financial strength. Proprietary models are used
to measure the capital requirements for credit,
country, market, operational and strategic risks.
The allocated capital assigned to each business
is based on its unique risk profile. With
oversight by the Board, executive management
assesses the risk-adjusted returns of each
business in approving strategic and financial
operating plans. The businesses use allocated
capital to define business strategies, and price
products and transactions.
 Capital Management 
The Corporation manages its capital position so
that its capital is more than adequate to support
its business activities and aligns with risk,
risk appetite and strategic planning.
Additionally, we seek to maintain safety and
soundness at all times, even under adverse
scenarios, take advantage of organic growth
opportunities, meet obligations to creditors and
counterparties, maintain ready access to
financial markets, continue to serve as a credit
intermediary, remain a source of strength for our
subsidiaries, and satisfy current and future
regulatory capital requirements. Capital
management is integrated into our risk and
governance processes, as capital is a key
consideration in the development of our strategic
plan, risk appetite and risk limits.
We conduct an Internal Capital Adequacy
Assessment Process (ICAAP) on a periodic basis.
The ICAAP is a forward-looking assessment of our
projected capital needs and resources,
incorporating earnings, balance sheet and risk
forecasts under baseline and adverse economic and
market conditions. We utilize periodic stress
tests to assess the potential impacts to our
balance sheet, earnings, regulatory capital and
liquidity under a variety of stress scenarios. We
perform qualitative risk assessments to identify
and assess material risks not fully captured in
our forecasts or stress tests. We assess the
potential capital impacts of proposed changes to
regulatory capital requirements. Management
assesses ICAAP results and provides documented
quarterly assessments of the adequacy of our
capital guidelines and capital position to the
Board or its committees.
We periodically review capital allocated to our
businesses and allocate capital annually during
the strategic and capital planning processes. For
more information, see Business Segment Operations
on page 36.
CCAR and Capital Planning
The Federal Reserve requires BHCs to submit a
capital plan and planned capital actions on an
annual basis, consistent with the rules governing
the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review
(CCAR) capital plan. Based on the results of our
2021 CCAR capital plan and related supervisory
stress tests, we are subject to a 2.5 percent
stress capital buffer (SCB), unchanged from the
prior level, effective October 1, 2021 through
September 30, 2022. Our Common equity tier 1
(CET1) capital ratio under the Standardized
approach must remain above 9.5 percent during
this period in order to avoid restrictions on
capital distributions and discretionary bonus
payments.
Due to uncertainty resulting from the pandemic,
the Federal Reserve imposed various restrictions
on share repurchase programs and dividends during
2020 and the first half of 2021.
 49Bank of America 
In conjunction with its release of 2021 CCAR
supervisory stress test results, the Federal
Reserve announced those restrictions would end as
of July 1, 2021 for large banks, including the
Corporation, and large banks would be subject to
the normal restrictions under the Federal
Reserve's SCB framework. On October 20, 2021, we
announced that the Board renewed the
Corporation’s $25 billion common stock repurchase
program previously announced in April 2021. The
Board’s authorization replaced the previous
program. As with the April authorization, the
Board also authorized common stock repurchases to
offset shares awarded under the Corporation’s
equity-based compensation plans. Pursuant to the
Board’s authorization, during 2021 we repurchased
$25.1 billion of common stock, including
repurchases to offset shares awarded under
equity-based compensation plans.
The timing and amount of common stock repurchases
made pursuant to our stock repurchase program are
subject to various factors, including the
Corporation’s capital position, liquidity,
financial performance and alternative uses of
capital, stock trading price, regulatory
requirements and general market conditions, and
may be suspended at any time. Such repurchases
may be effected through open market purchases or
privately negotiated transactions, including
repurchase plans that satisfy the conditions of
Rule 10b5-1 of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended (Exchange Act).
 Regulatory Capital 
As a financial services holding company, we are
subject to regulatory capital rules, including
Basel 3, issued by U.S. banking regulators. Basel
3 established minimum capital ratios and buffer
requirements and outlined two methods of
calculating risk-weighted assets (RWA), the
Standardized approach and the Advanced
approaches. The Standardized approach relies
primarily on supervisory risk weights based on
exposure type, and the Advanced approaches
determine risk weights based on internal models.
The Corporation's depository institution
subsidiaries are also subject to the Prompt
Corrective Action (PCA) framework. The
Corporation and its primary affiliated banking
entity, BANA, are Advanced approaches
institutions under Basel 3 and are required to
report regulatory risk-based capital ratios and
RWA under both the Standardized and Advanced
approaches. The approach that yields the lower
ratio is used to assess capital adequacy,
including under the PCA framework. As of December
31, 2021, the CET1, Tier 1 capital and Total
capital ratios for the Corporation were lower
under the Standardized approach.
 Minimum Capital Requirements 
In order to avoid restrictions on capital
distributions and discretionary bonus payments,
the Corporation must meet risk-based capital
ratio requirements that include a capital
conservation buffer of 2.5 percent (under the
Advanced approaches only), an SCB (under the
Standardized approach only), plus any applicable
countercyclical capital buffer and a global
systemically important bank (G-SIB) surcharge.
Including a regulatory minimum requirement of 4.5
percent, an SCB of 2.5 percent and a G-SIB
surcharge of 2.5 percent, the Corporation's CET1
capital ratio must be a minimum of 9.5 percent
under both the Standardized and Advanced
approaches.
The Corporation is required to calculate its
G-SIB surcharge on an annual basis under two
methods and is subject to the higher of the
resulting two surcharges. Method 1 is consistent
with the approach prescribed by the Basel
Committee’s assessment methodology and is
calculated using specified indicators of systemic
importance. Method 2 modifies the Method 1
approach by, among other factors, including a
measure of the Corporation’s reliance on short-
term wholesale funding. The Corporation’s G-SIB
surcharge, which is higher under Method 2, is
expected to increase to 3.0 percent on January 1,
2024 unless its surcharge calculated as of
December 31, 2022 is lower than 3.0 percent.
The current SCB of 2.5 percent, which remains
effective from October 1, 2021 through September
30, 2022, could change based on results of the
2022 CCAR capital plan and related supervisory
stress tests to be submitted in the first half of
2022.
The Corporation is also required to maintain a
minimum supplementary leverage ratio (SLR) of 3.0
percent plus a leverage buffer of 2.0 percent in
order to avoid certain restrictions on capital
distributions and discretionary bonus payments.
Our insured depository institution subsidiaries
are required to maintain a minimum 6.0 percent
SLR to be considered well capitalized under the
PCA framework. The numerator of the SLR is
quarter-end Basel 3 Tier 1 capital. The
denominator is total leverage exposure based on
the daily average of the sum of on-balance sheet
exposures less permitted deductions, and
applicable temporary exclusions, as well as the
simple average of certain off-balance sheet
exposures, as of the end of each month in a
quarter. The temporary exclusions expired after
March 31, 2021 and were not applicable for
December 31, 2021. For more information, see
Capital Management – Regulatory Developments on
page 54.
 Capital Composition and Ratios 
Table 10 presents Bank of America Corporation’s
capital ratios and related information in
accordance with Basel 3 Standardized and Advanced
approaches as measured at December 31, 2021 and
2020. For the periods presented herein, the
Corporation met the definition of well
capitalized under current regulatory
requirements.
 Bank of America50 
 Bank of 
 Table 10 America 
 (Dollars in Corporation 
 millions, Regulatory Standardized… 
 except as Capital under December 31, 
 noted) Basel 3 2021 AdvancedAppro… RegulatoryMi… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Risk-based 
 capital 
 metrics: 
 Common 
 equity tier $ 171,759 $ 171,759 
 1 capital 
 Tier 1 196,465 196,465 
 capital 
 Total 227,592 220,616 
 capital(3) 
 Risk-weight… 
 assets (in 1,618 1,399 
 billions) 
 Common 
 equity tier 10.6 % 12.3 % 9.5 % 
 1 capital 
 ratio 
 Tier 1 
 capital 12.1 14.0 11.0 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capital 14.1 15.8 13.0 
 ratio 
 Leverage-ba… 
 metrics: 
 Adjusted 
 quarterly 
 average $ 3,087 $ 3,087 
 assets (in 
 billions)(4) 
 Tier 1 
 leverage 6.4 % 6.4 % 4.0 
 ratio 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage $ 3,604 
 exposure (in 
 billions)(5) 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage 5.5 % 5.0 
 ratio 
 December 31, 
 2020 
 Risk-based 
 capital 
 metrics: 
 Common 
 equity tier $ 176,660 $ 176,660 
 1 capital 
 Tier 1 200,096 200,096 
 capital 
 Total 237,936 227,685 
 capital(3) 
 Risk-weight… 
 assets (in 1,480 1,371 
 billions) 
 Common 
 equity tier 11.9 % 12.9 % 9.5 % 
 1 capital 
 ratio 
 Tier 1 
 capital 13.5 14.6 11.0 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capital 16.1 16.6 13.0 
 ratio 
 Leverage-ba… 
 metrics: 
 Adjusted 
 quarterly 
 average $ 2,719 $ 2,719 
 assets (in 
 billions)(4) 
 Tier 1 
 leverage 7.4 % 7.4 % 4.0 
 ratio 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage $ 2,786 
 exposure (in 
 billions)(5) 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage 7.2 % 5.0 
 ratio 
(1) Capital ratios as of December 31, 2021 and
2020 are calculated using the regulatory capital
rule that allows a five-year transition period
related to the adoption of the current expected
credit losses (CECL) accounting standard.
(2) The capital conservation buffer and G-SIB
surcharge were 2.5 percent at both December 31,
2021 and 2020. At both December 31, 2021 and
2020, the Corporation's SCB of 2.5 percent was
applied in place of the capital conservation
buffer under the Standardized approach. The
countercyclical capital buffer for both periods
was zero. The CET1 capital regulatory minimum is
the sum of the CET1 capital ratio minimum of 4.5
percent, our G-SIB surcharge of 2.5 percent and
our SCB or the capital conservation buffer, as
applicable, of 2.5 percent. The SLR regulatory
minimum includes a leverage buffer of 2.0
percent.
(3) Total capital under the Advanced approaches
differs from the Standardized approach due to
differences in the amount permitted in Tier 2
capital related to the qualifying allowance for
credit losses.
(4) Reflects total average assets adjusted for
certain Tier 1 capital deductions.
(5) Supplementary leverage exposure at December
31, 2020 reflects the temporary exclusion of U.S.
Treasury securities and deposits at Federal
Reserve Banks. The temporary relief expired after
March 31, 2021 and is not reflected in
supplementary leverage exposure at December 31,
2021.
At December 31, 2021, CET1 capital was $171.8
billion, a decrease of $4.9 billion from December
31, 2020, driven by common stock repurchases,
dividends and decreases in net unrealized gains
on available-for-sale (AFS) debt securities
included in accumulated other comprehensive
income (OCI), partially offset by earnings. Tier
1 capital decreased $3.6 billion primarily driven
by the same factors as CET1 capital, partially
offset by non-cumulative perpetual preferred
stock issuances. Total capital under the
Standardized approach decreased $10.3 billion
primarily due to the same factors driving the
decrease in CET1 capital, and a decrease in the
adjusted allowance for credit losses included in
Tier 2 capital. RWA under the
Standardized approach, which yielded the lower
CET1 capital
ratio at December 31, 2021, increased $138.1
billion during 2021 to $1,618 billion primarily
due to loan growth in Global Banking, strong
client activity in Global Markets and an increase
in debt securities resulting from the deployment
of cash received from deposit inflows.
Supplementary leverage exposure at December 31,
2021 increased $818.1 billion during 2021
primarily due to the expiration of the Federal
Reserve’s temporary relief to exclude U.S.
Treasury securities and deposits at Federal
Reserve Banks and an increase in debt securities
resulting from the deployment of cash received
from deposit inflows.
 51Bank of America 
Table 11 shows the capital composition at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 Table 11 Capital Composition December 31 
 (Dollars in millions) under Basel 3 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total common shareholders’ equity $ 245,358 $ 248,414 
 CECL transitional amount(1) 2,508 4,213 
 Goodwill, net of related deferred tax -68,641 -68,565 
 liabilities 
 Deferred tax assets arising from net 
 operating loss and tax credit -7,743 -5,773 
 carryforwards 
 Intangibles, other than mortgage 
 servicing rights, net of related -1,605 -1,617 
 deferred tax liabilities 
 Defined benefit pension plan net assets -1,261 -1,164 
 Cumulative unrealized net (gain) loss 
 related to changes in fair value of 
 financial liabilities attributable to own 1,400 1,753 
 creditworthiness, 
 net-of-tax 
 Accumulated net (gain) loss on certain 1,870 -436 
 cash flow hedges(2) 
 Other -127 -165 
 Common equity tier 1 capital 171,759 176,660 
 Qualifying preferred stock, net of 24,707 23,437 
 issuance cost 
 Other -1 -1 
 Tier 1 capital 196,465 200,096 
 Tier 2 capital instruments 20,750 22,213 
 Qualifying allowance for credit 10,534 15,649 
 losses(3) 
 Other -157 -22 
 Total capital under the Standardized 227,592 237,936 
 approach 
 Adjustment in qualifying allowance for 
 credit losses under the Advanced -6,976 -10,251 
 approaches(3) 
 Total capital under the Advanced $ 220,616 $ 227,685 
 approaches 
(1) Includes the impact of the Corporation's adoption of the CECL accounting standard on January 1,
2020 and 25 percent of the increase in reserves since the initial adoption.
(2) Includes amounts in accumulated other comprehensive income related to the hedging of items that
are not recognized at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(3) Includes the impact of transition provisions
related to the CECL accounting standard.
Table 12 shows the components of RWA as measured under Basel 3 at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 Risk-wei… 
 Table 12 Assets 
 under 
 Basel 3 
 Standard… Advanced Standard… Advanced 
 Approach Approaches Approach Approaches 
 December 
 31 
 (Dollars 
 in 2021 2020 
 billion… 
 Credit $ 1,549 $ 913 $ 1,420 $ 896 
 risk 
 Market 69 69 60 60 
 risk 
 Operati… n/a 378 n/a 372 
 risk 
 Risks 
 related 
 to n/a 39 n/a 43 
 credit 
 valuati… 
 adjustm… 
 Total 
 risk-we… $ 1,618 $ 1,399 $ 1,480 $ 1,371 
 assets 
n/a = not applicable
 Bank of America52 
 Bank of America, N.A. Regulatory Capital 
Table 13 presents regulatory capital information for BANA in accordance with Basel 3 Standardized and
Advanced approaches as measured at December 31, 2021 and 2020. BANA met the definition of well
capitalized under the PCA framework for both periods.
 Table 13 Bank of 
 (Dollars in America, N.A. 
 millions, Regulatory Standardized… 
 except as Capital December 31, 
 noted) under Basel 3 2021 AdvancedAppro… RegulatoryMi… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Risk-based 
 capital 
 metrics: 
 Common 
 equity tier $ 182,526 $ 182,526 
 1 capital 
 Tier 1 182,526 182,526 
 capital 
 Total 194,773 188,091 
 capital(3) 
 Risk-weight… 
 assets (in 1,352 1,048 
 billions) 
 Common 
 equity tier 13.5 % 17.4 % 7.0 % 
 1 capital 
 ratio 
 Tier 1 
 capital 13.5 17.4 8.5 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capital 14.4 17.9 10.5 
 ratio 
 Leverage-ba… 
 metrics: 
 Adjusted 
 quarterly 
 average $ 2,414 $ 2,414 
 assets (in 
 billions)(4) 
 Tier 1 
 leverage 7.6 % 7.6 % 5.0 
 ratio 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage $ 2,824 
 exposure (in 
 billions) 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage 6.5 % 6.0 
 ratio 
 December 31, 
 2020 
 Risk-based 
 capital 
 metrics: 
 Common 
 equity tier $ 164,593 $ 164,593 
 1 capital 
 Tier 1 164,593 164,593 
 capital 
 Total 181,370 170,922 
 capital(3) 
 Risk-weight… 
 assets (in 1,221 1,014 
 billions) 
 Common 
 equity tier 13.5 % 16.2 % 7.0 % 
 1 capital 
 ratio 
 Tier 1 
 capital 13.5 16.2 8.5 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capital 14.9 16.9 10.5 
 ratio 
 Leverage-ba… 
 metrics: 
 Adjusted 
 quarterly 
 average $ 2,143 $ 2,143 
 assets (in 
 billions)(4) 
 Tier 1 
 leverage 7.7 % 7.7 % 5.0 
 ratio 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage $ 2,525 
 exposure (in 
 billions) 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage 6.5 % 6.0 
 ratio 
(1) Capital ratios for both December 31, 2021 and 2020 are calculated using the regulatory capital
rule that allows a five-year transition period related to the adoption of CECL.
(2) Risk-based capital regulatory minimums at both December 31, 2021 and 2020 are the minimum ratios
under Basel 3 including a capital conservation buffer of 2.5 percent. The regulatory minimums for the
leverage ratios as of both period ends are the percent required to be considered well capitalized
under the PCA framework.
(3) Total capital under the Advanced approaches differs from the Standardized approach due to
differences in the amount permitted in Tier 2 capital related to the qualifying allowance for credit
losses.
(4) Reflects total average assets adjusted for certain Tier 1 capital deductions.
 Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity Requirements 
Total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) consists of
the Corporation’s Tier 1 capital and eligible
long-term debt issued directly by the
Corporation. Eligible long-term debt for TLAC
ratios is comprised of unsecured debt that has a
remaining maturity of at least one year and
satisfies additional requirements as prescribed
in the TLAC final rule. As with the
risk-based capital ratios and SLR, the
Corporation is required to maintain TLAC ratios
in excess of minimum requirements plus applicable
buffers to avoid restrictions on capital
distributions and discretionary bonus payments.
Table 14 presents the Corporation's TLAC and
long-term debt ratios and related information as
of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 53Bank of America 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Corporati… 
 Total 
 Loss-Abso… 
 Table 14 Capacity 
 (Dollars and TLAC(1) 
 in Long-Term December Regulatory Long-term Regulatory 
 millions) Debt 31, 2021 Minimum(2) Debt Minimum(3) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total 
 eligible $ 435,904 $ 227,714 
 balance 
 Percenta… 
 of 26.9 % 22.0 % 14.1 % 8.5 % 
 risk-wei… 
 assets(4) 
 Percenta… 
 of 
 suppleme… 12.1 9.5 6.3 4.5 
 leverage 
 exposure… 
 December 
 31, 2020 
 Total 
 eligible $ 405,153 $ 196,997 
 balance 
 Percenta… 
 of 27.4 % 22.0 % 13.3 % 8.5 % 
 risk-wei… 
 assets(4) 
 Percenta… 
 of 
 suppleme… 14.5 9.5 7.1 4.5 
 leverage 
 exposure… 
(1) As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, TLAC ratios are calculated using the regulatory capital rule
that allows a five-year transition period related to the adoption of CECL.
(2) The TLAC RWA regulatory minimum consists of 18.0 percent plus a TLAC RWA buffer comprised of 2.5
percent plus the Method 1 G-SIB surcharge of 1.5 percent. The countercyclical buffer is zero for both
periods. The TLAC supplementary leverage exposure regulatory minimum consists of 7.5 percent plus a
2.0 percent TLAC leverage buffer. The TLAC RWA and leverage buffers must be comprised solely of CET1
capital and Tier 1 capital, respectively.
(3) The long-term debt RWA regulatory minimum is comprised of 6.0 percent plus an additional 2.5
percent requirement based on the Corporation’s Method 2 G-SIB surcharge. The long-term debt leverage
exposure regulatory minimum is 4.5 percent.
(4) The approach that yields the higher RWA is used to calculate TLAC and long-term debt ratios,
which was the Standardized approach as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(5) Supplementary leverage exposure at December 31, 2020 reflects the temporary exclusion of U.S.
Treasury Securities and deposits at Federal Reserve Banks. The temporary relief expired after March
31, 2021 and is not reflected in supplementary leverage exposure at December 31, 2021.
 Regulatory Developments 
 Supplementary Leverage Ratio 
On March 19, 2021, U.S. banking regulators
announced that temporary changes issued in 2020
for BHCs and depository institutions would expire
as scheduled after March 31, 2021. These
temporary changes to the SLR allowed the
exclusion of on-balance sheet amounts of U.S.
Treasury securities and deposits at Federal
Reserve Banks from the calculation of
supplementary leverage exposure. While the
temporary relief automatically applied to the
Corporation, the Corporation’s lead depository
institution, Bank of America, N.A., did not opt
to take advantage of the SLR relief offered by
the OCC. At December 31, 2021, the Corporation’s
SLR was 5.5 percent, which exceeds the 5.0
percent minimum required by the Federal Reserve.
 Regulatory Capital and Securities Regulation 
The Corporation’s principal U.S. broker-dealer
subsidiaries are BofA Securities, Inc. (BofAS),
Merrill Lynch Professional Clearing Corp. (MLPCC)
and Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith
Incorporated (MLPF&S). The Corporation's
principal European broker-dealer subsidiaries are
Merrill Lynch International (MLI) and BofA
Securities Europe SA (BofASE).
The U.S. broker-dealer subsidiaries are subject
to the net capital requirements of Rule 15c3-1
under the Exchange Act. BofAS computes its
minimum capital requirements as an alternative
net capital broker-dealer under Rule 15c3-1e, and
MLPCC and MLPF&S compute their minimum capital
requirements in accordance with the alternative
standard under Rule 15c3-1. BofAS and MLPCC are
also registered as futures commission merchants
and are subject to Commodity Futures Trading
Commission (CFTC) Regulation 1.17. The U.S.
broker-dealer subsidiaries are also registered
with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority,
Inc. (FINRA). Pursuant to FINRA Rule 4110, FINRA
may impose higher net capital requirements than
Rule 15c3-1 under the Exchange Act with respect
to each of the broker-dealers.
BofAS provides institutional services, and in
accordance with the alternative net capital
requirements, is required to maintain tentative
net capital in excess of $5.0 billion and net
capital in excess of the greater of $1.0 billion
or a certain percentage of its reserve
requirement in addition to a certain percentage
of securities-based swap risk margin. BofAS must
also notify the SEC in the event its tentative
net capital is less than $6.0 billion. BofAS is
also required to hold a certain percentage of its
customers' and affiliates' risk-based margin in
order to meet its CFTC minimum net capital
requirement. At December 31, 2021, BofAS had
tentative net capital of $19.4 billion. BofAS
also had regulatory net capital of $16.6 billion,
which exceeded the minimum requirement of $3.5
billion.
MLPCC is a fully-guaranteed subsidiary of BofAS
and provides clearing and settlement services as
well as prime brokerage and arranged financing
services for institutional clients. At December
31, 2021, MLPCC’s regulatory net capital of $6.2
billion exceeded the minimum requirement of $1.5
billion.
MLPF&S provides retail services. At December 31,
2021, MLPF&S' regulatory net capital was $5.7
billion, which exceeded the minimum requirement
of $199 million.
Our European broker-dealers are regulated by
non-U.S. regulators. MLI, a U.K. investment firm,
is regulated by the Prudential Regulation
Authority and the Financial Conduct Authority and
is subject to certain regulatory capital
requirements. At December 31, 2021, MLI’s capital
resources were $33.6 billion, which exceeded the
minimum Pillar 1 requirement of $14.0 billion.
BofASE, a French investment firm, is regulated by
the Autorité de Contrôle Prudentiel et de
Résolution and the Autorité des Marchés
Financiers, and is subject to certain regulatory
capital requirements. At December 31, 2021,
BofASE's capital resources were $7.9 billion,
which exceeded the minimum Pillar 1 requirement
of $2.8 billion.
 Liquidity Risk 
 Funding and Liquidity Risk Management 
Our primary liquidity risk management objective
is to meet expected or unexpected cash flow and
collateral requirements, including payments under
long-term debt agreements, commitments to extend
credit and customer deposit withdrawals, while
continuing to support our businesses and
customers under a range of economic conditions.
To achieve that objective, we analyze and monitor
our liquidity risk under expected and stressed
conditions, maintain liquidity and access to
diverse funding sources, including our stable
deposit base, and seek to align liquidity-related
incentives and risks. These liquidity risk
management practices have allowed us to
effectively manage the market fluctuation from
the pandemic. For more information on the risks
of the pandemic, see Part I. Item 1A. Risk
Factors – Coronavirus Disease on page 8 and
Executive Summary – Recent Developments –
COVID-19
 Bank of America54 
Pandemic on page 27. We define liquidity as
readily available assets, limited to cash and
high-quality, liquid, unencumbered securities
that we can use to meet our contractual and
contingent financial obligations as they arise.
We manage our liquidity position through line-of-
business and ALM activities, as well as through
our legal entity funding strategy, on both a
forward and current (including intraday) basis
under both expected and stressed conditions. We
believe that a centralized approach to funding
and liquidity management enhances our ability to
monitor liquidity requirements, maximizes access
to funding sources, minimizes borrowing costs and
facilitates timely responses to liquidity events.
The Board approves our liquidity risk policy and
the Financial Contingency and Recovery Plan. The
ERC establishes our liquidity risk tolerance
levels. The MRC is responsible for overseeing
liquidity risks and directing management to
maintain exposures within the established
tolerance levels. The MRC reviews and monitors
our liquidity position and stress testing
results, approves certain liquidity risk limits
and reviews the impact of strategic decisions on
our liquidity. For more information, see Managing
Risk on page 46. Under this governance framework,
we developed certain funding and liquidity risk
management practices which include: maintaining
liquidity at the parent company and selected
subsidiaries, including our bank subsidiaries and
other regulated entities; determining what
amounts of liquidity are appropriate for these
entities based on analysis of debt maturities and
other potential cash outflows, including those
that we may experience during stressed market
conditions; diversifying funding sources,
considering our asset profile and legal entity
structure; and performing contingency planning.
NB Holdings Corporation The parent company, which
is a separate and distinct legal entity from our
bank and nonbank subsidiaries, has an
intercompany arrangement with our wholly-owned
holding company subsidiary, NB Holdings
Corporation (NB Holdings). We have transferred,
and agreed to transfer, additional parent company
assets not required to satisfy anticipated near-
term expenditures to NB Holdings. The parent
company is expected to continue to have access to
the same flow of dividends, interest and other
amounts of cash necessary to service its debt,
pay dividends and perform other obligations as it
would have had it not entered into these
arrangements and transferred any assets. These
arrangements support our preferred single point
of entry resolution strategy, under which only
the parent company would be resolved under the
U.S. Bankruptcy Code. In consideration for the
transfer of assets, NB Holdings issued a
subordinated note to the parent company in a
principal amount equal to the value of the
transferred assets. The aggregate principal
amount of the note will increase by the amount of
any future asset transfers. NB Holdings also
provided the parent company with a committed line
of credit that allows the parent company to draw
funds necessary to service near-term cash needs.
These arrangements support our preferred single
point of entry resolution strategy, under which
only the parent company would be resolved under
the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. These arrangements
include provisions to terminate the line of
credit, forgive the subordinated note and require
the parent company to transfer its remaining
financial assets to NB Holdings if our projected
liquidity resources deteriorate so severely that
resolution of the parent company becomes
imminent.
Global Liquidity Sources and Other Unencumbered
Assets We maintain liquidity available to the
Corporation, including the parent company and
selected subsidiaries, in the form of cash and
high-quality, liquid, unencumbered securities.
Our liquidity buffer, referred to as Global
Liquidity Sources (GLS), is comprised of assets
that are readily available to the parent company
and selected subsidiaries, including holding
company, bank and broker-dealer subsidiaries,
even during stressed market conditions. Our cash
is primarily on deposit with the Federal Reserve
Bank and, to a lesser extent, central banks
outside of the U.S. We limit the composition of
high-quality, liquid, unencumbered securities to
U.S. government securities, U.S. agency
securities, U.S. agency MBS and other investment-
grade securities, and a select group of non-U.S.
government securities. We can obtain cash for
these securities, even in stressed conditions,
through repurchase agreements or outright sales.
We hold our GLS in legal entities that allow us
to meet the liquidity requirements of our global
businesses, and we consider the impact of
potential regulatory, tax, legal and other
restrictions that could limit the transferability
of funds among entities. Table 15 presents
average GLS for the three months ended December
31, 2021 and 2020.
 Three Months Ended 
 Table 15 Average Global December 31 
 (Dollars in billions) Liquidity Sources 2021 2020 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Bank entities $ 1,006 $ 773 
 Nonbank and other entities(1) 152 170 
 Total Average Global Liquidity Sources $ 1,158 $ 943 
(1) Nonbank includes Parent, NB Holdings and
other regulated entities. Our bank subsidiaries’
liquidity is primarily driven by deposit and
lending activity, as well as securities valuation
and net debt activity. Bank subsidiaries can also
generate incremental liquidity by pledging a
range of unencumbered loans and securities to
certain FHLBs and the Federal Reserve Discount
Window. The cash we could have obtained by
borrowing against this pool of specifically-
identified eligible assets was $322 billion and
$306 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020. We
have established operational procedures to enable
us to borrow against these assets, including
regularly monitoring our total pool of eligible
loans and securities collateral. Eligibility is
defined in guidelines from the FHLBs and the
Federal Reserve and is subject to change at their
discretion. Due to regulatory restrictions,
liquidity generated by the bank subsidiaries can
generally be used only to fund obligations within
the bank subsidiaries, and transfers to the
parent company or nonbank subsidiaries may be
subject to prior regulatory approval. Liquidity
is also held in nonbank entities, including the
Parent, NB Holdings and other regulated entities.
Parent company and NB Holdings liquidity is
typically in the form of cash deposited at BANA,
which is excluded from the liquidity at bank
subsidiaries, and high-quality, liquid,
unencumbered securities. Liquidity held in other
regulated entities, comprised primarily of
broker-dealer subsidiaries, is primarily
available to meet the obligations of that entity,
and transfers to the parent company or to any
other subsidiary may be subject to prior
regulatory approval due to regulatory
restrictions and minimum requirements. Our other
regulated entities also hold unencumbered
investment-grade securities and equities that we
believe could be used to generate additional
liquidity.
 55Bank of America 
Table 16 presents the composition of average GLS
for the three months ended December 31, 2021 and
2020.
 Average Global Liquidity Three Months Ended 
 Table 16 Sources December 31 
 (Dollars in billions) Composition 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash on deposit $ 259 $ 322 
 U.S. Treasury securities 278 141 
 U.S. agency securities, 
 mortgage-backed 
 securities, and other 606 462 
 investment-grade 
 securities 
 Non-U.S. government 15 18 
 securities 
 Total Average Global $ 1,158 $ 943 
 Liquidity Sources 
Our GLS are substantially the same in composition to what qualifies as High Quality Liquid Assets
(HQLA) under the final U.S. Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) rules. However, HQLA for purposes of
calculating LCR is not reported at market value, but at a lower value that incorporates regulatory
deductions and the exclusion of excess liquidity held at certain subsidiaries. The LCR is calculated
as the amount of a financial institution’s unencumbered HQLA relative to the estimated net cash
outflows the institution could encounter over a 30-day period of significant liquidity stress,
expressed as a percentage. Our average consolidated HQLA, on a net basis, was $617 billion and $584
billion for the three months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. For the same periods, the average
consolidated LCR was 115 percent and 122 percent. Our LCR fluctuates due to normal business flows
from customer activity. Liquidity Stress Analysis We utilize liquidity stress analysis to assist us
in determining the appropriate amounts of liquidity to maintain at the parent company and our
subsidiaries to meet contractual and contingent cash outflows under a range of scenarios. The
scenarios we consider and utilize incorporate market-wide and Corporation-specific events, including
potential credit rating downgrades for the parent company and our subsidiaries, and more severe
events including potential resolution scenarios. The scenarios are based on our historical
experience, experience of distressed and failed financial institutions, regulatory guidance, and both
expected and unexpected future events. The types of potential contractual and contingent cash
outflows we consider in our scenarios may include, but are not limited to, upcoming contractual
maturities of unsecured debt and reductions in new debt issuances; diminished access to secured
financing markets; potential deposit withdrawals; increased draws on loan commitments, liquidity
facilities and letters of credit; additional collateral that counterparties could call if our credit
ratings were downgraded; collateral and margin requirements arising from market value changes; and
potential liquidity required to maintain businesses and finance customer activities. Changes in
certain market factors, including, but not limited to, credit rating downgrades, could negatively
impact potential contractual and contingent outflows and the related financial instruments, and in
some cases these impacts could be material to our financial results. We consider all sources of funds
that we could access during each stress scenario and focus particularly on matching available sources
with corresponding liquidity requirements by legal entity. We also use the stress modeling results to
manage our asset and liability profile and establish limits and guidelines on certain funding sources
and businesses.
Net Stable Funding Ratio Final Rule On October 20, 2020, U.S. banking regulators finalized the Net
Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), a rule requiring large banks to maintain a minimum level of stable
funding over a one-year period. The final rule is intended to support the ability of banks to lend to
households and businesses in both normal and adverse economic conditions and is complementary to the
LCR rule, which focuses on short-term liquidity risks. The final rule was effective July 1, 2021, and
the Corporation is in compliance. The U.S. NSFR applies to the Corporation on a consolidated basis
and to our insured depository institutions. There have not been any significant impacts to the
Corporation. Diversified Funding Sources We fund our assets primarily with a mix of deposits, and
secured and unsecured liabilities through a centralized, globally coordinated funding approach
diversified across products, programs, markets, currencies and investor groups. The primary benefits
of our centralized funding approach include greater control, reduced funding costs, wider name
recognition by investors and greater flexibility to meet the variable funding requirements of
subsidiaries. Where regulations, time zone differences or other business considerations make parent
company funding impractical, certain other subsidiaries may issue their own debt. We fund a
substantial portion of our lending activities through our deposits, which were $2.1 trillion and $1.8
trillion at December 31, 2021 and 2020. Deposits are primarily generated by our Consumer Banking ,
GWIM and Global Banking segments. These deposits are diversified by clients, product type and
geography, and the majority of our U.S. deposits are insured by the FDIC. We consider a substantial
portion of our deposits to be a stable, low-cost and consistent source of funding. We believe this
deposit funding is generally less sensitive to interest rate changes, market volatility or changes in
our credit ratings than wholesale funding sources. Our lending activities may also be financed
through secured borrowings, including credit card securitizations and securitizations with
government-sponsored enterprises (GSE), the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and private-label
investors, as well as FHLB loans. Our trading activities in other regulated entities are primarily
funded on a secured basis through securities lending and repurchase agreements, and these amounts
will vary based on customer activity and market conditions. We believe funding these activities in
the secured financing markets is more cost-efficient and less sensitive to changes in our credit
ratings than unsecured financing. Repurchase agreements are generally short-term and often overnight.
Disruptions in secured financing markets for financial institutions have occurred in prior market
cycles which resulted in adverse changes in terms or significant reductions in the availability of
such financing. We manage the liquidity risks arising from secured funding by sourcing funding
globally from a diverse group of counterparties, providing a range of securities collateral and
pursuing longer durations, when appropriate. For more information on secured financing agreements,
see Note 10 – Securities Financing Agreements, Short-term Borrowings and Restricted Cash to the
Consolidated Financial Statements. Total long-term debt increased $17.2 billion to $280.1 billion
during 2021, primarily due to debt issuances, partially offset by debt maturities, redemptions and
valuation adjustments. We may, from time to time, purchase outstanding debt instruments in various
transactions, depending on market conditions, liquidity and other factors. Our other regulated
 Bank of America56 
entities may also make markets in our debt
instruments to provide liquidity for investors.
During 2021, we issued $76.7 billion of long-term
debt consisting of $56.2 billion of notes issued
by Bank of America Corporation, substantially all
of which were TLAC compliant, $8.0 billion of
notes issued by Bank of America, N.A. and $12.5
billion of other debt. During 2020, we issued
$56.9 billion of long-term debt consisting of
$43.8 billion of notes issued by Bank of America
Corporation, substantially all of which were TLAC
compliant, $4.8 billion of notes issued by Bank
of America, N.A. and $8.3 billion of other debt.
During 2021, we had total long-term debt
maturities and redemptions in the aggregate of
$46.4 billion consisting of $24.4 billion for
Bank of America Corporation, $10.4 billion for
Bank of America, N.A. and $11.6 billion of other
debt. During 2020, we had total long-term debt
maturities and redemptions in the aggregate of
$47.1 billion consisting of $22.6 billion for
Bank of America Corporation, $11.5 billion for
Bank of America, N.A. and $13.0 billion of other
debt. At December 31, 2021, Bank of America
Corporation's senior notes of $212.9 billion
included $179.5 billion of outstanding notes that
are both TLAC eligible and callable at least one
year before their stated maturities. Of these
senior notes, $15.0 billion will be callable and
become TLAC ineligible during 2022, and $17.0
billion, $17.8 billion, $15.0 billion and $17.7
billion will do so during each of 2023 through
2026, respectively, and $97.0 billion thereafter.
We issue long-term unsecured debt in a variety of
maturities and currencies to achieve cost-
efficient funding and to maintain an appropriate
maturity profile. While the cost and availability
of unsecured funding may be negatively impacted
by general market conditions or by matters
specific to the financial services industry or
the Corporation, we seek to mitigate refinancing
risk by actively managing the amount of our
borrowings that we anticipate will mature within
any month or quarter. We may issue unsecured debt
in the form of structured notes for client
purposes, certain of which qualify as TLAC-
eligible debt. During 2021, we issued $7.1
billion of structured notes, which are debt
obligations that pay investors returns linked to
other debt or equity securities, indices,
currencies or commodities. We typically hedge the
returns we are obligated to pay on these
liabilities with derivatives and/or investments
in the underlying instruments, so that from a
funding perspective, the cost is similar to our
other unsecured long-term debt. We could be
required to settle certain structured note
obligations for cash or other securities prior to
maturity under certain circumstances, which we
consider for liquidity planning purposes. We
believe, however, that a portion of such
borrowings will remain outstanding beyond the
earliest put or redemption date. Substantially
all of our senior and subordinated debt
obligations contain no provisions that could
trigger a requirement for an early repayment,
require additional collateral support, result in
changes to terms, accelerate maturity or create
additional financial obligations upon an adverse
change in our credit ratings, financial ratios,
earnings, cash flows or stock price. For more
information on long-term debt funding, including
issuances and maturities and redemptions, see
Note 11 – Long-term Debt to the Consolidated
Financial Statements. We use derivative
transactions to manage the duration, interest
rate and currency risks of our borrowings,
considering the characteristics of the assets
they are funding. For more information on our ALM
activities, see Interest Rate Risk Management for
the Banking Book on page 79.
Uninsured Deposits The FDIC insures the
Corporation’s U.S. deposits up to $250,000 per
depositor, per insured bank for each account
ownership category, and various country-specific
funds insure non-U.S. deposits up to specified
limits. Deposits that exceed insurance limits are
uninsured. At December 31, 2021, the
Corporation’s deposits totaled $2.1 trillion, of
which total estimated uninsured U.S. and non-U.S.
deposits were $701.4 billion and $111.9 billion.
At December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s deposits
totaled $1.8 trillion, of which total estimated
uninsured U.S. and non-U.S. deposits were $597.7
billion and $104.1 billion. Table 17 presents
information about the Corporation’s total
estimated uninsured time deposits. For more
information on our liquidity sources, see Global
Liquidity Sources and Other Unencumbered Assets,
and for more information on deposits, see
Diversified Funding Sources in this section. For
more information on contractual time deposit
maturities, see Note 9 – Deposits to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Uninsured Time 
 Table 17 Deposits(1) December 31, 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Dollars in millions) U.S. Non-U.S. Total 
 Uninsured time deposits 
 with a maturity 
 of: 
 3 months or less $ 2,337 $ 7,274 $ 9,611 
 Over 3 months through 6 1,668 1,663 3,331 
 months 
 Over 6 months through 12 1,942 239 2,181 
 months 
 Over 12 months 289 1,470 1,759 
 Total $ 6,236 $ 10,646 $ 16,882 
(1) Amounts are estimated based on the regulatory
methodologies defined by each local jurisdiction.
Contingency Planning We maintain contingency
funding plans that outline our potential
responses to liquidity stress events at various
levels of severity. These policies and plans are
based on stress scenarios and include potential
funding strategies and communication and
notification procedures that we would implement
in the event we experienced stressed liquidity
conditions. We periodically review and test the
contingency funding plans to validate efficacy
and assess readiness. Our U.S. bank subsidiaries
can access contingency funding through the
Federal Reserve Discount Window. Certain non-U.S.
subsidiaries have access to central bank
facilities in the jurisdictions in which they
operate. While we do not rely on these sources in
our liquidity modeling, we maintain the policies,
procedures and governance processes that would
enable us to access these sources if necessary.
Credit Ratings Our borrowing costs and ability to
raise funds are impacted by our credit ratings.
In addition, credit ratings may be important to
customers or counterparties when we compete in
certain markets and when we seek to engage in
certain transactions, including over-the-counter
(OTC) derivatives. Thus, it is our objective to
maintain high-quality credit ratings, and
management maintains an active dialogue with the
major rating agencies. Credit ratings and
outlooks are opinions expressed by rating
agencies on our creditworthiness and that of our
obligations or securities, including long-term
debt, short-term borrowings, preferred stock and
other securities, including asset
securitizations. Our credit ratings are subject
to ongoing review
 57Bank of America 
by the rating agencies, and they consider a
number of factors, including our own financial
strength, performance, prospects and operations
as well as factors not under our control. The
rating agencies could make adjustments to our
ratings at any time, and they provide no
assurances that they will maintain our ratings at
current levels.
Other factors that influence our credit ratings
include changes to the rating agencies’
methodologies for our industry or certain
security types; the rating agencies’ assessment
of the general operating environment for
financial services companies; our relative
positions in the markets in which we compete; our
various risk exposures and risk management
policies and activities; pending litigation and
other contingencies or potential tail risks; our
reputation; our liquidity position, diversity of
funding sources and funding costs; the current
and expected level and volatility of our
earnings; our capital position and capital
management practices; our corporate governance;
the sovereign credit ratings of the U.S.
government; current or future regulatory and
legislative initiatives; and the agencies’ views
on whether the U.S. government would provide
meaningful support to the Corporation or its
subsidiaries in a crisis.
On May 24, 2021, Standard & Poor’s Global Ratings
(S&P) affirmed the current ratings of the
Corporation and its subsidiaries, while at the
same time revising its rating outlook to Positive
from Stable.
On June 7, 2021, Fitch Ratings (Fitch) upgraded
the long-term senior debt ratings of the
Corporation and its rated subsidiaries by one
notch, to AA- and AA, respectively. Fitch also
upgraded the Corporation’s short-term rating to
F1+ which is now aligned with the short-term
rating of its subsidiaries, including BANA.
Following the upgrade, the rating outlook for the
Corporation and its subsidiaries is Stable.
On November 22, 2021, Moody’s Investors Service
(Moody’s) affirmed the current ratings of the
Corporation and its subsidiaries, while at the
same time revising its rating outlook to Positive
from Stable.
Table 18 presents the Corporation’s current long-
term/short-term senior debt ratings and outlooks
expressed by the rating agencies.
 Tab… Seni… 
 18 Debt 
 Rati… 
 Stan… 
 Mood… & Fitch 
 Inve… Poor… Ratin… 
 Serv… Glob… 
 Rati… 
 Long… Shor… Outl… Long… Short… Outl… Long-… Shor… Outlo… 
 Bank 
 of A2 P-1 Posi… A- A-2 Posi… AA- F1+ Stable 
 Ame… 
 Cor… 
 Bank 
 of Aa2 P-1 Posi… A+ A-1 Posi… AA F1+ Stable 
 Ame… 
 N.A. 
 Bank 
 of 
 Ame… 
 Eur… NR NR NR A+ A-1 Posi… AA F1+ Stable 
 Des… 
 Act… 
 Com… 
 Mer… 
 Lyn… 
 Pie… 
 Fen… NR NR NR A+ A-1 Posi… AA F1+ Stable 
 & 
 Smi… 
 Inc… 
 BofA 
 Sec… NR NR NR A+ A-1 Posi… AA F1+ Stable 
 Inc. 
 Mer… 
 Lyn… NR NR NR A+ A-1 Posi… AA F1+ Stable 
 Int… 
 BofA 
 Sec… NR NR NR A+ A-1 Posi… AA F1+ Stable 
 Eur… 
 SA 
NR = not rated
A reduction in certain of our credit ratings or
the ratings of certain asset-backed
securitizations may have a material adverse
effect on our liquidity, potential loss of access
to credit markets, the related cost of funds, our
businesses and on certain revenues, particularly
in those businesses where counterparty
creditworthiness is critical. In addition, under
the terms of certain OTC derivative contracts and
other trading agreements, in the event of
downgrades of our or our rated subsidiaries’
credit ratings, the counterparties to those
agreements may require us to provide additional
collateral, or to terminate these contracts or
agreements, which could cause us to sustain
losses and/or adversely impact our liquidity. If
the short-term credit ratings of our parent
company, bank or broker-dealer subsidiaries were
downgraded by one or more levels, the potential
loss of access to short-term funding sources such
as repo financing and the effect on our
incremental cost of funds could be material.
While certain potential impacts are contractual
and quantifiable, the full scope of the
consequences of a credit rating downgrade to a
financial institution is inherently uncertain, as
it depends upon numerous dynamic, complex and
inter-related factors and assumptions, including
whether any downgrade of a company’s long-term
credit ratings precipitates downgrades to its
short-term credit ratings, and assumptions about
the potential behaviors of various customers,
investors and counterparties. For more
information on potential impacts of credit rating
downgrades, see Liquidity Risk – Liquidity Stress
Analysis on page 56.
For more information on additional collateral and
termination
payments that could be required in connection
with certain OTC derivative contracts and other
trading agreements as a result of such a credit
rating downgrade, see Note 3 – Derivatives to the
Consolidated Financial Statements and Item 1A.
Risk Factors.
 Common Stock Dividends 
For a summary of our declared quarterly cash
dividends on common stock during 2021 and through
February 22, 2022, see Note 13 – Shareholders’
Equity to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Finance Subsidiary Issuers and Parent Guarantor 
BofA Finance LLC, a Delaware limited liability
company (BofA Finance), is a consolidated finance
subsidiary of the Corporation that has issued and
sold, and is expected to continue to issue and
sell, its senior unsecured debt securities
(Guaranteed Notes) that are fully and
unconditionally guaranteed by the Corporation.
The Corporation guarantees the due and punctual
payment, on demand, of amounts payable on the
Guaranteed Notes if not paid by BofA Finance. In
addition, each of BAC Capital Trust XIII, BAC
Capital Trust XIV and BAC Capital Trust XV,
Delaware statutory trusts (collectively, the
Trusts), is a 100 percent owned finance
subsidiary of the Corporation that has issued and
sold trust preferred securities (the Trust
Preferred Securities) or capital securities (the
Capital Securities and, together with the
Guaranteed Notes and the Trust Preferred
Securities, the Guaranteed Securities), as
applicable, that remained outstanding at December
31, 2021. The Corporation guarantees the payment
of amounts and distributions with
 Bank of America58 
respect to the Trust Preferred Securities and
Capital Securities if not paid by the Trusts, to
the extent of funds held by the Trusts, and this
guarantee, together with the Corporation’s other
obligations with respect to the Trust Preferred
Securities and Capital Securities, effectively
constitutes a full and unconditional guarantee of
the Trusts’ payment obligations on the Trust
Preferred Securities or Capital Securities, as
applicable. No other subsidiary of the
Corporation guarantees the Guaranteed Securities.
BofA Finance and each of the Trusts are finance
subsidiaries, have no independent assets,
revenues or operations and are dependent upon the
Corporation and/or the Corporation’s other
subsidiaries to meet their respective obligations
under the Guaranteed Securities in the ordinary
course. If holders of the Guaranteed Securities
make claims on their Guaranteed Securities in a
bankruptcy, resolution or similar proceeding, any
recoveries on those claims will be limited to
those available under the applicable guarantee by
the Corporation, as described above.
The Corporation is a holding company and depends
upon its subsidiaries for liquidity. Applicable
laws and regulations and intercompany
arrangements entered into in connection with the
Corporation’s resolution plan could restrict the
availability of funds from subsidiaries to the
Corporation, which could adversely affect the
Corporation’s ability to make payments under its
guarantees. In addition, the obligations of the
Corporation under the guarantees of the
Guaranteed Securities will be structurally
subordinated to all existing and future
liabilities of its subsidiaries, and claimants
should look only to assets of the Corporation for
payments. If the Corporation, as guarantor of the
Guaranteed Notes, transfers all or substantially
all of its assets to one or more direct or
indirect majority-owned subsidiaries, under the
indenture governing the Guaranteed Notes, the
subsidiary or subsidiaries will not be required
to assume the Corporation’s obligations under its
guarantee of the Guaranteed Notes.
For more information on factors that may affect
payments to holders of the Guaranteed Securities,
see Liquidity Risk – NB Holdings Corporation in
this section, Item 1. Business – Insolvency and
the Orderly Liquidation Authority on page 5 and
Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors – Liquidity on page
10.
 Representations and Warranties Obligations 
For information on representations and warranties
obligations in connection with the sale of
mortgage loans, see Note 12 – Commitments and
Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
 Credit Risk Management 
Credit risk is the risk of loss arising from the
inability or failure of a borrower or
counterparty to meet its obligations. Credit risk
can also arise from operational failures that
result in an erroneous advance, commitment or
investment of funds. We define the credit
exposure to a borrower or counterparty as the
loss potential arising from all product
classifications including loans and leases,
deposit overdrafts, derivatives, assets held-for-
sale and unfunded lending commitments which
include loan commitments, letters of credit and
financial guarantees. Derivative positions are
recorded at fair value and assets held-for-sale
are recorded at either fair value or the lower of
cost or fair value. Certain loans and unfunded
commitments are accounted for under the fair
value option. Credit risk for categories of
assets carried at fair value is not accounted for
as part of the allowance for credit losses but as
part of the fair value adjustments recorded in
earnings. For derivative positions,
our credit risk is measured as the net cost in
the event the counterparties with contracts in
which we are in a gain position fail to perform
under the terms of those contracts. We use the
current fair value to represent credit exposure
without giving consideration to future mark-to-
market changes. The credit risk amounts take into
consideration the effects of legally enforceable
master netting agreements and cash collateral.
Our consumer and commercial credit extension and
review procedures encompass funded and unfunded
credit exposures. For more information on
derivatives and credit extension commitments, see
Note 3 – Derivatives and Note 12 – Commitments
and Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
We manage credit risk based on the risk profile
of the borrower or counterparty, repayment
sources, the nature of underlying collateral and
other support given current events, conditions
and expectations. We classify our portfolios as
either consumer or commercial and monitor credit
risk in each as discussed below.
We refine our underwriting and credit risk
management practices as well as credit standards
to meet the changing economic environment. To
mitigate losses and enhance customer support in
our consumer businesses, we have in place
collection programs and loan modification and
customer assistance infrastructures. We utilize a
number of actions to mitigate losses in the
commercial businesses including increasing the
frequency and intensity of portfolio monitoring,
hedging activity and our practice of transferring
management of deteriorating commercial exposures
to independent special asset officers as credits
enter criticized categories .
For information on our credit risk management
activities, see Consumer Portfolio Credit Risk
Management below, Commercial Portfolio Credit
Risk Management on page 65, Non-U.S. Portfolio on
page 71, Allowance for Credit Losses on page 73,
and Note 5 – Outstanding Loans and Leases and
Allowance for Credit Losses to the Consolidated
Financial Statements. For more information on the
factors that may expose us to credit risk, see
Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors - Credit on page
12.
During 2021, the economy gained momentum as
unemployment continued to decline from double-
digit highs during 2020 and the economy re-opened
as vaccination rates increased and restrictions
eased. With the easing of restrictions, we saw
increased business openings, a rebound to
commercial and consumer spending, higher asset
values and increased global GDP, all of which
positively impacted our consumer and commercial
credit portfolios. Additionally, individuals and
businesses in the U.S. benefited from various
forms of government support through economic
stimulus packages enacted in 2020 and 2021, which
contributed to strong asset quality across our
credit portfolios.
As a result of the economic recovery experienced
in 2021, net charge-offs, nonperforming loans and
commercial reservable criticized exposure
declined compared to 2020. While there has been
significant economic improvement in comparison to
2020, uncertainty remains about the timing and
strength of the economy’s recovery, which may
also be hampered by supply chain disruptions and
inflationary pressures and could lead to adverse
impacts to credit quality metrics in future
periods. The pandemic and its full impact on the
global economy continue to be highly uncertain.
While COVID-19 cases eased throughout the
majority of 2021, they reached new highs by the
end of 2021, and the spread of new, more
contagious variants could impact the magnitude
and duration of this health crisis. However,
ongoing virus containment efforts and vaccination
progress, could support the macroeconomic
recovery.
 59Bank of America 
For more information on how the pandemic may
affect our operations, see Executive Summary –
Recent Developments – COVID-19 Pandemic on page
27 and Item 1A. Risk Factors – Coronavirus
Disease on page 7.
 Consumer Portfolio Credit Risk Management 
Credit risk management for the consumer portfolio
begins with initial underwriting and continues
throughout a borrower’s credit cycle. Statistical
techniques in conjunction with experiential
judgment are used in all aspects of portfolio
management including underwriting, product
pricing, risk appetite, setting credit limits,
and establishing operating processes and metrics
to quantify and balance risks and returns.
Statistical models are built using detailed
behavioral information from external sources such
as credit bureaus and/or internal historical
experience and are a component of our consumer
credit risk management process. These models are
used in part to assist in making both new and
ongoing credit decisions, as well as portfolio
management strategies, including authorizations
and line management, collection practices and
strategies, and determination of the allowance
for loan and lease losses and allocated capital
for credit risk.
 Consumer Credit Portfolio 
The economic environment improved during 2021,
with the U.S. unemployment rate continuing to
decline and home prices increasing. During 2021,
net charge-offs decreased $805 million to $1.8
billion primarily due to lower credit card
losses, as the impact of government stimulus
measures were partially offset by charge-offs
associated with deferrals that expired in 2020.
During 2021, nonperforming loans increased due to
deferral activity.
The consumer allowance for loan and lease losses
decreased $3.0 billion in 2021 to $7.0 billion
primarily due to improvements in the
macroeconomic outlook and credit quality. For
more information, see Allowance for Credit Losses
on page 73.
For more information on our accounting policies
regarding delinquencies, nonperforming status,
charge-offs and troubled debt restructurings
(TDRs) for the consumer portfolio, as well as
interest accrual policies and delinquency status
for loan modifications related to the pandemic,
see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles and Note 5 – Outstanding Loans and
Leases and Allowance for Credit Losses to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Table 19 presents our outstanding consumer loans
and leases, consumer nonperforming loans and
accruing consumer loans past due 90 days or more.
 T… Co… 
 19 Cr… 
 Qu… 
 Ac… 
 Pa… 
 Due 
 Ou… No… 90 
 Da… 
 or 
 Mo… 
 De… 
 31 
 (… 
 in 20… 20… 20… 2020 20… 2020 
 m… 
 R… $ 22… $ 22… $ 2,… $ 2,0… $ 634 $ 762 
 m… 
 H… 27… 34… 630 649 — — 
 e… 
 C… 81… 78… n/a n/a 487 903 
 c… 
 D… 10… 91… 75 71 11 33 
 c… 
 O… 190 124 — — — — 
 c… 
 C… 
 l… 
 e… 
 l… 
 a… 
 f… $ 43… $ 42… $ 2,… $ 2,7… $ 1,… $ 1,6… 
 u… 
 t… 
 f… 
 v… 
 o… 
 L… 
 a… 
 f… 
 u… 618 735 
 t… 
 f… 
 v… 
 o… 
 T… 
 c… 
 l… $ 43… $ 42… 
 a… 
 l… 
 P… 
 of 
 o… 
 c… n/a n/a 0.… % 0.64 % 0.… % 0.40 % 
 l… 
 a… 
 l… 
 P… 
 of 
 o… 
 c… 
 l… 
 a… n/a n/a 0.… 0.65 0.… 0.22 
 l… 
 e… 
 f… 
 l… 
 p… 
(1) Residential mortgage loans accruing past due 90 days or more are fully-insured loans. At December
31, 2021 and 2020, residential mortgage includes $444 million and $537 million of loans on which
interest had been curtailed by the FHA, and therefore were no longer accruing interest, although
principal was still insured, and $190 million and $225 million of loans on which interest was still
accruing.
(2) Outstandings primarily include auto and specialty lending loans and leases of $48.5 billion and
$46.4 billion, U.S. securities-based lending loans of $51.1 billion and $41.1 billion and non-U.S.
consumer loans of $3.0 billion and $3.0 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(3) For more information on the fair value option, see Note 21 – Fair Value Option to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
(4) Excludes consumer loans accounted for under the fair value option. At December 31, 2021 and 2020,
$21 million and $11 million of loans accounted for under the fair value option were past due 90 days
or more and not accruing interest.
n/a = not applicable
Table 20 presents net charge-offs and related ratios for consumer loans and leases.
 Consumer Net 
 Charge-offs Net 
 Table 20 and Net Charge-off 
 (Dollars in Related Charge-offs Ratios(1) 
 millions) Ratios 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Residential $ -28 $ -30 -0.01 % -0.01 % 
 mortgage 
 Home equity -119 -73 -0.39 -0.19 
 Credit card 1,723 2,349 2.29 2.76 
 Direct/Indi… 1 122 — 0.14 
 consumer 
 Other 270 284 n/m n/m 
 consumer 
 Total $ 1,847 $ 2,652 0.44 0.59 
(1) Net charge-off ratios are calculated as net charge-offs divided by average outstanding loans and
leases excluding loans accounted for under the fair value option.
n/m = not meaningful
 Bank of America60 
We believe that the presentation of information
adjusted to exclude the impact of the fully-
insured loan portfolio and loans accounted for
under the fair value option is more
representative of the ongoing operations and
credit quality of the business. As a result, in
the following tables and discussions of the
residential mortgage and home equity portfolios,
we exclude loans accounted for under the fair
value option and provide information that
excludes the impact of the fully-insured loan
portfolio in certain credit quality statistics.
 Residential Mortgage 
The residential mortgage portfolio made up the
largest percentage of our consumer loan portfolio
at 51 percent of consumer loans and leases in
2021. Approximately 52 percent of the residential
mortgage portfolio was in Consumer Banking
and 43 percent was in GWIM. The remaining portion
was in All Other .
Outstanding balances in the residential mortgage
portfolio decreased $1.6 billion in 2021 as
paydowns were partially offset by originations.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the residential
mortgage portfolio included $12.7 billion and
$11.8 billion of outstanding fully-insured loans,
of which $2.2 billion and $2.8 billion had FHA
insurance, with the remainder protected by Fannie
Mae long-term standby agreements.
Table 21 presents certain residential mortgage
key credit statistics on both a reported basis
and excluding the fully-insured loan portfolio.
The following discussion presents the residential
mortgage portfolio excluding the fully-insured
loan portfolio.
 Residenti… 
 Table 21 Mortgage – 
 Key Credit 
 Statistics 
 Reported Excluding 
 Basis(1) Fully-ins… 
 Loans(1) 
 December 
 31 
 (Dollars 
 in 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 millions) 
 Outstand… $ 221,963 $ 223,555 $ 209,259 $ 211,737 
 Accruing 
 past due 1,753 2,314 866 1,224 
 30 days 
 or more 
 Accruing 
 past due 634 762 — — 
 90 days 
 or more 
 Nonperfo… 2,284 2,005 2,284 2,005 
 loans(2) 
 Percent 
 of 
 portfolio 
 Refreshed 
 LTV 
 greater 
 than 90 1 % 2 % 1 % 1 % 
 but less 
 than or 
 equal to 
 100 
 Refreshed 
 LTV — 1 — 1 
 greater 
 than 100 
 Refreshed 
 FICO 2 2 1 1 
 below 620 
(1) Outstandings, accruing past due,
nonperforming loans and percentages of portfolio
exclude loans accounted for under the fair value
option. For information on our interest accrual
policies and delinquency status for loan
modifications related to the pandemic, see Note 1
– Summary of Significant Accounting Principles to
the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2) Includes loans that are contractually current
which primarily consist of collateral-dependent
TDRs, including those that have been discharged
in Chapter 7 bankruptcy and loans that have not
yet demonstrated a sustained period of payment
performance following a TDR.
Nonperforming outstanding balances in the
residential mortgage portfolio increased $279
million in 2021 primarily driven by deferral
activity. Of the nonperforming residential
mortgage loans at December 31, 2021, $1.2
billion, or 51 percent, were current on
contractual payments. Loans accruing past due 30
days or more decreased $358 million driven by
continued improvement in credit quality.
Net recoveries of $28 million in 2021 remained
relatively unchanged compared to 2020.
Of the $209.3 billion in total residential
mortgage loans outstanding at December 31, 2021,
27 percent were originated as interest-only
loans. The outstanding balance of interest-only
residential mortgage loans that have entered the
amortization period was $4.8 billion, or eight
percent, at December 31, 2021. Residential
mortgage loans that have entered the amortization
period generally experienced a higher rate of
early stage delinquencies and nonperforming
status compared to the residential mortgage
portfolio as a whole. At December 31, 2021, $66
million, or one percent, of outstanding interest-
only residential mortgages that had entered the
amortization period were accruing past due 30
days or more compared to $866 million, or less
than one percent, for the entire residential
mortgage portfolio. In addition, at December 31,
2021, $275 million, or six percent, of
outstanding interest-only residential mortgage
loans that had entered the amortization period
were nonperforming, of which $83 million were
contractually current compared to $2.3 billion,
or one percent, for the entire residential
mortgage portfolio. Loans that have yet to enter
the amortization period in our interest-only
residential mortgage portfolio are primarily
well-collateralized loans to our wealth
management clients and have an interest-only
period of three to ten years. Approximately 91
percent of these loans that have yet to enter the
amortization period will not be required to make
a fully-amortizing payment until 2025 or later.
Table 22 presents outstandings, nonperforming
loans and net charge-offs by certain state
concentrations for the residential mortgage
portfolio. The Los Angeles-Long Beach-Santa Ana
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) within
California represented 15 percent and 16 percent
of outstandings at December 31, 2021 and 2020. In
the New York area, the New York-Northern New
Jersey-Long Island MSA made up 15 percent and 14
percent of outstandings at December 31, 2021 and
2020.
 61Bank of America 
 Reside… 
 Table Mortga… 
 22 State 
 Concen… 
 Outsta… Nonper… 
 Decemb… Net 
 31 Charg… 
 (Doll… Decemb… Decemb… Decemb… Decemb… 
 in 31 31 31 31 2021 2020 
 milli… 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 Calif… $ 77,819 $ 83,185 $ 693 $ 570 $ -14 $ -18 
 New 24,975 23,832 358 272 3 3 
 York 
 Flori… 13,883 13,017 158 175 -8 -5 
 Texas 9,002 8,868 86 78 — — 
 New 8,723 8,806 117 98 — -1 
 Jersey 
 Other 74,857 74,029 872 812 -9 -9 
 Resid… 
 mortg… $ 209,259 $ 211,737 $ 2,284 $ 2,005 $ -28 $ -30 
 loans 
 Fully… 
 loan 12,704 11,818 
 portf… 
 Total 
 resid… 
 mortg… $ 221,963 $ 223,555 
 loan 
 portf… 
(1) Outstandings and nonperforming loans exclude loans accounted for under the fair value option.
 Home Equity 
At December 31, 2021, the home equity portfolio
made up six percent of the consumer portfolio and
was comprised of home equity lines of credit
(HELOCs), home equity loans and reverse
mortgages. HELOCs generally have an initial draw
period of 10 years, and after the initial draw
period ends, the loans generally convert to 15-
or 20-year amortizing loans. We no longer
originate home equity loans or reverse mortgages.
At December 31, 2021, 80 percent of the home
equity portfolio was in Consumer Banking , 11
percent was in All Other and the remainder of the
portfolio was primarily in GWIM . Outstanding
balances in the home equity portfolio decreased
$6.4 billion in 2021 primarily due to paydowns
outpacing new
originations and draws on existing lines. Of the
total home equity portfolio at December 31, 2021
and 2020, $12.2 billion, or 44 percent, and $13.8
billion, or 40 percent, were in first-lien
positions. At December 31, 2021, outstanding
balances in the home equity portfolio that were
in a second-lien or more junior-lien position and
where we also held the first-lien loan totaled
$4.6 billion, or 16 percent of our total home
equity portfolio.
Unused HELOCs totaled $40.5 billion and $42.3
billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020. The HELOC
utilization rate was 39 percent and 43 percent at
December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Table 23 presents certain home equity portfolio
key credit statistics.
 Table 23 Home Equity – Key 
 (Dollars in Credit December 31 
 millions) Statistics(1) 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstandings $ 27,935 $ 34,311 
 Accruing past due 157 186 
 30 days or more 
 Nonperforming 630 649 
 loans(2) 
 Percent of 
 portfolio 
 Refreshed CLTV 
 greater than 90 
 but less — % 1 % 
 than or equal to 
 100 
 Refreshed CLTV 1 1 
 greater than 100 
 Refreshed FICO 3 3 
 below 620 
(1) Outstandings, accruing past due,
nonperforming loans and percentages of the
portfolio exclude loans accounted for under the
fair value option. For information on our
interest accrual policies and delinquency status
for loan modifications related to the pandemic,
see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
(2) Includes loans that are contractually current
which primarily consist of collateral-dependent
TDRs, including those that have been discharged
in Chapter 7 bankruptcy, junior-lien loans where
the underlying first lien is 90 days or more past
due, as well as loans that have not yet
demonstrated a sustained period of payment
performance following a TDR.
Nonperforming outstanding balances in the home
equity portfolio remained relatively flat at $630
million at December 31, 2021. Of the
nonperforming home equity loans at December 31,
2021, $227 million, or 36 percent, were current
on contractual payments. In addition, $273
million, or 43 percent of nonperforming home
equity loans were 180 days or more past due and
had been written down to the estimated fair value
of the collateral, less costs to sell. Accruing
loans that were 30 days or more past due
decreased $29 million in 2021.
Net recoveries increased $46 million to $119
million in 2021 compared to the same period in
2020. The increase was driven by favorable
portfolio trends due in part to improvement in
home prices.
Of the $27.9 billion in total home equity
portfolio outstandings at December 31, 2021, as
shown in Table 23, 14 percent require interest-
only payments. The outstanding balance of HELOCs
that have reached the end of their draw period
and have entered the amortization period was $6.8
billion at December 31, 2021. The HELOCs that
have entered the amortization period have
experienced a higher percentage of early stage
delinquencies and nonperforming status when
compared to the HELOC portfolio as a whole. At
December 31, 2021, $105 million, or two percent,
of outstanding HELOCs that had entered the
amortization period were accruing past due 30
days or more. In addition, at December 31, 2021,
$455 million, or seven percent, were
nonperforming. Loans that have yet to enter the
amortization period in our interest-only
portfolio are primarily post-2008 vintages and
generally have better credit quality than the
previous vintages that had entered the
amortization period. We communicate to
contractually current customers more than a year
prior to the end of their draw period to inform
them of the potential change to the payment
structure before entering the amortization
period, and provide payment options to customers
prior to the end of the draw period.
Although we do not actively track how many of our
home equity customers pay only the minimum amount
due on their home equity loans and lines, we can
infer some of this information through a review
of our HELOC portfolio that we service and that
is still in its revolving period. During 2021,
nine percent of these customers with an
outstanding balance did not pay any principal on
their HELOCs.
 Bank of America62 
Table 24 presents outstandings, nonperforming
balances and net recoveries by certain state
concentrations for the home equity portfolio. In
the New York area, the New York-Northern New
Jersey-Long Island MSA made up 13 percent of the
outstanding home equity portfolio at both
December 31, 2021
and 2020. The Los Angeles-Long Beach-Santa Ana
MSA within California made up 10 percent and 11
percent of the outstanding home equity portfolio
at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 Home 
 Table Equity 
 24 State 
 Concent… 
 Outsta… Nonperf… 
 Decemb… Net 
 31 Recove… 
 (Dolla… 
 in 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 millio… 
 Califo… $ 7,600 $ 9,488 $ 140 $ 143 $ -40 $ -26 
 Florida 2,977 3,715 78 80 -21 -11 
 New 2,259 2,749 69 67 -4 -3 
 Jersey 
 New 2,072 2,495 96 103 -1 -1 
 York 
 Massac… 1,422 1,719 32 32 -3 -1 
 Other 11,605 14,145 215 224 -50 -31 
 Total 
 home 
 equity $ 27,935 $ 34,311 $ 630 $ 649 $ -119 $ -73 
 loan 
 portfo… 
(1) Outstandings and nonperforming loans exclude loans accounted for under the fair value option.
 Credit Card 
At December 31, 2021, 97 percent of the credit
card portfolio was managed in Consumer Banking
with the remainder in GWIM . Outstandings in the
credit card portfolio increased $2.7 billion in
2021 to $81.4 billion due to higher retail spend.
Net charge-offs decreased $626 million to $1.7
billion during 2021 compared to the same period
in 2020 due to the impact of government stimulus
measures, partially offset by charge-offs of
certain loans with deferrals that expired in
2020. Credit card
loans 30 days or more past due and still accruing
interest decreased $692 million, and loans 90
days or more past due and still accruing interest
decreased $416 million primarily due to charge-
offs of certain loans with deferrals that expired
in 2020 and the impact of government stimulus
measures.
Unused lines of credit for credit card increased
to $361.2 billion at December 31, 2021 from
$342.4 billion at 2020.
Table 25 presents certain state concentrations
for the credit card portfolio.
 Credit 
 Table Card 
 25 State 
 Concent… 
 Accruing 
 Past Due 
 Outsta… 90 Days 
 or 
 More(1) 
 Decemb… Net 
 31 Charge… 
 (Doll… 
 in 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 milli… 
 Calif… $ 13,076 $ 12,543 $ 82 $ 166 $ 322 $ 419 
 Flori… 8,046 7,666 71 135 245 306 
 Texas 6,894 6,499 47 87 158 202 
 New 4,725 4,654 35 76 135 188 
 York 
 Washi… 4,080 3,685 13 21 39 56 
 Other 44,617 43,661 239 418 824 1,178 
 Total 
 credit $ 81,438 $ 78,708 $ 487 $ 903 $ 1,723 $ 2,349 
 card 
 portf… 
(1) For information on our interest accrual policies and delinquency status for loan modifications
related to the pandemic, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Direct/Indirect Consumer 
At December 31, 2021, 47 percent of the
direct/indirect portfolio was included in
Consumer Banking (consumer auto and recreational
vehicle lending) and 53 percent was included in
GWIM (principally securities-based lending
loans). Outstandings in the direct/indirect
portfolio increased by $12.2 billion in 2021 to
$103.6 billion driven by client demand for
liquidity and high asset values in the
securities-based lending portfolio.
 63Bank of America 
Table 26 presents certain state concentrations for the direct/indirect consumer loan portfolio.
 Table Direc… 
 26 State 
 Conce… 
 Accru… 
 Past 
 Outst… Due90 
 Days 
 or 
 More(… 
 Decem… Net 
 31 Charg… 
 (Dol… 
 in 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 mill… 
 Cali… $ 15,061 $ 12,248 $ 2 $ 6 $ 3 $ 20 
 Flor… 13,352 10,891 1 4 1 20 
 Texas 9,505 8,981 2 6 2 20 
 New 7,802 6,609 1 2 3 9 
 York 
 New 4,228 3,572 — — -3 2 
 Jers… 
 Other 53,612 49,062 5 15 -5 51 
 Total 
 dire… $ 103,5… $ 91,363 $ 11 $ 33 $ 1 $ 122 
 loan 
 port… 
(1) For information on our interest accrual policies and delinquency status for loan modifications
related to the pandemic, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Nonperforming Consumer Loans, Leases and
Foreclosed Properties Activity
Table 27 presents nonperforming consumer loans,
leases and foreclosed properties activity during
2021 and 2020. During 2021, nonperforming
consumer loans increased $264 million to $3.0
billion primarily driven by consumer real estate
deferral activity.
At December 31, 2021, $888 million, or 30 percent
of nonperforming loans were 180 days or more past
due and had been written down to their estimated
property value less costs
to sell. In addition, at December 31, 2021, $1.4
billion, or 48 percent of nonperforming consumer
loans were modified and are now current after
successful trial periods, or are current loans
classified as nonperforming loans in accordance
with applicable policies.
Foreclosed properties decreased $22 million in
2021 to $101 million. Nonperforming loans also
include certain loans that have been modified in
TDRs where economic concessions have been granted
to borrowers experiencing financial difficulties.
 Nonperforming Consumer Loans, 
 Table 27 Leases and Foreclosed 
 (Dollars in millions) Properties Activity 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Nonperforming loans and 
 leases, January $ 2,725 $ 2,053 
 1 
 Additions 2,006 2,278 
 Reductions: 
 Paydowns and payoffs -625 -440 
 Sales -4 -38 
 Returns to performing -1,037 -1,014 
 status(1) 
 Charge-offs -64 -78 
 Transfers to foreclosed -12 -36 
 properties 
 Total net additions to 
 nonperforming 264 672 
 loans and leases 
 Total nonperforming loans and 
 leases, 2,989 2,725 
 December 31 
 Foreclosed properties, 101 123 
 December 31(2) 
 Nonperforming consumer loans, 
 leases and $ 3,090 $ 2,848 
 foreclosed properties, 
 December 31 
 Nonperforming consumer loans 
 and leases 
 as a percentage of outstanding 0.69 % 0.64 % 
 consumer 
 loans and leases(3) 
 Nonperforming consumer loans, 
 leases and 
 foreclosed properties as a 
 percentage of 0.71 0.66 
 outstanding consumer loans, 
 leases and 
 foreclosed properties(3) 
(1) Consumer loans may be returned to performing status when all principal and interest is current
and full repayment of the remaining contractual principal and interest is expected, or when the loan
otherwise becomes well-secured and is in the process of collection.
(2) Foreclosed property balances do not include properties insured by certain government-guaranteed
loans, principally FHA-insured, of $52 million and $119 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(3) Outstanding consumer loans and leases exclude loans accounted for under the fair value option.
 Bank of America64 
Table 28 presents TDRs for the consumer real estate portfolio. Performing TDR balances are excluded
from nonperforming loans and leases in Table 27.
 Consum… 
 Real 
 Estate 
 Troubl… Decemb… Decemb… 
 Table Debt 31, 31, 
 28 Restru… 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Doll… 
 in Nonper… Perfor… Total Nonper… Perfor… Total 
 milli… 
 Resid… 
 mortg… $ 1,498 $ 2,278 $ 3,776 $ 1,195 $ 2,899 $ 4,094 
 2) 
 Home 254 652 906 248 836 1,084 
 equit… 
 Total 
 consu… 
 real 
 estate $ 1,752 $ 2,930 $ 4,682 $ 1,443 $ 3,735 $ 5,178 
 troub… 
 debt 
 restr… 
(1) At December 31, 2021 and 2020, residential
mortgage TDRs deemed collateral dependent totaled
$1.6 billion and $1.4 billion, and included $1.4
billion and $1.0 billion of loans classified as
nonperforming and $279 million and $361 million
of loans classified as performing.
(2) At December 31, 2021 and 2020, residential
mortgage performing TDRs include $1.2 billion and
$1.5 billion of loans that were fully-insured.
(3) At December 31, 2021 and 2020, home equity
TDRs deemed collateral dependent totaled $370
million and $407 million, and include $222
million and $216 million of loans classified as
nonperforming and $148 million and $191 million
of loans classified as performing.
In addition to modifying consumer real estate
loans, we work with customers who are
experiencing financial difficulty by modifying
credit card and other consumer loans. Credit card
and other consumer loan modifications generally
involve a reduction in the customer’s interest
rate on the account and placing the customer on a
fixed payment plan not exceeding 60 months.
Modifications of credit card and other consumer
loans are made through programs utilizing direct
customer contact, but may also utilize external
programs. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, our
credit card and other consumer TDR portfolio was
$672 million and $701 million, of which $599
million and $614 million were current or less
than 30 days past due under the modified terms.
 Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management 
Credit risk management for the commercial
portfolio begins with an assessment of the credit
risk profile of the borrower or counterparty
based on an analysis of its financial position.
As part of the overall credit risk assessment,
our commercial credit exposures are assigned a
risk rating and are subject to approval based on
defined credit approval standards. Subsequent to
loan origination, risk ratings are monitored on
an ongoing basis, and if necessary, adjusted to
reflect changes in the financial condition, cash
flow, risk profile or outlook of a borrower or
counterparty. In making credit decisions, we
consider risk rating, collateral, country,
industry and single-name concentration limits
while also balancing these considerations with
the total borrower or counterparty relationship.
We use a variety of tools to continuously monitor
the ability of a borrower or counterparty to
perform under its obligations. We use risk rating
aggregations to measure and evaluate
concentrations within portfolios. In addition,
risk ratings are a factor in determining the
level of allocated capital and the allowance for
credit losses.
As part of our ongoing risk mitigation
initiatives, we attempt to work with clients
experiencing financial difficulty to modify their
loans to terms that better align with their
current ability to pay. In situations where an
economic concession has been granted to a
borrower experiencing financial difficulty, we
identify these loans as TDRs. For more
information on our accounting policies regarding
delinquencies, nonperforming status and net
charge-offs for the commercial portfolio, see
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles to the Consolidated Financial
Statements .
Management of Commercial Credit Risk
Concentrations
Commercial credit risk is evaluated and managed
with the goal that concentrations of credit
exposure continue to be aligned with our risk
appetite. We review, measure and manage
concentrations of credit exposure by industry,
product,
geography, customer relationship and loan size.
We also review, measure and manage commercial
real estate loans by geographic location and
property type. In addition, within our non-U.S.
portfolio, we evaluate exposures by region and by
country. Tables 33, 36 and 39 summarize our
concentrations. We also utilize syndications of
exposure to third parties, loan sales, hedging
and other risk mitigation techniques to manage
the size and risk profile of the commercial
credit portfolio. For more information on our
industry concentrations, see Commercial Portfolio
Credit Risk Management – Industry Concentrations
on page 69 and Table 36.
We account for certain large corporate loans and
loan commitments, including issued but unfunded
letters of credit which are considered utilized
for credit risk management purposes, that exceed
our single-name credit risk concentration
guidelines under the fair value option. Lending
commitments, both funded and unfunded, are
actively managed and monitored, and as
appropriate, credit risk for these lending
relationships may be mitigated through the use of
credit derivatives, with our credit view and
market perspectives determining the size and
timing of the hedging activity. In addition, we
purchase credit protection to cover the funded
portion as well as the unfunded portion of
certain other credit exposures. To lessen the
cost of obtaining our desired credit protection
levels, credit exposure may be added within an
industry, borrower or counterparty group by
selling protection. These credit derivatives do
not meet the requirements for treatment as
accounting hedges. They are carried at fair value
with changes in fair value recorded in other
income.
In addition, we are a member of various
securities and derivative exchanges and
clearinghouses, both in the U.S. and other
countries. As a member, we may be required to pay
a pro-rata share of the losses incurred by some
of these organizations as a result of another
member default and under other loss scenarios.
For more information, see Note 12 – Commitments
and Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
 Commercial Credit Portfolio 
During 2021, commercial credit quality improved
as the economic recovery gained momentum driven
in part by increased consumer spending and
COVID-19 vaccination progress. Accordingly,
charge-offs, nonperforming commercial loans and
reservable criticized utilized exposure declined
during this period. Outstanding commercial loans
and leases increased $44.4 billion during 2021
due to growth in commercial and industrial,
primarily in Global Markets with most of the
increase in investment grade exposures. This
increase was partially offset by lower U.S. small
business commercial loans due to repayments of
PPP loans by the Small Business Administration
(SBA) under the terms of the program. For more
information on
 65Bank of America 
PPP loans, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant
Accounting Principles to the Consolidated
Financial Statements.
Credit quality of commercial real estate
borrowers has begun to stabilize in many sectors
as economies have reopened. However, certain
sectors, including hospitality, while showing
signs of improvement, continue to be negatively
impacted due to the pandemic. Moreover, many real
estate markets, while improving, are still
experiencing some disruptions in demand, supply
chain challenges and tenant difficulties. Current
and future office demand is uncertain as
companies evaluate space needs with employment
models that utilize a mix of remote and
conventional office use.
The commercial allowance for loan and lease
losses decreased $3.4 billion during 2021 to $5.4
billion driven by improvements in the
macroeconomic outlook and credit quality. For
more information, see Allowance for Credit Losses
on page 73.
Total commercial utilized credit exposure
increased $33.2 billion during 2021 to $653.5
billion primarily driven by higher loans and
leases. The utilization rate for loans and
leases, standby letters of credit (SBLCs) and
financial guarantees, and commercial letters of
credit, in the aggregate, was 56 percent at
December 31, 2021 and 57 percent at December 31,
2020.
Table 29 presents commercial credit exposure by
type for utilized, unfunded and total binding
committed credit exposure. Commercial utilized
credit exposure includes SBLCs and financial
guarantees and commercial letters of credit that
have been issued and for which we are legally
bound to advance funds under prescribed
conditions during a specified time period, and
excludes exposure related to trading account
assets. Although funds have not yet been
advanced, these exposure types are considered
utilized for credit risk management purposes.
 Comme… 
 Table Credit 
 29 Expos… 
 by 
 Type 
 Commer… Commer… Total 
 Utiliz… Unfund… Commer… 
 3, 4) Commit… 
 Decemb… 
 31 
 (Doll… 
 in 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 milli… 
 Loans 
 and $ 543,420 $ 499,0… $ 454,256 $ 404,7… $ 997,676 $ 903,8… 
 leases 
 Deriv… 35,344 47,179 — — 35,344 47,179 
 asset… 
 Stand… 
 lette… 
 of 
 credit 34,389 34,616 639 538 35,028 35,154 
 and 
 finan… 
 guara… 
 Debt 
 secur… 
 and 19,427 22,618 4,638 4,827 24,065 27,445 
 other 
 inves… 
 Loans 13,185 8,378 16,581 9,556 29,766 17,934 
 held-… 
 Opera… 5,935 6,424 — — 5,935 6,424 
 leases 
 Comme… 
 lette… 1,176 855 247 280 1,423 1,135 
 of 
 credit 
 Other 652 1,168 — — 652 1,168 
 Total $ 653,528 $ 620,3… $ 476,361 $ 419,9… $ 1,129,… $ 1,040… 
(1) Commercial utilized exposure includes loans of $7.2 billion and $5.9 billion accounted for under
the fair value option at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(2) Commercial unfunded exposure includes commitments accounted for under the fair value option with
a notional amount of $4.8 billion and $3.9 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(3) Excludes unused business card lines, which are not legally binding.
(4) Includes the notional amount of unfunded legally binding lending commitments net of amounts
distributed (i.e., syndicated or participated) to other financial institutions. The distributed
amounts were $10.7 billion and $10.5 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(5) Derivative assets are carried at fair value, reflect the effects of legally enforceable master
netting agreements and have been reduced by cash collateral of $30.8 billion and $42.5 billion at
December 31, 2021 and 2020. Not reflected in utilized and committed exposure is additional non-cash
derivative collateral held of $44.8 billion and $39.3 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, which
consists primarily of other marketable securities.
Nonperforming commercial loans decreased $649 million. Table 30 presents our commercial loans and
leases portfolio and related credit quality information at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 Table 
 30 
 (Doll… Accrui… 
 in Past 
 milli… Outsta… Due 
 Comme… Commer… Decemb… 90 Days 
 and Credit 31 Nonperf… or More 
 indus… Quality 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. $ 325,936 $ 288,728 $ 825 $ 1,243 $ 171 $ 228 
 comme… 
 Non-U… 113,266 90,460 268 418 19 10 
 comme… 
 Total 
 comme… 439,202 379,188 1,093 1,661 190 238 
 and 
 indus… 
 Comme… 
 real 63,009 60,364 382 404 40 6 
 estate 
 Comme… 
 lease 14,825 17,098 80 87 8 25 
 finan… 
 517,036 456,650 1,555 2,152 238 269 
 U.S. 
 small 19,183 36,469 23 75 87 115 
 busin… 
 comme… 
 Comme… 
 loans 
 exclu… 
 loans 
 accou… 
 for $ 536,219 $ 493,119 $ 1,578 $ 2,227 $ 325 $ 384 
 under 
 the 
 fair 
 value 
 option 
 Loans 
 accou… 
 for 
 under 7,201 5,946 
 the 
 fair 
 value 
 optio… 
 Total 
 comme… 
 loans $ 543,420 $ 499,065 
 and 
 leases 
(1) Includes card-related products.
(2) Commercial loans accounted for under the fair value option include U.S. commercial of $4.6
billion and $2.9 billion and non-U.S. commercial of $2.6 billion and $3.0 billion at December 31,
2021 and 2020. For more information on the fair value option, see Note 21 – Fair Value Option to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Bank of America66 
Table 31 presents net charge-offs and related ratios for our commercial loans and leases for 2021 and
2020.
 Table 31 
 (Dollars in 
 millions) Commercial Net 
 Commercial Charge-offs Net Charge-off 
 and and Net Charge-offs Ratios(1) 
 industrial: Related Ratios 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. $ -23 $ 718 -0.01 % 0.23 % 
 commercial 
 Non-U.S. 35 155 0.04 0.15 
 commercial 
 Total 
 commercial 12 873 — 0.21 
 and 
 industrial 
 Commercial 34 270 0.06 0.43 
 real estate 
 Commercial 
 lease -1 59 — 0.32 
 financing 
 45 1,202 0.01 0.24 
 U.S. small 
 business 351 267 1.19 0.86 
 commercial 
 Total $ 396 $ 1,469 0.08 0.28 
 commercial 
(1) Net charge-off ratios are calculated as net charge-offs divided by average outstanding loans and
leases excluding loans accounted for under the fair value option.
Table 32 presents commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure by loan type. Criticized
exposure corresponds to the Special Mention, Substandard and Doubtful asset categories as defined by
regulatory authorities. Total commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure decreased $16.3
billion during 2021, which was broad-based across industries. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, 87
percent and 79 percent of commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure was secured.
 Table 32 
 (Dollars in Commercial 
 millions) Reservable 
 Commercial and Criticized Utilized December 31 
 industrial: Exposure(1, 2) 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. commercial $ 11,327 3.20 % $ 21,388 6.83 % 
 Non-U.S. 2,582 2.17 5,051 5.03 
 commercial 
 Total commercial 13,909 2.94 26,439 6.40 
 and industrial 
 Commercial real 7,572 11.72 10,213 16.42 
 estate 
 Commercial lease 387 2.61 714 4.18 
 financing 
 21,868 3.96 37,366 7.59 
 U.S. small 
 business 513 2.67 1,300 3.56 
 commercial 
 Total commercial 
 reservable $ 22,381 3.91 $ 38,666 7.31 
 criticized 
 utilized exposure 
(1) Total commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure includes loans and leases of $21.2
billion and $36.6 billion and commercial letters of credit of $1.2 billion and $2.1 billion at
December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(2) Percentages are calculated as commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure divided by total
commercial reservable utilized exposure for each exposure category.
 Commercial and Industrial 
Commercial and industrial loans include U.S.
commercial and non-U.S. commercial portfolios.
 U.S. Commercial 
At December 31, 2021, 62 percent of the U.S.
commercial loan portfolio, excluding small
business, was managed in Global Banking, 22
percent in Global Markets , 15 percent in GWIM
(loans that provide financing for asset
purchases, business investments and other
liquidity needs for high net worth clients) and
the remainder primarily in Consumer Banking .
U.S. commercial loans increased $37.2 billion, or
13 percent, during 2021 primarily driven by
Global Markets and Global Banking . Reservable
criticized utilized exposure decreased $10.1
billion, driven by decreases across a broad range
of industries.
 Non-U.S. Commercial 
At December 31, 2021, 69 percent of the non-U.S.
commercial loan portfolio was managed in Global
Banking, 30 percent in Global Markets and the
remainder in GWIM . Non-U.S. commercial loans
increased $22.8 billion, or 25 percent, during
2021 primarily in Global Markets . Reservable
criticized utilized exposure decreased $2.5
billion, which was broad-based across industries.
For information on the non-U.S. commercial
portfolio, see Non-U.S. Portfolio on page 71.
 Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate primarily includes
commercial loans secured by non-owner-occupied
real estate and is dependent on the sale or lease
of the real estate as the primary source of
repayment. Outstanding loans increased $2.6
billion, or four percent, during 2021 to $63.0
billion due to new originations outpacing
paydowns. The portfolio remains diversified
across property types and geographic regions.
California represented the largest state
concentration at 21 percent and 23 percent of the
commercial real estate portfolio at December 31,
2021 and 2020. The commercial real estate
portfolio is predominantly managed in Global
Banking and consists of loans made primarily to
public and private developers, and commercial
real estate firms.
During 2021, we continued to see low default
rates and varying degrees of improvement in
certain geographic regions and property types of
the portfolio. We use a number of proactive risk
mitigation initiatives to reduce adversely rated
exposure in the commercial real estate portfolio,
including transfers of deteriorating exposures
for management by independent special asset
officers and the pursuit of loan restructurings
or asset sales to achieve the best results for
our customers and the Corporation.
Table 33 presents outstanding commercial real
estate loans by geographic region, based on the
geographic location of the collateral, and by
property type.
 67Bank of America 
 Table 33 
 (Dollars in millions) Outstanding Commercial Real December 31 
 By Geographic Region Estate Loans 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Northeast $ 14,318 $ 11,628 
 California 13,145 14,028 
 Southwest 7,510 8,551 
 Southeast 6,758 6,588 
 Florida 4,367 4,294 
 Midwest 3,221 3,483 
 Illinois 2,878 2,594 
 Midsouth 2,289 2,370 
 Northwest 1,709 1,634 
 Non-U.S. 4,760 3,187 
 Other 2,054 2,007 
 Total outstanding commercial real 
 estate $ 63,009 $ 60,364 
 loans 
 By Property Type 
 Non-residential 
 Office $ 18,309 $ 17,667 
 Industrial / Warehouse 10,749 8,330 
 Multi-family rental 8,173 7,051 
 Shopping centers /Retail 6,502 7,931 
 Hotel / Motels 5,932 7,226 
 Unsecured 3,178 2,336 
 Multi-use 1,835 1,460 
 Other 7,238 7,146 
 Total non-residential 61,916 59,147 
 Residential 1,093 1,217 
 Total outstanding commercial real 
 estate $ 63,009 $ 60,364 
 loans 
 U.S. Small Business Commercial 
The U.S. small business commercial loan portfolio
is comprised of small business card loans and
small business loans primarily managed in
Consumer Banking, and includes $4.7 billion and
$22.7 billion of PPP loans outstanding at
December 31, 2021 and 2020. The decline of $18.0
billion in PPP loans during 2021 was due to
repayment of the loans by the SBA under the terms
of the program. Excluding PPP, credit card-
related products were 50 percent of the U.S.
small business commercial portfolio at both
December 31, 2021 and 2020 and represented 95
percent of net charge-offs in 2021 compared to 91
percent in 2020.
Nonperforming Commercial Loans, Leases and
Foreclosed Properties Activity
Table 34 presents the nonperforming commercial
loans, leases and foreclosed properties activity
during 2021 and 2020. Nonperforming loans do not
include loans accounted for under the fair value
option. During 2021, nonperforming commercial
loans and leases decreased $649 million to $1.6
billion. At December 31, 2021, 88 percent of
commercial nonperforming loans, leases and
foreclosed properties were secured and 54 percent
were contractually current. Commercial
nonperforming loans were carried at 90 percent of
their unpaid principal balance, as the carrying
value of these loans has been reduced to the
estimated collateral value less costs to sell.
 Nonperforming Commercial Loans, 
 Leases and Foreclosed 
 Table 34 Properties 
 (Dollars in millions) Activity(1, 2) 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Nonperforming loans and 
 leases, January $ 2,227 $ 1,499 
 1 
 Additions 1,622 3,518 
 Reductions: 
 Paydowns -1,163 -1,002 
 Sales -199 -350 
 Returns to performing -264 -172 
 status(3) 
 Charge-offs -254 -1,208 
 Transfers to foreclosed — -2 
 properties 
 Transfers to loans -391 -56 
 held-for-sale 
 Total net additions 
 (reductions) to -649 728 
 nonperforming loans and leases 
 Total nonperforming loans and 
 leases, 1,578 2,227 
 December 31 
 Foreclosed properties, 29 41 
 December 31 
 Nonperforming commercial 
 loans, leases $ 1,607 $ 2,268 
 and foreclosed properties, 
 December 31 
 Nonperforming commercial loans 
 and 
 leases as a percentage of 0.29 % 0.45 % 
 outstanding 
 commercial loans and leases(4) 
 Nonperforming commercial 
 loans, leases 
 and foreclosed properties as a 
 percentage of outstanding 0.30 0.46 
 commercial 
 loans, leases and foreclosed 
 properties(4) 
(1) Balances do not include nonperforming loans held-for-sale of $264 million and $359 million at
December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(2) Includes U.S. small business commercial activity. Small business card loans are excluded as they
are not classified as nonperforming.
(3) Commercial loans and leases may be returned to performing status when all principal and interest
is current and full repayment of the remaining contractual principal and interest is expected, or
when the loan otherwise becomes well-secured and is in the process of collection. TDRs are generally
classified as performing after a sustained period of demonstrated payment performance.
(4) Outstanding commercial loans exclude loans accounted for under the fair value option.
 Bank of America68 
Table 35 presents our commercial TDRs by product
type and performing status. U.S. small business
commercial TDRs are comprised of renegotiated
small business card loans and small business
loans. The renegotiated small business card loans
are
not classified as nonperforming as they are
charged off no later than the end of the month in
which the loan becomes 180 days past due.
 Commer… 
 Troubl… Decemb… Decemb… 
 Table Debt 31, 31, 
 35 Restru… 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Doll… 
 in Nonper… Perfor… Total Nonper… Perfor… Total 
 milli… 
 Comme… 
 and 
 indus… 
 U.S. $ 359 $ 685 $ 1,044 $ 509 $ 850 $ 1,359 
 comme… 
 Non-U… 72 8 80 49 119 168 
 comme… 
 Total 
 comme… 431 693 1,124 558 969 1,527 
 and 
 indus… 
 Comme… 
 real 244 437 681 137 — 137 
 estate 
 Comme… 
 lease 50 7 57 42 2 44 
 finan… 
 725 1,137 1,862 737 971 1,708 
 U.S. 
 small — 38 38 — 29 29 
 busin… 
 comme… 
 Total 
 comme… 
 troub… $ 725 $ 1,175 $ 1,900 $ 737 $ 1,000 $ 1,737 
 debt 
 restr… 
 Industry Concentrations 
Table 36 presents commercial committed and
utilized credit exposure by industry. Our
commercial credit exposure is diversified across
a broad range of industries. Total commercial
committed exposure increased $89.6 billion, or
nine percent, during 2021 to $1.1 trillion. The
increase in commercial committed exposure was
concentrated in the Asset managers and funds,
Finance companies and Utilities industry sectors.
Increases were partially offset by decreased
exposure to the Government and public education
and Automobiles and components industry sectors.
Industry limits are used internally to manage
industry concentrations and are based on
committed exposure that is determined on an
industry-by-industry basis. A risk management
framework is in place to set and approve industry
limits as well as to provide ongoing monitoring.
Asset managers and funds, our largest industry
concentration with committed exposure of $136.9
billion, increased $36.6 billion, or 37 percent,
during 2021, which was primarily driven by
secured investment grade exposures.
Real estate, our second largest industry
concentration with committed exposure of $96.2
billion, increased $4.5 billion, or five percent,
during 2021. For more information on the
commercial real estate and related portfolios,
see Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management –
Commercial Real Estate on page 67.
Finance companies, our third largest industry
concentration with committed exposure of $86.0
billion, increased $16.0 billion, or 23 percent
during 2021, with the growth largely occurring in
Consumer Finance, Thrifts and Mortgage Finance
and Diversified Financials.
Given the widespread impact of the pandemic on
the U.S. and global economy, a number of
industries have been and will likely continue to
be adversely impacted. We continue to monitor all
industries, particularly higher risk industries
that are experiencing or could experience a more
significant impact to their financial condition.
 69Bank of America 
 Commercial 
 Table 36 Credit 
 Exposure by 
 Industry(1) 
 Commercial Total 
 Utilized Commercial 
 Committed(2) 
 December 31 
 (Dollars in 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 millions) 
 Asset 
 managers & $ 89,786 $ 67,360 $ 136,914 $ 100,296 
 funds 
 Real 69,384 68,967 96,202 91,730 
 estate(3) 
 Finance 59,327 46,948 86,009 70,004 
 companies 
 Capital 42,784 39,807 84,293 80,815 
 goods 
 Healthcare 
 equipment 32,003 33,488 58,195 57,540 
 and services 
 Materials 25,133 24,516 53,652 50,757 
 Retailing 24,514 23,700 50,816 48,306 
 Government & 
 public 37,597 41,669 50,066 56,212 
 education 
 Consumer 28,172 31,993 48,052 47,997 
 services 
 Food, 
 beverage and 21,584 22,755 45,419 44,417 
 tobacco 
 Commercial 
 services and 22,390 21,107 42,451 38,092 
 supplies 
 Individuals 29,752 24,727 39,869 34,036 
 and trusts 
 Utilities 17,082 12,387 36,855 29,234 
 Energy 14,217 13,930 34,136 32,974 
 Transportat… 21,079 23,126 32,015 33,082 
 Software and 10,663 10,853 27,643 22,524 
 services 
 Technology 
 hardware and 10,159 9,935 26,910 24,196 
 equipment 
 Media 12,495 12,632 26,318 24,120 
 Global 
 commercial 20,062 20,544 21,390 22,595 
 banks 
 Telecommuni… 10,056 9,411 21,270 15,605 
 services 
 Consumer 
 durables and 9,740 9,232 21,226 20,223 
 apparel 
 Pharmaceuti… 
 and 5,608 4,830 19,439 15,901 
 biotechnolo… 
 Automobiles 
 and 9,236 10,792 17,052 20,575 
 components 
 Vehicle 11,030 15,028 15,678 18,696 
 dealers 
 Insurance 5,743 5,772 14,323 13,277 
 Food and 
 staples 6,902 5,209 12,226 11,795 
 retailing 
 Financial 
 markets 3,876 4,939 6,076 8,648 
 infrastruct… 
 (clearingho… 
 Religious 
 and social 3,154 4,646 5,394 6,597 
 organizatio… 
 Total 
 commercial 
 credit $ 653,528 $ 620,303 $ 1,129,889 $ 1,040,244 
 exposure by 
 industry 
(1) Includes U.S. small business commercial exposure.
(2) Includes the notional amount of unfunded legally binding lending commitments net of amounts
distributed (i.e., syndicated or participated) to other financial institutions. The distributed
amounts were $10.7 billion and $10.5 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(3) Industries are viewed from a variety of perspectives to best isolate the perceived risks. For
purposes of this table, the real estate industry is defined based on the primary business activity of
the borrowers or counterparties using operating cash flows and primary source of repayment as key
factors.
Risk Mitigation We purchase credit protection to cover the funded portion as well as the unfunded
portion of certain credit exposures. To lower the cost of obtaining our desired credit protection
levels, we may add credit exposure within an industry, borrower or counterparty group by selling
protection. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, net notional credit default protection purchased in our
credit derivatives portfolio to hedge our funded and unfunded exposures for which we elected the fair
value option, as well as certain other credit exposures, was $2.6 billion and $4.2 billion. We
recorded net losses of $91 million in 2021 compared to net losses of $240 million in 2020. The gains
and losses on these instruments were offset by gains and losses on the related exposures. The Value-
at-Risk (VaR) results for these exposures are included in the fair value option portfolio information
in Table 43. For more information, see Trading Risk Management on page 76. Tables 37 and 38 present
the maturity profiles and the credit exposure debt ratings of the net credit default protection
portfolio at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 Table 37 Net Credit Default Protection by 
 Maturity 
 December 31 
 2021 2020 
 Less than or equal to one year 34 % 65 % 
 Greater than one year and less 
 than or 62 34 
 equal to five years 
 Greater than five years 4 1 
 Total net credit default 100 % 100 % 
 protection 
 Net Credit 
 Table 38 Default 
 (Dollars in Protection 
 millions) by Credit NetNotional… 
 Ratings(2, Exposure December 31 Percent of NetNotiona… Percent of 
 3) Debt Rating 2021 Total 2020 Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 A $ -350 13.4 % $ -250 6.0 % 
 BBB -710 27.1 -1,856 44.5 
 BB -809 30.9 -1,363 32.7 
 B -659 25.2 -465 11.2 
 CCC and -35 1.3 -182 4.4 
 below 
 NR(4) -55 2.1 -54 1.2 
 Total net 
 credit $ -2,618 100.0 % $ -4,170 100.0 % 
 default 
 protection 
(1) Represents net credit default protection
purchased. (2) Ratings are refreshed on a
quarterly basis. (3) Ratings of BBB- or higher
are considered to meet the definition of
investment grade. (4) NR is comprised of index
positions held and any names that have not been
rated.
 Bank of America70 
In addition to our net notional credit default
protection purchased to cover the funded and
unfunded portion of certain credit exposures,
credit derivatives are used for market-making
activities for clients and establishing positions
intended to profit from directional or relative
value changes. We execute the majority of our
credit derivative trades in the OTC market with
large, multinational financial institutions,
including broker-dealers and, to a lesser degree,
with a variety of other investors. Because these
transactions are executed in the OTC market, we
are subject to settlement risk. We are also
subject to credit risk in the event that these
counterparties fail to perform under the terms of
these contracts. In order to properly reflect
counterparty credit risk, we record counterparty
credit risk valuation adjustments on certain
derivative assets, including our
purchased credit default protection. In most
cases, credit derivative transactions are
executed on a daily margin basis. Therefore,
events such as a credit downgrade, depending on
the ultimate rating level, or a breach of credit
covenants would typically require an increase in
the amount of collateral required by the
counterparty, where applicable, and/or allow us
to take additional protective measures such as
early termination of all trades. For more
information on credit derivatives and
counterparty credit risk valuation adjustments,
see Note 3 – Derivatives to the Consolidated
Financial Statements .
 Non-U.S. Portfolio 
Our non-U.S. credit and trading portfolios are
subject to country risk. We define country risk
as the risk of loss from unfavorable economic and
political conditions, currency fluctuations,
social instability and changes in government
policies. A risk management framework is in place
to measure, monitor and
manage non-U.S. risk and exposures. In addition
to the direct risk of doing business in a
country, we also are exposed to indirect country
risks (e.g., related to the collateral received
on secured financing transactions or related to
client clearing activities). These indirect
exposures are managed in the normal course of
business through credit, market and operational
risk governance rather than through country risk
governance.
Table 39 presents our 20 largest non-U.S. country
exposures at December 31, 2021. These exposures
accounted for 89 percent and 90 percent of our
total non-U.S. exposure at December 31, 2021 and
2020. Net country exposure for these 20 countries
increased $10.5 billion in 2021 primarily driven
by increases in Australia, Canada and France,
partially offset by reductions in Germany and the
United Kingdom.
Non-U.S. exposure is presented on an internal
risk management basis and includes sovereign and
non-sovereign credit exposure, securities and
other investments issued by or domiciled in
countries other than the U.S.
Funded loans and loan equivalents include loans,
leases, and other extensions of credit and funds,
including letters of credit and due from
placements. Unfunded commitments are the undrawn
portion of legally binding commitments related to
loans and loan equivalents. Net counterparty
exposure includes the fair value of derivatives,
including the counterparty risk associated with
credit default swaps (CDS), and secured financing
transactions. Securities and other investments
are carried at fair value and long securities
exposures are netted against short exposures with
the same underlying issuer to, but not below,
zero. Net country exposure represents country
exposure less hedges and credit default
protection purchased, net of credit default
protection sold.
 Net 
 Co… Co… Inc… 
 T… Top Fu… Ex… Hed… Ex… (De… 
 39 20 Lo… at and at from 
 (… No… and Un… Net Sec… De… Cre… De… Dec… 
 in Co… Lo… Lo… Co… Oth… 31 Def… 31 31 
 m… Ex… Eq… Co… Ex… Inv… 20… Pro… 20… 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U… $ 32… $ 15… $ 5,… $ 2,3… $ 56… $ -1,… $ 54… $ -4,… 
 K… 
 G… 21… 9,… 1,… 1,8… 34… -963 33… -11… 
 C… 9,… 12… 1,… 3,5… 26… -602 26… 5,1… 
 F… 12… 8,… 1,… 3,7… 25… -821 24… 4,1… 
 A… 9,… 9,… 434 2,8… 21… -214 21… 8,2… 
 J… 14… 1,… 1,… 371 18… -757 17… -234 
 B… 6,… 1,… 526 4,2… 12… -199 12… 2,4… 
 C… 9,… 689 894 1,3… 12… -312 12… -838 
 S… 3,… 709 249 5,8… 10… -57 10… 1,3… 
 N… 3,… 4,… 452 950 10… -425 9,… -88 
 I… 6,… 388 470 1,4… 8,… -166 8,… 820 
 S… 5,… 3,… 277 338 8,… -237 8,… 1,6… 
 S… 5,… 771 545 1,1… 8,… -155 8,… -399 
 K… 
 H… 5,… 315 338 1,1… 7,… -16 7,… 790 
 K… 
 M… 4,… 1,… 136 629 j 6,… -213 6,… 175 
 S… 2,… 2,… 473 1,1… 6,… -359 5,… 1,1… 
 I… 4,… 1,… 136 376 5,… -29 5,… 1,3… 
 I… 2,… 1,… 348 1,4… 5,… -569 5,… -488 
 B… 2,… 1,… 462 687 5,… -182 5,… 64 
 U… 
 A… 2,… 329 36 234 3,… -47 3,… 807 
 E… 
 T… 
 t… 
 20 $ 16… $ 77… $ 17… $ 35,… $ 29… $ -7,… $ 28… $ 10,… 
 n… 
 c… 
 e… 
 71Bank of America 
Our largest non-U.S. country exposure at December
31, 2021 was the United Kingdom with net exposure
of $55.0 billion, which represents a $4.5 billion
decrease from December 31, 2020. Our second
largest non-U.S. country exposure was Germany
with net exposure of $33.8 billion at December
31, 2021, a $11.1 billion decrease from December
31, 2020. The decrease in both of these countries
was primarily driven by a reduction in deposits
with central banks.
In light of the global pandemic, we are
monitoring our non-U.S. exposure closely,
particularly in countries where restrictions on
certain activities, in an attempt to contain the
spread and impact of the virus, have affected and
will likely continue to adversely affect economic
activity.
The impact of COVID-19 could have an adverse
impact on the global economy for a prolonged
period of time. For more information on how the
pandemic may affect our operations, see Executive
Summary – Recent Developments – COVID-19 Pandemic
on page 27 and Part 1. Item 1A. Risk Factors on
page 7.
 Loan and Lease Contractual Maturities 
Table 40 disaggregates total outstanding loans
and leases by remaining contractual maturities
and interest rates. The amounts provided do not
reflect prepayment assumptions or hedging
activities related to the loan portfolio. For
information on the asset sensitivity of our total
banking book balance sheet, see Interest Rate
Risk Management for the Banking Book on page 79.
 Loan and 
 Lease 
 Contract… December 
 Table 40 Maturiti… 31, 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Due After Due 
 (Dollars Due in One Year After 
 in One Through Five Due After Total 
 million… Year or Five Years 15 Years 
 Less Years Through 
 15 Years 
 Residen… $ 175 $ 702 $ 48,614 $ 172,751 $ 222,242 
 mortgage 
 Home 1,596 92 6,159 20,427 28,274 
 equity 
 Credit 81,438 — — — 81,438 
 card 
 Direct/… 54,080 30,940 14,535 4,005 103,560 
 consumer 
 Other 190 — — — 190 
 consumer 
 Total 
 consumer $ 137,479 $ 31,734 $ 69,308 $ 197,183 $ 435,704 
 loans 
 U.S. $ 93,480 $ 195,157 $ 39,370 $ 2,505 $ 330,512 
 commerc… 
 Non-U.S. 42,570 50,514 21,754 1,053 115,891 
 commerc… 
 Commerc… 
 real 16,322 42,363 3,386 938 63,009 
 estate 
 Commerc… 
 lease 1,349 8,676 3,865 935 14,825 
 financi… 
 U.S. 
 small 9,428 3,895 5,656 204 19,183 
 business 
 commerc… 
 Total 
 commerc… $ 163,149 $ 300,605 $ 74,031 $ 5,635 $ 543,420 
 loans 
 Total 
 loans $ 300,628 $ 332,339 $ 143,339 $ 202,818 $ 979,124 
 and 
 leases 
 Amount Amount 
 due in due 
 one year after 
 or less one year 
 at: at: 
 (Dollars Variable Fixed Variable Fixed 
 in Interest Interest Interest Interest Total 
 million… Rates Rates Rates Rates 
 Residen… $ 18 $ 157 $ 80,967 $ 141,100 $ 222,242 
 mortgage 
 Home 98 1,498 25,982 696 28,274 
 equity 
 Credit 77,151 4,287 — — 81,438 
 card 
 Direct/… 48,424 5,656 2,551 46,929 103,560 
 consumer 
 Other — 190 — — 190 
 consumer 
 Total 
 consumer $ 125,691 $ 11,788 $ 109,500 $ 188,725 $ 435,704 
 loans 
 U.S. $ 84,398 $ 9,082 $ 190,978 $ 46,054 $ 330,512 
 commerc… 
 Non-U.S. 39,472 3,098 70,817 2,504 115,891 
 commerc… 
 Commerc… 
 real 15,673 649 44,626 2,061 63,009 
 estate 
 Commerc… 
 lease 187 1,162 1,560 11,916 14,825 
 financi… 
 U.S. 
 small 5,150 4,278 98 9,657 19,183 
 business 
 commerc… 
 Total 
 commerc… $ 144,880 $ 18,269 $ 308,079 $ 72,192 $ 543,420 
 loans 
 Total 
 loans $ 270,571 $ 30,057 $ 417,579 $ 260,917 $ 979,124 
 and 
 leases 
(1) Includes loans accounted for under the fair value option.
 Bank of America72 
 Allowance for Credit Losses 
The allowance for credit losses decreased $6.8
billion from December 31, 2020 to $13.8 billion
at December 31, 2021, which included a $3.8
billion reserve decrease related to the
commercial portfolio and a $3.1 billion reserve
decrease related
to the consumer portfolio. The decreases were
primarily driven by improvements in the
macroeconomic outlook and credit quality.
Table 41 presents an allocation of the allowance
for credit losses by product type at December 31,
2021 and 2020.
 Allo… 
 of 
 the 
 Allo… 
 for 
 Tab… Cred… 
 41 Loss… Amou… Perc… Perc… 
 (Do… by Dece… Perc… ofLo… Dece… Per… ofLo… 
 in Prod… 31, of andL… 31, of andL… 
 mil… Type 2021 Total Outs… 2020 Amou… Tot… Outs… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 All… 
 for 
 loan 
 and 
 lea… 
 los… 
 Res… $ 351 2.83 % 0.16 % $ 459 2.44 % 0.21 % 
 mor… 
 Home 206 1.66 0.74 399 2.12 1.16 
 equ… 
 Cre… 5,907 47.70 7.25 8,420 44.… 10.70 
 card 
 Dir… 523 4.22 0.51 752 4.00 0.82 
 con… 
 Oth… 46 0.37 n/m 41 0.22 n/m 
 con… 
 Tot… 7,033 56.78 1.62 10,0… 53.… 2.35 
 con… 
 U.S. 3,019 24.37 0.87 5,043 26.… 1.55 
 com… 
 Non… 975 7.87 0.86 1,241 6.60 1.37 
 com… 
 Com… 
 real 1,292 10.43 2.05 2,285 12.… 3.79 
 est… 
 Com… 
 lea… 68 0.55 0.46 162 0.86 0.95 
 fin… 
 Tot… 5,354 43.22 1.00 8,731 46.… 1.77 
 com… 
 All… 
 for 
 loan 12,3… 100.… % 1.28 18,8… 100… % 2.04 
 and 
 lea… 
 los… 
 Res… 
 for 
 unf… 1,456 1,878 
 len… 
 com… 
 All… 
 for $ 13,8… $ 20,6… 
 cre… 
 los… 
(1) Ratios are calculated as allowance for loan
and lease losses as a percentage of loans and
leases outstanding excluding loans accounted for
under the fair value option.
(2) Includes allowance for loan and lease losses
for U.S. small business commercial loans of $1.2
billion and $1.5 billion at December 31, 2021 and
2020.
n/m = not meaningful
Net charge-offs for 2021 were $2.2 billion
compared to $4.1 billion in 2020 driven by
decreases across most products. The provision for
credit losses decreased $15.9 billion to a $4.6
billion benefit during 2021 compared to 2020. The
allowance for credit losses had a reserve release
of $6.8 billion for 2021, primarily driven by
improvements in the macroeconomic outlook and
credit quality. The provision for credit losses
for the consumer portfolio, including unfunded
lending commitments, decreased $6.1 billion to a
benefit of $1.2 billion during 2021 compared to
2020. The provision for credit losses for the
commercial portfolio, including unfunded lending
commitments, decreased $9.8 billion to a $3.4
billion benefit for 2021 compared to 2020.
Table 42 presents a rollforward of the allowance
for credit losses, including certain loan and
allowance ratios for 2021 and 2020. For more
information on the Corporation’s credit loss
accounting policies and activity related to the
allowance for credit losses, see Note 1 – Summary
of Significant Accounting Principles and Note 5 –
Outstanding Loans and Leases and Allowance for
Credit Losses to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
 73Bank of America 
 Table 42 Allowance for 
 (Dollars in millions) Credit Losses 2021 2020 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Allowance for loan and lease losses, $ 18,802 $ 12,358 
 January 1 
 Loans and leases charged off 
 Residential mortgage -34 -40 
 Home equity -44 -58 
 Credit card -2,411 -2,967 
 Direct/Indirect consumer -297 -372 
 Other consumer -292 -307 
 Total consumer charge-offs -3,078 -3,744 
 U.S. commercial(1) -626 -1,163 
 Non-U.S. commercial -47 -168 
 Commercial real estate -46 -275 
 Commercial lease financing — -69 
 Total commercial charge-offs -719 -1,675 
 Total loans and leases charged off -3,797 -5,419 
 Recoveries of loans and leases 
 previously charged off 
 Residential mortgage 62 70 
 Home equity 163 131 
 Credit card 688 618 
 Direct/Indirect consumer 296 250 
 Other consumer 22 23 
 Total consumer recoveries 1,231 1,092 
 U.S. commercial(2) 298 178 
 Non-U.S. commercial 12 13 
 Commercial real estate 12 5 
 Commercial lease financing 1 10 
 Total commercial recoveries 323 206 
 Total recoveries of loans and leases 1,554 1,298 
 previously charged off 
 Net charge-offs -2,243 -4,121 
 Provision for loan and lease losses -4,173 10,565 
 Other 1 — 
 Allowance for loan and lease losses, 12,387 18,802 
 December 31 
 Reserve for unfunded lending 1,878 1,123 
 commitments, January 1 
 Provision for unfunded lending -421 755 
 commitments 
 Other -1 — 
 Reserve for unfunded lending 1,456 1,878 
 commitments, December 31 
 Allowance for credit losses, December 31 $ 13,843 $ 20,680 
 Loan and allowance ratios(3): 
 Loans and leases outstanding at December $ 971,305 $ 921,180 
 31 
 Allowance for loan and lease losses as a 
 percentage of total loans and leases 1.28 % 2.04 % 
 outstanding at December 31 
 Consumer allowance for loan and lease 
 losses as a percentage of total consumer 1.62 2.35 
 loans and leases outstanding at December 
 31 
 Commercial allowance for loan and lease 
 losses as a percentage of total 1.00 1.77 
 commercial loans and leases outstanding 
 at December 31 
 Average loans and leases outstanding $ 913,354 $ 974,281 
 Annualized net charge-offs as a 
 percentage of average loans and leases 0.25 % 0.42 % 
 outstanding 
 Allowance for loan and lease losses as a 
 percentage of total nonperforming loans 271 380 
 and leases at December 31 
 Ratio of the allowance for loan and 
 lease losses at December 31 to net 5.52 4.56 
 charge-offs 
 Amounts included in allowance for loan 
 and lease losses for loans and leases $ 7,027 $ 9,854 
 that are excluded from nonperforming 
 loans and leases at December 31(4) 
 Allowance for loan and lease losses as a 
 percentage of total nonperforming loans 
 and leases, excluding the allowance for 
 loan and lease losses for loans and 117 % 181 % 
 leases that are excluded from 
 nonperforming loans and leases at 
 December 31(4) 
(1) Includes U.S. small business commercial charge-offs of $425 million in 2021 compared to $321
million in 2020.
(2) Includes U.S. small business commercial recoveries of $74 million for 2021 compared to $54
million in 2020.
(3) Ratios are calculated as allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of loans and leases
outstanding excluding loans accounted for under the fair value option.
(4) Primarily includes amounts related to credit card and unsecured consumer lending portfolios in
Consumer Banking .
 Bank of America74 
 Market Risk Management 
Market risk is the risk that changes in market
conditions may adversely impact the value of
assets or liabilities, or otherwise negatively
impact earnings. This risk is inherent in the
financial instruments associated with our
operations, primarily within our Global Markets
segment. We are also exposed to these risks in
other areas of the Corporation (e.g., our ALM
activities). In the event of market stress, these
risks could have a material impact on our
results. For more information, see Interest Rate
Risk Management for the Banking Book on page 79.
We have been affected, and may continue to be
affected, by market stress resulting from the
pandemic that began in the first quarter of 2020.
For more information, see Part 1. Item 1A. Risk
Factors – Coronavirus Disease on page 8.
Our traditional banking loan and deposit products
are non-trading positions and are generally
reported at amortized cost for assets or the
amount owed for liabilities (historical cost).
However, these positions are still subject to
changes in economic value based on varying market
conditions, with one of the primary risks being
changes in the levels of interest rates. The risk
of adverse changes in the economic value of our
non-trading positions arising from changes in
interest rates is managed through our ALM
activities. We have elected to account for
certain assets and liabilities under the fair
value option.
Our trading positions are reported at fair value
with changes reflected in income. Trading
positions are subject to various changes in
market-based risk factors. The majority of this
risk is generated by our activities in the
interest rate, foreign exchange, credit, equity
and commodities markets. In addition, the values
of assets and liabilities could change due to
market liquidity, correlations across markets and
expectations of market volatility. We seek to
manage these risk exposures by using a variety of
techniques that encompass a broad range of
financial instruments. The key risk management
techniques are discussed in more detail in the
Trading Risk Management section.
Global Risk Management is responsible for
providing senior management with a clear and
comprehensive understanding of the trading risks
to which we are exposed. These responsibilities
include ownership of market risk policy,
developing and maintaining quantitative risk
models, calculating aggregated risk measures,
establishing and monitoring position limits
consistent with risk appetite, conducting daily
reviews and analysis of trading inventory,
approving material risk exposures and fulfilling
regulatory requirements. Market risks that impact
businesses outside of Global Markets are
monitored and governed by their respective
governance functions.
Model risk is the potential for adverse
consequences from decisions based on incorrect or
misused model outputs and reports. Given that
models are used across the Corporation, model
risk impacts all risk types including credit,
market and operational risks. The Enterprise
Model Risk Policy defines model risk standards,
consistent with our Risk Framework and risk
appetite, prevailing regulatory guidance and
industry best practice. All models, including
risk management, valuation and regulatory capital
models, must meet certain validation criteria,
including effective challenge of the conceptual
soundness of the model, independent model testing
and ongoing monitoring through outcomes analysis
and benchmarking. The Enterprise Model Risk
Committee (EMRC), a subcommittee of the MRC,
oversees that model standards are consistent with
model risk requirements and monitors the
effective challenge in the model validation
process across the Corporation.
 Interest Rate Risk 
Interest rate risk represents exposures to
instruments whose values vary with the level or
volatility of interest rates. These instruments
include, but are not limited to, loans, debt
securities, certain trading-related assets and
liabilities, deposits, borrowings and
derivatives. Hedging instruments used to mitigate
these risks include derivatives such as options,
futures, forwards and swaps.
 Foreign Exchange Risk 
Foreign exchange risk represents exposures to
changes in the values of current holdings and
future cash flows denominated in currencies other
than the U.S. dollar. The types of instruments
exposed to this risk include investments in
non-U.S. subsidiaries, foreign currency-
denominated loans and securities, future cash
flows in foreign currencies arising from foreign
exchange transactions, foreign currency-
denominated debt and various foreign exchange
derivatives whose values fluctuate with changes
in the level or volatility of currency exchange
rates or non-U.S. interest rates. Hedging
instruments used to mitigate this risk include
foreign exchange options, currency swaps,
futures, forwards, and foreign currency-
denominated debt and deposits.
 Mortgage Risk 
Mortgage risk represents exposures to changes in
the values of mortgage-related instruments. The
values of these instruments are sensitive to
prepayment rates, mortgage rates, agency debt
ratings, default, market liquidity, government
participation and interest rate volatility. Our
exposure to these instruments takes several
forms. For example, we trade and engage in
market-making activities in a variety of mortgage
securities including whole loans, pass-through
certificates, commercial mortgages and
collateralized mortgage obligations including
collateralized debt obligations using mortgages
as underlying collateral. In addition, we
originate a variety of MBS, which involves the
accumulation of mortgage-related loans in
anticipation of eventual securitization, and we
may hold positions in mortgage securities and
residential mortgage loans as part of the ALM
portfolio. We also record MSRs as part of our
mortgage origination activities. Hedging
instruments used to mitigate this risk include
derivatives such as options, swaps, futures and
forwards as well as securities including MBS and
U.S. Treasury securities. For more information,
see Mortgage Banking Risk Management on page 80.
 Equity Market Risk 
Equity market risk represents exposures to
securities that represent an ownership interest
in a corporation in the form of domestic and
foreign common stock or other equity-linked
instruments. Instruments that would lead to this
exposure include, but are not limited to, the
following: common stock, exchange-traded funds,
American Depositary Receipts, convertible bonds,
listed equity options (puts and calls), OTC
equity options, equity total return swaps, equity
index futures and other equity derivative
products. Hedging instruments used to mitigate
this risk include options, futures, swaps,
convertible bonds and cash positions.
 Commodity Risk 
Commodity risk represents exposures to
instruments traded in the petroleum, natural gas,
power and metals markets. These instruments
consist primarily of futures, forwards, swaps and
options. Hedging instruments used to mitigate
this risk include
 75Bank of America 
options, futures and swaps in the same or similar
commodity product, as well as cash positions.
 Issuer Credit Risk 
Issuer credit risk represents exposures to
changes in the creditworthiness of individual
issuers or groups of issuers. Our portfolio is
exposed to issuer credit risk where the value of
an asset may be adversely impacted by changes in
the levels of credit spreads, by credit migration
or by defaults. Hedging instruments used to
mitigate this risk include bonds, CDS and other
credit fixed-income instruments.
 Market Liquidity Risk 
Market liquidity risk represents the risk that
the level of expected market activity changes
dramatically and, in certain cases, may even
cease. This exposes us to the risk that we will
not be able to transact business and execute
trades in an orderly manner which may impact our
results. This impact could be further exacerbated
if expected hedging or pricing correlations are
compromised by disproportionate demand or lack of
demand for certain instruments. We utilize
various risk mitigating techniques as discussed
in more detail in Trading Risk Management.
 Trading Risk Management 
To evaluate risks in our trading activities, we
focus on the actual and potential volatility of
revenues generated by individual positions as
well as portfolios of positions. Various
techniques and procedures are utilized to enable
the most complete understanding of these risks.
Quantitative measures of market risk are
evaluated on a daily basis from a single position
to the portfolio of the Corporation. These
measures include sensitivities of positions to
various market risk factors, such as the
potential impact on revenue from a one basis
point change in interest rates, and statistical
measures utilizing both actual and hypothetical
market moves, such as VaR and stress testing.
Periods of extreme market stress influence the
reliability of these techniques to varying
degrees. Qualitative evaluations of market risk
utilize the suite of quantitative risk measures
while understanding each of their respective
limitations. Additionally, risk managers
independently evaluate the risk of the portfolios
under the current market environment and
potential future environments.
VaR is a common statistic used to measure market
risk as it allows the aggregation of market risk
factors, including the effects of portfolio
diversification. A VaR model simulates the value
of a portfolio under a range of scenarios in
order to generate a distribution of potential
gains and losses. VaR represents the loss a
portfolio is not expected to exceed more than a
certain number of times per period, based on a
specified holding period, confidence level and
window of historical data. We use one VaR model
consistently across the trading portfolios and it
uses a historical simulation approach based on a
three-year window of historical data. Our primary
VaR statistic is equivalent to a 99 percent
confidence level, which means that for a VaR with
a one-day holding period, there should not be
losses in excess of VaR, on average, 99 out of
100 trading days.
Within any VaR model, there are significant and
numerous assumptions that will differ from
company to company. The accuracy of a VaR model
depends on the availability and quality of
historical data for each of the risk factors in
the portfolio. A VaR model may require additional
modeling assumptions for new products that do not
have the necessary historical market data or for
less liquid positions for which accurate daily
prices
are not consistently available. For positions
with insufficient historical data for the VaR
calculation, the process for establishing an
appropriate proxy is based on fundamental and
statistical analysis of the new product or less
liquid position. This analysis identifies
reasonable alternatives that replicate both the
expected volatility and correlation to other
market risk factors that the missing data would
be expected to experience.
VaR may not be indicative of realized revenue
volatility as changes in market conditions or in
the composition of the portfolio can have a
material impact on the results. In particular,
the historical data used for the VaR calculation
might indicate higher or lower levels of
portfolio diversification than will be
experienced. In order for the VaR model to
reflect current market conditions, we update the
historical data underlying our VaR model on a
weekly basis, or more frequently during periods
of market stress, and regularly review the
assumptions underlying the model. A minor portion
of risks related to our trading positions is not
included in VaR. These risks are reviewed as part
of our ICAAP. For more information regarding
ICAAP, see Capital Management on page 49.
Global Risk Management continually reviews,
evaluates and enhances our VaR model so that it
reflects the material risks in our trading
portfolio. Changes to the VaR model are reviewed
and approved prior to implementation and any
material changes are reported to management
through the appropriate management committees.
Trading limits on quantitative risk measures,
including VaR, are independently set by Global
Markets Risk Management and reviewed on a regular
basis so that trading limits remain relevant and
within our overall risk appetite for market
risks. Trading limits are reviewed in the context
of market liquidity, volatility and strategic
business priorities. Trading limits are set at
both a granular level to allow for extensive
coverage of risks as well as at aggregated
portfolios to account for correlations among risk
factors. All trading limits are approved at least
annually. Approved trading limits are stored and
tracked in a centralized limits management
system. Trading limit excesses are communicated
to management for review. Certain quantitative
market risk measures and corresponding limits
have been identified as critical in the
Corporation’s Risk Appetite Statement. These risk
appetite limits are reported on a daily basis and
are approved at least annually by the ERC and the
Board.
In periods of market stress, Global Markets
senior leadership communicates daily to discuss
losses, key risk positions and any limit
excesses. As a result of this process, the
businesses may selectively reduce risk.
Table 43 presents the total market-based
portfolio VaR, which is the combination of the
total covered positions (and less liquid trading
positions) portfolio and the fair value option
portfolio. Covered positions are defined by
regulatory standards as trading assets and
liabilities, both on- and off-balance sheet, that
meet a defined set of specifications. These
specifications identify the most liquid trading
positions which are intended to be held for a
short-term horizon and where we are able to hedge
the material risk elements in a two-way market.
Positions in less liquid markets, or where there
are restrictions on the ability to trade the
positions, typically do not qualify as covered
positions. Foreign exchange and commodity
positions are always considered covered
positions, except for structural foreign currency
positions that are excluded with prior regulatory
approval.
 Bank of America76 
In addition, Table 43 presents our fair value
option portfolio, which includes substantially
all of the funded and unfunded exposures for
which we elect the fair value option, and their
corresponding hedges. Additionally, market risk
VaR for trading activities as presented in Table
43 differs from VaR used for regulatory capital
calculations due to the holding period being
used. The holding period for VaR used for
regulatory capital calculations is 10 days, while
for the market risk VaR presented below, it is
one day. Both measures utilize the same process
and methodology.
The total market-based portfolio VaR results in
Table 43 include market risk to which we are
exposed from all business segments, excluding
credit valuation adjustment (CVA), DVA and
related hedges. The majority of this portfolio is
within the Global Markets segment.
Table 43 presents year-end, average, high and low
daily trading VaR for 2021 and 2020 using a 99
percent confidence level. The amounts disclosed
in Table 43 and Table 44 align to the view of
covered positions used in the Basel 3 capital
calculations. Foreign exchange and commodity
positions are always considered covered
positions, regardless of trading or banking
treatment for the trade, except for structural
foreign currency positions that are excluded with
prior regulatory approval.
The annual average of total covered positions and
less liquid trading positions portfolio VaR
decreased for 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due
to an increase in diversification across asset
classes.
 Ma… 
 T… Ri… 
 43 VaR 
 (… for 20… 
 in Tr… Ye… Ye… 
 m… Ac… End Av… Hi… Lo… 20… End Av… Hig… Lo… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 F… $ 11 $ 12 $ 21 $ 5 $ 8 $ 7 $ 25 $ 2 
 e… 
 I… 54 40 80 16 30 19 39 7 
 r… 
 C… 73 69 84 53 79 58 91 25 
 E… 21 24 35 19 20 24 162 12 
 C… 6 8 28 4 4 6 12 3 
 P… -1… -1… — — -72 -61 — — 
 d… 
 T… 
 c… 51 53 85 34 69 53 171 27 
 p… 
 p… 
 I… 
 f… 
 l… 8 20 — — 52 27 — — 
 l… 
 e… 
 T… 
 c… 
 p… 
 a… 
 l… 59 73 125 46 121 80 169 30 
 l… 
 t… 
 p… 
 p… 
 F… 
 v… 51 50 65 31 52 52 84 7 
 o… 
 l… 
 F… 
 v… 15 16 20 11 11 13 17 9 
 o… 
 h… 
 F… 
 v… 
 o… -27 -32 — — -17 -24 — — 
 p… 
 d… 
 T… 
 f… 
 v… 39 34 53 23 46 41 86 9 
 o… 
 p… 
 P… -24 -10 — — -4 -15 — — 
 d… 
 T… 
 m… $ 74 $ 97 169 54 $ 163 $ 106 171 32 
 p… 
(1) The high and low for each portfolio may have occurred on different trading days than the high and
low for the components. Therefore the impact from less liquid exposures and the amount of portfolio
diversification, which is the difference between the total portfolio and the sum of the individual
components, is not relevant.
(2) Impact is net of diversification effects between the covered positions and less liquid trading
positions portfolios.
The graph below presents the daily covered positions and less liquid trading positions portfolio VaR
for 2021, corresponding to the data in Table 43.
 77Bank of America 
Additional VaR statistics produced within our
single VaR model are provided in Table 44 at the
same level of detail as in Table 43. Evaluating
VaR with additional statistics allows for an
increased understanding of the risks in the
portfolio, as the
historical market data used in the VaR
calculation does not necessarily follow a
predefined statistical distribution. Table 44
presents average trading VaR statistics at 99
percent and 95 percent confidence levels for 2021
and 2020.
 Average 
 Market 
 Risk VaR 
 for 
 Trading 
 Activities 
 – 99 
 percent 
 Table 44 and 95 
 (Dollars percent 
 in VaR 2021 95 95 
 millions) Statistics 99 percent percent 2020 99 percent percent 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Foreign $ 12 $ 8 $ 7 $ 4 
 exchange 
 Interest 40 20 19 9 
 rate 
 Credit 69 21 58 18 
 Equity 24 12 24 13 
 Commodit… 8 4 6 3 
 Portfolio -100 -39 -61 -26 
 diversif… 
 Total 
 covered 53 26 53 21 
 positions 
 portfolio 
 Impact 
 from less 20 2 27 2 
 liquid 
 exposures 
 Total 
 covered 
 positions 
 and less 73 28 80 23 
 liquid 
 trading 
 positions 
 portfolio 
 Fair 
 value 50 12 52 13 
 option 
 loans 
 Fair 
 value 16 9 13 7 
 option 
 hedges 
 Fair 
 value 
 option -32 -9 -24 -8 
 portfolio 
 diversif… 
 Total 
 fair 
 value 34 12 41 12 
 option 
 portfolio 
 Portfolio -10 -7 -15 -6 
 diversif… 
 Total 
 market-b… $ 97 $ 33 $ 106 $ 29 
 portfolio 
 Backtesting 
The accuracy of the VaR methodology is evaluated
by backtesting, which compares the daily VaR
results, utilizing a one-day holding period,
against a comparable subset of trading revenue. A
backtesting excess occurs when a trading loss
exceeds the VaR for the corresponding day. These
excesses are evaluated to understand the
positions and market moves that produced the
trading loss with a goal to ensure that the VaR
methodology accurately represents those losses.
We expect the frequency of trading losses in
excess of VaR to be in line with the confidence
level of the VaR statistic being tested. For
example, with a 99 percent confidence level, we
expect one trading loss in excess of VaR every
100 days or between two to three trading losses
in excess of VaR over the course of a year. The
number of backtesting excesses observed can
differ from the statistically expected number of
excesses if the current level of market
volatility is materially different than the level
of market volatility that existed during the
three years of historical data used in the VaR
calculation.
The trading revenue used for backtesting is
defined by regulatory agencies in order to most
closely align with the VaR component of the
regulatory capital calculation. This revenue
differs from total trading-related revenue in
that it excludes revenue from trading activities
that either do not generate market risk or the
market risk cannot be included in VaR. Some
examples of the types of revenue excluded for
backtesting are fees, commissions, reserves, net
interest income and intra-day trading revenues.
We conduct daily backtesting on the VaR results
used for regulatory capital calculations as well
as the VaR results for key legal entities,
regions and risk factors. These results are
reported to senior market risk management. Senior
management regularly reviews and evaluates the
results of these tests.
During 2021, there were two days where this
subset of trading revenue had losses that
exceeded our total covered portfolio VaR,
utilizing a one-day holding period.
 Total Trading-related Revenue 
Total trading-related revenue, excluding
brokerage fees, and CVA, DVA and funding
valuation adjustment gains (losses), represents
the total amount earned from trading positions,
including market-based net interest income, which
are taken in a diverse range of financial
instruments and markets. For more information on
fair value, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements
to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Trading-related revenue can be volatile and is
largely driven by general market conditions and
customer demand. Also, trading-related revenue is
dependent on the volume and type of transactions,
the level of risk assumed, and the volatility of
price and rate movements at any given time within
the ever-changing market environment. Significant
daily revenue by business is monitored and the
primary drivers of these are reviewed.
The following histogram is a graphic depiction of
trading volatility and illustrates the daily
level of trading-related revenue for 2021 and
2020. During 2021, positive trading-related
revenue was recorded for 97 percent of the
trading days, of which 80 percent were daily
trading gains of over $25 million, and the
largest loss was $45 million. This compares to
2020 where positive trading-related revenue was
recorded for 98 percent of the trading days, of
which 87 percent were daily trading gains of over
$25 million, and the largest loss was $90
million.
 Bank of America78 
Trading Portfolio Stress Testing Because the very nature of a VaR model suggests results can exceed
our estimates and it is dependent on a limited historical window, we also stress test our portfolio
using scenario analysis. This analysis estimates the change in the value of our trading portfolio
that may result from abnormal market movements. A set of scenarios, categorized as either historical
or hypothetical, are computed daily for the overall trading portfolio and individual businesses.
These scenarios include shocks to underlying market risk factors that may be well beyond the shocks
found in the historical data used to calculate VaR. Historical scenarios simulate the impact of the
market moves that occurred during a period of extended historical market stress. Generally, a multi-
week period representing the most severe point during a crisis is selected for each historical
scenario. Hypothetical scenarios provide estimated portfolio impacts from potential future market
stress events. Scenarios are reviewed and updated in response to changing positions and new economic
or political information. In addition, new or ad hoc scenarios are developed to address specific
potential market events or particular vulnerabilities in the portfolio. The stress tests are reviewed
on a regular basis and the results are presented to senior management. Stress testing for the trading
portfolio is integrated with enterprise-wide stress testing and incorporated into the limits
framework. The macroeconomic scenarios used for enterprise-wide stress testing purposes differ from
the typical trading portfolio scenarios in that they have a longer time horizon and the results are
forecasted over multiple periods for use in consolidated capital and liquidity planning. For more
information, see Managing Risk on page 46. Interest Rate Risk Management for the Banking Book The
following discussion presents net interest income for banking book activities. Interest rate risk
represents the most significant market risk exposure to our banking book balance sheet. Interest rate
risk is measured as the potential change in net interest income caused by movements in market
interest rates. Client-facing activities, primarily lending and deposit-taking, create interest rate
sensitive positions on our balance sheet. We prepare forward-looking forecasts of net interest
income. The baseline forecast takes into consideration expected future business growth, ALM
positioning -and the direction of interest rate movements as implied by the market-based forward
curve. We then measure and evaluate the impact that alternative interest rate scenarios have on the
baseline forecast in order to assess interest rate sensitivity under varied conditions. The net
interest income forecast is frequently updated for changing assumptions and differing outlooks based
on economic trends, market conditions and business strategies. Thus, we continually monitor our
balance sheet position in order to maintain an acceptable level of exposure to interest rate changes.
The interest rate scenarios that we analyze incorporate balance sheet assumptions such as loan and
deposit growth and pricing, changes in funding mix, product repricing, maturity characteristics and
investment securities premium amortization. Our overall goal is to manage interest rate risk so that
movements in interest rates do not significantly adversely affect earnings and capital. Table 45
presents the spot and 12-month forward rates used in our baseline forecasts at December 31, 2021 and
2020.
 Table 45 Forward Rates December 31, 2021 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Federal Three-month 10-Year 
 Funds LIBOR Swap 
 Spot rates 0.25 % 0.21 % 1.58 % 
 12-month forward rates 1.00 1.07 1.84 
 December 31, 2020 
 Spot rates 0.25 % 0.24 % 0.93 % 
 12-month forward rates 0.25 0.19 1.06 
Table 46 shows the pretax impact to forecasted
net interest income over the next 12 months from
December 31, 2021 and 2020 resulting from
instantaneous parallel and non-parallel shocks to
the market-based forward curve. Periodically, we
evaluate the scenarios presented so that they are
meaningful in the context of the current rate
environment. The interest rate scenarios also
assume U.S. dollar rates are floored at zero.
During 2021, the overall decrease in asset
sensitivity of our balance sheet to Up-rate and
Down-rate scenarios was primarily due to ALM
activity and an increase in long-end rates. We
continue to be asset sensitive to a parallel
upward move in interest rates with the majority
of that impact coming from the short end of the
yield curve. Additionally, higher interest rates
impact the fair value of debt securities and,
accordingly, for debt securities classified as
AFS, may adversely affect accumulated OCI and
thus capital levels under the Basel 3 capital
rules. Under instantaneous upward parallel
shifts, the near-term adverse impact to Basel 3
capital is reduced over time by offsetting
positive impacts to net interest income. For more
information on Basel 3, see Capital Management –
Regulatory Capital on page 50.
 Estimated 
 Banking Book 
 Table 46 Net Interest 
 (Dollars in Income Long 
 millions) Sensitivity Rate (bps) 
 Parallel to Short December 31 
 Shifts Curve Changes Rate (bps) 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 +100 bps 
 instantaneous +100 +100 $ 6,542 $ 10,468 
 shift 
 -25 bps 
 instantaneous -25 -25 -2,092 -2,766 
 shift 
 Flatteners 
 Short-end 
 instantaneous +100 — 4,982 6,321 
 change 
 Long-end 
 instantaneous — -25 -735 -1,686 
 change 
 Steepeners 
 Short-end 
 instantaneous -25 — -1,344 -1,084 
 change 
 Long-end 
 instantaneous — +100 1,646 4,333 
 change 
The sensitivity analysis in Table 46 assumes that
we take no action in response to these rate
shocks and does not assume any change in other
macroeconomic variables normally correlated with
changes in interest rates. As part of our ALM
activities, we use securities, certain
residential mortgages, and interest rate and
foreign exchange derivatives in managing interest
rate sensitivity. The behavior of our deposits
portfolio in the baseline forecast and in
alternate interest rate scenarios is a key
assumption in our projected estimates of net
interest income. The sensitivity analysis in
Table 46 assumes no change in
 79Bank of America 
deposit portfolio size or mix from the baseline
forecast in alternate rate environments. In
higher rate scenarios, any customer activity
resulting in the replacement of low-cost or
noninterest-bearing deposits with higher yielding
deposits or market-based funding would reduce our
benefit in those scenarios.
Interest Rate and Foreign Exchange Derivative
Contracts
We use interest rate and foreign exchange
derivative contracts in our ALM activities to
manage our interest rate and foreign exchange
risks. Specifically, we use those derivatives to
manage both the variability in cash flows and
changes in fair value of various assets and
liabilities arising from those risks. Our
interest rate derivative contracts are generally
non-leveraged swaps tied to various benchmark
interest rates and foreign exchange basis swaps,
options, futures and forwards, and our foreign
exchange contracts include cross-currency
interest rate swaps, foreign currency futures
contracts, foreign currency forward contracts and
options.
The derivatives used in our ALM activities can be
split into two broad categories: designated
accounting hedges and other risk management
derivatives. Designated accounting hedges are
primarily used to manage our exposure to interest
rates as described in the Interest Rate Risk
Management for the Banking Book section and are
included in the sensitivities presented in Table
46. The Corporation also uses foreign currency
derivatives in accounting hedges to manage
substantially all of the foreign exchange risk of
our foreign operations. By hedging the foreign
exchange risk of our foreign operations, the
Corporation's market risk exposure in this area
is insignificant.
Risk management derivatives are predominantly
used to hedge foreign exchange risks related to
various foreign currency-denominated assets and
liabilities and eliminate substantially all
foreign currency exposures in the cash flows of
the Corporation’s non-trading foreign currency-
denominated financial instruments. These foreign
exchange derivatives are sensitive to other
market risk exposures such as cross-currency
basis spreads and interest rate risk. However, as
these features are not a significant component of
these foreign exchange derivatives, the market
risk related to this exposure is insignificant.
For more information on the accounting for
derivatives, see Note 3 – Derivatives to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Mortgage Banking Risk Management 
We originate, fund and service mortgage loans,
which subject us to credit, liquidity and
interest rate risks, among others. We determine
whether loans will be held for investment or held
for sale at the time of commitment and manage
credit and liquidity risks by selling or
securitizing a portion of the loans we originate.
Interest rate risk and market risk can be
substantial in the mortgage business. Changes in
interest rates and other market factors impact
the volume of mortgage originations. Changes in
interest rates also impact the value of interest
rate lock commitments (IRLCs) and the related
residential first mortgage LHFS between the date
of the IRLC and the date the loans are
sold to the secondary market. An increase in
mortgage interest rates typically leads to a
decrease in the value of these instruments.
Conversely, when there is an increase in interest
rates, the value of the MSRs will increase driven
by lower prepayment expectations. Because the
interest rate risks of these hedged items offset,
we combine them into one overall hedged item with
one combined economic hedge portfolio consisting
of derivative contracts and securities.
During 2021, 2020 and 2019, we recorded gains of
$39 million, $321 million and $291 million. For
more information on MSRs, see Note 20 – Fair
Value Measurements to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
 Compliance and Operational Risk Management 
Compliance risk is the risk of legal or
regulatory sanctions, material financial loss or
damage to the reputation of the Corporation
arising from the failure of the Corporation to
comply with the requirements of applicable laws,
rules, regulations and our internal policies and
procedures (collectively, applicable laws, rules
and regulations). We are subject to comprehensive
regulation under federal and state laws, rules
and regulations in the U.S. and the laws of the
various jurisdictions in which we operate,
including those related to financial crimes and
anti-money laundering, market conduct, trading
activities, fair lending, privacy, data
protection and unfair, deceptive or abusive acts
or practices.
Operational risk is the risk of loss resulting
from inadequate or failed processes or systems,
people or external events, and includes legal
risk. Operational risk may occur anywhere in the
Corporation, including third-party business
processes, and is not limited to operations
functions. The Corporation faces a number of key
operational risks including third-party risk,
model risk, conduct risk, technology risk,
information security risk and data risk.
Operational risk can result in financial losses
and reputational impacts and is a component in
the calculation of total RWA used in the Basel 3
capital calculation. For more information on
Basel 3 calculations, see Capital Management on
page 49.
FLUs and control functions are first and foremost
responsible for managing all aspects of their
businesses, including their compliance and
operational risk. FLUs and control functions are
required to understand their business processes
and related risks and controls, including third-
party dependencies and the related regulatory
requirements, and monitor and report on the
effectiveness of the control environment. In
order to actively monitor and assess the
performance of their processes and controls, they
must conduct comprehensive quality assurance
activities and identify issues and risks to
remediate control gaps and weaknesses. FLUs and
control functions must also adhere to compliance
and operational risk appetite limits to meet
strategic, capital and financial planning
objectives. Finally, FLUs and control functions
are responsible for the proactive identification,
management and escalation of compliance and
operational risks across the Corporation.
Collectively, these efforts are important to
strengthen their compliance and operational
resiliency, which is the ability to deliver
critical operations through disruption.
 Bank of America80 
Global Compliance and Operational Risk teams
independently assess compliance and operational
risk, monitor business activities and processes
and evaluate FLUs and control functions for
adherence to applicable laws, rules and
regulations, including identifying issues and
risks, determining and developing tests to be
conducted by the Enterprise Independent Testing
unit and reporting on the state of the control
environment. Enterprise Independent Testing, an
independent testing function within GRM, works
with Global Compliance and Operational Risk, the
FLUs and control functions in the identification
of testing needs and test design, and is
accountable for test execution, reporting and
analysis of results. Corporate Audit provides an
independent assessment and validation through
testing of key compliance and operational risk
processes and controls across the Corporation.
The Corporation's Global Compliance Enterprise
Policy and Operational Risk Management –
Enterprise Policy set the requirements for
reporting compliance and operational risk
information to executive management as well as
the Board or appropriate Board-level committees
and reflect Global Compliance and Operational
Risk’s responsibilities for conducting
independent oversight of the Corporation’s
compliance and operational risk management
activities. The Board provides oversight of
compliance risk through its Audit Committee and
the ERC, and operational risk through its ERC.
A key operational risk facing the Corporation is
information security, which includes
cybersecurity. Cybersecurity risk represents,
among other things, exposure to failures or
interruptions of service or breaches of security,
including as a result of malicious technological
attacks, that impact the confidentiality,
availability or integrity of our or third
parties' operations, systems or data. The
Corporation seeks to mitigate information
security risk and associated reputational and
compliance risk by employing a multi-layered and
intelligence-led Global Information Security
Program, which is focused on preparing for,
preventing, detecting, mitigating, responding to
and recovering from cyber threats and incidents
and ensuring the Corporation’s processes operate
effectively and mitigate the aforementioned
risks.
The Global Information Security Program is
supported by three lines of defense. The Global
Information Security Team within the first line
of defense is responsible for the day-to-day
management of the Global Information Security
Program, which includes defining policies and
procedures to safeguard the Corporation’s
information systems and data, conducting
vulnerability and third-party information
security assessments, information security event
management (e.g., responding to ransomware and
distributed denial of service attacks),
evaluation of external cyber intelligence,
supporting industry cybersecurity efforts and
working with governmental agencies, as well as
developing employee training to support adherence
to the Corporation’s policies and procedures. As
the second line of defense, Global Compliance and
Operational Risk independently assesses, monitors
and tests information security risk across the
Corporation as well as the effectiveness of the
Global Information Security Program. Corporate
Audit serves as the third line of defense,
conducting additional independent review and
validation of the first line processes and
functions.
Through established governance structures, we
have processes to help facilitate appropriate and
effective oversight of information security risk.
These routines enable our three lines of defense
and management to debate information security
risks and monitor control performance to allow
for further escalation to executive management,
management and Board-level committees or to the
Board, as appropriate. The Board is actively
engaged in the oversight of Bank of America’s
Global Information Security Program, primarily
through the ERC.
 Reputational Risk Management 
Reputational risk is the risk that negative
perception of the Corporation may adversely
impact profitability or operations. Reputational
risk may result from many of the Corporation’s
activities, including those related to the
management of our strategic, operational,
compliance and credit risks.
The Corporation manages reputational risk through
established policies and controls embedded
throughout its business and risk management
processes. We proactively monitor and identify
potential reputational risk events and have
processes established to mitigate reputational
risks in a timely manner. If reputational risk
events occur, we focus on remediating the
underlying issue and taking action to minimize
damage to the Corporation’s reputation. The
Corporation has processes and procedures in place
to respond to events that give rise to
reputational risk, including educating
individuals and organizations that influence
public opinion, implementing external
communication strategies to mitigate the risk,
and informing key stakeholders of potential
reputational risks. The Corporation’s
organization and governance structure provides
oversight of reputational risks. Reputational
risk reporting is provided regularly and directly
to management and the ERC, which provides primary
oversight of reputational risk. In addition, each
FLU has a committee, which includes
representatives from Legal and Risk, that is
responsible for the oversight of reputational
risk, including approval for business activities
that present elevated levels of reputational
risks.
 Climate Risk Management 
Climate-related risks are divided into two major
categories: (1) risks related to the transition
to a low-carbon economy, which may entail
extensive policy, legal, technology and market
changes, and (2) risks related to the physical
impacts of climate change, driven by extreme
weather events, such as hurricanes and floods, as
well as chronic longer-term shifts, such as
rising average global temperatures and sea-level
rise. These changes and events can have broad
impacts on operations, supply chains,
distribution networks, customers and markets and
are otherwise referred to, respectively, as
transition risk and physical risk. These risks
can impact both financial and nonfinancial risk
types. The impacts of transition risk can lead to
and amplify credit risk or market risk by
reducing our customers’ operating income or the
value of their assets as well as expose us to
reputational and/or litigation risk due to
increased regulatory scrutiny or negative public
sentiment. Physical risk can lead to increased
credit risk by diminishing borrowers’ repayment
capacity or impacting the value of collateral. In
addition, it could pose increased operational
risk to our facilities and people.
 81Bank of America 
Effective management of climate risk requires
coordinated governance, clearly defined roles and
responsibilities and well-developed processes to
identify, measure, monitor and control risks. We
continue to build out and enhance our climate
risk management capabilities. As climate risk is
interconnected with all key risk types, we have
developed and continue to enhance processes to
embed climate risk considerations into our Risk
Framework and risk management programs
established for strategic, credit, market,
liquidity, compliance, operational and
reputational risks. Our Environmental and Social
Risk Policy Framework (ESRPF) aligns with our
Risk Framework and provides additional clarity
and transparency regarding our approach to
environmental and social risks, inclusive of
climate risk.
Our governance framework establishes oversight of
climate risk practices and strategies by the
Board, supported by its Corporate Governance,
ESG, and Sustainability Committee and ERC, as
well as the MRC and the Global ESG Committee,
both of which are management-level committees
comprised of senior leaders across every major
FLU and control function.
Our climate risk management efforts are overseen
by the Global Climate Risk Executive who reports
to the CRO. The Global Climate Risk Executive
chairs the Climate Risk Steering Council, which
meets monthly and shapes our approach to managing
climate-related risks in line with our Risk
Framework.
As outlined in our ESRPF, we are focused on
supporting and financing areas critical to the
transition to a low-carbon economy. Accordingly,
we have a goal, publicly announced in early 2021,
to achieve net zero greenhouse gas emissions in
our financing activities, operations and supply
chain before 2050 (Net Zero Goal). More broadly,
achieving this goal will require technological
advances, clearly defined roadmaps for industry
sectors, public policies, and better emissions
data reporting, as well as ongoing, strong and
active engagement with clients, suppliers,
investors, government officials and other
stakeholders.
Our progress towards achieving our Net Zero Goal
is based on establishing the baseline for
emissions associated with our financing
activities often referred to as financed
emissions. Currently, we are using the
Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financials
methodology to assess our financed emissions.
Additionally, given the urgency required to
address climate change, we helped to launch the
Net Zero Banking Alliance (NZBA) in April 2021,
which outlines guidelines for banks to achieve
net zero greenhouse gas emissions including
requirements for setting interim targets. As a
member of NZBA, the Corporation and more than 100
other financial institution members representing
more than 40 percent of the world’s banking
assets, have committed to set emission reduction
targets for 2030. We plan to begin disclosure of
financed emissions by 2023, and set 2030 targets
for the significant majority of emissions in our
portfolio.
In 2021, we also announced a goal to deploy $1
trillion by 2030 to accelerate the transition to
a low-carbon, sustainable economy by providing
lending, capital raising, advisory and investment
services, and by developing other client-driven
financial solutions. This commitment anchors a
broader $1.5
trillion sustainable finance goal to support both
environmental transition and social inclusive
development, which spans business activities
across the globe. These goals are intended to
help drive business opportunities and enhance
risk management related to the transition to a
low-carbon economy.
For more information about climate risk, see the
Bank of America website. For more information
about the Corporation’s climate-related goals and
commitments, including emissions associated with
our operations and supply chain and progress on
our sustainable finance goals, see the
Corporation’s 2021 Annual Report to shareholders
that will be available on the Investor Relations
portion of our website in March 2022. The
contents of the Corporation’s website and 2021
Annual Report to shareholders are not
incorporated by reference into this Annual Report
on Form 10-K.
The foregoing discussion and our discussion in
the 2021 Annual Report to shareholders regarding
our goals and commitments with respect to climate
risk management, including environmental
transition considerations, include “forward-
looking statements” within the meaning of the
Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
These statements are not guarantees of future
results or performance and involve certain known
and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions
that are difficult to predict and are often
beyond the Corporation’s control. Actual outcomes
and results may differ materially from those
expressed in, or implied by, any of these
forward-looking statements.
 Complex Accounting Estimates 
Our significant accounting principles, as
described in Note 1 – Summary of Significant
Accounting Principles to the Consolidated
Financial Statements, are essential in
understanding the MD&A. Many of our significant
accounting principles require complex judgments
to estimate the values of assets and liabilities.
We have procedures and processes in place to
facilitate making these judgments.
The more judgmental estimates are summarized in
the following discussion. We have identified and
described the development of the variables most
important in the estimation processes that
involve mathematical models to derive the
estimates. In many cases, there are numerous
alternative judgments that could be used in the
process of determining the inputs to the models.
Where alternatives exist, we have used the
factors that we believe represent the most
reasonable value in developing the inputs. Actual
performance that differs from our estimates of
the key variables could materially impact our
results of operations. Separate from the possible
future impact to our results of operations from
input and model variables, the value of our
lending portfolio and market-sensitive assets and
liabilities may change subsequent to the balance
sheet date, often significantly, due to the
nature and magnitude of future credit and market
conditions. Such credit and market conditions may
change quickly and in unforeseen ways and the
resulting volatility could have a significant,
negative effect on future operating results.
These fluctuations would not be indicative of
deficiencies in our models or inputs.
 Bank of America82 
 Allowance for Credit Losses 
The allowance for credit losses includes the
allowance for loan and lease losses and the
reserve for unfunded lending commitments. Our
process for determining the allowance for credit
losses is discussed in Note 1 – Summary of
Significant Accounting Principles and Note 5 –
Outstanding Loans and Leases and Allowance for
Credit Losses to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
The determination of allowance for credit losses
is based on numerous estimates and assumptions,
which require a high degree of judgment and are
often interrelated. A critical judgment in the
process is the weighting of our forward-looking
macroeconomic scenarios that are incorporated
into our quantitative models. As any one economic
outlook is inherently uncertain, the Corporation
uses multiple macroeconomic scenarios in its
expected credit losses (ECL) calculation, which
have included a baseline scenario, which is
derived from consensus estimates, downside
scenarios, a tail risk scenario similar to the
severely adverse scenario used in stress testing
and an upside scenario. Beginning in 2020, the
scenarios incorporated the potential impacts of
the pandemic and, beginning in the second quarter
in 2021, an additional scenario was added to
account for inflationary risk and higher interest
rates. Generally, as the consensus estimates
improve or deteriorate, the allowance for credit
losses will change in a similar direction.
There are multiple variables that drive the
macroeconomic scenarios with the key variables
including, but not limited to, U.S. gross
domestic product (GDP) and unemployment rates. As
of December 31, 2020, the weighted macroeconomic
outlook for U.S. average unemployment rate was
forecasted at 6.6 percent, 5.5 percent and 5.0
percent in the fourth quarters of 2021, 2022 and
2023, respectively, and the weighted
macroeconomic outlook for U.S. GDP was forecasted
to grow at 2.5 percent, 2.4 percent and 2.1
percent year-over-year in the fourth quarters of
2021, 2022 and 2023, respectively. As of December
31, 2021 the latest consensus estimates for the
U.S. average unemployment rate for the fourth
quarter of 2021 was 4.4 percent and U.S. GDP was
forecasted to grow 5.2 percent year-over-year in
the fourth quarter of 2021, both of which were
meaningfully better than our macroeconomic
outlook as of December 31, 2020 and were factored
into our December 31, 2021 allowance for credit
losses estimate. In addition, as of December 31,
2021, the weighted macroeconomic outlook for the
U.S. average unemployment rate was forecasted at
5.2 percent and 4.7 percent in the fourth
quarters of 2022 and 2023, and the weighted
macroeconomic outlook for U.S. GDP was forecasted
to grow 2.1 percent and 1.9 percent year-over-
year in the fourth quarters of 2022 and 2023.
In addition to the above judgments and estimates,
the allowance for credit losses can also be
impacted by unanticipated changes in asset
quality of the portfolio, such as increases or
decreases in credit and/or internal risk ratings
in our commercial portfolio, improvement or
deterioration in borrower delinquencies or credit
scores in our credit card portfolio and increases
or decreases in home prices, which is a primary
driver of LTVs, in our consumer real estate
portfolio, all
of which have some degree of uncertainty. As the
macroeconomic outlook improved in 2021, along
with improvements in asset quality, the allowance
for credit losses decreased to $13.8 billion from
$20.7 billion at December 31, 2020.
To provide an illustration of the sensitivity of
the macroeconomic scenarios and other assumptions
on the estimate of our allowance for credit
losses, the Corporation compared the December 31,
2021 modeled ECL from the baseline scenario and
our downside scenario. Relative to the baseline
scenario, the downside scenario assumed a peak
U.S. unemployment rate of approximately three
percentage points higher than the consensus
outlook, a decline in U.S. GDP followed by a
prolonged recovery and a lower home price outlook
with a difference of 14 percent at the trough.
This sensitivity analysis resulted in a
hypothetical increase in the allowance for credit
losses of approximately $5 billion.
While the sensitivity analysis may be useful to
understand how changes in macroeconomic
assumptions could impact our modeled ECLs, it is
not meant to forecast how our allowance for
credit losses is expected to change in a
different macroeconomic outlook. Importantly, the
analysis does not incorporate a variety of
factors, including qualitative reserves and the
weighting of alternate scenarios, which could
have offsetting effects on the estimate.
Considering the variety of factors contemplated
when developing and weighting macroeconomic
outlooks such as recent economic events, leading
economic indicators, views of internal and third-
party economists and industry trends, in addition
to other qualitative factors, the Corporation
believes the allowance for credit losses at
December 31, 2021 is appropriate.
 Fair Value of Financial Instruments 
Under applicable accounting standards, we are
required to maximize the use of observable inputs
and minimize the use of unobservable inputs in
measuring fair value. We classify fair value
measurements of financial instruments and MSRs
based on the three-level fair value hierarchy in
the accounting standards.
The fair values of assets and liabilities may
include adjustments, such as market liquidity and
credit quality, where appropriate. Valuations of
products using models or other techniques are
sensitive to assumptions used for the significant
inputs. Where market data is available, the
inputs used for valuation reflect that
information as of our valuation date. Inputs to
valuation models are considered unobservable if
they are supported by little or no market
activity. In periods of extreme volatility,
lessened liquidity or in illiquid markets, there
may be more variability in market pricing or a
lack of market data to use in the valuation
process. In keeping with the prudent application
of estimates and management judgment in
determining the fair value of assets and
liabilities, we have in place various processes
and controls that include: a model validation
policy that requires review and approval of
quantitative models used for deal pricing,
financial statement fair value determination and
risk quantification; a trading product valuation
policy that requires verification of all traded
product valuations; and a periodic review and
substantiation of daily profit and loss
 83Bank of America 
reporting for all traded products. Primarily
through validation controls, we utilize both
broker and pricing service inputs which can and
do include both market-observable and internally-
modeled values and/or valuation inputs. Our
reliance on this information is affected by our
understanding of how the broker and/or pricing
service develops its data with a higher degree of
reliance applied to those that are more directly
observable and lesser reliance applied to those
developed through their own internal modeling.
For example, broker quotes in less active markets
may only be indicative and therefore less
reliable. These processes and controls are
performed independently of the business. For more
information, see Note 20 – Fair Value
Measurements and Note 21 – Fair Value Option to
the Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Level 3 Assets and Liabilities 
Financial assets and liabilities, and MSRs, where
values are based on valuation techniques that
require inputs that are both unobservable and are
significant to the overall fair value measurement
are classified as Level 3 under the fair value
hierarchy established in applicable accounting
standards. The fair value of these Level 3
financial assets and liabilities and MSRs is
determined using pricing models, discounted cash
flow methodologies or similar techniques for
which the determination of fair value requires
significant management judgment or estimation.
Level 3 financial instruments may be hedged with
derivatives classified as Level 1 or 2;
therefore, gains or losses associated with Level
3 financial instruments may be offset by gains or
losses associated with financial instruments
classified in other levels of the fair value
hierarchy. The Level 3 gains and losses recorded
in earnings did not have a significant impact on
our liquidity or capital. We conduct a review of
our fair value hierarchy classifications on a
quarterly basis. Transfers into or out of Level 3
are made if the significant inputs used in the
financial models measuring the fair values of the
assets and liabilities became unobservable or
observable, respectively, in the current
marketplace. For more information on transfers
into and out of Level 3 during 2021, 2020 and
2019, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements to
the Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Accrued Income Taxes and Deferred Tax Assets 
Accrued income taxes, reported as a component of
either other assets or accrued expenses and other
liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet,
represent the net amount of current income taxes
we expect to pay to or receive from various
taxing jurisdictions attributable to our
operations to date. We currently file income tax
returns in more than 100 jurisdictions and
consider many factors, including statutory,
judicial and
regulatory guidance, in estimating the
appropriate accrued income taxes for each
jurisdiction.
Net deferred tax assets, reported as a component
of other assets on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet, represent the net decrease in taxes
expected to be paid in the future because of net
operating loss (NOL) and tax credit carryforwards
and because of future reversals of temporary
differences in the bases of assets and
liabilities as measured by tax laws and their
bases as reported in the financial statements.
NOL and tax credit carryforwards result in
reductions to future tax liabilities, and many of
these attributes can expire if not utilized
within certain periods. We consider the need for
valuation allowances to reduce net deferred tax
assets to the amounts that we estimate are more
likely than not to be realized.
Consistent with the applicable accounting
guidance, we monitor relevant tax authorities and
change our estimates of accrued income taxes
and/or net deferred tax assets due to changes in
income tax laws and their interpretation by the
courts and regulatory authorities. These
revisions of our estimates, which also may result
from our income tax planning and from the
resolution of income tax audit matters, may be
material to our operating results for any given
period.
See Note 19 – Income Taxes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements for a table of significant
tax attributes and
additional information. For more information, see
page 18 under Item 1A. Risk Factors – Regulatory,
Compliance and Legal.
 Goodwill and Intangible Assets 
The nature of and accounting for goodwill and
intangible assets are discussed in Note 1 –
Summary of Significant Accounting Principles ,
and Note 7 – Goodwill and Intangible Assets to
the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We completed our annual goodwill impairment test
as of June 30, 2021 by using a qualitative
assessment to determine whether it was more
likely than not that the fair value of each
reporting unit was less than its respective
carrying value. Factors considered in the
qualitative assessment included, among other
things, macroeconomic conditions, industry and
market considerations, financial performance of
the respective reporting unit and other relevant
entity- and reporting-unit specific
considerations. Based on our qualitative
assessment, we have concluded that it was not
“more likely than not” that the reporting units
’fair values were less than their carrying
values.
 Certain Contingent Liabilities 
For more information on the complex judgments
associated with certain contingent liabilities,
see Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies to
the Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Bank of America84 
 Non-GAAP Reconciliations 
Tables 47 and 48 provide reconciliations of certain non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial
measures.
 Table 47 
 (Dollars in millions, 
 shares in thousands) 
 Reconciliation of 
 average shareholders’ 
 equity to average 
 tangible shareholders’ 
 equity and average Annual Reconciliations 
 tangible common to GAAP Financial 
 shareholders’ equity Measures(1) 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Shareholders’ equity $ 273,757 $ 267,309 $ 267,889 
 Goodwill -69,005 -68,951 -68,951 
 Intangible assets -2,177 -1,862 -1,721 
 (excluding MSRs) 
 Related deferred tax 916 821 773 
 liabilities 
 Tangible shareholders’ $ 203,491 $ 197,317 $ 197,990 
 equity 
 Preferred stock -23,970 -23,624 -23,036 
 Tangible common $ 179,521 $ 173,693 $ 174,954 
 shareholders’ equity 
 Reconciliation of 
 year-end shareholders’ 
 equity to year-end 
 tangible 
 shareholders’ equity 
 and year-end 
 tangible common 
 shareholders’ equity 
 Shareholders’ equity $ 270,066 $ 272,924 $ 264,810 
 Goodwill -69,022 -68,951 -68,951 
 Intangible assets -2,153 -2,151 -1,661 
 (excluding MSRs) 
 Related deferred tax 929 920 713 
 liabilities 
 Tangible shareholders’ $ 199,820 $ 202,742 $ 194,911 
 equity 
 Preferred stock -24,708 -24,510 -23,401 
 Tangible common $ 175,112 $ 178,232 $ 171,510 
 shareholders’ equity 
 Reconciliation of 
 year-end assets to 
 year-end tangible 
 assets 
 Assets $ 3,169,495 $ 2,819,627 $ 2,434,079 
 Goodwill -69,022 -68,951 -68,951 
 Intangible assets -2,153 -2,151 -1,661 
 (excluding MSRs) 
 Related deferred tax 929 920 713 
 liabilities 
 Tangible assets $ 3,099,249 $ 2,749,445 $ 2,364,180 
(1) Presents reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial measures. For more
information on non-GAAP financial measures and ratios we use in assessing the results of the
Corporation, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 31.
 Ta… 
 48 
 (D… 
 in 
 mi… 
 Re… 
 of 
 av… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 to 
 av… 
 ta… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 and Qua… 
 av… Rec… 
 ta… to 
 co… GAAP 2021 20… 
 sh… Fin… Qua… Qu… 
 eq… Mea… Fou… Thi… Sec… Fir… Fo… Thi… Se… Fir… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Sh… $ 270… $ 275… $ 274… $ 274… $ 27… $ 267… $ 26… $ 264… 
 eq… 
 Go… -69… -69… -69… -68… -6… -68… -6… -68… 
 In… 
 as… -2,… -2,… -2,… -2,… -2… -1,… -1… -1,… 
 (e… 
 MS… 
 Re… 
 de… 913 915 915 920 910 855 790 728 
 tax 
 li… 
 Ta… 
 sh… $ 200… $ 205… $ 204… $ 203… $ 20… $ 197… $ 19… $ 194… 
 eq… 
 Pr… -24… -23… -23… -24… -2… -23… -2… -23… 
 st… 
 Ta… 
 co… $ 176… $ 181… $ 180… $ 179… $ 17… $ 173… $ 17… $ 171… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 Re… 
 of 
 pe… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 to 
 pe… 
 ta… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 and 
 pe… 
 ta… 
 co… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 Sh… $ 270… $ 272… $ 277… $ 274… $ 27… $ 268… $ 26… $ 264… 
 eq… 
 Go… -69… -69… -69… -68… -6… -68… -6… -68… 
 In… 
 as… -2,… -2,… -2,… -2,… -2… -2,… -1… -1,… 
 (e… 
 MS… 
 Re… 
 de… 929 913 915 915 920 910 789 790 
 tax 
 li… 
 Ta… 
 sh… $ 199… $ 202… $ 206… $ 203… $ 20… $ 198… $ 19… $ 195… 
 eq… 
 Pr… -24… -23… -23… -24… -2… -23… -2… -23… 
 st… 
 Ta… 
 co… $ 175… $ 178… $ 183… $ 179… $ 17… $ 175… $ 17… $ 171… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 Re… 
 of 
 pe… 
 as… 
 to 
 pe… 
 ta… 
 as… 
 As… $ 3,1… $ 3,0… $ 3,0… $ 2,9… $ 2,… $ 2,7… $ 2,… $ 2,6… 
 Go… -69… -69… -69… -68… -6… -68… -6… -68… 
 In… 
 as… -2,… -2,… -2,… -2,… -2… -2,… -1… -1,… 
 (e… 
 MS… 
 Re… 
 de… 929 913 915 915 920 910 789 790 
 tax 
 li… 
 Ta… $ 3,0… $ 3,0… $ 2,9… $ 2,8… $ 2,… $ 2,6… $ 2,… $ 2,5… 
 as… 
(1) Presents reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial measures. For more
information on non-GAAP financial measures and ratios we use in assessing the results of the
Corporation, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 31.
 85Bank of America 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk │
See Market Risk Management on page 75 in the MD&A and the sections referenced therein for
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk.
 Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary 
 Data 
 Table of Contents 
 Page 
 Consolidated Statement of Income 90 
 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 90 
 Consolidated Balance Sheet 91 
 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ 92 
 Equity 
 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 93 
 Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting 94 
 Principles 
 Note 2 – Net Interest Income and Noninterest 103 
 Income 
 Note 3 – Derivatives 104 
 Note 4 – Securities 111 
 Note 5 – Outstanding Loans and Leasesand Allowance 114 
 for Credit Losses 
 Note 6 – Securitizations and Other Variable 125 
 Interest Entities 
 Note 7 – Goodwill and Intangible Assets 129 
 Note 8 – Leases 130 
 Note 9 – Deposits 131 
 Note 10 –Securities Financing Agreements, Short-term Borrowings 131 
 and Restricted Cash 
 Note 11 – Long-term Debt 133 
 Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies 134 
 Note 13 – Shareholders’ Equity 138 
 Note 14 – Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income 141 
 Note 15 – Earnings Per Common Share 141 
 Note 16 – Regulatory Requirements and Restrictions 142 
 Note 17 – Employee Benefit Plans 143 
 Note 18 – Stock-based Compensation Plans 148 
 Note 19 – Income Taxes 148 
 Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements 150 
 Note 21 – Fair Value Option 159 
 Note 22 – Fair Value of Financial Instruments 161 
 Note 23 – Business Segment Information 162 
 Note 24 – Parent Company Information 165 
 Note 25 – Performance by Geographical Area 167 
 Glossary 168 
 Acronyms 170 
 Bank of America86 
Report of Management on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
The management of Bank of America Corporation is
responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial
reporting.
The Corporation’s internal control over financial
reporting is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of
financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America. The
Corporation’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures
that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records
that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the
assets of the Corporation; (ii) provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are
recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America, and that receipts and
expenditures of the Corporation are being made
only in accordance with authorizations of
management and directors of the Corporation; and
(iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the
Corporation’s assets that could have a material
effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal
control over financial reporting may not prevent
or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or
that the degree of compliance with the policies
or procedures may deteriorate.
Management assessed the effectiveness of the
Corporation’s internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2021 based on the
framework set forth by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission in Internal Control – Integrated
Framework (2013) . Based on that assessment,
management concluded that, as of December 31,
2021, the Corporation’s internal control over
financial reporting is effective.
The Corporation’s internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2021 has been
audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers , LLP , an
independent registered public accounting firm, as
stated in their accompanying report which
expresses an unqualified opinion on the
effectiveness of the Corporation’s internal
control over financial reporting as of December
31, 2021.
 Brian T. Moynihan 
Chair, Chief Executive Officer and President
 Alastair M. Borthwick 
Chief Financial Officer
 87Bank of America 
Report of Independent Registered Public
Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of
Bank of America Corporation
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal
Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the accompanying consolidated
balance sheets of Bank of America Corporation and
its subsidiaries (the “Corporation”) as of
December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the related
consolidated statements of income, comprehensive
income, changes in shareholders’ equity and cash
flows for each of the three years in the period
ended December 31, 2021, including the related
notes (collectively referred to as the
“consolidated financial statements”). We also
have audited the Corporation's internal control
over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021,
based on criteria established in Internal Control
- Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
Treadway Commission (COSO).
In our opinion, the consolidated financial
statements referred to above present fairly, in
all material respects, the financial position of
the Corporation as of December 31, 2021 and 2020,
and the results of its operations and its cash
flows for each of the three years in the period
ended December 31, 2021 in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America. Also in our opinion,
the Corporation maintained, in all material
respects, effective internal control over
financial reporting as of December 31, 2021,
based on criteria established in Internal Control
- Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the COSO.
Change in Accounting Principle
As discussed in Note 5 to the consolidated
financial statements, the Corporation changed the
manner in which it accounts for credit losses on
certain financial instruments in 2020.
 Basis for Opinions 
The Corporation’s management is responsible for
these consolidated financial statements, for
maintaining effective internal control over
financial reporting, and for its assessment of
the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting, included in the accompanying
Report of Management on Internal Control Over
Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to
express opinions on the Corporation’s
consolidated financial statements and on the
Corporation's internal control over financial
reporting based on our audits. We are a public
accounting firm registered with the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United
States) (PCAOB) and are required to be
independent with respect to the Corporation in
accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws
and the applicable rules and regulations of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the
standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audits to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the
consolidated financial statements are free of
material misstatement, whether due to error or
fraud, and whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all
material respects. Our audits of the consolidated
financial statements included performing
procedures to assess the risks of material
misstatement of the consolidated financial
statements, whether due to error or fraud, and
performing procedures that respond to those
risks. Such procedures included examining, on a
test basis, evidence
regarding the amounts and disclosures in the
consolidated financial statements. Our audits
also included evaluating the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by
management, as well as evaluating the overall
presentation of the consolidated financial
statements. Our audit of internal control over
financial reporting included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial
reporting, assessing the risk that a material
weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the
design and operating effectiveness of internal
control based on the assessed risk. Our audits
also included performing such other procedures as
we considered necessary in the circumstances. We
believe that our audits provide a reasonable
basis for our opinions.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control
over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial
reporting is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of
financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles. A company’s internal control over
financial reporting includes those policies and
procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of
records that, in reasonable detail, accurately
and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii)
provide reasonable assurance that transactions
are recorded as necessary to permit preparation
of financial statements in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles, and
that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations
of management and directors of the company; and
(iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s
assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal
control over financial reporting may not prevent
or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or
that the degree of compliance with the policies
or procedures may deteriorate.
 Critical Audit Matters 
The critical audit matters communicated below are
matters arising from the current period audit of
the consolidated financial statements that were
communicated or required to be communicated to
the audit committee and that (i) relate to
accounts or disclosures that are material to the
consolidated financial statements and (ii)
involved our especially challenging, subjective,
or complex judgments. The communication of
critical audit matters does not alter in any way
our opinion on the consolidated financial
statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by
communicating the critical audit matters below,
providing separate opinions on the critical audit
matters or on the accounts or disclosures to
which they relate.
Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses - Commercial
and Consumer Card Loans
As described in Notes 1 and 5 to the consolidated
financial statements, the allowance for loan and
lease losses represents management’s estimate of
the expected credit losses in the Corporation’s
loan and lease portfolio, excluding loans and
unfunded lending commitments accounted for under
the fair
 Bank of America88 
value option. As of December 31, 2021, the
allowance for loan and lease losses was $12.4
billion on total loans and leases of $971.3
billion, which excludes loans accounted for under
the fair value option. For commercial and
consumer card loans, the expected credit loss is
typically estimated using quantitative methods
that consider a variety of factors such as
historical loss experience, the current credit
quality of the portfolio as well as an economic
outlook over the life of the loan. In its loss
forecasting framework, the Corporation
incorporates forward looking information through
the use of macroeconomic scenarios applied over
the forecasted life of the assets. These
macroeconomic scenarios include variables that
have historically been key drivers of increases
and decreases in credit losses. These variables
include, but are not limited to, unemployment
rates, real estate prices, gross domestic product
levels and corporate bond spreads. The scenarios
that are chosen and the weighting given to each
scenario depend on a variety of factors including
recent economic events, leading economic
indicators, views of internal as well as third-
party economists and industry trends. Also
included in the allowance for loan and lease
losses are qualitative reserves to cover losses
that are expected but, in the Corporation's
assessment, may not be adequately reflected in
the quantitative methods or the economic
assumptions. Factors that the Corporation
considers include changes in lending policies and
procedures, business conditions, the nature and
size of the portfolio, portfolio concentrations,
the volume and severity of past due loans and
nonaccrual loans, the effect of external factors
such as competition, and legal and regulatory
requirements, among others. Further, the
Corporation considers the inherent uncertainty in
quantitative models that are built on historical
data.
The principal considerations for our
determination that performing procedures relating
to the allowance for loan and lease losses for
the commercial and consumer card portfolios is a
critical audit matter are (i) the significant
judgment and estimation by management in
developing lifetime economic forecast scenarios,
related weightings to each scenario and certain
qualitative reserves, which in turn led to a high
degree of auditor judgment, subjectivity and
effort in performing procedures and in evaluating
audit evidence obtained, and (ii) the audit
effort involved professionals with specialized
skill and knowledge.
Addressing the matter involved performing
procedures and evaluating audit evidence in
connection with forming our overall opinion on
the consolidated financial statements. These
procedures included testing the effectiveness of
controls relating to the allowance for loan and
lease losses, including controls over the
evaluation and approval of models, forecast
scenarios and related weightings, and qualitative
reserves. These procedures also included, among
others, testing management’s process for
estimating the allowance for loan and lease
losses, including (i) evaluating the
appropriateness of the loss forecast models and
methodology, (ii) evaluating the reasonableness
of certain macroeconomic variables, (iii)
evaluating the reasonableness of management’s
development, selection and weighting of lifetime
economic forecast scenarios used in the loss
forecast models, (iv) testing the completeness
and accuracy of data used in the estimate, and
(v) evaluating the reasonableness of certain
qualitative reserves made to the model output
results to determine the overall allowance for
loan
and lease losses. The procedures also included
the involvement of professionals with specialized
skill and knowledge to assist in evaluating the
appropriateness of certain loss forecast models,
the reasonableness of economic forecast scenarios
and related weightings and the reasonableness of
certain qualitative reserves.
Valuation of Certain Level 3 Financial
Instruments
As described in Notes 1 and 20 to the
consolidated financial statements, the
Corporation carries certain financial instruments
at fair value, which includes $10.7 billion of
assets and $6.9 billion of liabilities classified
as Level 3 fair value measurements that are
valued on a recurring basis and $2.3 billion of
assets classified as Level 3 fair value
measurements that are valued on a nonrecurring
basis, for which the determination of fair value
requires significant management judgment or
estimation. The Corporation determines the fair
value of Level 3 financial instruments using
pricing models, discounted cash flow
methodologies, or similar techniques that require
inputs that are both unobservable and are
significant to the overall fair value
measurement. Unobservable inputs, such as
volatility or price, may be determined using
quantitative-based extrapolations or other
internal methodologies which incorporate
management estimates and available market
information.
The principal considerations for our
determination that performing procedures relating
to the valuation of certain Level 3 financial
instruments is a critical audit matter are the
significant judgment and estimation used by
management to determine the fair value of these
financial instruments, which in turn led to a
high degree of auditor judgment, subjectivity and
effort in performing procedures and in evaluating
audit evidence obtained, including the
involvement of professionals with specialized
skill and knowledge.
Addressing the matter involved performing
procedures and evaluating audit evidence in
connection with forming our overall opinion on
the consolidated financial statements. These
procedures included testing the effectiveness of
controls relating to the valuation of financial
instruments, including controls related to
valuation models, significant unobservable
inputs, and data. These procedures also included,
among others, the involvement of professionals
with specialized skill and knowledge to assist in
developing an independent estimate of fair value
for a sample of these certain financial
instruments and comparison of management’s
estimate to the independently developed estimate
of fair value. Developing the independent
estimate involved testing the completeness and
accuracy of data provided by management and
evaluating the reasonableness of management’s
significant unobservable inputs.
Charlotte, North Carolina
February 22, 2022
We have served as the Corporation’s auditor since
1958.
 89Bank of America 
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
 Consolidated Statement of Income 
 (In millions, except per share information) 
 Net interest income 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest income $ 47,672 $ 51,585 $ 71,236 
 Interest expense 4,738 8,225 22,345 
 Net interest income 42,934 43,360 48,891 
 Noninterest income 
 Fees and commissions 39,299 34,551 33,015 
 Market making and similar activities 8,691 8,355 9,034 
 Other income -1,811 -738 304 
 Total noninterest income 46,179 42,168 42,353 
 Total revenue, net of interest expense 89,113 85,528 91,244 
 Provision for credit losses -4,594 11,320 3,590 
 Noninterest expense 
 Compensation and benefits 36,140 32,725 31,977 
 Occupancy and equipment 7,138 7,141 6,588 
 Information processing and 5,769 5,222 4,646 
 communications 
 Product delivery and transaction related 3,881 3,433 2,762 
 Marketing 1,939 1,701 1,934 
 Professional fees 1,775 1,694 1,597 
 Other general operating 3,089 3,297 5,396 
 Total noninterest expense 59,731 55,213 54,900 
 Income before income taxes 33,976 18,995 32,754 
 Income tax expense 1,998 1,101 5,324 
 Net income $ 31,978 $ 17,894 $ 27,430 
 Preferred stock dividends 1,421 1,421 1,432 
 Net income applicable to common $ 30,557 $ 16,473 $ 25,998 
 shareholders 
 Per common share information 
 Earnings $ 3.60 $ 1.88 $ 2.77 
 Diluted earnings 3.57 1.87 2.75 
 Average common shares issued and 8,493.3 8,753.2 9,390.5 
 outstanding 
 Average diluted common shares issued and 8,558.4 8,796.9 9,442.9 
 outstanding 
 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 31,978 $ 17,894 $ 27,430 
 Other comprehensive income (loss), 
 net-of-tax: 
 Net change in debt securities -2,077 4,799 5,875 
 Net change in debit valuation 356 -498 -963 
 adjustments 
 Net change in derivatives -2,306 826 616 
 Employee benefit plan adjustments 624 -98 136 
 Net change in foreign currency -45 -52 -86 
 translation adjustments 
 Other comprehensive income (loss) -3,448 4,977 5,578 
 Comprehensive income $ 28,530 $ 22,871 $ 33,008 
 See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
 Bank of America90 
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
 Consolidated Balance Sheet 
 (Dollars in millions) December 31 
 Assets 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and due from banks $ 29,222 $ 36,430 
 Interest-bearing deposits 
 with the 
 Federal Reserve, non-U.S. 318,999 344,033 
 central banks 
 and other banks 
 Cash and cash equivalents 348,221 380,463 
 Time deposits placed and 
 other 7,144 6,546 
 short-term investments 
 Federal funds sold and 
 securities borrowed or 
 purchased under agreements to 
 resell 250,720 304,058 
 (includes$150,665and 
 $108,856measured at fair 
 value) 
 Trading account assets 
 (includes$103,434and 247,080 198,854 
 $91,510pledged as 
 collateral) 
 Derivative assets 35,344 47,179 
 Debt securities: 
 Carried at fair value 308,073 246,601 
 Held-to-maturity, at cost 
 (fair value 674,554 438,249 
 –$665,890and $448,180) 
 Total debt securities 982,627 684,850 
 Loans and leases 
 (includes$7,819and 979,124 927,861 
 $6,681measured at fair value) 
 Allowance for loan and lease -12,387 -18,802 
 losses 
 Loans and leases, net of 966,737 909,059 
 allowance 
 Premises and equipment, net 10,833 11,000 
 Goodwill 69,022 68,951 
 Loans held-for-sale 
 (includes$4,455and 15,635 9,243 
 $1,585measured at fair value) 
 Customer and other 72,263 64,221 
 receivables 
 Other assets 
 (includes$12,144and 163,869 135,203 
 $15,718measured at fair 
 value) 
 Total assets $ 3,169,495 $ 2,819,627 
 Liabilities 
 Deposits in U.S. offices: 
 Noninterest-bearing $ 784,189 $ 650,674 
 Interest-bearing 
 (includes$408and 1,165,914 1,038,341 
 $481measured at fair value) 
 Deposits in non-U.S. offices: 
 Noninterest-bearing 27,457 17,698 
 Interest-bearing 86,886 88,767 
 Total deposits 2,064,446 1,795,480 
 Federal funds purchased and 
 securities loaned or sold 
 under agreements to 
 repurchase 192,329 170,323 
 (includes$139,641and 
 $135,391measured at fair 
 value) 
 Trading account liabilities 100,690 71,320 
 Derivative liabilities 37,675 45,526 
 Short-term borrowings 
 (includes$4,279and 23,753 19,321 
 $5,874measured at fair value) 
 Accrued expenses and other 
 liabilities 
 (includes$11,489and 
 $16,311measured at fair value 200,419 181,799 
 and$1,456and $1,878of reserve 
 for unfunded lending 
 commitments) 
 Long-term debt 
 (includes$29,708and 280,117 262,934 
 $32,200measured at fair 
 value) 
 Total liabilities 2,899,429 2,546,703 
 Commitments and 
 contingencies(Note 6 – 
 Securitizations and Other 
 Variable Interest Entities 
 andNote 12 – Commitments and 
 Contingencies) 
 Shareholders’ equity 
 Preferred stock, $0.01par 
 value; 
 authorized 24,708 24,510 
 –100,000,000shares; issued 
 and outstanding 
 –3,939,686and3,931,440shares 
 Common stock and additional 
 paid-in capital,$0.01par 
 value; authorized 62,398 85,982 
 –12,800,000,000shares; 
 issued and outstanding 
 –8,077,831,463and8,650,814,1… 
 Retained earnings 188,064 164,088 
 Accumulated other 
 comprehensive income -5,104 -1,656 
 (loss) 
 Total shareholders’ equity 270,066 272,924 
 Total liabilities and 
 shareholders’ $ 3,169,495 $ 2,819,627 
 equity 
 Assets of consolidated 
 variable interest entities 
 included in total assets above 
 (isolated to settle the 
 liabilities of the variable 
 interest entities) 
 Trading account assets $ 5,004 $ 5,225 
 Loans and leases 17,135 23,636 
 Allowance for loan and lease -958 -1,693 
 losses 
 Loans and leases, net of 16,177 21,943 
 allowance 
 All other assets 189 1,387 
 Total assets of consolidated $ 21,370 $ 28,555 
 variable interest entities 
 Liabilities of consolidated 
 variable interest entities 
 included in total liabilities 
 above 
 Short-term borrowings 
 (includes$51and $22of $ 247 $ 454 
 non-recourse short-term 
 borrowings) 
 Long-term debt 
 (includes$3,587and $7,053of 3,587 7,053 
 non-recourse debt) 
 All other liabilities 
 (includes$7and $16of 7 16 
 non-recourse liabilities) 
 Total liabilities of 
 consolidated variable interest $ 3,841 $ 7,523 
 entities 
 See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
 91Bank of America 
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
 Cons… 
 Stat… 
 of 
 Chan… Common 
 in Stock Accum… 
 Shar… and Other 
 Equi… Addit… Compr… Total 
 (In Prefe… Paid-… Reta… Income Shar… 
 mill… Stock Shares Capit… Amou… Earn… (Loss) Equi… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Bala… 
 Dece… $ 22,326 9,669… $ 118,8… $ 136,… $ -12,2… $ 265,… 
 31, 
 2018 
 Cumu… 
 adju… 
 for 
 adop… 165 165 
 of 
 lease 
 acco… 
 stan… 
 Net 27,4… 27,4… 
 inco… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in 5,875 5,875 
 debt 
 secu… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in -963 -963 
 debit 
 valu… 
 adju… 
 Net 
 chan… 616 616 
 in 
 deri… 
 Empl… 
 bene… 136 136 
 plan 
 adju… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in 
 fore… -86 -86 
 curr… 
 tran… 
 adju… 
 Divi… 
 decl… 
 Comm… -6,1… -6,1… 
 Pref… -1,4… -1,4… 
 Issu… 
 of 3,643 3,643 
 pref… 
 stock 
 Rede… 
 of -2,568 -2,5… 
 pref… 
 stock 
 Comm… 
 stock 
 issu… 
 under 
 empl… 123.3 971 -12 959 
 plan… 
 net, 
 and 
 other 
 Comm… 
 stock -956.5 -28,1… -28,… 
 repu… 
 Bala… 
 Dece… $ 23,401 8,836… $ 91,723 $ 156,… $ -6,633 $ 264,… 
 31, 
 2019 
 Cumu… 
 adju… 
 for 
 adop… 
 of -2,4… -2,4… 
 cred… 
 loss 
 acco… 
 stan… 
 Net 17,8… 17,8… 
 inco… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in 4,799 4,799 
 debt 
 secu… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in -498 -498 
 debit 
 valu… 
 adju… 
 Net 
 chan… 826 826 
 in 
 deri… 
 Empl… 
 bene… -98 -98 
 plan 
 adju… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in 
 fore… -52 -52 
 curr… 
 tran… 
 adju… 
 Divi… 
 decl… 
 Comm… -6,2… -6,2… 
 Pref… -1,4… -1,4… 
 Issu… 
 of 2,181 2,181 
 pref… 
 stock 
 Rede… 
 of -1,072 -1,0… 
 pref… 
 stock 
 Comm… 
 stock 
 issu… 
 under 
 empl… 41.7 1,284 -9 1,275 
 plan… 
 net, 
 and 
 other 
 Comm… 
 stock -227.0 -7,025 -7,0… 
 repu… 
 Bala… 
 Dece… $ 24,510 8,650… $ 85,982 $ 164,… $ -1,656 $ 272,… 
 31, 
 2020 
 Net 31,9… 31,9… 
 inco… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in -2,077 -2,0… 
 debt 
 secu… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in 356 356 
 debit 
 valu… 
 adju… 
 Net 
 chan… -2,306 -2,3… 
 in 
 deri… 
 Empl… 
 bene… 624 624 
 plan 
 adju… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in 
 fore… -45 -45 
 curr… 
 tran… 
 adju… 
 Divi… 
 decl… 
 Comm… -6,5… -6,5… 
 Pref… -1,4… -1,4… 
 Issu… 
 of 2,169 2,169 
 pref… 
 stock 
 Rede… 
 of -1,971 -1,9… 
 pref… 
 stock 
 Comm… 
 stock 
 issu… 
 under 
 empl… 42.3 1,542 -6 1,536 
 plan… 
 net, 
 and 
 other 
 Comm… 
 stock -615.3 -25,1… -25,… 
 repu… 
 Bala… 
 Dece… $ 24,708 8,077… $ 62,398 $ 188,… $ -5,104 $ 270,… 
 31, 
 2021 
 See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
 Bank of America92 
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Operating activities 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 31,978 $ 17,894 $ 27,430 
 Adjustments to reconcile net income to 
 net cash provided by operating 
 activities: 
 Provision for credit losses -4,594 11,320 3,590 
 Gains on sales of debt securities -22 -411 -217 
 Depreciation and amortization 1,898 1,843 1,729 
 Net amortization of premium/discount on 5,837 4,101 2,066 
 debt securities 
 Deferred income taxes -838 -1,737 2,435 
 Stock-based compensation 2,768 2,031 1,974 
 Impairment of equity method investment — — 2,072 
 Loans held-for-sale: 
 Originations and purchases -43,635 -19,657 -28,874 
 Proceeds from sales and paydowns of loans originally 
 classified as held for sale and instruments 34,684 19,049 30,191 
 from related securitization activities 
 Net change in: 
 Trading and derivative -22,104 16,942 7,920 
 assets/liabilities 
 Other assets -34,455 -12,883 -11,113 
 Accrued expenses and other liabilities 16,639 -4,385 16,363 
 Other operating activities, net 4,651 3,886 6,211 
 Net cash provided by (used in) operating -7,193 37,993 61,777 
 activities 
 Investing activities 
 Net change in: 
 Time deposits placed and other -598 561 387 
 short-term investments 
 Federal funds sold and securities 
 borrowed or purchased under agreements 53,338 -29,461 -13,466 
 to resell 
 Debt securities carried at fair value: 
 Proceeds from sales 6,893 77,524 52,006 
 Proceeds from paydowns and maturities 159,616 91,084 79,114 
 Purchases -238,398 -194,877 -152,782 
 Held-to-maturity debt securities: 
 Proceeds from paydowns and maturities 124,880 93,835 34,770 
 Purchases -362,736 -257,535 -37,115 
 Loans and leases: 
 Proceeds from sales of loans originally classified 
 as held for investment and instruments 10,396 13,351 12,201 
 from related securitization activities 
 Purchases -5,164 -5,229 -5,963 
 Other changes in loans and leases, net -58,039 36,571 -46,808 
 Other investing activities, net -3,479 -3,489 -2,974 
 Net cash used in investing activities -313,291 -177,665 -80,630 
 Financing activities 
 Net change in: 
 Deposits 268,966 360,677 53,327 
 Federal funds purchased and securities 
 loaned or sold under agreements to 22,006 5,214 -21,879 
 repurchase 
 Short-term borrowings 4,432 -4,893 4,004 
 Long-term debt: 
 Proceeds from issuance 76,675 57,013 52,420 
 Retirement -46,826 -47,948 -50,794 
 Preferred stock: 
 Proceeds from issuance 2,169 2,181 3,643 
 Redemption -1,971 -1,072 -2,568 
 Common stock repurchased -25,126 -7,025 -28,144 
 Cash dividends paid -8,055 -7,727 -5,934 
 Other financing activities, net -620 -601 -698 
 Net cash provided by financing 291,650 355,819 3,377 
 activities 
 Effect of exchange rate changes on cash -3,408 2,756 -368 
 and cash equivalents 
 Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash -32,242 218,903 -15,844 
 equivalents 
 Cash and cash equivalents at January 1 380,463 161,560 177,404 
 Cash and cash equivalents at December 31 $ 348,221 $ 380,463 $ 161,560 
 Supplemental cash flow disclosures 
 Interest paid $ 4,506 $ 8,662 $ 22,196 
 Income taxes paid, net 2,760 2,894 4,359 
 See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
 93Bank of America 
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
NOTE 1 Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles
Bank of America Corporation, a bank holding
company and a financial holding company, provides
a diverse range of financial services and
products throughout the U.S. and in certain
international markets. The term “the Corporation”
as used herein may refer to Bank of America
Corporation, individually, Bank of America
Corporation and its subsidiaries, or certain of
Bank of America Corporation’s subsidiaries or
affiliates. Principles of Consolidation and Basis
of Presentation The Consolidated Financial
Statements include the accounts of the
Corporation and its majority-owned subsidiaries
and those variable interest entities (VIEs) where
the Corporation is the primary beneficiary.
Intercompany accounts and transactions have been
eliminated. Results of operations of acquired
companies are included from the dates of
acquisition, and for VIEs, from the dates that
the Corporation became the primary beneficiary.
Assets held in an agency or fiduciary capacity
are not included in the Consolidated Financial
Statements. The Corporation accounts for
investments in companies for which it owns a
voting interest and for which it has the ability
to exercise significant influence over operating
and financing decisions using the equity method
of accounting. These investments, which include
the Corporation’s interests in affordable housing
and renewable energy partnerships, are recorded
in other assets. Equity method investments are
subject to impairment testing, and the
Corporation’s proportionate share of income or
loss is included in other income. The preparation
of the Consolidated Financial Statements in
conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect reported amounts and disclosures. Actual
results could materially differ from those
estimates and assumptions. Certain prior-period
amounts have been reclassified to conform to
current period presentation. Significant
Accounting Principles Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include cash on hand,
cash items in the process of collection, cash
segregated under federal and other brokerage
regulations, and amounts due from correspondent
banks, the Federal Reserve Bank and certain
non-U.S. central banks. Certain cash balances are
restricted as to withdrawal or usage by legally
binding contractual agreements or regulatory
requirements. Securities Financing Agreements
Securities borrowed or purchased under agreements
to resell and securities loaned or sold under
agreements to repurchase (securities financing
agreements) are treated as collateralized
financing transactions except in instances where
the transaction is required to be accounted for
as individual sale and purchase transactions.
Generally, these agreements are recorded at
acquisition or sale price plus accrued interest.
In instances where the interest is negative, the
Corporation’s policy is to present negative
interest on financial assets as interest income
and negative interest on financial liabilities as
interest expense. For securities financing
agreements that are accounted for under the fair
value option, the changes in the fair value of
these securities financing agreements are
recorded in market
making and similar activities in the Consolidated
Statement of Income. The Corporation’s policy is
to monitor the market value of the principal
amount loaned under resale agreements and obtain
collateral from or return collateral pledged to
counterparties when appropriate. Securities
financing agreements do not create material
credit risk due to these collateral provisions;
therefore, an allowance for loan losses is not
necessary. In transactions where the Corporation
acts as the lender in a securities lending
agreement and receives securities that can be
pledged or sold as collateral, it recognizes an
asset on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at fair
value, representing the securities received, and
a liability, representing the obligation to
return those securities. Collateral The
Corporation accepts securities and loans as
collateral that it is permitted by contract or
practice to sell or repledge. At December 31,
2021 and 2020, the fair value of this collateral
was $ 854.8billion and $ 812.4billion, of which $
782.7billion and $ 758.5billion were sold or
repledged. The primary source of this collateral
is securities borrowed or purchased under
agreements to resell. The Corporation also
pledges company-owned securities and loans as
collateral in transactions that include
repurchase agreements, securities loaned, public
and trust deposits, U.S. Treasury tax and loan
notes, and short-term borrowings. This
collateral, which in some cases can be sold or
repledged by the counterparties to the
transactions, is parenthetically disclosed on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet. In certain cases, the
Corporation has transferred assets to
consolidated VIEs where those restricted assets
serve as collateral for the interests issued by
the VIEs. These assets are included on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet in Assets of
Consolidated VIEs. In addition, the Corporation
obtains collateral in connection with its
derivative contracts. Required collateral levels
vary depending on the credit risk rating and the
type of counterparty. Generally, the Corporation
accepts collateral in the form of cash, U.S.
Treasury securities and other marketable
securities. Based on provisions contained in
master netting agreements, the Corporation nets
cash collateral received against derivative
assets. The Corporation also pledges collateral
on its own derivative positions which can be
applied against derivative liabilities. Trading
Instruments Financial instruments utilized in
trading activities are carried at fair value.
Fair value is generally based on quoted market
prices for the same or similar assets and
liabilities. If these market prices are not
available, fair values are estimated based on
dealer quotes, pricing models, discounted cash
flow methodologies, or similar techniques where
the determination of fair value may require
significant management judgment or estimation.
Realized gains and losses are recorded on a
trade-date basis. Realized and unrealized gains
and losses are recognized in market making and
similar activities. Derivatives and Hedging
Activities Derivatives are entered into on behalf
of customers, for trading or to support risk
management activities. Derivatives used in risk
management activities include derivatives that
are both designated in qualifying accounting
hedge relationships and derivatives used to hedge
market risks in relationships that are
 Bank of America94 
not designated in qualifying accounting hedge relationships (referred to as other risk management
activities). The Corporation manages interest rate and foreign currency exchange rate sensitivity
predominantly through the use of derivatives. Derivatives utilized by the Corporation include swaps,
futures and forward settlement contracts, and option contracts. All derivatives are recorded on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet at fair value, taking into consideration the effects of legally
enforceable master netting agreements that allow the Corporation to settle positive and negative
positions and offset cash collateral held with the same counterparty on a net basis. For exchange-
traded contracts, fair value is based on quoted market prices in active or inactive markets or is
derived from observable market-based pricing parameters, similar to those applied to over-the-counter
(OTC) derivatives. For non-exchange traded contracts, fair value is based on dealer quotes, pricing
models, discounted cash flow methodologies or similar techniques for which the determination of fair
value may require significant management judgment or estimation. Valuations of derivative assets and
liabilities reflect the value of the instrument including counterparty credit risk. These values also
take into account the Corporation’s own credit standing. Trading Derivatives and Other Risk
Management Activities Derivatives held for trading purposes are included in derivative assets or
derivative liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet with changes in fair value included in
market making and similar activities. Derivatives used for other risk management activities are
included in derivative assets or derivative liabilities. Derivatives used in other risk management
activities have not been designated in qualifying accounting hedge relationships because they did not
qualify or the risk that is being mitigated pertains to an item that is reported at fair value
through earnings so that the effect of measuring the derivative instrument and the asset or liability
to which the risk exposure pertains will offset in the Consolidated Statement of Income to the extent
effective. The changes in the fair value of derivatives that serve to mitigate certain risks
associated with mortgage servicing rights (MSRs), interest rate lock commitments (IRLCs) and first-
lien mortgage loans held-for-sale (LHFS) that are originated by the Corporation are recorded in other
income. Changes in the fair value of derivatives that serve to mitigate interest rate risk and
foreign currency risk are included in market making and similar activities. Credit derivatives are
also used by the Corporation to mitigate the risk associated with various credit exposures. The
changes in the fair value of these derivatives are included in market making and similar activities
and other income. Derivatives Used For Hedge Accounting Purposes (Accounting Hedges) For accounting
hedges, the Corporation formally documents at inception all relationships between hedging instruments
and hedged items, as well as the risk management objectives and strategies for undertaking various
accounting hedges. Additionally, the Corporation primarily uses regression analysis at the inception
of a hedge and for each reporting period thereafter to assess whether the derivative used in an
accounting hedge transaction is expected to be and has been highly effective in offsetting changes in
the fair value or cash flows of a hedged item or forecasted transaction. The Corporation discontinues
hedge accounting when it is determined that a derivative is not expected to be or has ceased to be
highly effective as a hedge, and then reflects changes in fair value of the derivative in earnings
after termination of the hedge relationship. Fair value hedges are used to protect against changes in
the fair value of the Corporation’s assets and liabilities that are attributable to interest rate or
foreign exchange volatility. Changes in the fair value of derivatives designated as fair value hedges
are recorded in earnings, together and in the same income statement line item with changes in the
fair value of the related hedged item. If a derivative instrument in a fair value hedge is terminated
or the hedge designation removed, the previous adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged asset
or liability are subsequently accounted for in the same manner as other components of the carrying
value of that asset or liability. For interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, such
adjustments are amortized to earnings over the remaining life of the respective asset or liability.
Cash flow hedges are used primarily to minimize the variability in cash flows of assets and
liabilities or forecasted transactions caused by interest rate or foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
The Corporation also uses cash flow hedges to hedge the price risk associated with deferred
compensation. Changes in the fair value of derivatives used in cash flow hedges are recorded in
accumulated other comprehensive income (OCI) and are reclassified into the line item in the income
statement in which the hedged item is recorded in the same period the hedged item affects earnings.
Components of a derivative that are excluded in assessing hedge effectiveness are recorded in the
same income statement line item as the hedged item. Net investment hedges are used to manage the
foreign exchange rate sensitivity arising from a net investment in a foreign operation. Changes in
the spot prices of derivatives that are designated as net investment hedges of foreign operations are
recorded as a component of accumulated OCI. The remaining components of these derivatives are
excluded in assessing hedge effectiveness and are recorded in market making and similar activities.
Securities Debt securities are reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at their trade date. Their
classification is dependent on the purpose for which the securities were acquired. Debt securities
purchased for use in the Corporation’s trading activities are reported in trading account assets at
fair value with unrealized gains and losses included in market making and similar activities.
Substantially all other debt securities purchased are used in the Corporation’s asset and liability
management (ALM) activities and are reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheet as either debt
securities carried at fair value or as held-to-maturity (HTM) debt securities. Debt securities
carried at fair value are either available-for-sale (AFS) securities with unrealized gains and losses
net-of-tax included in accumulated OCI or carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses
reported in market making and similar activities. HTM debt securities are debt securities that
management has the intent and ability to hold to maturity and are reported at amortized cost. The
Corporation evaluates each AFS security where the value has declined below amortized cost. If the
Corporation intends to sell or believes it is more likely than not that it will be required to sell
the debt security, it is written down to fair value through earnings. For AFS debt securities the
Corporation intends to hold, the Corporation evaluates the debt securities for expected credit losses
(ECL), except for debt securities that are
 95Bank of America 
guaranteed by the U.S. Treasury, U.S. government agencies or sovereign entities of high credit
quality where the Corporation applies a zero credit loss assumption. For the remaining AFS debt
securities, the Corporation considers qualitative parameters such as internal and external credit
ratings and the value of underlying collateral. If an AFS debt security fails any of the qualitative
parameters, a discounted cash flow analysis is used by the Corporation to determine if a portion of
the unrealized loss is a result of an expected credit loss. The Corporation will then recognize
either credit loss expense or a reversal of credit loss expense in other income for the amount
necessary to adjust the debt securities valuation allowance to its current estimate of excepted
credit losses. Cash flows expected to be collected are estimated using all relevant information
available such as remaining payment terms, prepayment speeds, the financial condition of the issuer,
expected defaults and the value of the underlying collateral. If any of the decline in fair value is
related to market factors, that amount is recognized in accumulated OCI. In certain instances, the
credit loss may exceed the total decline in fair value, in which case, the allowance recorded is
limited to the difference between the amortized cost and the fair value of the asset. The Corporation
separately evaluates its HTM debt securities for any credit losses, of which substantially all
qualify for the zero loss assumption. For the remaining securities, the Corporation performs a
discounted cash flow analysis to estimate any credit losses which are then recognized as part of the
allowance for credit losses. Interest on debt securities, including amortization of premiums and
accretion of discounts, is included in interest income. Premiums and discounts are amortized or
accreted to interest income at a constant effective yield over the contractual lives of the
securities. Realized gains and losses from the sales of debt securities are determined using the
specific identification method. Equity securities with readily determinable fair values that are not
held for trading purposes are carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included in
other income. Equity securities that do not have readily determinable fair values are recorded at
cost less impairment, if any, plus or minus qualifying observable price changes. These securities are
reported in other assets. Loans and Leases Loans, with the exception of loans accounted for under the
fair value option, are measured at historical cost and reported at their outstanding principal
balances net of any unearned income, charge-offs, unamortized deferred fees and costs on originated
loans, and for purchased loans, net of any unamortized premiums or discounts. Loan origination fees
and certain direct origination costs are deferred and recognized as adjustments to interest income
over the lives of the related loans. Unearned income, discounts and premiums are amortized to
interest income using a level yield methodology. The Corporation elects to account for certain
consumer and commercial loans under the fair value option with interest reported in interest income
and changes in fair value reported in market making and similar activities or other income. Under
applicable accounting guidance, for reporting purposes, the loan and lease portfolio is categorized
by portfolio segment and, within each portfolio segment, by class of financing receivables. A
portfolio segment is defined as the level at which an entity develops and documents a systematic
methodology to determine the allowance for credit losses, and a class of financing receivables is
defined as the level of disaggregation of portfolio segments based on the initial measurement
attribute, risk characteristics and methods for assessing risk. The Corporation’s threeportfolio
segments are Consumer Real Estate, Credit Card and Other Consumer, and Commercial. The classes within
the Consumer Real Estate portfolio segment are residential mortgage and home equity . The classes
within the Credit Card and Other Consumer portfolio segment are credit card, direct/indirect consumer
and other consumer. The classes within the Commercial portfolio segment are U.S. commercial, non-U.S.
commercial, commercial real estate, commercial lease financing and U.S. small business commercial.
Leases The Corporation provides equipment financing to its customers through a variety of lessor
arrangements. Direct financing leases and sales-type leases are carried at the aggregate of lease
payments receivable plus the estimated residual value of the leased property less unearned income,
which is accreted to interest income over the lease terms using methods that approximate the interest
method. Operating lease income is recognized on a straight-line basis. The Corporation's lease
arrangements generally do not contain non-lease components. Allowance for Credit Losses The allowance
for credit losses includes both the allowance for loan and lease losses and the reserve for unfunded
lending commitments and represents management’s estimate of the ECL in the Corporation’s loan and
lease portfolio, excluding loans and unfunded lending commitments accounted for under the fair value
option. The ECL on funded consumer and commercial loans and leases is referred to as the allowance
for loan and lease losses and is reported separately as a contra-asset to loans and leases on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet. The ECL for unfunded lending commitments, including home equity lines of
credit (HELOCs), standby letters of credit (SBLCs) and binding unfunded loan commitments is reported
on the Consolidated Balance Sheet in accrued expenses and other liabilities. The provision for credit
losses related to the loan and lease portfolio and unfunded lending commitments is reported in the
Consolidated Statement of Income at the amount necessary to adjust the allowance for credit losses to
the current estimate of ECL. For loans and leases, the ECL is typically estimated using quantitative
methods that consider a variety of factors such as historical loss experience, the current credit
quality of the portfolio as well as an economic outlook over the life of the loan. The life of the
loan for closed-ended products is based on the contractual maturity of the loan adjusted for any
expected prepayments. The contractual maturity includes any extension options that are at the sole
discretion of the borrower. For open-ended products (e.g., lines of credit), the ECL is determined
based on the maximum repayment term associated with future draws from credit lines unless those lines
of credit are unconditionally cancellable (e.g., credit cards) in which case the Corporation does not
record any allowance. In its loss forecasting framework, the Corporation incorporates forward-looking
information through the use of macroeconomic scenarios applied over the forecasted life of the
assets. These macroeconomic scenarios include variables that have historically been key drivers of
increases and decreases in credit losses. These variables include, but are not limited to,
unemployment rates, real estate prices, gross domestic product levels and corporate bond spreads. As
any one economic outlook is inherently uncertain, the Corporation leverages
 Bank of America96 
multiple scenarios. The scenarios that are chosen each quarter and the weighting given to each
scenario depend on a variety of factors including recent economic events, leading economic
indicators, views of internal and third-party economists and industry trends. The estimate of credit
losses includes expected recoveries of amounts previously charged off (i.e., negative allowance). If
a loan has been charged off, the expected cash flows on the loan are not limited by the current
amortized cost balance. Instead, expected cash flows can be assumed up to the unpaid principal
balance immediately prior to the charge-off. The allowance for loan and lease losses for troubled
debt restructurings (TDR) is measured based on the present value of projected future lifetime
principal and interest cash flows discounted at the loan’s original effective interest rate, or in
cases where foreclosure is probable or the loan is collateral dependent, at the loan’s collateral
value or its observable market price, if available. The measurement of ECL for the renegotiated
consumer credit card TDR portfolio is based on the present value of projected cash flows discounted
using the average TDR portfolio contractual interest rate, excluding promotionally priced loans, in
effect prior to restructuring. Projected cash flows for TDRs use the same economic outlook as
discussed above. For purposes of computing this specific loss component of the allowance, larger
impaired loans are evaluated individually and smaller impaired loans are evaluated as a pool. Also
included in the allowance for loan and lease losses are qualitative reserves to cover losses that are
expected but, in the Corporation's assessment, may not be adequately reflected in the quantitative
methods or the economic assumptions described above. For example, factors that the Corporation
considers include changes in lending policies and procedures, business conditions, the nature and
size of the portfolio, portfolio concentrations, the volume and severity of past due loans and
nonaccrual loans, the effect of external factors such as competition, and legal and regulatory
requirements, among others. Further, the Corporation considers the inherent uncertainty in
quantitative models that are built on historical data. With the exception of the Corporation's credit
card portfolio, the Corporation does not include reserves for interest receivable in the measurement
of the allowance for credit losses as the Corporation generally classifies consumer loans as
nonperforming at 90 days past due and reverses interest income for these loans at that time. For
credit card loans, the Corporation reserves for interest and fees as part of the allowance for loan
and lease losses. Upon charge-off of a credit card loan, the Corporation reverses the interest and
fee income against the income statement line item where it was originally recorded. The Corporation
has identified the following threeportfolio segments and measures the allowance for credit losses
using the following methods. Consumer Real Estate To estimate ECL for consumer loans secured by
residential real estate, the Corporation estimates the number of loans that will default over the
life of the existing portfolio, after factoring in estimated prepayments, using quantitative modeling
methodologies. The attributes that are most significant in estimating the Corporation’s ECL include
refreshed loan-to-value (LTV) or, in the case of a subordinated lien, refreshed combined LTV (CLTV),
borrower credit score, months since origination and geography, all of which are further broken down
by present collection status (whether the loan is current, delinquent, in default, or in bankruptcy).
The estimates are based on the Corporation’s historical experience with the loan portfolio, adjusted
to reflect the economic outlook. The outlook on the unemployment rate and consumer real estate prices
are key factors that impact the frequency and severity of loss estimates. The Corporation does not
reserve for credit losses on the unpaid principal balance of loans insured by the Federal Housing
Administration (FHA) and long-term standby loans, as these loans are fully insured. The Corporation
records a reserve for unfunded lending commitments for the ECL associated with the undrawn portion of
the Corporation’s HELOCs, which can only be canceled by the Corporation if certain criteria are met.
The ECL associated with these unfunded lending commitments is calculated using the same models and
methodologies noted above and incorporate utilization assumptions at time of default. For loans that
are more than 180 days past due and collateral-dependent TDRs, the Corporation bases the allowance on
the estimated fair value of the underlying collateral as of the reporting date less costs to sell.
The fair value of the collateral securing these loans is generally determined using an automated
valuation model (AVM) that estimates the value of a property by reference to market data including
sales of comparable properties and price trends specific to the Metropolitan Statistical Area in
which the property being valued is located. In the event that an AVM value is not available, the
Corporation utilizes publicized indices or if these methods provide less reliable valuations, the
Corporation uses appraisals or broker price opinions to estimate the fair value of the collateral.
While there is inherent imprecision in these valuations, the Corporation believes that they are
representative of this portfolio in the aggregate. For loans that are more than 180 days past due and
collateral-dependent TDRs, with the exception of the Corporation’s fully insured portfolio, the
outstanding balance of loans that is in excess of the estimated property value after adjusting for
costs to sell is charged off. If the estimated property value decreases in periods subsequent to the
initial charge-off, the Corporation will record an additional charge-off; however, if the value
increases in periods subsequent to the charge-off, the Corporation will adjust the allowance to
account for the increase but not to a level above the cumulative charge-off amount. Credit Cards and
Other Consumer Credit cards are revolving lines of credit without a defined maturity date. The
estimated life of a credit card receivable is determined by estimating the amount and timing of
expected future payments (e.g., borrowers making full payments, minimum payments or somewhere in
between) that it will take for a receivable balance to pay off. The ECL on the future payments
incorporates the spending behavior of a borrower through time using key borrower-specific factors and
the economic outlook described above. The Corporation applies all expected payments in accordance
with the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009 (i.e., paying down the
highest interest rate bucket first). Then forecasted future payments are prioritized to pay off the
oldest balance until it is brought to zero or an expected charge-off amount. Unemployment rate
outlook, borrower credit score, delinquency status and historical payment behavior are all key inputs
into the credit card receivable loss forecasting model.
 97Bank of America 
Future draws on the credit card lines are excluded from the ECL as they are unconditionally
cancellable. The ECL for the consumer vehicle lending portfolio is also determined using quantitative
methods supplemented with qualitative analysis. The quantitative model estimates ECL giving
consideration to key borrower and loan characteristics such as delinquency status, borrower credit
score, LTV ratio, underlying collateral type and collateral value. Commercial The ECL on commercial
loans is forecasted using models that estimate credit losses over the loan’s contractual life at an
individual loan level. The models use the contractual terms to forecast future principal cash flows
while also considering expected prepayments. For open-ended commitments such as revolving lines of
credit, changes in funded balance are captured by forecasting a borrower’s draw and payment behavior
over the remaining life of the commitment. For loans collateralized with commercial real estate and
for which the underlying asset is the primary source of repayment, the loss forecasting models
consider key loan and customer attributes such as LTV ratio, net operating income and debt service
coverage, and captures variations in behavior according to property type and region. The outlook on
the unemployment rate, gross domestic product, and forecasted real estate prices are utilized to
determine indicators such as rent levels and vacancy rates, which impact the ECL estimate. For all
other commercial loans and leases, the loss forecasting model determines the probabilities of
transition to different credit risk ratings or default at each point over the life of the asset based
on the borrower’s current credit risk rating, industry sector, size of the exposure and the
geographic market. The severity of loss is determined based on the type of collateral securing the
exposure, the size of the exposure, the borrower’s industry sector, any guarantors and the geographic
market. Assumptions of expected loss are conditioned to the economic outlook, and the model considers
key economic variables such as unemployment rate, gross domestic product, corporate bond spreads,
real estate and other asset prices and equity market returns. In addition to the allowance for loan
and lease losses, the Corporation also estimates ECL related to unfunded lending commitments such as
letters of credit, financial guarantees, unfunded bankers acceptances and binding loan commitments,
excluding commitments accounted for under the fair value option. Reserves are estimated for the
unfunded exposure using the same models and methodologies as the funded exposure and are reported as
reserves for unfunded lending commitments. Nonperforming Loans and Leases, Charge-offs and
Delinquencies Nonperforming loans and leases generally include loans and leases that have been placed
on nonaccrual status. Loans accounted for under the fair value option and LHFS are not reported as
nonperforming. When a nonaccrual loan is deemed uncollectible, it is charged off against the
allowance for credit losses. If the charged-off amount is later recovered, the amount is reversed
through the allowance for credit losses at the recovery date. Charge-offs are reported net of
recoveries (net charge-offs). If recoveries for the period are greater than charge-offs, net charge-
offs are reported as a negative amount. In accordance with the Corporation’s policies, consumer real
estate-secured loans, including residential mortgages and home equity loans, are generally placed on
nonaccrual status and classified as nonperforming at 90days past due unless repayment of the loan is
insured by the FHA or through individually insured long-term standby agreements with Fannie Mae
(FNMA) or Freddie Mac (FHLMC) (the fully-insured portfolio). Residential mortgage loans in the fully-
insured portfolio are not placed on nonaccrual status and, therefore, are not reported as
nonperforming. Junior-lien home equity loans are placed on nonaccrual status and classified as
nonperforming when the underlying first-lien mortgage loan becomes 90days past due even if the
junior-lien loan is current. The outstanding balance of real estate-secured loans that is in excess
of the estimated property value less costs to sell is charged off no later than the end of the month
in which the loan becomes 180days past due unless the loan is fully insured, or for loans in
bankruptcy, within 60days of receipt of notification of filing, with the remaining balance classified
as nonperforming. Consumer loans secured by personal property, credit card loans and other unsecured
consumer loans are not placed on nonaccrual status prior to charge-off and, therefore, are not
reported as nonperforming loans, except for certain secured consumer loans, including those that have
been modified in a TDR. Personal property-secured loans (including auto loans) are charged off to
collateral value no later than the end of the month in which the account becomes 120days past due, or
upon repossession of an auto or, for loans in bankruptcy, within 60days of receipt of notification of
filing. Credit card and other unsecured customer loans are charged off no later than the end of the
month in which the account becomes 180days past due, within 60days after receipt of notification of
death or bankruptcy, or upon confirmation of fraud. Commercial loans and leases, excluding business
card loans, that are past due 90days or more as to principal or interest, or where reasonable doubt
exists as to timely collection, including loans that are individually identified as being impaired,
are generally placed on nonaccrual status and classified as nonperforming unless well-secured and in
the process of collection. Business card loans are charged off in the same manner as consumer credit
card loans. Other commercial loans and leases are generally charged off when all or a portion of the
principal amount is determined to be uncollectible. The entire balance of a consumer loan or
commercial loan or lease is contractually delinquent if the minimum payment is not received by the
specified due date on the customer’s billing statement. Interest and fees continue to accrue on past
due loans and leases until the date the loan is placed on nonaccrual status, if applicable. Accrued
interest receivable is reversed when loans and leases are placed on nonaccrual status. Interest
collections on nonaccruing loans and leases for which the ultimate collectability of principal is
uncertain are applied as principal reductions; otherwise, such collections are credited to income
when received. Loans and leases may be restored to accrual status when all principal and interest is
current and full repayment of the remaining contractual principal and interest is expected. Troubled
Debt Restructurings Consumer and commercial loans and leases whose contractual terms have been
restructured in a manner that grants a concession to a borrower experiencing financial difficulties
are classified as TDRs. Concessions could include a reduction in the interest rate to a rate that is
below market on the loan, payment extensions, forgiveness of principal, forbearance or other actions
designed to maximize collections. Loans that are carried at fair value and LHFS are not classified as
TDRs.
 Bank of America98 
Loans and leases whose contractual terms have been modified in a TDR and are current at the time of
restructuring may remain on accrual status if there is demonstrated performance prior to the
restructuring and payment in full under the restructured terms is expected. Otherwise, the loans are
placed on nonaccrual status and reported as nonperforming, except for fully-insured consumer real
estate loans, until there is sustained repayment performance for a reasonable period, generally six
months. If accruing TDRs cease to perform in accordance with their modified contractual terms, they
are placed on nonaccrual status and reported as nonperforming TDRs. Secured consumer loans that have
been discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy and have not been reaffirmed by the borrower are classified
as TDRs at the time of discharge. Such loans are placed on nonaccrual status and written down to the
estimated collateral value less costs to sell no later than at the time of discharge. If these loans
are contractually current, interest collections are generally recorded in interest income on a cash
basis. Consumer real estate-secured loans for which a binding offer to restructure has been extended
are also classified as TDRs. Credit card and other unsecured consumer loans that have been
renegotiated in a TDR generally remain on accrual status until the loan is either paid in full or
charged off, which occurs no later than the end of the month in which the loan becomes 180days past
due or, for loans that have been placed on a fixed payment plan, 120days past due. A loan that had
previously been modified in a TDR and is subsequently refinanced under current underwriting standards
at a market rate with no concessionary terms is accounted for as a new loan and is no longer reported
as a TDR. COVID-19 Programs The Corporation has implemented various consumer and commercial loan
modification programs to provide its borrowers relief from the economic impacts of the Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic (the pandemic). In accordance with the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security Act (CARES Act), the Corporation has elected to not apply TDR classification to
eligible COVID-19 related loan modifications that were performed after March 1, 2020 to loans that
were current as of December 31, 2019. Accordingly, these restructurings are not classified as TDRs.
The availability of this election expired on January 1, 2022. In addition, for loans modified in
response to the pandemic that do not meet the above criteria (e.g., current payment status at
December 31, 2019), the Corporation is applying the guidance included in an interagency statement
issued by the bank regulatory agencies. This guidance states that loan modifications performed in
light of the pandemic, including loan payment deferrals that are up to six months in duration, that
were granted to borrowers who were current as of the implementation date of a loan modification
program or modifications granted under government mandated modification programs, are not TDRs. For
loan modifications that include a payment deferral and are not TDRs, the borrowers' past due and
nonaccrual status have not been impacted during the deferral period. The Corporation has continued to
accrue interest during the deferral period using a constant effective yield method. For most
mortgage, HELOC and commercial loan modifications, the contractual interest that accrued during the
deferral period is payable at the maturity of the loan. The Corporation includes these amounts with
the unpaid principal balance when computing its allowance for credit losses. Amounts that are
subsequently deemed uncollectible are written off against the allowance for credit losses. Loans
Held-for-sale Loans that the Corporation intends to sell in the foreseeable future, including
residential mortgages, loan syndications, and to a lesser degree, commercial real estate, consumer
finance and other loans, are reported as LHFS and are carried at the lower of aggregate cost or fair
value. The Corporation accounts for certain LHFS, including residential mortgage LHFS, under the fair
value option. Loan origination costs for LHFS carried at the lower of cost or fair value are
capitalized as part of the carrying value of the loans and, upon the sale of a loan, are recognized
as part of the gain or loss in noninterest income. LHFS that are on nonaccrual status and are
reported as nonperforming, as defined in the policy herein, are reported separately from
nonperforming loans and leases. Premises and Equipment Premises and equipment are carried at cost
less accumulated depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization are recognized using
the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Estimated lives range up to
40years for buildings, up to 12years for furniture and equipment, and the shorter of lease term or
estimated useful life for leasehold improvements. Other Assets For the Corporation’s financial assets
that are measured at amortized cost and are not included in debt securities or loans and leases on
the Consolidated Balance Sheet, the Corporation evaluates these assets for ECL using various
techniques. For assets that are subject to collateral maintenance provisions, including federal funds
sold and securities borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell, where the collateral consists
of daily margining of liquid and marketable assets where the margining is expected to be maintained
into the foreseeable future, the expected losses are assumed to be zero. For all other assets, the
Corporation performs qualitative analyses, including consideration of historical losses and current
economic conditions, to estimate any ECL which are then included in a valuation account that is
recorded as a contra-asset against the amortized cost basis of the financial asset. Lessee
Arrangements Substantially all of the Corporation’s lessee arrangements are operating leases. Under
these arrangements, the Corporation records right-of-use assets and lease liabilities at lease
commencement. Right-of-use assets are reported in other assetson the Consolidated Balance Sheet, and
the related lease liabilities are reported in accrued expenses and other liabilities. All leases are
recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet except leases with an initial term less than 12 months for
which the Corporation made the short-term lease election. Lease expense is recognized on a straight-
line basis over the lease term and is recorded in occupancy and equipment expense in the Consolidated
Statement of Income. The Corporation made an accounting policy election not to separate lease and
non-lease components of a contract that is or contains a lease for its real estate and equipment
leases. As such, lease payments represent payments on both lease and non-lease components. At lease
commencement, lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the remaining lease
payments and discounted using the Corporation’s incremental borrowing rate. Right-of-use assets
initially equal the lease liability, adjusted for any lease payments
 99Bank of America 
made prior to lease commencement and for any lease incentives. Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill is the purchase premium after adjusting for the fair value of net assets acquired. Goodwill
is not amortized but is reviewed for potential impairment on an annual basis, or when events or
circumstances indicate a potential impairment, at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is a
business segment or one level below a business segment. The Corporation assesses the fair value of
each reporting unit against its carrying value, including goodwill, as measured by allocated equity.
For purposes of goodwill impairment testing, the Corporation utilizes allocated equity as a proxy for
the carrying value of its reporting units. Allocated equity in the reporting units is comprised of
allocated capital plus capital for the portion of goodwill and intangibles specifically assigned to
the reporting unit. In performing its goodwill impairment testing, the Corporation first assesses
qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a
reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Qualitative factors include, among other things,
macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, financial performance of the respective
reporting unit and other relevant entity- and reporting-unit specific considerations. If the
Corporation concludes it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than
its carrying value, a quantitative assessment is performed. The Corporation has an unconditional
option to bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly
to performing the quantitative goodwill impairment test. The Corporation may resume performing the
qualitative assessment in any subsequent period. When performing the quantitative assessment, if the
fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill of the reporting unit would not
be considered impaired. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, a
goodwill impairment loss would be recognized for the amount by which the reporting unit’s allocated
equity exceeds its fair value. An impairment loss recognized cannot exceed the amount of goodwill
assigned to a reporting unit. An impairment loss establishes a new basis in the goodwill, and
subsequent reversals of goodwill impairment losses are not permitted under applicable accounting
guidance. For intangible assets subject to amortization, an impairment loss is recognized if the
carrying value of the intangible asset is not recoverable and exceeds fair value. The carrying value
of the intangible asset is considered not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash
flows expected to result from the use of the asset. Intangible assets deemed to have indefinite
useful lives are not subject to amortization. An impairment loss is recognized if the carrying value
of the intangible asset with an indefinite life exceeds its fair value. Variable Interest Entities A
VIE is an entity that lacks equity investors or whose equity investors do not have a controlling
financial interest in the entity through their equity investments. The Corporation consolidates a VIE
if it has both the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s
economic performance and an obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits that could
potentially be significant to the VIE. On a quarterly basis, the Corporation reassesses its
involvement with the VIE and evaluates the impact of changes in governing documents and its financial
interests in the VIE. The consolidation status of the VIEs with which the Corporation is involved may
change as a result of such reassessments. The Corporation primarily uses VIEs for its securitization
activities, in which the Corporation transfers whole loans or debt securities into a trust or other
vehicle. When the Corporation is the servicer of whole loans held in a securitization trust,
including non-agency residential mortgages, home equity loans, credit cards, and other loans, the
Corporation has the power to direct the most significant activities of the trust. The Corporation
generally does not have the power to direct the most significant activities of a residential mortgage
agency trust except in certain circumstances in which the Corporation holds substantially all of the
issued securities and has the unilateral right to liquidate the trust. The power to direct the most
significant activities of a commercial mortgage securitization trust is typically held by the special
servicer or by the party holding specific subordinate securities which embody certain controlling
rights. The Corporation consolidates a whole-loan securitization trust if it has the power to direct
the most significant activities and also holds securities issued by the trust or has other
contractual arrangements, other than standard representations and warranties, that could potentially
be significant to the trust. The Corporation may also transfer trading account securities and AFS
securities into municipal bond or resecuritization trusts. The Corporation consolidates a municipal
bond or resecuritization trust if it has control over the ongoing activities of the trust such as the
remarketing of the trust’s liabilities or, if there are no ongoing activities, sole discretion over
the design of the trust, including the identification of securities to be transferred in and the
structure of securities to be issued, and also retains securities or has liquidity or other
commitments that could potentially be significant to the trust. The Corporation does not consolidate
a municipal bond or resecuritization trust if one or a limited number of third-party investors share
responsibility for the design of the trust or have control over the significant activities of the
trust through liquidation or other substantive rights. Other VIEs used by the Corporation include
collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), investment vehicles created on behalf of customers and other
investment vehicles. The Corporation does not routinely serve as collateral manager for CDOs and,
therefore, does not typically have the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact
the economic performance of a CDO. However, following an event of default, if the Corporation is a
majority holder of senior securities issued by a CDO and acquires the power to manage its assets, the
Corporation consolidates the CDO. The Corporation consolidates a customer or other investment vehicle
if it has control over the initial design of the vehicle or manages the assets in the vehicle and
also absorbs potentially significant gains or losses through an investment in the vehicle, derivative
contracts or other arrangements. The Corporation does not consolidate an investment vehicle if a
single investor controlled the initial design of the vehicle or manages the assets in the vehicles or
if the Corporation does not have a variable interest that could potentially be significant to the
vehicle. Retained interests in securitized assets are initially recorded at fair value. In addition,
the Corporation may invest in debt securities issued by unconsolidated VIEs. Fair values of these
debt securities, which are classified as trading account assets, debt securities carried at fair
value or HTM securities, are based primarily on quoted market prices in active or inactive markets.
Generally, quoted market prices for retained residual interests
 Bank of America100 
are not available; therefore, the Corporation estimates fair values based on the present value of the
associated expected future cash flows. Fair Value The Corporation measures the fair values of its
assets and liabilities, where applicable, in accordance with accounting guidance that requires an
entity to base fair value on exit price. Under this guidance, an entity is required to maximize the
use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs in measuring fair value. Under
applicable accounting standards, fair value measurements are categorized into one of three levels
based on the inputs to the valuation technique with the highest priority given to unadjusted quoted
prices in active markets and the lowest priority given to unobservable inputs. The Corporation
categorizes its fair value measurements of financial instruments based on this three-level hierarchy.
Level 1 Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. Level 1
assets and liabilities include debt and equity securities and derivative contracts that are traded in
an active exchange market, as well as certain U.S. Treasury securities that are highly liquid and are
actively traded in OTC markets. Level 2 Observable inputs other than Level 1 prices, such as quoted
prices for similar assets or liabilities, quoted prices in markets that are not active, or other
inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the
full term of the assets or liabilities. Level 2 assets and liabilities include debt securities with
quoted prices that are traded less frequently than exchange-traded instruments and derivative
contracts where fair value is determined using a pricing model with inputs that are observable in the
market or can be derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data. This category
generally includes U.S. government and agency mortgage-backed (MBS) and asset-backed securities
(ABS), corporate debt securities, derivative contracts, certain loans and LHFS. Level 3 Unobservable
inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to the overall
fair value of the assets or liabilities. Level 3 assets and liabilities include financial instruments
for which the determination of fair value requires significant management judgment or estimation. The
fair value for such assets and liabilities is generally determined using pricing models, discounted
cash flow methodologies or similar techniques that incorporate the assumptions a market participant
would use in pricing the asset or liability. This category generally includes retained residual
interests in securitizations, consumer MSRs, certain ABS, highly structured, complex or long-dated
derivative contracts, certain loans and LHFS, IRLCs and certain CDOs where independent pricing
information cannot be obtained for a significant portion of the underlying assets. Income Taxes There
are two components of income tax expense: current and deferred. Current income tax expense reflects
taxes to be paid or refunded for the current period. Deferred income tax expense results from changes
in deferred tax assets and liabilities between periods. These gross deferred tax assets and
liabilities represent decreases or increases in taxes expected to be paid in the future because of
future reversals of temporary differences in the bases of assets and liabilities as measured by tax
laws and their bases as reported in the financial statements. Deferred tax assets are also recognized
for tax attributes such as net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards. Valuation
allowances are recorded to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts management concludes are more
likely than not to be realized. Income tax benefits are recognized and measured based upon a two-step
model: first, a tax position must be more likely than not to be sustained based solely on its
technical merits in order to be recognized, and second, the benefit is measured as the largest dollar
amount of that position that is more likely than not to be sustained upon settlement. The difference
between the benefit recognized and the tax benefit claimed on a tax return is referred to as an
unrecognized tax benefit. The Corporation records income tax-related interest and penalties, if
applicable, within income tax expense. Revenue Recognition The following summarizes the Corporation’s
revenue recognition accounting policies for certain noninterest income activities. Card Income Card
income includes annual, late and over-limit fees as well as interchange, cash advances and other
miscellaneous items from credit and debit card transactions and from processing card transactions for
merchants. Card income is presented net of direct costs. Interchange fees are recognized upon
settlement of the credit and debit card payment transactions and are generally determined on a
percentage basis for credit cards and fixed rates for debit cards based on the corresponding payment
network’s rates. Substantially all card fees are recognized at the transaction date, except for
certain time-based fees such as annual fees, which are recognized over 12 months. Fees charged to
cardholders and merchants that are estimated to be uncollectible are reserved in the allowance for
loan and lease losses. Included in direct cost are rewards and credit card partner payments. Rewards
paid to cardholders are related to points earned by the cardholder that can be redeemed for a broad
range of rewards including cash, travel and gift cards. The points to be redeemed are estimated based
on past redemption behavior, card product type, account transaction activity and other historical
card performance. The liability is reduced as the points are redeemed. The Corporation also makes
payments to credit card partners. The payments are based on revenue-sharing agreements that are
generally driven by cardholder transactions and partner sales volumes. As part of the revenue-sharing
agreements, the credit card partner provides the Corporation exclusive rights to market to the credit
card partner’s members or customers on behalf of the Corporation. Service Charges Service charges
include deposit and lending-related fees. Deposit-related fees consist of fees earned on consumer and
commercial deposit activities and are generally recognized when the transactions occur or as the
service is performed. Consumer fees are earned on consumer deposit accounts for account maintenance
and various transaction-based services, such as ATM transactions, wire transfer activities, check and
money order processing and insufficient funds/overdraft transactions. Commercial deposit-related fees
are from the Corporation’s Global Transaction Services business and consist of commercial deposit and
treasury management services, including account maintenance and other services, such as payroll,
sweep
 101Bank of America 
account and other cash management services.
Lending-related fees generally represent
transactional fees earned from certain loan
commitments, financial guarantees and SBLCs.
Investment and Brokerage Services Investment and
brokerage services consist of asset management
and brokerage fees. Asset management fees are
earned from the management of client assets under
advisory agreements or the full discretion of the
Corporation’s financial advisors (collectively
referred to as assets under management (AUM)).
Asset management fees are earned as a percentage
of the client’s AUM and generally range from
50basis points (bps) to 150bps of the AUM. In
cases where a third party is used to obtain a
client’s investment allocation, the fee remitted
to the third party is recorded net and is not
reflected in the transaction price, as the
Corporation is an agent for those services.
Brokerage fees include income earned from
transaction-based services that are performed as
part of investment management services and are
based on a fixed price per unit or as a
percentage of the total transaction amount.
Brokerage fees also include distribution fees and
sales commissions that are primarily in the
Global Wealth & Investment Management ( GWIM )
segment and are earned over time. In addition,
primarily in the Global Markets segment,
brokerage fees are earned when the Corporation
fills customer orders to buy or sell various
financial products or when it acknowledges,
affirms, settles and clears transactions and/or
submits trade information to the appropriate
clearing broker. Certain customers pay brokerage,
clearing and/or exchange fees imposed by relevant
regulatory bodies or exchanges in order to
execute or clear trades. These fees are recorded
net and are not reflected in the transaction
price, as the Corporation is an agent for those
services. Investment Banking Income Investment
banking income includes underwriting income and
financial advisory services income. Underwriting
consists of fees earned for the placement of a
customer’s debt or equity securities. The revenue
is generally earned based on a percentage of the
fixed number of shares or principal placed. Once
the number of shares or notes is determined and
the service is completed, the underwriting fees
are recognized. The Corporation incurs certain
out-of-pocket expenses, such as legal costs, in
performing these services. These expenses are
recovered through the revenue the Corporation
earns from the customer and are included in
operating expenses. Syndication fees represent
fees earned as the agent or lead lender
responsible for structuring, arranging and
administering a loan syndication. Financial
advisory services consist of fees earned for
assisting clients with transactions related to
mergers and acquisitions and financial
restructurings. Revenue varies depending on the
size of the transaction and scope of services
performed and is generally contingent on
successful completion of the transaction. Revenue
is typically recognized once the transaction is
completed and all services have been rendered.
Additionally, the Corporation may earn a fixed
fee in merger and acquisition transactions to
provide a fairness opinion, with the fees
recognized when the opinion is delivered to the
client. Other Revenue Measurement and Recognition
Policies The Corporation did not disclose the
value of any open performance obligations at
December 31, 2021, as its contracts with
customers generally have a fixed term that is
less than one year, an open term with a
cancellation period that is less than one year,
or provisions that allow the Corporation to
recognize revenue at the amount it has the right
to invoice.
Earnings Per Common Share Earnings per common
share (EPS) is computed by dividing net income
allocated to common shareholders by the weighted-
average common shares outstanding, excluding
unvested common shares subject to repurchase or
cancellation. Net income allocated to common
shareholders is net income adjusted for preferred
stock dividends including dividends declared,
accretion of discounts on preferred stock
including accelerated accretion when preferred
stock is repaid early, and cumulative dividends
related to the current dividend period that have
not been declared as of period end, less income
allocated to participating securities. Diluted
EPS is computed by dividing income allocated to
common shareholders plus dividends on dilutive
convertible preferred stock and preferred stock
that can be tendered to exercise warrants, by the
weighted-average common shares outstanding plus
amounts representing the dilutive effect of stock
options outstanding, restricted stock, restricted
stock units (RSUs), outstanding warrants and the
dilution resulting from the conversion of
convertible preferred stock, if applicable.
Foreign Currency Translation Assets, liabilities
and operations of foreign branches and
subsidiaries are recorded based on the functional
currency of each entity. When the functional
currency of a foreign operation is the local
currency, the assets, liabilities and operations
are translated, for consolidation purposes, from
the local currency to the U.S. dollar reporting
currency at period-end rates for assets and
liabilities and generally at average rates for
results of operations. The resulting unrealized
gains and losses are reported as a component of
accumulated OCI, net-of-tax. When the foreign
entity’s functional currency is the U.S. dollar,
the resulting remeasurement gains or losses on
foreign currency-denominated assets or
liabilities are included in earnings. Paycheck
Protection Program The Corporation is
participating in the Paycheck Protection Program
(PPP), which is a loan program that originated
from the CARES Act and was subsequently expanded
by the Paycheck Protection Program and Health
Care Enhancement Act. The PPP is designed to
provide U.S. small businesses with cash-flow
assistance through loans fully guaranteed by the
Small Business Administration (SBA). If the
borrower meets certain criteria and uses the
proceeds towards certain eligible expenses, the
borrower’s obligation to repay the loan can be
forgiven up to the full principal amount of the
loan and any accrued interest. Upon borrower
forgiveness, the SBA pays the Corporation for the
principal and accrued interest owed on the loan.
If the full principal of the loan is not
forgiven, the loan will operate according to the
original loan terms with the 100 percent SBA
guaranty remaining. At December 31, 2021 and
2020, the Corporation had approximately 67,000and
332,000PPP loans with a carrying value of $
4.7billion and $ 22.7billion. As compensation for
originating the loans, the Corporation received
lender processing fees from the SBA, which were
capitalized, along with the loan origination
costs, and are being amortized over the loans’
contractual lives and recognized as interest
income. Upon forgiveness of a loan and repayment
by the SBA, any unrecognized net capitalized fees
and costs related to the loan are recognized as
interest income in that period.
 Bank of America102 
 NOTE 2 
 Net Interest Income and Noninterest Income 
The table below presents the Corporation’s net interest income and noninterest income disaggregated
by revenue source for 2021, 2020 and 2019. For more information, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant
Accounting Principles. For a disaggregation of noninterest income by business segment and All Other ,
see Note 23 – Business Segment Information .
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Net interest income 
 Interest income 2021 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans and leases $ 29,282 $ 34,029 $ 43,086 
 Debt securities 12,376 9,790 11,806 
 Federal funds sold and securities 
 borrowed or purchased under agreements -90 903 4,843 
 to resell(1) 
 Trading account assets 3,770 4,128 5,196 
 Other interest income 2,334 2,735 6,305 
 Total interest income 47,672 51,585 71,236 
 Interest expense 
 Deposits 537 1,943 7,188 
 Short-term borrowings(1) -358 987 7,208 
 Trading account liabilities 1,128 974 1,249 
 Long-term debt 3,431 4,321 6,700 
 Total interest expense 4,738 8,225 22,345 
 Net interest income $ 42,934 $ 43,360 $ 48,891 
 Noninterest income 
 Fees and commissions 
 Card income 
 Interchange fees(2) $ 4,560 $ 3,954 $ 3,834 
 Other card income 1,658 1,702 1,963 
 Total card income 6,218 5,656 5,797 
 Service charges 
 Deposit-related fees 6,271 5,991 6,588 
 Lending-related fees 1,233 1,150 1,086 
 Total service charges 7,504 7,141 7,674 
 Investment and brokerage services 
 Asset management fees 12,729 10,708 10,241 
 Brokerage fees 3,961 3,866 3,661 
 Total investment and brokerage services 16,690 14,574 13,902 
 Investment banking fees 
 Underwriting income 5,077 4,698 2,998 
 Syndication fees 1,499 861 1,184 
 Financial advisory services 2,311 1,621 1,460 
 Total investment banking fees 8,887 7,180 5,642 
 Total fees and commissions 39,299 34,551 33,015 
 Market making and similar activities 8,691 8,355 9,034 
 Other income (loss) -1,811 -738 304 
 Total noninterest income $ 46,179 $ 42,168 $ 42,353 
(1) For more information on negative interest, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles.
(2) Gross interchange fees and merchant income were $ 11.5billion, $ 9.2billion and $ 10.0billion for
2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and are presented net of $ 6.9billion, $ 5.5billion and $
6.2billion of expenses for rewards and partner payments as well as certain other card costs for the
same periods.
 103Bank of America 
NOTE 3 Derivatives
Derivative Balances Derivatives are entered into
on behalf of customers, for trading or to support
risk management activities. Derivatives used in
risk management activities include derivatives
that may or may not be designated in qualifying
hedge accounting relationships. Derivatives that
are not designated in qualifying hedge accounting
relationships are referred to as other risk
management derivatives. For more information on
the
Corporation’s derivatives and hedging activities,
see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles. The following tables present
derivative instruments included on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet in derivative assets
and liabilities at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Balances are presented on a gross basis, prior to
the application of counterparty and cash
collateral netting. Total derivative assets and
liabilities are adjusted on an aggregate basis to
take into consideration the effects of legally
enforceable master netting agreements and have
been reduced by cash collateral received or paid.
 Decem… 
 31, 
 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gross Gross 
 Deriv… Deriv… 
 Assets Liabi… 
 Tradi… Tradi… 
 (Dol… and Quali… and Qualif… 
 in Contr… Other Accou… Total Other Accoun… Total 
 bill… Notio… Risk Hedges Risk Hedges 
 Manag… Manag… 
 Deriv… Deriv… 
 Inte… 
 rate 
 cont… 
 Swaps $ 18,06… $ 150.5 $ 8.9 $ 159.4 $ 156.4 $ 4.4 $ 160.8 
 Futu… 
 and 2,243… 1.1 — 1.1 1.0 — 1.0 
 forw… 
 Writ… 1,616… — — — 28.8 — 28.8 
 opti… 
 Purc… 1,673… 33.1 — 33.1 — — — 
 opti… 
 Fore… 
 exch… 
 cont… 
 Swaps 1,420… 28.6 0.2 28.8 30.5 0.2 30.7 
 Spot, 
 futu… 4,087… 37.1 0.3 37.4 37.7 0.2 37.9 
 and 
 forw… 
 Writ… 287.2 — — — 4.1 — 4.1 
 opti… 
 Purc… 267.6 4.1 — 4.1 — — — 
 opti… 
 Equi… 
 cont… 
 Swaps 443.8 12.3 — 12.3 14.5 — 14.5 
 Futu… 
 and 113.3 0.5 — 0.5 1.7 — 1.7 
 forw… 
 Writ… 737.7 — — — 58.5 — 58.5 
 opti… 
 Purc… 657.0 55.9 — 55.9 — — — 
 opti… 
 Comm… 
 cont… 
 Swaps 47.7 3.1 — 3.1 6.0 — 6.0 
 Futu… 
 and 101.5 2.3 — 2.3 0.3 1.1 1.4 
 forw… 
 Writ… 44.4 — — — 2.6 — 2.6 
 opti… 
 Purc… 38.3 3.2 — 3.2 — — — 
 opti… 
 Cred… 
 deri… 
 Purc… 
 cred… 
 deri… 
 Cred… 
 defa… 297.0 1.9 — 1.9 4.3 — 4.3 
 swaps 
 Total 
 retu… 85.3 0.2 — 0.2 1.1 — 1.1 
 swap… 
 Writ… 
 cred… 
 deri… 
 Cred… 
 defa… 279.8 4.2 — 4.2 1.6 — 1.6 
 swaps 
 Total 
 retu… 85.3 0.9 — 0.9 0.5 — 0.5 
 swap… 
 Gross 
 deri… $ 339.0 $ 9.4 $ 348.4 $ 349.6 $ 5.9 $ 355.5 
 asse… 
 Less: 
 Lega… 
 enfo… -282.3 -282.3 
 mast… 
 nett… 
 agre… 
 Less: 
 Cash -30.8 -35.5 
 coll… 
 rece… 
 Total 
 deri… $ 35.3 $ 37.7 
 asse… 
(1) Represents the total contract/notional amount of derivative assets and liabilities outstanding.
(2) The net derivative asset and notional amount of written credit derivatives for which the
Corporation held purchased credit derivatives with identical underlying referenced names were $
2.3billion and $ 258.4billion at December 31, 2021.
 Bank of America104 
 Decem… 
 31, 
 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gross Gross 
 Deriv… Deriv… 
 Assets Liabi… 
 Tradi… Tradi… 
 (Dol… and Quali… and Qualif… 
 in Contr… Other Accou… Total Other Accoun… Total 
 bill… Notio… Risk Hedges Risk Hedges 
 Manag… Manag… 
 Deriv… Deriv… 
 Inte… 
 rate 
 cont… 
 Swaps $ 13,24… $ 199.9 $ 10.9 $ 210.8 $ 209.3 $ 1.3 $ 210.6 
 Futu… 
 and 3,222… 3.5 0.1 3.6 3.6 — 3.6 
 forw… 
 Writ… 1,530… — — — 40.5 — 40.5 
 opti… 
 Purc… 1,545… 45.3 — 45.3 — — — 
 opti… 
 Fore… 
 exch… 
 cont… 
 Swaps 1,475… 37.1 0.3 37.4 39.7 0.6 40.3 
 Spot, 
 futu… 3,710… 53.4 — 53.4 54.5 0.5 55.0 
 and 
 forw… 
 Writ… 289.6 — — — 4.8 — 4.8 
 opti… 
 Purc… 279.3 5.0 — 5.0 — — — 
 opti… 
 Equi… 
 cont… 
 Swaps 320.2 13.3 — 13.3 14.5 — 14.5 
 Futu… 
 and 106.2 0.3 — 0.3 1.4 — 1.4 
 forw… 
 Writ… 599.1 — — — 48.8 — 48.8 
 opti… 
 Purc… 541.2 52.6 — 52.6 — — — 
 opti… 
 Comm… 
 cont… 
 Swaps 36.4 1.9 — 1.9 4.4 — 4.4 
 Futu… 
 and 63.6 2.0 — 2.0 1.0 — 1.0 
 forw… 
 Writ… 24.6 — — — 1.4 — 1.4 
 opti… 
 Purc… 24.7 1.5 — 1.5 — — — 
 opti… 
 Cred… 
 deri… 
 Purc… 
 cred… 
 deri… 
 Cred… 
 defa… 322.7 2.3 — 2.3 4.4 — 4.4 
 swaps 
 Total 
 retu… 63.6 0.2 — 0.2 1.0 — 1.0 
 swap… 
 Writ… 
 cred… 
 deri… 
 Cred… 
 defa… 301.5 4.4 — 4.4 1.9 — 1.9 
 swaps 
 Total 
 retu… 68.6 0.6 — 0.6 0.4 — 0.4 
 swap… 
 Gross 
 deri… $ 423.3 $ 11.3 $ 434.6 $ 431.6 $ 2.4 $ 434.0 
 asse… 
 Less: 
 Lega… 
 enfo… -344.9 -344.9 
 mast… 
 nett… 
 agre… 
 Less: 
 Cash -42.5 -43.6 
 coll… 
 rece… 
 Total 
 deri… $ 47.2 $ 45.5 
 asse… 
(1) Represents the total contract/notional amount of derivative assets and liabilities outstanding.
(2) The net derivative asset and notional amount of written credit derivatives for which the
Corporation held purchased credit derivatives with identical underlying referenced names were $
2.2billion and $ 269.8billion at December 31, 2020.
Offsetting of Derivatives The Corporation enters into International Swaps and Derivatives
Association, Inc. (ISDA) master netting agreements or similar agreements with substantially all of
the Corporation’s derivative counterparties. Where legally enforceable, these master netting
agreements give the Corporation, in the event of default by the counterparty, the right to liquidate
securities held as collateral and to offset receivables and payables with the same counterparty. For
purposes of the Consolidated Balance Sheet, the Corporation offsets derivative assets and liabilities
and cash collateral held with the same counterparty where it has such a legally enforceable master
netting agreement. The following table presents derivative instruments included in derivative assets
and liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2021 and 2020 by primary risk
(e.g., interest rate risk) and the platform, where applicable, on which these derivatives are
transacted. Balances are presented on a gross basis, prior to the application of counterparty and
cash collateral netting. Total gross derivative assets and liabilities are adjusted on an aggregate
basis to take into consideration the effects of legally enforceable master netting agreements, which
include reducing the balance for counterparty netting and cash collateral received or paid. For more
information on offsetting of securities financing agreements, see Note 10 – Securities Financing
Agreements, Short-term Borrowings and Restricted Cash .
 105Bank of America 
 Offsetting of Derivative Derivative 
 Derivatives(1) Assets Assets 
 (Dollars in December 31, Derivative December 31, Derivative 
 billions) 2021 Liabilities 2020 Liabilities 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest rate 
 contracts 
 Over-the-count… $ 171.3 $ 166.3 $ 247.7 $ 243.5 
 Exchange-traded 0.2 — — — 
 Over-the-count… 22.6 22.5 10.2 9.1 
 cleared 
 Foreign 
 exchange 
 contracts 
 Over-the-count… 67.9 70.5 92.2 96.5 
 Over-the-count… 1.1 1.1 1.4 1.3 
 cleared 
 Equity 
 contracts 
 Over-the-count… 29.2 32.9 31.3 28.3 
 Exchange-traded 38.3 38.4 32.3 31.0 
 Commodity 
 contracts 
 Over-the-count… 6.1 7.6 3.5 5.0 
 Exchange-traded 1.4 1.3 0.7 0.7 
 Over-the-count… 0.1 0.1 — — 
 cleared 
 Credit 
 derivatives 
 Over-the-count… 5.2 5.3 5.2 5.6 
 Over-the-count… 1.8 1.8 2.2 1.9 
 cleared 
 Total gross 
 derivative 
 assets/liabili… 
 before netting 
 Over-the-count… 279.7 282.6 379.9 378.9 
 Exchange-traded 39.9 39.7 33.0 31.7 
 Over-the-count… 25.6 25.5 13.8 12.3 
 cleared 
 Less: Legally 
 enforceable 
 master netting 
 agreements and 
 cash collateral 
 received/paid 
 Over-the-count… -250.3 -254.6 -345.7 -347.2 
 Exchange-traded -37.8 -37.8 -29.5 -29.5 
 Over-the-count… -25.0 -25.4 -12.2 -11.8 
 cleared 
 Derivative 
 assets/liabili… 32.1 30.0 39.3 34.4 
 after 
 netting 
 Other gross 
 derivative 3.2 7.7 7.9 11.1 
 assets/liabili… 
 Total 
 derivative 35.3 37.7 47.2 45.5 
 assets/liabili… 
 Less: Financial 
 instruments -11.8 -10.6 -16.1 -16.6 
 collateral(3) 
 Total net 
 derivative $ 23.5 $ 27.1 $ 31.1 $ 28.9 
 assets/liabili… 
(1) Over-the-counter derivatives include bilateral transactions between the Corporation and a
particular counterparty. Over-the-counter cleared derivatives include bilateral transactions between
the Corporation and a counterparty where the transaction is cleared through a clearinghouse.
Exchange-traded derivatives include listed options transacted on an exchange.
(2) Consists of derivatives entered into under master netting agreements where the enforceability of
these agreements is uncertain under bankruptcy laws in some countries or industries.
(3) Amounts are limited to the derivative asset/liability balance and, accordingly, do not include
excess collateral received/pledged. Financial instruments collateral includes securities collateral
received or pledged and cash securities held and posted at third-party custodians that are not offset
on the Consolidated Balance Sheet but shown as a reduction to derive net derivative assets and
liabilities.
ALM and Risk Management Derivatives The Corporation’s ALM and risk management activities include the
use of derivatives to mitigate risk to the Corporation including derivatives designated in qualifying
hedge accounting relationships and derivatives used in other risk management activities. Interest
rate, foreign exchange, equity, commodity and credit contracts are utilized in the Corporation's ALM
and risk management activities. The Corporation maintains an overall interest rate risk management
strategy that incorporates the use of interest rate contracts, which are generally non-leveraged
generic interest rate and basis swaps, options, futures and forwards, to minimize significant
fluctuations in earnings caused by interest rate volatility. The Corporation’s goal is to manage
interest rate sensitivity and volatility so that movements in interest rates do not significantly
adversely affect earnings or capital. As a result of interest rate fluctuations, hedged fixed-rate
assets and liabilities appreciate or depreciate in fair value. Gains or losses on the derivative
instruments that are linked to the hedged fixed-rate assets and liabilities are expected to
substantially offset this unrealized appreciation or depreciation. Market risk, including interest
rate risk, can be substantial in the mortgage business. Market risk in the mortgage business is the
risk that values of mortgage assets or revenues will be adversely affected by changes in market
conditions such as interest rate movements. To mitigate the interest rate risk in mortgage banking
production income, the Corporation utilizes forward loan sale commitments and other derivative
instruments, including purchased options, and certain debt securities. The Corporation also utilizes
derivatives such as interest rate options, interest rate swaps, forward settlement contracts and
eurodollar futures to hedge certain market risks of MSRs. The Corporation uses foreign exchange
contracts to manage the foreign exchange risk associated with certain foreign currency-denominated
assets and liabilities, as well as the Corporation’s investments in non-U.S. subsidiaries. Exposure
to loss on these contracts will increase or decrease over their respective lives as currency exchange
and interest rates fluctuate. The Corporation purchases credit derivatives to manage credit risk
related to certain funded and unfunded credit exposures. Credit derivatives include credit default
swaps (CDS), total return swaps and swaptions. These derivatives are recorded on the Consolidated
Balance Sheet at fair value with changes in fair value recorded in other income. Derivatives
Designated as Accounting Hedges The Corporation uses various types of interest rate and foreign
exchange derivative contracts to protect against changes in the fair value of its assets and
liabilities due to fluctuations in interest rates and exchange rates (fair value hedges). The
Corporation also uses these types of contracts to protect against changes in the cash flows of its
assets and liabilities,
 Bank of America106 
and other forecasted transactions (cash flow hedges). The Corporation hedges its net investment in
consolidated non-U.S. operations determined to have functional currencies other than the U.S. dollar
using forward exchange contracts and cross-currency basis swaps, and by issuing foreign currency-
denominated debt (net investment hedges). Fair Value Hedges The table below summarizes information
related to fair value hedges for 2021, 2020 and 2019.
 Gains 
 and 
 Loss… 
 on 
 Deri… 
 Desi… 
 as 
 Fair 
 Value 
 Hedg… 
 (Dol… Hedged 
 in Deriv… Item 
 mill… 2021 2020 2019 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Inte… 
 rate 
 risk $ -7,018 $ 7,091 $ 6,113 $ 6,838 $ -7,220 $ -6,110 
 on 
 long… 
 debt… 
 Inte… 
 rate 
 and 
 fore… 
 curr… -90 783 119 79 -783 -101 
 risk 
 on 
 long… 
 debt… 
 Inte… 
 rate 
 risk 5,203 -44 -102 -5,167 49 98 
 on 
 avai… 
 secu… 
 Total $ -1,905 $ 7,830 $ 6,130 $ 1,750 $ -7,954 $ -6,113 
(1) Amounts are recorded in interest expense in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
(2) For 2021, 2020 and 2019, the derivative amount includes gains (losses) of $( 73) million, $
701million and $ 73million in interest expense, $ 0, $ 73million and $ 28million in market making and
similar activities, and $( 17) million, $ 9million and $ 18million in accumulated OCI, respectively.
Line item totals are in the Consolidated Statement of Income and on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(3) Amounts are recorded in interest income in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
The table below summarizes the carrying value of hedged assets and liabilities that are designated
and qualifying in fair value hedging relationships along with the cumulative amount of fair value
hedging adjustments included in the carrying value that have been recorded in the current hedging
relationships. These fair value hedging adjustments are open basis adjustments that are not subject
to amortization as long as the hedging relationship remains designated.
 Designated 
 Fair Value 
 Hedged Assets 
 and December 31, December 31, 
 Liabilities 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Dollars in Cumulative Cumulative 
 millions) Carrying Value Fair Value Carrying Value Fair Value 
 Adjustments(1) Adjustments(1) 
 Long-term $ 181,745 $ 3,987 $ 150,556 $ 8,910 
 debt(2) 
 Available-fo… 
 debt 
 securities(2, 209,038 -2,294 116,252 114 
 3, 
 4) 
 Trading 
 account 2,067 32 427 15 
 assets(5) 
(1) Increase (decrease) to carrying value.
(2) At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the cumulative fair value adjustments remaining on long-term debt
and available-for-sale debt securities from discontinued hedging relationships resulted in an
increase in the related liability of $ 1.5billion and $ 3.7billion and a decrease in the related
asset of $ 1.0billion and $ 69million, which are being amortized over the remaining contractual life
of the de-designated hedged items.
(3) These amounts include the amortized cost of the prepayable financial assets used to designate
hedging relationships in which the hedged item is the last layer expected to be remaining at the end
of the hedging relationship (i.e. last-of-layer hedging relationship). At December 31, 2021 and 2020,
the amortized cost of the closed portfolios used in these hedging relationships was $ 21.1billion and
$ 34.6billion, of which $ 6.9billion and $ 7.0billion was designated in the last-of-layer hedging
relationship. At December 31, 2021, the cumulative adjustment associated with these hedging
relationships was a decrease of $ 172million. At December 31, 2020, the cumulative adjustment was
insignificant.
(4) Carrying value represents amortized cost.
(5) Represents hedging activities related to certain commodities inventory.
Cash Flow and Net Investment Hedges The table below summarizes certain information related to cash
flow hedges and net investment hedges for 2021, 2020 and 2019. Of the $ 1.9billion after-tax net loss
($ 2.5billion pretax) on derivatives in accumulated OCI at December 31, 2021, gains of $ 477million
after-tax ($ 630million pretax) related to both open and terminated cash flow hedges are expected to
be reclassified into earnings in the next 12 months. These net gains reclassified into earnings are
expected to primarily increase net interest income related to the respective hedged items. For
terminated cash flow hedges, the time period over which the majority of the forecasted transactions
are hedged is approximately 3years, with a maximum length of time for certain forecasted transactions
of 15years.
 Gains and 
 Losses on 
 Derivatives 
 Designated 
 as Cash Flow 
 and Net 
 Investment Gains 
 Hedges Gains (Losses) in 
 (Dollars in (Losses) Income 
 millions, Recognized in Reclassified 
 amounts Accumulated from 
 pretax) OCI on Accumulated 
 Cash flow Derivatives OCI 
 hedges 2021 2020 2019 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest 
 rate risk on $ -2,686 $ 763 $ 671 $ 148 $ -7 $ -104 
 variable-ra… 
 assets(1) 
 Price risk 
 on 
 forecasted -249 241 — 26 9 — 
 MBS 
 purchases(1) 
 Price risk 
 on certain 93 85 34 55 12 -2 
 compensation 
 plans(2) 
 Total $ -2,842 $ 1,089 $ 705 $ 229 $ 14 $ -106 
 Net 
 investment 
 hedges 
 Foreign 
 exchange $ 1,451 $ -834 $ 22 $ 23 $ 4 $ 366 
 risk(3) 
(1) Amounts reclassified from accumulated OCI are recorded in interest income in the Consolidated
Statement of Income.
(2) Amounts reclassified from accumulated OCI are recorded in compensation and benefits expense in
the Consolidated Statement of Income.
(3) Amounts reclassified from accumulated OCI are recorded in other income in the Consolidated
Statement of Income. Amounts excluded from effectiveness testing and recognized in market making and
similar activities were gains (losses) of $( 123) million, $( 11) million and $ 154million in 2021,
2020 and 2019, respectively.
 107Bank of America 
Other Risk Management Derivatives Other risk
management derivatives are used by the
Corporation to reduce certain risk exposures by
economically hedging various assets and
liabilities. The table below presents gains
(losses) on these derivatives for 2021, 2020 and
2019. These gains (losses) are largely offset by
the income or expense recorded on the hedged
item.
 Gains and Losses on Other Risk Management Derivatives 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest rate risk on mortgage $ -18 $ 611 $ 388 
 activities(1, 2) 
 Credit risk on loans(2) -25 -68 -58 
 Interest rate and foreign currency risk 
 on asset and liability management 1,757 -2,971 1,112 
 activities(3) 
 Price risk on certain compensation 917 700 943 
 plans(4) 
(1) Includes hedges of interest rate risk on MSRs and IRLCs to originate mortgage loans that will be
held for sale.
(2) Gains (losses) on these derivatives are recorded in other income.
(3) Gains (losses) on these derivatives are recorded in market making and similar activities.
(4) Gains (losses) on these derivatives are recorded in compensation and benefits expense.
Transfers of Financial Assets with Risk Retained
through Derivatives The Corporation enters into
certain transactions involving the transfer of
financial assets that are accounted for as sales
where substantially all of the economic exposure
to the transferred financial assets is retained
through derivatives (e.g., interest rate and/or
credit), but the Corporation does not retain
control over the assets transferred. At December
31, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation had
transferred $ 4.8billion and $ 5.2billion of
non-U.S. government-guaranteed mortgage-backed
securities to a third-party trust and retained
economic exposure to the transferred assets
through derivative contracts. In connection with
these transfers, the Corporation received gross
cash proceeds of $ 4.8billion and $ 5.2billion at
the transfer dates. At December 31, 2021 and
2020, the fair value of the transferred
securities was $ 5.0billion and $ 5.5billion.
Sales and Trading Revenue The Corporation enters
into trading derivatives to facilitate client
transactions and to manage risk exposures arising
from trading account assets and liabilities. It
is the Corporation’s policy to include these
derivative instruments in its trading activities,
which include derivatives and non-derivative cash
instruments. The resulting risk from these
derivatives is managed on a portfolio basis as
part of the Corporation’s Global Markets business
segment. The related sales and trading revenue
generated within Global Markets is recorded in
various income statement line items, including
market making and similar activities and net
interest income as well as other revenue
categories. Sales and trading revenue includes
changes in the fair value and realized gains and
losses on the sales of trading and other assets,
net interest income, and fees primarily from
commissions on equity securities. Revenue is
generated by the difference in the client price
for an instrument and the price at which the
trading desk can execute the trade in the dealer
market. For equity securities, commissions
related to purchases and sales are recorded in
the “Other” column in the Sales and Trading
Revenue table. Changes in the fair value of these
securities are included in market making and
similar activities. For debt securities, revenue,
with the exception of interest associated with
the debt securities, is typically included in
market making and similar activities. Unlike
commissions for equity securities, the initial
revenue related to broker-dealer
services for debt securities is typically
included in the pricing of the instrument rather
than being charged through separate fee
arrangements. Therefore, this revenue is recorded
in market making and similar activities as part
of the initial mark to fair value. For
derivatives, the majority of revenue is included
in market making and similar activities. In
transactions where the Corporation acts as agent,
which include exchange-traded futures and
options, fees are recorded in other income.
The table below, which includes both derivatives and non-derivative cash instruments, identifies the
amounts in the respective income statement line items attributable to the Corporation’s sales and
trading revenue in Global Markets , categorized by primary risk, for 2021, 2020 and 2019. This table
includes debit valuation adjustment (DVA) and funding valuation adjustment (FVA) gains (losses).
Global Markets results in Note 23 – Business Segment Information are presented on a fully taxable-
equivalent (FTE) basis. The table below is not presented on an FTE basis.
 Sales and Trading 
 Revenue Market making and 
 (Dollars in similar Net Interest 
 millions) 2021 activities Income Other(1) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest rate $ 523 $ 1,794 $ 217 $ 2,534 
 risk 
 Foreign exchange 1,505 -80 14 1,439 
 risk 
 Equity risk 4,581 -5 1,834 6,410 
 Credit risk 1,390 1,684 556 3,630 
 Other risk(2) 759 -128 124 755 
 Total sales and $ 8,758 $ 3,265 $ 2,745 $ 14,768 
 trading revenue 
 2020 
 Interest rate $ 2,236 $ 2,279 $ 229 $ 4,744 
 risk 
 Foreign exchange 1,486 -19 2 1,469 
 risk 
 Equity risk 3,656 -77 1,801 5,380 
 Credit risk 783 1,758 331 2,872 
 Other risk(2) 308 4 44 356 
 Total sales and $ 8,469 $ 3,945 $ 2,407 $ 14,821 
 trading revenue 
 2019 
 Interest rate $ 1,046 $ 1,697 $ 113 $ 2,856 
 risk 
 Foreign exchange 1,293 61 56 1,410 
 risk 
 Equity risk 3,563 -634 1,569 4,498 
 Credit risk 1,040 1,928 519 3,487 
 Other risk(2) 120 70 54 244 
 Total sales and $ 7,062 $ 3,122 $ 2,311 $ 12,495 
 trading revenue 
(1) Represents amounts in investment and brokerage services and other income that are recorded in
Global Markets and included in the definition of sales and trading revenue. Includes investment and
brokerage services revenue of $ 1.9billion, $ 1.9billion and $ 1.7billion in 2021, 2020 and 2019,
respectively.
(2) Includes commodity risk.
Credit Derivatives The Corporation enters into
credit derivatives primarily to facilitate client
transactions and to manage credit risk exposures.
Credit derivatives derive value based on an
underlying third-party referenced obligation or a
portfolio of referenced obligations and generally
require the Corporation, as the seller of credit
protection, to make payments to a buyer upon the
occurrence of a predefined credit event. Such
credit events generally include bankruptcy of the
referenced credit entity and failure to pay under
the obligation, as well as acceleration of
indebtedness and payment repudiation or
moratorium. For credit derivatives based on a
portfolio of referenced credits or credit
indices, the Corporation may not be required to
make payment until a specified amount of loss has
 Bank of America108 
occurred and/or may only be required to make payment up to a specified amount. Credit derivatives are
classified as investment and non-investment grade based on the credit quality of the underlying
referenced obligation. The Corporation considers ratings of BBB- or higher as investment grade. Non-
investment grade includes non-rated credit derivative instruments. The Corporation discloses internal
categorizations of investment grade and non-investment grade consistent with how risk is managed for
these instruments. Credit derivative instruments where the Corporation is the seller of credit
protection and their expiration at December 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized in the table below.
 Less than 
 Credit One Year 
 Derivative December 31, One to Three to Over Five 
 Instruments 2021 Three Years Five Years Years Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Dollars in Carrying 
 millions) Value 
 Credit 
 default 
 swaps: 
 Investment $ — $ 5 $ 79 $ 49 $ 133 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 34 250 453 769 1,506 
 grade 
 Total 34 255 532 818 1,639 
 Total return 
 swaps/optio… 
 Investment 35 388 — — 423 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 105 — 16 — 121 
 grade 
 Total 140 388 16 — 544 
 Total credit $ 174 $ 643 $ 548 $ 818 $ 2,183 
 derivatives 
 Credit-rela… 
 notes: 
 Investment $ — $ — $ 36 $ 412 $ 448 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 5 — 9 1,334 1,348 
 grade 
 Total 
 credit-rela… $ 5 $ — $ 45 $ 1,746 $ 1,796 
 notes 
 Maximum 
 Payout/Notio… 
 Credit 
 default 
 swaps: 
 Investment $ 34,503 $ 66,334 $ 73,444 $ 17,844 $ 192,125 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 16,119 29,233 34,356 7,961 87,669 
 grade 
 Total 50,622 95,567 107,800 25,805 279,794 
 Total return 
 swaps/optio… 
 Investment 49,626 11,494 78 — 61,198 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 22,621 717 642 73 24,053 
 grade 
 Total 72,247 12,211 720 73 85,251 
 Total credit $ 122,869 $ 107,778 $ 108,520 $ 25,878 $ 365,045 
 derivatives 
 December 31, 
 2020 
 Carrying 
 Value 
 Credit 
 default 
 swaps: 
 Investment $ — $ 1 $ 35 $ 94 $ 130 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 26 233 364 1,163 1,786 
 grade 
 Total 26 234 399 1,257 1,916 
 Total return 
 swaps/optio… 
 Investment 21 4 — — 25 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 345 — — — 345 
 grade 
 Total 366 4 — — 370 
 Total credit $ 392 $ 238 $ 399 $ 1,257 $ 2,286 
 derivatives 
 Credit-rela… 
 notes: 
 Investment $ — $ — $ — $ 572 $ 572 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 64 2 10 947 1,023 
 grade 
 Total 
 credit-rela… $ 64 $ 2 $ 10 $ 1,519 $ 1,595 
 notes 
 Maximum 
 Payout/Notio… 
 Credit 
 default 
 swaps: 
 Investment $ 33,474 $ 75,731 $ 87,218 $ 16,822 $ 213,245 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 13,664 28,770 35,978 9,852 88,264 
 grade 
 Total 47,138 104,501 123,196 26,674 301,509 
 Total return 
 swaps/optio… 
 Investment 30,961 1,061 77 — 32,099 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 36,128 364 27 5 36,524 
 grade 
 Total 67,089 1,425 104 5 68,623 
 Total credit $ 114,227 $ 105,926 $ 123,300 $ 26,679 $ 370,132 
 derivatives 
The notional amount represents the maximum amount payable by the Corporation for most credit
derivatives. However, the Corporation does not monitor its exposure to credit derivatives based
solely on the notional amount because this measure does not take into consideration the probability
of occurrence. As such, the notional amount is not a reliable indicator of the Corporation’s exposure
to these contracts. Instead, a risk framework is used to define risk tolerances and establish limits
so that certain credit risk-related losses occur within acceptable, predefined limits. Credit-related
notes in the table above include investments in securities issued by CDO, collateralized loan
obligation (CLO)
 109Bank of America 
and credit-linked note vehicles. These
instruments are primarily classified as trading
securities. The carrying value of these
instruments equals the Corporation’s maximum
exposure to loss. The Corporation is not
obligated to make any payments to the entities
under the terms of the securities owned. Credit-
related Contingent Features and Collateral The
Corporation executes the majority of its
derivative contracts in the OTC market with
large, international financial institutions,
including broker-dealers and, to a lesser degree,
with a variety of non-financial companies. A
significant majority of the derivative
transactions are executed on a daily margin
basis. Therefore, events such as a credit rating
downgrade (depending on the ultimate rating
level) or a breach of credit covenants would
typically require an increase in the amount of
collateral required of the counterparty, where
applicable, and/or allow the Corporation to take
additional protective measures such as early
termination of all trades. Further, as previously
discussed on page 105, the Corporation enters
into legally enforceable master netting
agreements that reduce risk by permitting
closeout and netting of transactions with the
same counterparty upon the occurrence of certain
events. Certain of the Corporation’s derivative
contracts contain credit risk-related contingent
features, primarily in the form of ISDA master
netting agreements and credit support
documentation that enhance the creditworthiness
of these instruments compared to other
obligations of the respective counterparty with
whom the Corporation has transacted. These
contingent features may be for the benefit of the
Corporation as well as its counterparties with
respect to changes in the Corporation’s
creditworthiness and the mark-to-market exposure
under the derivative transactions. At December
31, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation held cash and
securities collateral of $ 91.4billion and $
96.5billion and posted cash and securities
collateral of $ 79.3billion and $ 88.6billion in
the normal course of business under derivative
agreements, excluding cross-product margining
agreements where clients are permitted to margin
on a net basis for both derivative and secured
financing arrangements. In connection with
certain OTC derivative contracts and other
trading agreements, the Corporation can be
required to provide additional collateral or to
terminate transactions with certain
counterparties in the event of a downgrade of the
senior debt ratings of the Corporation or certain
subsidiaries. The amount of additional collateral
required depends on the contract and is usually a
fixed incremental amount and/or the market value
of the exposure. At December 31, 2021, the amount
of collateral, calculated based on the terms of
the contracts, that the Corporation and certain
subsidiaries could be required to post to
counterparties but had not yet posted to
counterparties was $ 2.3billion, including $
1.4billion for Bank of America, National
Association (BANA). Some counterparties are
currently able to unilaterally terminate certain
contracts, or the Corporation or certain
subsidiaries may be required to take other action
such as find a suitable replacement or obtain a
guarantee. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the
liability recorded for these derivative contracts
was not significant. The following table presents
the amount of additional collateral that would
have been contractually required by
derivative contracts and other trading agreements at December 31, 2021 if the rating agencies had
downgraded their long-term senior debt ratings for the Corporation or certain subsidiaries by one
incremental notch and by an additional second incremental notch. The table also presents derivative
liabilities that would be subject to unilateral termination by counterparties upon downgrade of the
Corporation's or certain subsidiaries' long-term senior debt ratings.
 Additional Collateral Required to be Posted and Derivative 
 Liabilities Subject to Unilateral Termination Upon Downgrade 
 at December 31, 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 One Second 
 (Dollars in millions) incremental incremental 
 notch notch 
 Additional collateral required to be 
 posted upon downgrade 
 Bank of America Corporation $ 316 $ 823 
 Bank of America, N.A. and 75 646 
 subsidiaries(1) 
 Derivative liabilities subject to 
 unilateral termination upon downgrade 
 Derivative liabilities $ 32 $ 994 
 Collateral posted 25 634 
(1) Included in Bank of America Corporation collateral requirements in this table.
Valuation Adjustments on Derivatives The
Corporation records credit risk valuation
adjustments on derivatives in order to properly
reflect the credit quality of the counterparties
and its own credit quality. The Corporation
calculates valuation adjustments on derivatives
based on a modeled expected exposure that
incorporates current market risk factors. The
exposure also takes into consideration credit
mitigants such as enforceable master netting
agreements and collateral. CDS spread data is
used to estimate the default probabilities and
severities that are applied to the exposures.
Where no observable credit default data is
available for counterparties, the Corporation
uses proxies and other market data to estimate
default probabilities and severity.
The table below presents credit valuation adjustment (CVA), DVA and FVA gains (losses) on derivatives
(excluding the effect of any related hedge activities), which are recorded in market making and
similar activities, for 2021, 2020 and 2019. CVA gains reduce the cumulative CVA thereby increasing
the derivative assets balance. DVA gains increase the cumulative DVA thereby decreasing the
derivative liabilities balance. CVA and DVA losses have the opposite impact. FVA gains related to
derivative assets reduce the cumulative FVA thereby increasing the derivative assets balance. FVA
gains related to derivative liabilities increase the cumulative FVA thereby decreasing the derivative
liabilities balance. FVA losses have the opposite impact.
 Valuation Adjustments Gains (Losses) on Derivatives(1) 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 2019 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Derivative assets (CVA) $ 208 $ -118 $ 72 
 Derivative assets/liabilities (FVA) -2 -24 -2 
 Derivative liabilities (DVA) 3 24 -147 
(1) At December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, cumulative CVA reduced the derivative assets balance by $
438million, $ 646million, and $ 528million cumulative FVA reduced the net derivatives balance by $
179million, $ 177million and $ 153million, and cumulative DVA reduced the derivative liabilities
balance by $ 312million, $ 309million and $ 285million, respectively.
 Bank of America110 
 NOTE 4 
 Securities 
The table below presents the amortized cost, gross unrealized gains and losses, and fair value of AFS
debt securities, other debt securities carried at fair value and HTM debt securities at December 31,
2021 and 2020.
 Debt Amor… Amor… 
 Sec… Cost Cost 
 (Do… Dece… Gross Gross Dece… Gro… Gross 
 in 31, Unre… Unre… Fair 31, Unr… Unre… Fair 
 mil… 2021 Gains Loss… Val… 2020 Gai… Loss… Val… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Ava… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 Mor… 
 sec… 
 Age… $ 45,2… $ 1,257 $ -186 $ 46,… $ 59,5… $ 2,3… $ -39 $ 61,… 
 Age… 
 mor… 3,331 74 -25 3,3… 5,112 161 -13 5,2… 
 obl… 
 Com… 19,0… 647 -79 19,… 15,4… 1,0… -4 16,… 
 Non… 591 25 -33 583 899 127 -17 1,0… 
 res… 
 Tot… 
 mor… 68,2… 2,003 -323 69,… 80,9… 3,6… -73 84,… 
 sec… 
 U.S. 
 Tre… 
 and 197,… 1,610 -318 199… 114,… 2,2… -13 116… 
 gov… 
 age… 
 Non… 11,9… — — 11,… 14,0… 15 -7 14,… 
 sec… 
 Oth… 
 tax… 2,725 39 -3 2,7… 2,656 61 -6 2,7… 
 sec… 
 Tax… 15,1… 317 -39 15,… 16,4… 389 -32 16,… 
 sec… 
 Tot… 
 ava… 295,… 3,969 -683 299… 228,… 6,3… -131 234… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 Oth… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 car… 8,873 105 -83 8,8… 11,7… 429 -39 12,… 
 at 
 fair 
 val… 
 Tot… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 car… 304,… 4,074 -766 308… 239,… 6,8… -170 246… 
 at 
 fair 
 val… 
 Hel… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 Age… 
 mor… 553,… 3,855 -10,… 547… 414,… 9,7… -36 424… 
 sec… 
 U.S. 
 Tre… 
 and 111,… 254 -2,3… 109… 16,0… — -71 16,… 
 gov… 
 age… 
 Oth… 
 tax… 9,011 147 -196 8,9… 7,906 327 -87 8,1… 
 sec… 
 Tot… 
 hel… 674,… 4,256 -12,… 665… 438,… 10,… -194 448… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 Tot… 
 debt $ 979,… $ 8,330 $ -13,… $ 973… $ 678,… $ 16,… $ -364 $ 694… 
 sec… 
(1) At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the underlying collateral type included approximately 21percent
and 37percent prime, 0 percentand 2percent Alt-A and 79percent and 61percent subprime.
(2) Primarily includes non-U.S. securities used to satisfy certain international regulatory
requirements. Any changes in value are reported in market making and similar activities. For detail
on the components, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements .
(3) Includes securities pledged as collateral of $ 111.9billion and $ 65.5billion at December 31,
2021 and 2020.
(4) The Corporation held debt securities from FNMA and FHLMC that each exceeded 10 percent of
shareholders’ equity, with an amortized cost of $ 345.3billion and $ 205.3billion, and a fair value
of $ 342.5billion and $ 202.4billion at December 31, 2021, and an amortized cost of $ 260.1billion
and $ 118.1billion, and a fair value of $ 267.5billion and $ 120.7billion at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2021, the accumulated net
unrealized gain on AFS debt securities, excluding
the amount related to debt securities previously
transferred to held to maturity, included in
accumulated OCI was $ 2.5billion, net of the
related income tax expense of $ 817million. At
December 31, 2021 and 2020, nonperforming AFS
debt securities held by the Corporation were
insignificant. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the
Corporation had $ 268.5billion and $ 200.0billion
in AFS debt securities, which were primarily U.S.
agency and U.S. Treasury securities that have a
zero credit loss assumption. For the remaining $
30.7billion and $ 34.5billion in AFS debt
securities at December 31, 2021 and 2020, the
amount of ECL was insignificant. Substantially
all of the Corporation's HTM debt securities
consist of U.S. agency and U.S. Treasury
securities and have a zero credit loss
assumption. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the
Corporation held equity securities at an
aggregate fair value of $ 513million and $
769million and other equity securities, as valued
under the
measurement alternative, at a carrying value of $
266million and $ 240million, both of which are
included in other assets. At December 31, 2021
and 2020, the Corporation also held money market
investments at a fair value of $ 707million and $
1.6billion, which are included in time deposits
placed and other short-term investments.
The gross realized gains and losses on sales of
AFS debt securities for 2021, 2020 and 2019 are
presented in the table below.
 Gains and Losses on Sales of AFS Debt Securities 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gross gains $ 49 $ 423 $ 336 
 Gross losses -27 -12 -119 
 Net gains on sales of AFS debt $ 22 $ 411 $ 217 
 securities 
 Income tax expense attributable to 
 realized net gains on sales of AFS debt $ 5 $ 103 $ 54 
 securities 
 111Bank of America 
The table below presents the fair value and the associated gross unrealized losses on AFS debt
securities and whether these securities have had gross unrealized losses for less than 12 months or
for 12 months or longer at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 Total 
 AFS 
 Debt 
 Securi… 
 in a 
 Contin… 
 Unreal… 
 Loss 
 Positi… 
 (Dolla… 
 in 
 millio… 
 Contin… Less 
 unreal… than 
 loss-p… Twelve Twelve 
 AFS Months Months 
 debt Fair or 
 securi… Value Gross Longer Gross Total Gross 
 Mortga… December Unreali… Fair Unreali… Fair Unrealiz… 
 securi… 31, 2021 Losses Value Losses Value Losses 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Agency $ 11,733 $ -166 $ 815 $ -20 $ 12,548 $ -186 
 Agency… 
 mortga… 1,427 -22 122 -3 1,549 -25 
 obliga… 
 Commer… 3,451 -41 776 -38 4,227 -79 
 Non-ag… 241 -13 174 -20 415 -33 
 reside… 
 Total 
 mortga… 16,852 -242 1,887 -81 18,739 -323 
 securi… 
 U.S. 
 Treasu… 
 and 103,307 -272 4,850 -46 108,157 -318 
 govern… 
 agenci… 
 Other 
 taxable — — 82 -3 82 -3 
 securi… 
 Tax-ex… 502 -16 109 -23 611 -39 
 securi… 
 Total 
 AFS 
 debt 
 securi… 
 in a $ 120,661 $ -530 $ 6,928 $ -153 $ 127,589 $ -683 
 contin… 
 unreal… 
 loss 
 positi… 
 December 
 31, 2020 
 Contin… 
 unreal… 
 loss-p… 
 AFS 
 debt 
 securi… 
 Mortga… 
 securi… 
 Agency $ 2,841 $ -39 $ 2 $ — $ 2,843 $ -39 
 Agency… 
 mortga… 187 -2 364 -11 551 -13 
 obliga… 
 Commer… 566 -4 9 — 575 -4 
 Non-ag… 342 -9 56 -8 398 -17 
 reside… 
 Total 
 mortga… 3,936 -54 431 -19 4,367 -73 
 securi… 
 U.S. 
 Treasu… 
 and 8,282 -9 498 -4 8,780 -13 
 govern… 
 agenci… 
 Non-U.… 1,861 -6 135 -1 1,996 -7 
 securi… 
 Other 
 taxable 576 -2 396 -4 972 -6 
 securi… 
 Tax-ex… 4,108 -29 617 -3 4,725 -32 
 securi… 
 Total 
 AFS 
 debt 
 securi… 
 in a $ 18,763 $ -100 $ 2,077 $ -31 $ 20,840 $ -131 
 contin… 
 unreal… 
 loss 
 positi… 
 Bank of America112 
The remaining contractual maturity distribution and yields of the Corporation’s debt securities
carried at fair value and HTM debt securities at December 31, 2021 are summarized in the table below.
Actual duration and yields may differ as prepayments on the loans underlying the MBS or other ABS are
passed through to the Corporation.
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … D… D… 
 … D… a… a… 
 … in O… F… 
 … O… Y… Y… D… 
 … Y… t… t… a… 
 … or F… T… T… 
 … L… Y… Y… Y… T… 
 … A… Y… A… Y… A… Y… A… … A… … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … $ — — % $ 5 5… % $ 49 4… % $ 4… … % $ 4… … % 
 … 
 … — — — — 20 2… 3… … 3… … 
 … 
 … 3… 2… 1… 2… 6… 1… 2… … 1… … 
 … — — — — — — 1… … 1… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 3… 2… 1… 2… 6… 1… 5… … 6… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 6… 1… 3… 1… 1… 1… 27 … 1… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… 0… 1… 3… — — 7 … 1… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 5… 1… 1… 1… 3… 2… 2… … 2… … 
 … 
 … 2… 1… 6… 1… 3… 1… 3… … 1… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 2… 0… $ 5… 1… $ 1… 1… $ 5… … $ 3… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ — — % $ — — % $ 4 2… % $ 5… … % $ 5… … % 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — — — 1… 1… — — 1… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 37 5… 1… 2… 4… 2… 7… … 9… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 37 5… $ 1… 2… $ 1… 1… $ 5… … $ 6… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ — $ 5 $ 53 $ 4… $ 4… 
 … 
 … — — 20 3… 3… 
 … 
 … 3… 1… 6… 2… 1… 
 … — 4 — 1… 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 3… 1… 6… 5… 7… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 6… 4… 1… 26 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… 1… — 7 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 5… 1… 3… 2… 2… 
 … 
 … 2… 6… 3… 3… 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 2… $ 6… $ 1… $ 5… $ 3… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ — $ — $ 4 $ 5… $ 5… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — 1… — 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 37 1… 4… 7… 8… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 37 $ 1… $ 1… $ 5… $ 6… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
(1) The weighted-average yield is computed based on a constant effective interest rate over the
contractual life of each security. The average yield considers the contractual coupon and the
amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts, excluding the effect of related hedging
derivatives.
 113Bank of America 
NOTE 5 Outstanding Loans and Leases and Allowance for Credit Losses
The following tables present total outstanding loans and leases and an aging analysis for the
Consumer Real Estate, Credit Card and Other Consumer, and Commercial portfolio segments, by class of
financing receivables, at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 Tot… 
 Cur… Lo… 
 30-… To… or Ac… 
 Days Pa… Less for 
 Past 90 Due Than Un… 
 Due… 60… Days 30 30 the 
 (… Dec… Da… orM… Da… Days Fa… 
 in 31, Pa… Past or Past Va… Tot… 
 m… 2021 Du… Due… Mo… Due… Op… Out… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 C… 
 r… 
 e… 
 R… $ 1,0… $ 297 $ 1,5… $ 2,… $ 219… $ 221… 
 m… 
 H… 123 69 369 561 27,… 27,… 
 e… 
 C… 
 c… 
 a… 
 o… 
 c… 
 C… 298 212 487 997 80,… 81,… 
 c… 
 D… 147 52 18 217 103… 103… 
 c… 
 O… — — — — 190 190 
 c… 
 T… 1,5… 630 2,4… 4,… 430… 435… 
 c… 
 C… 
 l… 
 a… 
 f… 
 u… $ 618 618 
 t… 
 f… 
 v… 
 o… 
 T… 
 c… 
 l… 1,5… 630 2,4… 4,… 430… 618 435… 
 a… 
 l… 
 C… 
 U… 815 308 396 1,… 324… 325… 
 c… 
 N… 148 20 83 251 113… 113… 
 c… 
 C… 
 r… 115 34 285 434 62,… 63,… 
 e… 
 C… 
 l… 104 28 13 145 14,… 14,… 
 f… 
 U… 
 s… 129 259 89 477 18,… 19,… 
 b… 
 c… 
 T… 1,3… 649 866 2,… 533… 536… 
 c… 
 C… 
 l… 
 a… 
 f… 
 u… 7,… 7,2… 
 t… 
 f… 
 v… 
 o… 
 T… 
 c… 
 l… 1,3… 649 866 2,… 533… 7,… 543… 
 a… 
 l… 
 T… 
 l… $ 2,8… $ 1,… $ 3,3… $ 7,… $ 963… $ 7,… $ 979… 
 a… 
 l… 
 P… 
 of 0.29 % 0.… % 0.34 % 0.… % 98.… % 0.… % 100… % 
 o… 
(1) Consumer real estate loans 30-59 days past due includes fully-insured loans of $ 164million and
nonperforming loans of $ 118million. Consumer real estate loans 60-89 days past due includes fully-
insured loans of $ 89million and nonperforming loans of $ 100million. Consumer real estate loans 90
days or more past due includes fully-insured loans of $ 633million. Consumer real estate loans
current or less than 30 days past due includes $ 1.4billion and direct/indirect consumer includes $
55million of nonperforming loans. For information on the Corporation's interest accrual policies and
delinquency status for loan modifications related to the pandemic, see Note 1 – Summary of
Significant Accounting Principles .
(2) Total outstandings primarily includes auto and specialty lending loans and leases of $
48.5billion, U.S. securities-based lending loans of $ 51.1billion and non-U.S. consumer loans of $
3.0billion.
(3) Consumer loans accounted for under the fair value option includes residential mortgage loans of $
279million and home equity loans of $ 339million. Commercial loans accounted for under the fair value
option includes U.S. commercial loans of $ 4.6billion and non-U.S. commercial loans of $ 2.6billion.
For more information, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements and Note 21 – Fair Value Option .
(4) Total outstandings includes U.S. commercial real estate loans of $ 58.2billion and non-U.S.
commercial real estate loans of $ 4.8billion.
(5) Includes Paycheck Protection Program loans.
(6) Total outstandings includes loans and leases pledged as collateral of $ 13.0billion. The
Corporation also pledged $ 146.6billion of loans with no related outstanding borrowings to secure
potential borrowing capacity with the Federal Reserve Bank and Federal Home Loan Bank.
 Bank of America114 
 Tot… 
 Cur… Lo… 
 To… or Ac… 
 30-… Pa… Less for 
 Day… Due Than Un… 
 Due… 60… 90 30 30 the 
 (… Dec… Da… Days Da… Days Fa… 
 in 31, Pa… orM… or Past Va… Tot… 
 m… 2020 Du… Due… Mo… Due… Op… Out… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 C… 
 r… 
 e… 
 R… $ 1,4… $ 297 $ 1,6… $ 3,… $ 220… $ 223… 
 m… 
 H… 154 78 345 577 33,… 34,… 
 e… 
 C… 
 c… 
 a… 
 o… 
 c… 
 C… 445 341 903 1,… 77,… 78,… 
 c… 
 D… 209 67 37 313 91,… 91,… 
 c… 
 O… — — — — 124 124 
 c… 
 T… 2,2… 783 2,9… 6,… 422… 428… 
 c… 
 C… 
 l… 
 a… 
 f… 
 u… $ 735 735 
 t… 
 f… 
 v… 
 o… 
 T… 
 c… 
 l… 2,2… 783 2,9… 6,… 422… 735 428… 
 a… 
 l… 
 C… 
 U… 561 214 512 1,… 287… 288… 
 c… 
 N… 61 44 11 116 90,… 90,… 
 c… 
 C… 
 r… 128 113 226 467 59,… 60,… 
 e… 
 C… 
 l… 86 20 57 163 16,… 17,… 
 f… 
 U… 
 s… 84 56 123 263 36,… 36,… 
 b… 
 c… 
 T… 920 447 929 2,… 490… 493… 
 c… 
 C… 
 l… 
 a… 
 f… 
 u… 5,… 5,9… 
 t… 
 f… 
 v… 
 o… 
 T… 
 c… 
 l… 920 447 929 2,… 490… 5,… 499… 
 a… 
 l… 
 T… 
 l… $ 3,1… $ 1,… $ 3,9… $ 8,… $ 912… $ 6,… $ 927… 
 a… 
 l… 
 P… 
 of 0.34 % 0.… % 0.42 % 0.… % 98.… % 0.… % 100… % 
 o… 
(1) Consumer real estate loans 30-59 days past due includes fully-insured loans of $ 225million and
nonperforming loans of $ 126million. Consumer real estate loans 60-89 days past due includes fully-
insured loans of $ 103million and nonperforming loans of $ 95million. Consumer real estate loans 90
days or more past due includes fully-insured loans of $ 762million. Consumer real estate loans
current or less than 30 days past due includes $ 1.2billion and direct/indirect consumer includes $
66million of nonperforming loans. For information on the Corporation's interest accrual policies and
delinquency status for loan modifications related to the pandemic, see Note 1 – Summary of
Significant Accounting Principles.
(2) Total outstandings primarily includes auto and specialty lending loans and leases of $
46.4billion, U.S. securities-based lending loans of $ 41.1billion and non-U.S. consumer loans of $
3.0billion.
(3) Consumer loans accounted for under the fair value option includes residential mortgage loans of $
298million and home equity loans of $ 437million. Commercial loans accounted for under the fair value
option includes U.S. commercial loans of $ 2.9billion and non-U.S. commercial loans of $ 3.0billion.
For more information, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements and Note 21 – Fair Value Option .
(4) Total outstandings includes U.S. commercial real estate loans of $ 57.2billion and non-U.S.
commercial real estate loans of $ 3.2billion.
(5) Includes Paycheck Protection Program loans.
(6) Total outstandings includes loans and leases pledged as collateral of $ 15.5billion. The
Corporation also pledged $ 153.1billion of loans with no related outstanding borrowings to secure
potential borrowing capacity with the Federal Reserve Bank and Federal Home Loan Bank.
The Corporation has entered into long-term credit protection agreements with FNMA and FHLMC on loans
totaling $ 10.5billion and $ 9.0billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, providing full credit
protection on residential mortgage loans that become severely delinquent. All of these loans are
individually insured, and therefore the Corporation does not record an allowance for credit losses
related to these loans. Nonperforming Loans and Leases Commercial nonperforming loans decreased to $
1.6billion at December 31, 2021 from $ 2.2billion at December 31, 2020. Consumer nonperforming loans
increased to $ 3.0billion at December 31, 2021 from $ 2.7billion at December 31, 2020 driven by
consumer real estate deferral activity. The following table presents the Corporation’s nonperforming
loans and leases including nonperforming TDRs, and loans accruing past due 90days or more at December
31, 2021 and 2020. Nonperforming LHFS are excluded from nonperforming loans and leases as they are
recorded at either fair value or the lower of cost or fair value. For more information on the
criteria for classification as nonperforming, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles.
 115Bank of America 
 Credit Quality 
 Nonperforming Accruing Past 
 Loans Due 
 and Leases 90 Days or 
 More(1) 
 December 31 
 (Dollars in 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 millions) 
 Residential $ 2,284 $ 2,005 $ 634 $ 762 
 mortgage(2) 
 With no related 1,950 1,378 — — 
 allowance(3) 
 Home equity(2) 630 649 — — 
 With no related 414 347 — — 
 allowance(3) 
 Credit Card n/a n/a 487 903 
 Direct/indirect 75 71 11 33 
 consumer 
 Total consumer 2,989 2,725 1,132 1,698 
 U.S. commercial 825 1,243 171 228 
 Non-U.S. 268 418 19 10 
 commercial 
 Commercial real 382 404 40 6 
 estate 
 Commercial 80 87 8 25 
 lease financing 
 U.S. small 
 business 23 75 87 115 
 commercial 
 Total 1,578 2,227 325 384 
 commercial 
 Total 
 nonperforming $ 4,567 $ 4,952 $ 1,457 $ 2,082 
 loans 
 Percentage of 
 outstanding 0.47 % 0.54 % 0.15 % 0.23 % 
 loans and 
 leases 
(1) For information on the Corporation's interest accrual policies and delinquency status for loan
modifications related to the pandemic, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles..
(2) Residential mortgage loans accruing past due 90 days or more are fully-insured loans. At December
31, 2021 and 2020 residential mortgage includes $ 444million and $ 537million of loans on which
interest had been curtailed by the FHA, and therefore were no longer accruing interest, although
principal was still insured, and $ 190million and $ 225million of loans on which interest was still
accruing.
(3) Primarily relates to loans for which the estimated fair value of the underlying collateral less
any costs to sell is greater than the amortized cost of the loans as of the reporting date.
n/a = not applicable
Credit Quality Indicators The Corporation monitors credit quality within its Consumer Real Estate,
Credit Card and Other Consumer, and Commercial portfolio segments based on primary credit quality
indicators. For more information on the portfolio segments, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant
Accounting Principles . Within the Consumer Real Estate portfolio segment, the primary credit quality
indicators are refreshed LTV and refreshed Fair Isaac Corporation (FICO) score. Refreshed LTV
measures the carrying value of the loan as a percentage of the value of the property securing the
loan, refreshed quarterly. Home equity loans are evaluated using combined loan-to-value (CLTV), which
measures the carrying value of the Corporation’s loan and available line of credit combined with any
outstanding senior liens against the property as a percentage of the value of the property securing
the loan, refreshed quarterly. FICO score measures the creditworthiness of the borrower based on the
financial obligations of the borrower and the borrower’s credit history. FICO scores are typically
refreshed quarterly or more frequently. Certain borrowers (e.g., borrowers that have had debts
discharged in a bankruptcy proceeding) may not have their FICO scores updated. FICO scores are also a
primary credit quality indicator for the Credit Card and Other Consumer portfolio segment and the
business card portfolio within U.S. small business commercial. Within the Commercial portfolio
segment, loans are evaluated using the internal classifications of pass rated or reservable
criticized as the primary credit quality indicators. The term reservable criticized refers to those
commercial loans that are internally classified or listed by the Corporation as Special Mention,
Substandard or Doubtful, which are asset quality categories defined by regulatory authorities. These
assets have an elevated level of risk and may have a high probability of default or total loss. Pass
rated refers to all loans not considered reservable criticized. In addition to these primary credit
quality indicators, the Corporation uses other credit quality indicators for certain types of loans.
The following tables present certain credit quality indicators for the Corporation's Consumer Real
Estate, Credit Card and Other Consumer, and Commercial portfolio segments by class of financing
receivables and year of origination for term loan balances at December 31, 2021, including revolving
loans that converted to term loans without an additional credit decision after origination or through
a TDR.
 Bank of America116 
 Resid… 
 Mortg… 
 – 
 Credit 
 Quali… 
 Indic… Term 
 By Total Loans 
 Vinta… as of by 
 (Doll… Decem… Origin… 
 in 31, Year 
 milli… 2021 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 Prior 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total 
 Resid… 
 Mortg… 
 Refre… 
 LTV 
 Less 
 than 
 or $ 206,5… $ 87,051 $ 43,597 $ 23,205 $ 7,392 $ 10,956 $ 34,361 
 equal 
 to 90  
 perce… 
 Great… 
 than 
 90 
 perce… 
 but 
 less 1,938 1,401 331 81 17 14 94 
 than 
 or 
 equal 
 to 100 
 perce… 
 Great… 
 than 759 520 112 29 11 12 75 
 100  
 perce… 
 Fully… 12,704 3,845 3,486 1,150 216 235 3,772 
 loans 
 Total 
 Resid… $ 221,9… $ 92,817 $ 47,526 $ 24,465 $ 7,636 $ 11,217 $ 38,302 
 Mortg… 
 Total 
 Resid… 
 Mortg… 
 Refre… 
 FICO 
 score 
 Less 
 than $ 2,451 $ 636 $ 442 $ 140 $ 120 $ 104 $ 1,009 
 620 
 Great… 
 than 
 or 
 equal 
 to 620 5,199 1,511 1,123 477 294 307 1,487 
 and 
 less 
 than 
 680 
 Great… 
 than 
 or 
 equal 
 to 680 24,532 8,822 5,454 2,785 1,057 1,434 4,980 
 and 
 less 
 than 
 740 
 Great… 
 than 
 or 177,0… 78,003 37,021 19,913 5,949 9,137 27,054 
 equal 
 to 740 
 Fully… 12,704 3,845 3,486 1,150 216 235 3,772 
 loans 
 Total 
 Resid… $ 221,9… $ 92,817 $ 47,526 $ 24,465 $ 7,636 $ 11,217 $ 38,302 
 Mortg… 
 Home Equity - 
 Credit 
 Quality Home Equity Revolving 
 Indicators Total Loans and Loans 
 (Dollars in December 31, Reverse Revolving Converted 
 millions) 2021 Mortgages(1) Loans to Term Loans 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total Home 
 Equity 
 Refreshed LTV 
 Less than or 
 equal to 90  $ 27,594 $ 1,773 $ 19,095 $ 6,726 
 percent 
 Greater than 
 90 percent 
 but less than 130 55 34 41 
 or 
 equal to 100 
 percent 
 Greater than 211 85 54 72 
 100 percent 
 Total Home $ 27,935 $ 1,913 $ 19,183 $ 6,839 
 Equity 
 Total Home 
 Equity 
 Refreshed 
 FICO score 
 Less than 620 $ 893 $ 244 $ 209 $ 440 
 Greater than 
 or equal to 1,434 222 495 717 
 620 and less 
 than 680 
 Greater than 
 or equal to 4,625 468 2,493 1,664 
 680 and less 
 than 740 
 Greater than 
 or equal to 20,983 979 15,986 4,018 
 740 
 Total Home $ 27,935 $ 1,913 $ 19,183 $ 6,839 
 Equity 
(1) Includes reverse mortgages of $ 1.3billion and home equity loans of $ 582million which are no
longer originated.
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 – 
 … 
 … C… 
 … D… C… 
 … T… T… 
 … D… C… 
 … I… T… C… R… 
 … as L… as L… 
 … of by of C… 
 … D… O… D… to 
 … 3… R… Y… 3… … T… 
 … 2… L… 2… 2… 2… … 2… … 2… … L… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … $ 6… $ 13 $ 1… $ 1… $ 1… $ … $ 1… $ … $ 3… $ … $ 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… 14 1… 4… 3… … 1… … 9… … 2… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 8… 60 4… 1… 1… … 3… … 2… … 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 3… 94 1… 8… 6… … 1… … 4… … 48 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 5… 5… 2… 53 77 … 63 … — — — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 1… $ 5… $ 2… $ 1… $ 8… $ … $ 2… $ … $ 8… $ … $ 6… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
(1) Represents TDRs that were modified into term loans.
(2) Other internal credit metrics may include delinquency status, geography or other factors.
(3) Direct/indirect consumer includes $ 54.2billion of securities-based lending which is typically
supported by highly liquid collateral with market value greater than or equal to the outstanding loan
balance and therefore has minimal credit risk at December 31, 2021.
 117Bank of America 
 Com… 
 – 
 Cre… 
 Qua… 
 Ind… 
 By 
 Vin… Term 
 2) Loans 
 (Do… Amor… 
 in Cost 
 mil… Total Basis 
 U.S. as of by 
 Com… Dece… Orig… 
 Risk 31, Year Revo… 
 rat… 2021 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 Pri… Loans 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Pass $ 315,… $ 55,8… $ 25,… $ 23,3… $ 11,… $ 10,4… $ 23,… $ 165,… 
 rat… 
 Res… 10,3… 598 687 1,308 1,6… 514 1,0… 4,524 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 U.S. $ 325,… $ 56,4… $ 25,… $ 24,6… $ 13,… $ 10,9… $ 24,… $ 170,… 
 Com… 
 Non… 
 Com… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 110,… $ 25,7… $ 8,7… $ 7,133 $ 4,5… $ 3,016 $ 3,0… $ 58,6… 
 rat… 
 Res… 2,479 223 324 487 275 257 216 697 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 Non… $ 113,… $ 25,9… $ 9,0… $ 7,620 $ 4,7… $ 3,273 $ 3,2… $ 59,3… 
 Com… 
 Com… 
 Real 
 Est… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 55,5… $ 14,4… $ 7,2… $ 11,2… $ 5,7… $ 3,326 $ 6,8… $ 6,761 
 rat… 
 Res… 7,498 277 990 2,237 1,7… 596 1,4… 224 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 Com… $ 63,0… $ 14,6… $ 8,2… $ 13,4… $ 7,4… $ 3,922 $ 8,2… $ 6,985 
 Real 
 Est… 
 Com… 
 Lea… 
 Fin… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 14,4… $ 3,280 $ 2,4… $ 2,427 $ 2,0… $ 1,741 $ 2,4… $ — 
 rat… 
 Res… 387 25 18 91 67 48 138 — 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 Com… $ 14,8… $ 3,305 $ 2,5… $ 2,518 $ 2,0… $ 1,789 $ 2,6… $ — 
 Lea… 
 Fin… 
 U.S. 
 Sma… 
 Bus… 
 Com… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 11,6… $ 4,257 $ 2,9… $ 1,059 $ 763 $ 623 $ 1,8… $ 141 
 rat… 
 Res… 433 12 29 91 87 64 147 3 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 U.S. 
 Sma… $ 12,0… $ 4,269 $ 2,9… $ 1,150 $ 850 $ 687 $ 2,0… $ 144 
 Bus… 
 Com… 
 Tot… $ 529,… $ 104,… $ 48,… $ 49,4… $ 28,… $ 20,6… $ 41,… $ 236,… 
(1) Excludes $ 7.2billion of loans accounted for under the fair value option at December 31, 2021.
(2) Includes $ 16million of loans that converted from revolving to term loans.
(3) Excludes U.S. Small Business Card loans of $ 7.1billion. Refreshed FICO scores for this portfolio
are $ 192million for less than 620; $ 618million for greater than or equal to 620 and less than 680;
$ 1.9billion for greater than or equal to 680 and less than 740; and $ 4.4billion greater than or
equal to 740.
 Bank of America118 
The following tables present certain credit quality indicators for the Corporation's Consumer Real
Estate, Credit Card and Other Consumer, and Commercial portfolio segments by class of financing
receivables and year of origination for term loan balances at December 31, 2020, including revolving
loans that converted to term loans without an additional credit decision after origination or through
a TDR.
 Resi… 
 Mort… 
 – 
 Cred… 
 Qual… 
 Indi… Term 
 By Total Loans 
 Vint… as of by 
 (Dol… Decem… Origin… 
 in 31, Year 
 mill… 2020 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 Prior 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total 
 Resi… 
 Mort… 
 Refr… 
 LTV 
 Less 
 than 
 or $ 207,3… $ 68,907 $ 43,771 $ 14,658 $ 21,589 $ 22,967 $ 35,497 
 equal 
 to 90 
 perc… 
 Grea… 
 than 
 90 
 perc… 
 but 
 less 3,138 1,970 684 128 70 96 190 
 than 
 or 
 equal 
 to 
 100 
 perc… 
 Grea… 
 than 1,210 702 174 47 39 37 211 
 100  
 perc… 
 Full… 11,818 3,826 2,014 370 342 1,970 3,296 
 loans 
 Total 
 Resi… $ 223,5… $ 75,405 $ 46,643 $ 15,203 $ 22,040 $ 25,070 $ 39,194 
 Mort… 
 Total 
 Resi… 
 Mort… 
 Refr… 
 FICO 
 score 
 Less 
 than $ 2,717 $ 823 $ 177 $ 139 $ 170 $ 150 $ 1,258 
 620 
 Grea… 
 than 
 or 
 equal 
 to 5,462 1,804 666 468 385 368 1,771 
 620 
 and 
 less 
 than 
 680 
 Grea… 
 than 
 or 
 equal 
 to 25,349 8,533 4,679 1,972 2,427 2,307 5,431 
 680 
 and 
 less 
 than 
 740 
 Grea… 
 than 
 or 178,2… 60,419 39,107 12,254 18,716 20,275 27,438 
 equal 
 to 
 740 
 Full… 11,818 3,826 2,014 370 342 1,970 3,296 
 loans 
 Total 
 Resi… $ 223,5… $ 75,405 $ 46,643 $ 15,203 $ 22,040 $ 25,070 $ 39,194 
 Mort… 
 Home Equity 
 - Credit Revolving 
 Quality Home Equity Loans 
 Indicators Loans and Converted 
 (Dollars in December 31, Reverse Revolving to Term 
 millions) 2020 Total Mortgages(1) Loans Loans 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total Home 
 Equity 
 Refreshed 
 LTV 
 Less than 
 or equal to $ 33,447 $ 1,919 $ 22,639 $ 8,889 
 90 percent 
 Greater 
 than 90 
 percent but 
 less than 351 126 94 131 
 or 
 equal to 
 100 percent 
 Greater 
 than 100  513 172 118 223 
 percent 
 Total Home $ 34,311 $ 2,217 $ 22,851 $ 9,243 
 Equity 
 Total Home 
 Equity 
 Refreshed 
 FICO score 
 Less than $ 1,082 $ 250 $ 244 $ 588 
 620 
 Greater 
 than or 
 equal to 1,798 263 568 967 
 620 and 
 less 
 than 680 
 Greater 
 than or 
 equal to 5,762 556 2,905 2,301 
 680 and 
 less 
 than 740 
 Greater 
 than or 25,669 1,148 19,134 5,387 
 equal to 
 740 
 Total Home $ 34,311 $ 2,217 $ 22,851 $ 9,243 
 Equity 
(1) Includes reverse mortgages of $ 1.3billion and home equity loans of $ 885million which are no
longer originated.
 119Bank of America 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 – 
 … 
 … C… 
 … C… 
 … D… T… 
 … T… C… 
 … D… T… C… R… 
 … as L… as L… 
 … of by of C… 
 … D… O… D… to 
 … 3… R… Y… 3… … T… 
 … 2… L… 2… 2… 2… … 2… … 2… … L… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … $ 9… $ 19 $ 1… $ 2… $ 1… $ … $ 1… $ … $ 4… $ … $ 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… 20 6… 5… 3… … 1… … 9… … 2… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 7… 80 2… 2… 1… … 4… … 2… … 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 3… 1… 1… 1… 5… … 1… … 3… … 44 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 4… 4… 74 1… 84 … 52 … — — — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 9… $ 4… $ 1… $ 1… $ 7… $ … $ 2… $ … $ 7… $ … $ 6… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
(1) Represents TDRs that were modified into term loans.
(2) Other internal credit metrics may include delinquency status, geography or other factors.
(3) Direct/indirect consumer includes $ 44.1billion of securities-based lending which is typically
supported by highly liquid collateral with market value greater than or equal to the outstanding loan
balance and therefore has minimal credit risk at December 31, 2020.
 Com… 
 – 
 Cre… 
 Qua… 
 Ind… 
 By 
 Vin… Term 
 2) Loans 
 (Do… Amor… 
 in Cost 
 mil… Total Basis 
 U.S. as of by 
 Com… Dece… Orig… 
 Risk 31, Year Revo… 
 rat… 2020 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 Pri… Loans 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Pass $ 268,… $ 33,4… $ 33,… $ 17,3… $ 14,… $ 7,420 $ 21,… $ 141,… 
 rat… 
 Res… 19,9… 2,524 2,5… 2,689 854 698 1,4… 9,207 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 U.S. $ 288,… $ 35,9… $ 35,… $ 20,0… $ 14,… $ 8,118 $ 23,… $ 150,… 
 Com… 
 Non… 
 Com… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 85,9… $ 16,3… $ 11,… $ 7,451 $ 5,0… $ 1,674 $ 2,1… $ 41,8… 
 rat… 
 Res… 4,546 914 572 492 436 138 259 1,735 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 Non… $ 90,4… $ 17,2… $ 11,… $ 7,943 $ 5,4… $ 1,812 $ 2,4… $ 43,5… 
 Com… 
 Com… 
 Real 
 Est… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 50,2… $ 8,429 $ 14,… $ 8,228 $ 4,5… $ 3,299 $ 6,5… $ 5,037 
 rat… 
 Res… 10,1… 933 2,5… 2,115 1,5… 606 1,4… 874 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 Com… $ 60,3… $ 9,362 $ 16,… $ 10,3… $ 6,1… $ 3,905 $ 7,9… $ 5,911 
 Real 
 Est… 
 Com… 
 Lea… 
 Fin… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 16,3… $ 3,083 $ 3,2… $ 2,956 $ 2,5… $ 1,703 $ 2,8… $ — 
 rat… 
 Res… 714 117 117 132 81 88 179 — 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 Com… $ 17,0… $ 3,200 $ 3,3… $ 3,088 $ 2,6… $ 1,791 $ 3,0… $ — 
 Lea… 
 Fin… 
 U.S. 
 Sma… 
 Bus… 
 Com… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 28,7… $ 24,5… $ 1,1… $ 837 $ 735 $ 527 $ 855 $ 172 
 rat… 
 Res… 1,148 76 239 210 175 113 322 13 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 U.S. 
 Sma… $ 29,9… $ 24,6… $ 1,3… $ 1,047 $ 910 $ 640 $ 1,1… $ 185 
 Bus… 
 Com… 
 Tot… $ 486,… $ 90,3… $ 69,… $ 42,4… $ 30,… $ 16,2… $ 37,… $ 200,… 
(1) Excludes $ 5.9billion of loans accounted for under the fair value option at December 31, 2020.
(2) Includes $ 58million of loans that converted from revolving to term loans.
(3) Excludes U.S. Small Business Card loans of $ 6.5billion. Refreshed FICO scores for this portfolio
are $ 265million for less than 620; $ 582million for greater than or equal to 620 and less than 680;
$ 1.7billion for greater than or equal to 680 and less than 740; and $ 3.9billion greater than or
equal to 740.
 Bank of America120 
During 2021, commercial credit quality showed
signs of stabilization as the economy continued
to recover. Commercial reservable criticized
utilized exposure decreased to $ 22.4billion at
December 31, 2021 from $ 38.7billion (to
3.91percent from 7.31percent of total commercial
reservable utilized exposure) at December 31,
2020, which was broad-based across industries.
Consumer Real Estate Modifications of consumer
real estate loans are classified as TDRs when the
borrower is experiencing financial difficulties
and a concession has been granted. Concessions
may include reductions in interest rates,
capitalization of past due amounts, principal
and/or interest forbearance, payment extensions,
principal and/or interest forgiveness, or
combinations thereof. Prior to permanently
modifying a loan, the Corporation may enter into
trial modifications with certain borrowers under
both government and proprietary programs. Trial
modifications generally represent a three- to
four-month period during which the borrower makes
monthly payments under the anticipated modified
payment terms. Upon successful completion of the
trial period, the Corporation and the borrower
enter into a permanent modification. Binding
trial modifications are classified as TDRs when
the trial offer is made and continue to be
classified as TDRs regardless of whether the
borrower enters into a permanent modification.
Consumer real estate loans of $ 306million that
have been discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy with
no change in
repayment terms and not reaffirmed by the
borrower were included in TDRs at December 31,
2021, of which $ 87million were classified as
nonperforming and $ 55million were loans fully
insured. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, remaining
commitments to lend additional funds to debtors
whose terms have been modified in a consumer real
estate TDR were not significant. Consumer real
estate foreclosed properties totaled $ 101million
and $ 123million at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The carrying value of consumer real estate loans,
including fully-insured loans, for which formal
foreclosure proceedings were in process at
December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $ 1.1billion and $
1.2billion. During 2021 and 2020, the Corporation
reclassified $ 64million and $ 182million of
consumer real estate loans, to foreclosed
properties or, for properties acquired upon
foreclosure of certain government-guaranteed
loans (principally FHA-insured loans), to other
assets. The reclassifications represent non-cash
investing activities and, accordingly, are not
reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash
Flows. The table below presents the December 31,
2021, 2020 and 2019 unpaid principal balance,
carrying value, and average pre- and post-
modification interest rates of consumer real
estate loans that were modified in TDRs during
2021, 2020 and 2019. The following Consumer Real
Estate portfolio segment tables include loans
that were initially classified as TDRs during the
period and also loans that had previously been
classified as TDRs and were modified again during
the period.
 Consumer 
 Real Estate 
 – TDRs 
 Entered 
 into During 
 2021, 2020 
 and 2019 Unpaid Pre-Modific… Post-Modif… 
 (Dollars in December 31, Principal Carrying Interest Interest 
 millions) 2021 Balance Value Rate Rate(1) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Residential $ 891 $ 788 3.48 % 3.38 % 
 mortgage 
 Home equity 107 77 3.60 3.59 
 Total $ 998 $ 865 3.49 3.41 
 December 31, 
 2020 
 Residential $ 732 $ 646 3.66 % 3.59 % 
 mortgage 
 Home equity 87 69 3.67 3.61 
 Total $ 819 $ 715 3.66 3.59 
 December 31, 
 2019 
 Residential $ 464 $ 377 4.19 % 4.13 % 
 mortgage 
 Home equity 141 101 5.04 4.31 
 Total $ 605 $ 478 4.39 4.17 
(1) The post-modification interest rate reflects the interest rate applicable only to permanently
completed modifications, which exclude loans that are in a trial modification period.
 121Bank of America 
The table below presents the December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 carrying value for consumer real estate
loans that were modified in a TDR during 2021, 2020 and 2019, by type of modification.
 Consumer Real Estate – Modification Programs TDRs Entered into During 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Modifications under government programs $ 4 $ 13 $ 35 
 Modifications under proprietary programs 774 570 174 
 Loans discharged in Chapter 7 33 53 68 
 bankruptcy(1) 
 Trial modifications 54 79 201 
 Total modifications $ 865 $ 715 $ 478 
(1) Includes loans discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy with no change in repayment terms that are
classified as TDRs.
The table below presents the carrying value of consumer real estate loans that entered into payment
default during 2021, 2020 and 2019 that were modified in a TDR during the 12 months preceding payment
default. A payment default for consumer real estate TDRs is recognized when a borrower has missed
threemonthly payments (not necessarily consecutively) since modification.
 Consumer Real Estate – TDRs Entering Payment Default that were 
 Modified During the Preceding 12 Months 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Modifications under government programs $ 4 $ 16 $ 26 
 Modifications under proprietary programs 128 51 88 
 Loans discharged in Chapter 7 9 19 30 
 bankruptcy(1) 
 Trial modifications(2) 19 54 57 
 Total modifications $ 160 $ 140 $ 201 
(1) Includes loans discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy with no change in repayment terms that are
classified as TDRs.
(2) Includes trial modification offers to which the customer did not respond.
Credit Card and Other Consumer The Corporation seeks to assist customers who are experiencing
financial difficulty by modifying loans while ensuring compliance with federal and local laws and
guidelines. Credit card and other consumer loan modifications generally involve reducing the interest
rate on the account, placing the customer on a fixed payment plan not exceeding 60 months and
canceling the customer’s available line of credit, all of which are considered TDRs. The Corporation
makes loan modifications directly with borrowers for debt held only by the Corporation (internal
programs). Additionally, the Corporation makes loan modifications for borrowers working with third-
party renegotiation agencies that provide solutions to customers’ entire unsecured debt structures
(external programs). The Corporation classifies other secured consumer loans that have been
discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy as TDRs, which are written down to collateral value and placed on
nonaccrual status no later than the time of discharge. The table below provides information on the
Corporation’s Credit Card and Other Consumer TDR portfolio including the December 31, 2021, 2020 and
2019 unpaid principal balance, carrying value, and average pre- and post-modification interest rates
of loans that were modified in TDRs during 2021, 2020 and 2019.
 Credit 
 Card and 
 Other 
 Consumer – 
 TDRs 
 Entered 
 into 
 During 
 2021, 2020 
 and 2019 
 (Dollars Unpaid Pre-Modifi… Post-Modif… 
 in December Principal Interest Interest 
 millions) 31, 2021 Balance CarryingVa… Rate Rate 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Credit $ 237 $ 248 18.45 % 4.09 % 
 card 
 Direct/In… 23 16 5.88 5.88 
 consumer 
 Total $ 260 $ 264 17.68 4.20 
 December 
 31, 2020 
 Credit $ 269 $ 277 18.16 % 5.63 % 
 card 
 Direct/In… 52 37 5.83 5.83 
 consumer 
 Total $ 321 $ 314 16.70 5.65 
 December 
 31, 2019 
 Credit $ 340 $ 355 19.18 % 5.35 % 
 card 
 Direct/In… 40 21 5.23 5.21 
 consumer 
 Total $ 380 $ 376 18.42 5.34 
(1) Includes accrued interest and fees.
 Bank of America122 
The table below presents the December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 carrying value for Credit Card and
Other Consumer loans that were modified in a TDR during 2021, 2020 and 2019, by program type.
 Credit Card and Other Consumer – TDRs by Program Type at 
 December 31(1) 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Internal programs $ 214 $ 225 $ 247 
 External programs 44 73 108 
 Other 6 16 21 
 Total $ 264 $ 314 $ 376 
(1) Includes accrued interest and fees.
Credit card and other consumer loans are deemed
to be in payment default during the quarter in
which a borrower misses the second of
twoconsecutive payments. Payment defaults are one
of the factors considered when projecting future
cash flows in the calculation of the allowance
for loan and lease losses for credit card and
other consumer. Based on historical experience,
the Corporation estimates that 10percent of new
credit card TDRs and 18percent of new
direct/indirect consumer TDRs may be in payment
default within 12months after modification.
Commercial Loans Modifications of loans to
commercial borrowers that are experiencing
financial difficulty are designed to reduce the
Corporation’s loss exposure while providing the
borrower with an opportunity to work through
financial difficulties, often to avoid
foreclosure or bankruptcy. Each modification is
unique and reflects the individual circumstances
of the borrower. Modifications that result in a
TDR may include extensions of maturity at a
concessionary (below market) rate of interest,
payment forbearances or other actions designed to
benefit the borrower while mitigating the
Corporation’s risk exposure. Reductions in
interest rates are rare. Instead, the interest
rates are typically increased, although the
increased rate may not represent a market rate of
interest. Infrequently, concessions may also
include principal forgiveness in connection with
foreclosure, short sale or other settlement
agreements leading to termination or sale of the
loan. At the time of restructuring, the loans are
remeasured to reflect the impact, if any, on
projected cash flows resulting from the modified
terms. If a portion of the loan is deemed to be
uncollectible, a charge-off may be recorded at
the time of restructuring. Alternatively, a
charge-off may have already been recorded in a
previous period such that no charge-off is
required at the time of modification. During
2021, the carrying value of the Corporation’s
commercial loans that were modified as TDRs was $
1.3billion compared to $ 1.2billion and $
1.7billion for 2020 and 2019. At
December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Corporation
had commitments to lend $ 283million, $
402million and $ 445million to commercial
borrowers whose loans were classified as TDRs.
The balance of commercial TDRs in payment default
was $ 262million, $ 218million and $ 207million
at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Loans Held-
for-sale The Corporation had LHFS of $
15.6billion and $ 9.2billion at December 31, 2021
and 2020. Cash and non-cash proceeds from sales
and paydowns of loans originally classified as
LHFS were $ 43.6billion, $ 20.1billion and $
30.6billion for 2021, 2020 and 2019,
respectively. Cash used for originations and
purchases of LHFS totaled $ 37.3billion, $
19.7billion and $ 28.9billion for 2021, 2020 and
2019, respectively. Accrued Interest Receivable
Accrued interest receivable for loans and leases
and loans held-for-sale at December 31, 2021 and
2020 was $ 2.2billion and $ 2.4billion and is
reported in customer and other receivables on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet. Outstanding credit
card loan balances include unpaid principal,
interest and fees. Credit card loans are not
classified as nonperforming but are charged off
no later than the end of the month in which the
account becomes 180 days past due, within 60 days
after receipt of notification of death or
bankruptcy, or upon confirmation of fraud .
During 2021 and 2020, the Corporation reversed $
446million and $ 512million of interest and fee
income against the income statement line item in
which it was originally recorded upon charge-off
of the principal balance of the loan . For the
outstanding residential mortgage, home equity,
direct/indirect consumer and commercial loan
balances classified as nonperforming during 2021
and 2020, interest and fee income reversed at the
time the loans were classified as nonperforming
was not significant. For more information on the
Corporation's nonperforming loan policies, see
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles .
 123Bank of America 
Allowance for Credit Losses On January 1, 2020, the Corporation adopted the new accounting standard
that requires the measurement of the allowance for credit losses to be based on management’s best
estimate of lifetime ECL inherent in the Corporation’s relevant financial assets. Upon adoption of
the new accounting standard, the Corporation recorded a $ 3.3billion, or 32percent, increase in the
allowance for credit losses on January 1, 2020, which was comprised of a net increase of $ 2.9billion
in the allowance for loan and lease losses and a $ 310million increase in the reserve for unfunded
lending commitments. The net increase in the allowance for loan and lease losses was primarily driven
by a $ 3.1billion increase in credit card as the Corporation now reserves for the life of these
receivables. The increase in the reserve for unfunded lending commitments included $ 119million in
the consumer portfolio for the undrawn portion of HELOCs and $ 191million in the commercial
portfolio. For more information on the Corporation's credit loss accounting policies including the
allowance for credit losses see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles . The allowance
for credit losses is estimated using quantitative and qualitative methods that consider a variety of
factors, such as historical loss experience, the current credit quality of the portfolio and an
economic outlook over the life of the loan. Qualitative reserves cover losses that are expected but,
in the Corporation's assessment, may not be adequately reflected in the quantitative methods or the
economic assumptions. The Corporation incorporates forward-looking information through the use of
several macroeconomic scenarios in determining the weighted economic outlook over the forecasted life
of the assets. These scenarios include key macroeconomic variables such as gross domestic product,
unemployment rate, real estate prices and corporate bond spreads. The scenarios that are chosen each
quarter and the weighting given to each scenario depend on a variety of factors including recent
economic events, leading economic indicators, internal and third-party economist views, and industry
trends. The December 31, 2021 estimate for allowance for credit losses was based on various economic
outlooks that included a baseline scenario, which is derived from consensus estimates, a downside
scenario that assumed a significantly longer period until full economic recovery, a tail risk
scenario similar to the severely adverse scenario used in stress testing, a scenario to account for
inflationary risk and higher interest rates and an upside scenario to consider the potential for
improvement in the consensus outlooks. The weighted economic outlook assumes that the U.S. average
unemployment rate will be just above fivepercent by the fourth quarter of 2022 and slowly declines to
just under fivepercent by the fourth quarter of 2023. Additionally, in this economic outlook, U.S.
gross domestic product is forecasted to grow at 2.1percent and 1.9percent year-over-year in the
fourth quarters of 2022 and 2023. For comparison, as of December 31, 2020, the weighted macroeconomic
outlook for the U.S. average unemployment rate was forecasted at 6.6percent, 5.5percent and
5.0percent in the fourth quarters of 2021, 2022 and 2023, respectively, and the weighted
macroeconomic outlook for U.S. GDP was forecasted to grow at 2.5percent, 2.4percent and 2.1percent
year-over-year in the fourth quarters of 2021, 2022 and 2023, respectively. The allowance for credit
losses considered the impact of enacted government stimulus measures and continued to factor in the
uncertainty resulting from the unprecedented nature of the current public health crisis and risks
that may prevent a full economic recovery. While there has been improvement across the U.S. economy,
the Corporation continues to factor into its allowance for credit losses an estimated impact from
higher-risk segments that included leveraged loans and industries such as travel and entertainment,
which have been adversely impacted by the effects of the pandemic. The allowance for credit losses at
December 31, 2021 was $ 13.8billion, a decrease of $ 6.8billion compared to December 31, 2020. The
decrease in the allowance for credit losses was primarily driven by improvements in the macroeconomic
outlook and credit quality. The change in the allowance for credit losses was comprised of a net
decrease of $ 6.4billion in the allowance for loan and lease losses and a $ 422million decrease in
the reserve for unfunded lending commitments. The decrease in the allowance for credit losses was
attributed to $ 342million in the consumer real estate portfolio, $ 2.7billion in the credit card and
other consumer portfolio, and $ 3.8billion in the commercial portfolio. Similarly, the provision for
credit losses improved $ 15.9billion to a benefit of $ 4.6billion in 2021 compared to provision
expense of $ 11.3billion and $ 3.6billion in 2020 and 2019. The benefit in 2021 was primarily driven
by improvements in the macroeconomic outlook and credit quality. Outstanding loans and leases
excluding loans accounted for under the fair value option increased $ 50.1billion in 2021 driven by
commercial loans, which increased $ 60.4billion, excluding small business, primarily driven by Global
Markets . Consumer loans increased $ 7.0billion primarily driven by securities-based lending,
partially offset by lower consumer real estate due to prepayments in a low rate environment. The
changes in the allowance for credit losses, including net charge-offs and provision for loan and
lease losses, are detailed in the following table.
 Bank of America124 
 Consumer 
 Real Estate Credit Card and 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 Other Consumer Commercial Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Allowance for loan and 
 lease losses, $ 858 $ 9,213 $ 8,731 $ 18,802 
 January 1 
 Loans and leases charged -78 -3,000 -719 -3,797 
 off 
 Recoveries of loans and 
 leases 225 1,006 323 1,554 
 previously charged off 
 Net charge-offs 147 -1,994 -396 -2,243 
 Provision for loan and -449 -744 -2,980 -4,173 
 lease losses 
 Other 1 1 -1 1 
 Allowance for loan and 
 lease losses, 557 6,476 5,354 12,387 
 December 31 
 Reserve for unfunded 
 lending 137 — 1,741 1,878 
 commitments, January 1 
 Provision for unfunded 
 lending -41 — -380 -421 
 commitments 
 Other — — -1 -1 
 Reserve for unfunded 
 lending 96 — 1,360 1,456 
 commitments, December 31 
 Allowance for credit $ 653 $ 6,476 $ 6,714 $ 13,843 
 losses, December 31 
 2020 
 Allowance for loan and 
 lease losses, $ 440 $ 7,430 $ 4,488 $ 12,358 
 January 1 
 Loans and leases charged -98 -3,646 -1,675 -5,419 
 off 
 Recoveries of loans and 
 leases 201 891 206 1,298 
 previously charged off 
 Net charge-offs 103 -2,755 -1,469 -4,121 
 Provision for loan and 307 4,538 5,720 10,565 
 lease losses 
 Other 8 — -8 — 
 Allowance for loan and 
 lease losses, 858 9,213 8,731 18,802 
 December 31 
 Reserve for unfunded 
 lending 119 — 1,004 1,123 
 commitments, January 1 
 Provision for unfunded 
 lending 18 — 737 755 
 commitments 
 Reserve for unfunded 
 lending 137 — 1,741 1,878 
 commitments, December 31 
 Allowance for credit $ 995 $ 9,213 $ 10,472 $ 20,680 
 losses, December 31 
 2019 
 Allowance for loan and 
 lease losses, $ 928 $ 3,874 $ 4,799 $ 9,601 
 January 1 
 Loans and leases charged -522 -4,302 -822 -5,646 
 off 
 Recoveries of loans and 
 leases 927 911 160 1,998 
 previously charged off 
 Net charge-offs 405 -3,391 -662 -3,648 
 Provision for loan and -680 3,512 742 3,574 
 lease losses 
 Other(1) -107 1 -5 -111 
 Allowance for loan and 
 lease losses, 546 3,996 4,874 9,416 
 December 31 
 Reserve for unfunded 
 lending — — 797 797 
 commitments, January 1 
 Provision for unfunded 
 lending — — 16 16 
 commitments 
 Reserve for unfunded 
 lending — — 813 813 
 commitments, December 31 
 Allowance for credit $ 546 $ 3,996 $ 5,687 $ 10,229 
 losses, December 31 
(1) Primarily represents write-offs of purchased credit-impaired loans in 2019.
NOTE 6 Securitizations and Other Variable
Interest Entities
The Corporation utilizes VIEs in the ordinary
course of business to support its own and its
customers’ financing and investing needs. The
Corporation routinely securitizes loans and debt
securities using VIEs as a source of funding for
the Corporation and as a means of transferring
the economic risk of the loans or debt securities
to third parties. The assets are transferred into
a trust or other securitization vehicle such that
the assets are legally isolated from the
creditors of the Corporation and are not
available to satisfy its obligations. These
assets can only be used to settle obligations of
the trust or other securitization vehicle. The
Corporation also administers, structures or
invests in other VIEs including CDOs, investment
vehicles and other entities. For more information
on the Corporation’s use of VIEs, see Note 1 –
Summary of Significant Accounting Principles. The
tables in this Note present the assets and
liabilities of consolidated and unconsolidated
VIEs at December 31, 2021 and 2020 in situations
where the Corporation has continuing involvement
with transferred assets or if the Corporation
otherwise has a variable interest in the VIE. The
tables also present the Corporation’s maximum
loss exposure at December 31, 2021 and 2020
resulting from its involvement with consolidated
VIEs and unconsolidated VIEs in which the
Corporation holds a variable interest. The
Corporation’s
maximum loss exposure is based on the unlikely
event that all of the assets in the VIEs become
worthless and incorporates not only potential
losses associated with assets recorded on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet but also potential
losses associated with off-balance sheet
commitments, such as unfunded liquidity
commitments and other contractual arrangements.
The Corporation’s maximum loss exposure does not
include losses previously recognized through
write-downs of assets. The Corporation invests in
ABS issued by third-party VIEs with which it has
no other form of involvement and enters into
certain commercial lending arrangements that may
also incorporate the use of VIEs, for example to
hold collateral. These securities and loans are
included in Note 4 – Securities or Note 5 –
Outstanding Loans and Leases and Allowance for
Credit Losses. In addition, the Corporation has
used VIEs in connection with its funding
activities. The Corporation did not provide
financial support to consolidated or
unconsolidated VIEs during 2021, 2020 and 2019
that it was not previously contractually required
to provide, nor does it intend to do so. The
Corporation had liquidity commitments, including
written put options and collateral value
guarantees, with certain unconsolidated VIEs of $
968million and $ 929million at December 31, 2021
and 2020.
 125Bank of America 
First-lien Mortgage Securitizations As part of its mortgage banking activities, the Corporation
securitizes a portion of the first-lien residential mortgage loans it originates or purchases from
third parties, generally in the form of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) guaranteed by
government-sponsored enterprises, FNMA and FHLMC (collectively the GSEs), or the Government National
Mortgage Association (GNMA) primarily in the case of FHA-insured and U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA)-guaranteed mortgage loans. Securitization usually occurs in conjunction with or shortly
after origination or purchase, and the Corporation may also securitize loans held in its residential
mortgage portfolio. In addition, the Corporation may, from time to time, securitize commercial
mortgages it originates or purchases from other entities. The Corporation typically services the
loans it securitizes. Further, the Corporation may retain beneficial interests in the securitization
trusts including senior and subordinate securities and equity tranches issued by the trusts. Except
as described in Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies , the Corporation does not provide guarantees
or recourse to the securitization trusts other than standard representations and warranties. The
table below summarizes select information related to first-lien mortgage securitizations for 2021,
2020 and 2019.
 First-… 
 Mortga… 
 Securi… Resident… 
 (Dolla… Mortgage 
 in - Agency Commerc… 
 millio… 2021 2020 2019 Mortgage 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Procee… 
 from $ 6,664 $ 15,823 $ 6,858 $ 10,874 $ 5,084 $ 8,661 
 loan 
 sales(… 
 Gains 
 on 9 728 27 156 61 103 
 securi… 
 Repurc… 
 from 756 436 881 — — — 
 securi… 
 trusts… 
(1) The Corporation transfers residential mortgage loans to securitizations sponsored primarily by
the GSEs or GNMA in the normal course of business and primarily receives RMBS in exchange.
Substantially all of these securities are classified as Level 2 within the fair value hierarchy and
are typically sold shortly after receipt.
(2) A majority of the first-lien residential mortgage loans securitized are initially classified as
LHFS and accounted for under the fair value option. Gains recognized on these LHFS prior to
securitization, which totaled $ 121million, $ 160million and $ 64million net of hedges, during 2021,
2020 and 2019, respectively, are not included in the table above.
(3) The Corporation may have the option to repurchase delinquent loans out of securitization trusts,
which reduces the amount of servicing advances it is required to make. The Corporation may also
repurchase loans from securitization trusts to perform modifications. Repurchased loans include FHA-
insured mortgages collateralizing GNMA securities.
The Corporation recognizes consumer MSRs from the sale or securitization of consumer real estate
loans. The unpaid principal balance of loans serviced for investors, including residential mortgage
and home equity loans, totaled $ 115.4billion and $ 160.4billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Servicing fee and ancillary fee income on serviced loans was $ 392million, $ 474million and $
585million during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Servicing advances on serviced loans, including
loans serviced for others and loans held for investment, were $ 2.0billion and $ 2.2billion at
December 31, 2021 and 2020. For more information on MSRs, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements .
During 2020, the Corporation completed the sale of $ 9.3billion of consumer real estate loans through
GNMA loan securitizations. As part of the securitizations, the Corporation retained $ 8.4billion of
MBS, which are classified as debt securities carried at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Total gains on loan sales of $ 704million were recorded in other income in the Consolidated Statement
of Income. The following table summarizes select information related to first-lien mortgage
securitization trusts in which the Corporation held a variable interest at December 31, 2021 and
2020.
 Bank of America126 
 F… 
 M… 
 V… Re… 
 (… Mo… 
 in Ag… 
 m… De… No… Co… 
 U… 31 Pr… Su… Al… Mo… 
 V… 20… 2… 20… 2… 20… 2… 20… 2… 20… 2… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 M… 
 l… $ 11… $ 1… $ 121 $ 2… $ 908 $ 1… $ 14 $ 46 $ 1,… $ 1… 
 e… 
 O… 
 s… 
 a… 
 S… 
 s… 
 T… 
 a… $ 175 $ 1… $ 8 $ 2 $ 44 $ 8 $ 12 $ 12 $ 21 $ 60 
 a… 
 D… 
 s… 
 c… 5,… 7… — 1… 537 6… — 33 — — 
 at 
 f… 
 v… 
 H… 6,… 5… — — — — — — 1,… 9… 
 s… 
 A… 
 o… — — 3 6 29 26 2 1 93 50 
 a… 
 T… 
 r… $ 11… $ 1… $ 11 $ 1… $ 610 $ 7… $ 14 $ 46 $ 1,… $ 1… 
 p… 
 P… 
 b… $ 93… $ 1… $ 4,… $ 6… $ 6,… $ 6… $ 13… $ 1… $ 85… $ 5… 
 o… 
 C… 
 V… 
 M… 
 l… $ 1,… $ 1… $ 49 $ 66 $ — $ 53 $ — $ — $ — $ — 
 e… 
 O… 
 s… 
 a… 
 T… 
 a… $ 1,… $ 1… $ — $ 3… $ — $ 2… $ — $ — $ — $ — 
 a… 
 L… 
 a… — — 58 — — — — — — — 
 l… 
 n… 
 T… $ 1,… $ 1… $ 58 $ 3… $ — $ 2… $ — $ — $ — $ — 
 a… 
 T… $ — $ — $ 9 $ 2… $ — $ 2… $ — $ — $ — $ — 
 l… 
(1) Maximum loss exposure includes obligations under loss-sharing reinsurance and other arrangements
for non-agency residential mortgage and commercial mortgage securitizations, but excludes the reserve
for representations and warranties obligations and corporate guarantees and also excludes servicing
advances and other servicing rights and obligations. For more information, see Note 12 – Commitments
and Contingencies and Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements .
(2) Principal balance outstanding includes loans where the Corporation was the transferor to
securitization VIEs with which it has continuing involvement, which may include servicing the loans.
Other Asset-backed Securitizations
The table below summarizes select information related to home equity, credit card and other asset-
backed VIEs in which the Corporation held a variable interest at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 Home 
 Equ… 
 Loa… 
 Cre… 
 Card 
 and 
 Oth… 
 Ass… 
 VIEs 
 (Do… Home 
 in Equi… Muni… 
 mil… Dece… Cred… Rese… Bond 
 Unc… 31 Card… Trus… Trus… 
 VIEs 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Max… 
 loss $ 152 $ 206 $ — $ — $ 6,089 $ 8,5… $ 4,094 $ 3,5… 
 exp… 
 On-… 
 she… 
 ass… 
 Sec… 
 Tra… 
 acc… $ — $ — $ — $ — $ 1,030 $ 948 $ — $ — 
 ass… 
 Debt 
 sec… 
 car… 1 2 — — 1,903 2,7… — — 
 at 
 fair 
 val… 
 Hel… — — — — 3,156 4,8… — — 
 sec… 
 Tot… 
 ret… $ 1 $ 2 $ — $ — $ 6,089 $ 8,5… $ — $ — 
 pos… 
 Tot… 
 ass… $ 430 $ 609 $ — $ — $ 18,6… $ 17,… $ 4,655 $ 4,0… 
 of 
 VIEs 
 Con… 
 VIEs 
 Max… 
 loss $ 45 $ 58 $ 10,2… $ 14,6… $ 680 $ 217 $ 210 $ 1,0… 
 exp… 
 On-… 
 she… 
 ass… 
 Tra… 
 acc… $ — $ — $ — $ — $ 686 $ 217 $ 122 $ 990 
 ass… 
 Loa… 
 and 140 218 14,4… 21,3… — — — — 
 lea… 
 All… 
 for 
 loan 14 14 -970 -1,7… — — — — 
 and 
 lea… 
 los… 
 All 
 oth… 3 4 70 1,289 — — 88 40 
 ass… 
 Tot… $ 157 $ 236 $ 13,5… $ 20,8… $ 686 $ 217 $ 210 $ 1,0… 
 ass… 
 On-… 
 she… 
 lia… 
 Sho… $ — $ — $ — $ — $ — $ — $ 196 $ 432 
 bor… 
 Lon… 113 178 3,248 6,273 6 — — — 
 debt 
 All 
 oth… — — 7 16 — — — — 
 lia… 
 Tot… $ 113 $ 178 $ 3,255 $ 6,289 $ 6 $ — $ 196 $ 432 
 lia… 
(1) For unconsolidated home equity loan VIEs, the maximum loss exposure includes outstanding trust
certificates issued by trusts in rapid amortization, net of recorded reserves. For both consolidated
and unconsolidated home equity loan VIEs, the maximum loss exposure excludes the reserve for
representations and warranties obligations and corporate guarantees. For more information, see Note
12 – Commitments and Contingencies .
(2) At December 31, 2021 and 2020, loans and leases in the consolidated credit card trust included $
4.3billion and $ 7.6billion of seller’s interest.
(3) The retained senior securities were valued using quoted market prices or observable market inputs
(Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy).
 127Bank of America 
Home Equity Loans The Corporation retains interests, primarily senior securities, in home equity
securitization trusts to which it transferred home equity loans. In addition, the Corporation may be
obligated to provide subordinate funding to the trusts during a rapid amortization event. This
obligation is included in the maximum loss exposure in the table above. The charges that will
ultimately be recorded as a result of the rapid amortization events depend on the undrawn portion of
the home equity lines of credit, performance of the loans, the amount of subsequent draws and the
timing of related cash flows. Credit Card Securitizations The Corporation securitizes originated and
purchased credit card loans. The Corporation’s continuing involvement with the securitization trust
includes servicing the receivables, retaining an undivided interest (seller’s interest) in the
receivables, and holding certain retained interests, including subordinate interests in accrued
interest and fees on the securitized receivables and cash reserve accounts. During 2021, 2020 and
2019, the Corporation issued new senior debt securities issued to third-party investors from the
credit card securitization trust of $ 1.0billion, $ 1.0billion and $ 1.3billion, respectively. At
December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation held subordinate securities issued by the credit card
securitization trust with a notional principal amount of $ 6.5billion and $ 6.8billion. These
securities serve as a form of credit enhancement to the senior debt securities and have a stated
interest rate of zeropercent. During 2021, 2020 and 2019, the credit card securitization trust issued
$ 161million, $ 161million and $ 202million, respectively, of these subordinate securities.
Resecuritization Trusts The Corporation transfers securities, typically MBS, into resecuritization
VIEs generally at the request of customers seeking securities with specific characteristics.
Generally, there are no significant ongoing activities performed in a resecuritization trust, and no
single investor has the unilateral ability to liquidate the trust. The Corporation resecuritized $
28.9billion, $ 39.0billion and $ 24.4billion of securities during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Securities transferred into resecuritization VIEs were measured at fair value with changes in fair
value recorded in market making and similar activities prior to the resecuritization and,
accordingly, no gain or loss on sale was recorded. Securities received from the resecuritization VIEs
were recognized at their fair value of $ 2.2billion, $ 6.1billion and $ 5.2billion during 2021, 2020
and 2019, respectively. In 2021 and 2019, substantially all of the securities were classified as
trading account assets. All of the securities received as resecuritization proceeds during 2020 were
classified as trading account assets. Of the securities received as resecuritization proceeds during
2020, $ 2.4billion, $ 2.1billion and $ 1.7billion were classified as trading account assets, debt
securities carried at fair value and HTM securities, respectively. Substantially all of the trading
account securities carried at fair value were categorized as Level 2 within the fair value hierarchy.
Municipal Bond Trusts The Corporation administers municipal bond trusts that hold highly-rated, long-
term, fixed-rate municipal bonds. The trusts obtain financing by issuing floating-rate trust
certificates that reprice on a weekly or other short-term basis to third-party investors. The
Corporation’s liquidity commitments to unconsolidated municipal bond trusts, including those for
which the Corporation was transferor, totaled $ 4.1billion and $ 3.5billion at December 31, 2021 and
2020. The weighted-average remaining life of bonds held in the trusts at December 31, 2021 was
6.3years. There were no significant write-downs or downgrades of assets or issuers during 2021, 2020
and 2019. Other Variable Interest Entities The table below summarizes select information related to
other VIEs in which the Corporation held a variable interest at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 Other 
 VIEs 
 (Dollars Consolid… Consoli… 
 in December December 
 million… 31, 2021 Unconsol… Total 31, 2020 Unconsol… Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Maximum 
 loss $ 4,819 $ 27,790 $ 32,609 $ 4,106 $ 23,870 $ 27,976 
 exposure 
 On-bala… 
 sheet 
 assets 
 Trading 
 account $ 2,552 $ 626 $ 3,178 $ 2,080 $ 623 $ 2,703 
 assets 
 Debt 
 securit… 
 carried — 7 7 — 9 9 
 at fair 
 value 
 Loans 
 and 2,503 47 2,550 2,108 184 2,292 
 leases 
 Allowan… 
 for loan 
 and -2 -12 -14 -3 -3 -6 
 lease 
 losses 
 All 
 other 28 26,628 26,656 54 22,553 22,607 
 assets 
 Total $ 5,081 $ 27,296 $ 32,377 $ 4,239 $ 23,366 $ 27,605 
 On-bala… 
 sheet 
 liabili… 
 Short-t… $ 51 $ — $ 51 $ 22 $ — $ 22 
 borrowi… 
 Long-te… 211 — 211 111 — 111 
 debt 
 All 
 other — 6,548 6,548 — 5,658 5,658 
 liabili… 
 Total $ 262 $ 6,548 $ 6,810 $ 133 $ 5,658 $ 5,791 
 Total 
 assets $ 5,081 $ 92,249 $ 97,330 $ 4,239 $ 77,984 $ 82,223 
 of VIEs 
 Bank of America128 
Customer VIEs Customer VIEs include credit-
linked, equity-linked and commodity-linked note
VIEs, repackaging VIEs and asset acquisition
VIEs, which are typically created on behalf of
customers who wish to obtain market or credit
exposure to a specific company, index, commodity
or financial instrument. The Corporation’s
maximum loss exposure to consolidated and
unconsolidated customer VIEs totaled $ 2.9billion
and $ 2.3billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020,
including the notional amount of derivatives to
which the Corporation is a counterparty, net of
losses previously recorded, and the Corporation’s
investment, if any, in securities issued by the
VIEs. Collateralized Debt Obligation VIEs The
Corporation receives fees for structuring CDO
VIEs, which hold diversified pools of fixed-
income securities, typically corporate debt or
ABS, which the CDO VIEs fund by issuing multiple
tranches of debt and equity securities. CDOs are
generally managed by third-party portfolio
managers. The Corporation typically transfers
assets to these CDOs, holds securities issued by
the CDOs and may be a derivative counterparty to
the CDOs. The Corporation’s maximum loss exposure
to consolidated and unconsolidated CDOs totaled $
235million and $ 298million at December 31, 2021
and 2020. Investment VIEs The Corporation
sponsors, invests in or provides financing, which
may be in connection with the sale of assets, to
a variety of investment VIEs that hold loans,
real estate, debt securities or other financial
instruments and are designed to provide the
desired investment profile to investors or the
Corporation. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the
Corporation’s consolidated investment VIEs had
total assets of $ 1.0billion and $ 494million.
The Corporation also held investments in
unconsolidated VIEs with total assets of $
7.1billion and $ 5.4billion at December 31, 2021
and 2020. The Corporation’s maximum loss exposure
associated with both consolidated and
unconsolidated investment VIEs totaled $
2.0billion and $ 1.5billion at December 31, 2021
and 2020 comprised primarily of on-balance sheet
assets less non-recourse liabilities. Leveraged
Lease Trusts The Corporation’s net investment in
consolidated leveraged lease trusts totaled $
1.5billion and $ 1.7billion at December 31, 2021
and 2020. The trusts hold long-lived equipment
such as rail cars, power generation and
distribution equipment, and commercial aircraft.
The Corporation structures the trusts and holds a
significant residual interest. The net investment
represents the Corporation’s maximum loss
exposure to the trusts in the unlikely event that
the leveraged lease investments become worthless.
Debt issued by the leveraged lease trusts is non-
recourse to the Corporation. Tax Credit VIEs The
Corporation holds investments in unconsolidated
limited partnerships and similar entities that
construct, own and operate affordable housing,
wind and solar projects. An unrelated third party
is typically the general partner or managing
member and has control over the significant
activities of the VIE. The Corporation earns a
return primarily through the receipt of tax
credits allocated to the projects. The maximum
loss exposure included in the Other VIEs table
was $ 25.7billion and $ 22.0billion at December
31, 2021 and 2020. The Corporation’s risk of loss
is generally mitigated by policies requiring that
the project qualify for the expected tax credits
prior to making its investment. The Corporation’s
investments in affordable housing partnerships,
which are reported in other assets on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet, totaled $ 12.6billion
and $ 11.2billion, including unfunded commitments
to provide capital contributions of $ 5.8billion
and $ 5.0billion, at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The unfunded commitments are expected to be paid
over the next five years. During 2021, 2020 and
2019, the Corporation recognized tax credits and
other tax benefits from investments in affordable
housing partnerships of $ 1.3billion, $
1.2billion and $ 1.0billion and reported pretax
losses in other income of $ 1.1billion, $
1.0billion and $ 882million, respectively. These
tax credits are recognized as part of the
Corporation’s annual effective tax rate used to
determine tax expense in a given quarter. The
Corporation may be asked to invest additional
amounts to support a troubled affordable housing
project. Such additional investments have not
been and are not expected to be significant. NOTE
7 Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill
The table below presents goodwill balances by
business segment at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The reporting units utilized for goodwill
impairment testing are the operating segments or
one level below.
 Goodwill December 31 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer Banking $ 30,137 $ 30,123 
 Global Wealth & Investment Management 9,677 9,677 
 Global Banking(1) 24,026 23,969 
 Global Markets 5,182 5,182 
 Total goodwill $ 69,022 $ 68,951 
(1) Prior period has been revised to conform to
current-period presentation.
During 2021, the Corporation completed its annual
goodwill impairment test as of June 30, 2021
using qualitative assessments for all applicable
reporting units. Based on the results of the
annual goodwill impairment test, the Corporation
determined there was noimpairment. For more
information on the use of qualitative
assessments, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant
Accounting Principles.
Intangible Assets
At both December 31, 2021 and 2020, the net
carrying value of intangible assets was $
2.2billion. At both December 31, 2021 and 2020,
intangible assets included $ 1.6billion of
intangible assets associated with trade names,
substantially all of which had an indefinite life
and, accordingly, are not being amortized.
Amortization of intangibles expense was $
76million, $ 95million and $ 112million for 2021,
2020 and 2019.
 129Bank of America 
NOTE 8 Leases
The Corporation enters into both lessor and
lessee arrangements. For more information on
lease accounting, see Note 1 – Summary of
Significant Accounting Principles and on lease
financing receivables, see Note 5 – Outstanding
Loans and Leases and Allowance for Credit Losses
.
Lessor Arrangements
The Corporation’s lessor arrangements primarily
consist of operating, sales-type and direct
financing leases for equipment. Lease agreements
may include options to renew and for the lessee
to purchase the leased equipment at the end of
the lease term.
The table below presents the net investment in
sales-type and direct financing leases at
December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 Net Investment(1) December 31 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Lease receivables $ 16,806 $ 17,627 
 Unguaranteed residuals 2,078 2,303 
 Total net investment in sales-type and direct $ 18,884 $ 19,930 
 financing leases 
(1) In certain cases, the Corporation obtains
third-party residual value insurance to reduce
its residual asset risk. The carrying value of
residual assets with third-party residual value
insurance for at least a portion of the asset
value was $ 7.1billion and $ 6.9billion at
December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The table below presents lease income at December
31, 2021 and 2020.
 Lease Income 
 (Dollars in millions) December 31 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Sales-type and direct financing leases $ 613 $ 707 
 Operating leases 930 931 
 Total lease income $ 1,543 $ 1,638 
Lessee Arrangements
The Corporation's lessee arrangements
predominantly consist of operating leases for
premises and equipment; the Corporation's
financing leases are not significant.
Lease terms may contain renewal and extension
options and early termination features.
Generally, these options do not impact the lease
term because the Corporation is not reasonably
certain that it will exercise the options.
The following table provides information on the
right-of-use assets, lease liabilities and
weighted-average discount rates and lease terms
at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 Lessee Arrangements December 31 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Right-of-use asset $ 10,233 $ 10,000 
 Lease liabilities 10,858 10,474 
 Weighted-average discount rate used to 
 calculate present value of future 2.91 % 3.38 % 
 minimum lease payments 
 Weighted-average lease term (in years) 9.0 8.4 
 Lease Cost and Supplemental Information: 
 Operating lease cost $ 2,025 $ 2,149 
 Variable lease cost(1) 462 474 
 Total lease cost(2) $ 2,487 $ 2,623 
 Right-of-use assets obtained in exchange for $ 1,713 $ 851 
 new operating lease liabilities(3) 
 Operating cash flows from operating 1,964 2,039 
 leases(4) 
(1) Primarily consists of payments for common
area maintenance and property taxes.
(2) Amounts are recorded in occupancy and
equipment expense in the Consolidated Statement
of Income.
(3) Represents non-cash activity and,
accordingly, is not reflected in the Consolidated
Statement of Cash Flows.
(4) Represents cash paid for amounts included in
the measurements of lease liabilities.
Maturity Analysis
The maturities of lessor and lessee arrangements
outstanding at December 31, 2021 are presented in
the table below based on undiscounted cash flows.
 Lessor 
 Maturities of Lessor and Lessee Operating Sales-type and Lessee(1) 
 Arrangements Leases Direct Financing Operating 
 (Dollars in millions) December 31, 2021 Leases(2) Leases 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2022 $ 848 $ 5,208 $ 1,917 
 2023 742 4,617 1,716 
 2024 591 3,888 1,550 
 2025 412 1,318 1,309 
 2026 296 1,634 1,153 
 Thereafter 696 1,358 4,758 
 Total undiscounted $ 3,585 18,023 12,403 
 cash flows 
 Less: Net present 1,217 1,545 
 value adjustment 
 Total(3) $ 16,806 $ 10,858 
(1) Excludes $ 179million in commitments under
lessee arrangements that have not yet commenced
with lease terms that will begin in 2022.
(2) Includes $ 10.9billion in commercial lease
financing receivables and $ 5.9billion in
direct/indirect consumer lease financing
receivables.
(3) Represents lease receivables for lessor
arrangements and lease liabilities for lessee
arrangements.
 Bank of America130 
 NOTE 9 
 Deposits 
The scheduled contractual maturities for total time deposits at December 31, 2021 are presented in
the table below.
 Contractual Maturities of Total Time Deposits 
 (Dollars in millions) U.S. Non-U.S. Total 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Due in 2022 $ 34,555 $ 9,193 $ 43,748 
 Due in 2023 1,934 75 2,009 
 Due in 2024 350 5 355 
 Due in 2025 230 11 241 
 Due in 2026 120 1,361 1,481 
 Thereafter 248 29 277 
 Total time deposits $ 37,437 $ 10,674 $ 48,111 
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation
had aggregate U.S. time deposits of $ 9.4billion
and $ 10.7billion and non-U.S. time deposits of $
10.6billion and $ 11.8billion in denominations
that met or exceeded insurance limits.
NOTE 10 Securities Financing Agreements, Short-
term Borrowings and Restricted Cash
The Corporation enters into securities financing
agreements to accommodate customers (also
referred to as “matched-book transactions”),
obtain securities to cover short positions and
finance inventory positions. The Corporation
elects to account for certain securities
financing agreements and short-term borrowings
under the fair value option. For more information
on the fair value option, see Note 21 – Fair
Value Option . Offsetting of Securities Financing
Agreements Substantially all of the Corporation’s
securities financing activities are transacted
under legally enforceable master repurchase
agreements or legally enforceable master
securities lending agreements that give the
Corporation, in the event of
default by the counterparty, the right to
liquidate securities held and to offset
receivables and payables with the same
counterparty. The Corporation offsets securities
financing transactions with the same counterparty
on the Consolidated Balance Sheet where it has
such a legally enforceable master netting
agreement and the transactions have the same
maturity date. The Securities Financing
Agreements table presents securities financing
agreements included on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet in federal funds sold and securities
borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell,
and in federal funds purchased and securities
loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase at
December 31, 2021 and 2020. Balances are
presented on a gross basis, prior to the
application of counterparty netting. Gross assets
and liabilities are adjusted on an aggregate
basis to take into consideration the effects of
legally enforceable master netting agreements.
For more information on the offsetting of
derivatives, see Note 3 – Derivatives.
 Securiti… 
 Financing 
 Agreemen… Gross 
 (Dollars Assets/Lia… Net Balance 
 in December Amounts Sheet Financial Net 
 millions) 31, 2021 Offset Amount Instrumen… Assets/Lia… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Securiti… 
 borrowed 
 or 
 purchased $ 527,054 $ -276,334 $ 250,720 $ -229,525 $ 21,195 
 under 
 agreemen… 
 to 
 resell(3) 
 Securiti… 
 loaned or 
 sold 
 under $ 468,663 $ -276,334 $ 192,329 $ -181,860 $ 10,469 
 agreemen… 
 to 
 repurcha… 
 Other(4) 11,391 — 11,391 -11,391 — 
 Total $ 480,054 $ -276,334 $ 203,720 $ -193,251 $ 10,469 
 December 
 31, 2020 
 Securiti… 
 borrowed 
 or 
 purchased $ 492,387 $ -188,329 $ 304,058 $ -272,351 $ 31,707 
 under 
 agreemen… 
 to 
 resell(3) 
 Securiti… 
 loaned or 
 sold 
 under $ 358,652 $ -188,329 $ 170,323 $ -158,867 $ 11,456 
 agreemen… 
 to 
 repurcha… 
 Other(4) 16,210 — 16,210 -16,210 — 
 Total $ 374,862 $ -188,329 $ 186,533 $ -175,077 $ 11,456 
(1) Includes activity where uncertainty exists as to the enforceability of certain master netting
agreements under bankruptcy laws in some countries or industries.
(2) Includes securities collateral received or pledged under repurchase or securities lending
agreements where there is a legally enforceable master netting agreement. These amounts are not
offset on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, but are shown as a reduction to derive a net asset or
liability. Securities collateral received or pledged where the legal enforceability of the master
netting agreements is uncertain is excluded from the table.
(3) Excludes repurchase activity of $ 20.1billion and $ 14.7billion reported in loans and leases on
the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(4) Balance is reported in accrued expenses and other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet
and relates to transactions where the Corporation acts as the lender in a securities lending
agreement and receives securities that can be pledged as collateral or sold. In these transactions,
the Corporation recognizes an asset at fair value, representing the securities received, and a
liability, representing the obligation to return those securities.
Repurchase Agreements and Securities Loaned Transactions Accounted for as Secured Borrowings
The following tables present securities sold under agreements to repurchase and securities loaned by
remaining contractual term to maturity and class of collateral pledged. Included in “Other” are
transactions where the Corporation acts as the lender in a securities lending agreement and receives
securities that can be pledged as collateral or sold. Certain agreements contain a right to
substitute collateral and/or terminate the agreement prior to maturity at the option of the
Corporation or the counterparty. Such agreements are included in the table below based on the
remaining contractual term to maturity.
 131Bank of America 
 Remaining 
 Contractu… Overnight 
 Maturity and After 30 
 (Dollars Continuous Days Greater 
 in December 30 Days or Through 90 than 
 millions) 31, 2021 Less Days 90 Days(1) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Securities 
 sold under 
 agreements $ 148,023 $ 194,964 $ 36,939 $ 36,501 $ 416,427 
 to 
 repurchase 
 Securities 46,231 466 1,428 4,111 52,236 
 loaned 
 Other 11,391 — — — 11,391 
 Total $ 205,645 $ 195,430 $ 38,367 $ 40,612 $ 480,054 
 December 
 31, 2020 
 Securities 
 sold under 
 agreements $ 158,400 $ 122,448 $ 32,149 $ 22,684 $ 335,681 
 to 
 repurchase 
 Securities 19,140 271 1,029 2,531 22,971 
 loaned 
 Other 16,210 — — — 16,210 
 Total $ 193,750 $ 122,719 $ 33,178 $ 25,215 $ 374,862 
(1) Noagreements have maturities greater than three years.
 Securities Sold Under 
 Class of Collateral Agreements to 
 Pledged Repurchase Securities 
 (Dollars in millions) December 31, 2021 Loaned Other Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. government and $ 201,546 $ 27 $ — $ 201,573 
 agency securities 
 Corporate securities, 
 trading loans and 12,838 3,440 1,148 17,426 
 other 
 Equity securities 19,907 48,650 10,192 78,749 
 Non-U.S. sovereign debt 178,019 119 51 178,189 
 Mortgage trading loans 4,117 — — 4,117 
 and ABS 
 Total $ 416,427 $ 52,236 $ 11,391 $ 480,054 
 December 31, 2020 
 U.S. government and $ 195,167 $ 5 $ — $ 195,172 
 agency securities 
 Corporate securities, 
 trading loans and 8,633 1,628 1,217 11,478 
 other 
 Equity securities 14,752 21,125 14,931 50,808 
 Non-U.S. sovereign debt 113,142 213 62 113,417 
 Mortgage trading loans 3,987 — — 3,987 
 and ABS 
 Total $ 335,681 $ 22,971 $ 16,210 $ 374,862 
Under repurchase agreements, the Corporation is required to post collateral with a market value equal
to or in excess of the principal amount borrowed. For securities loaned transactions, the Corporation
receives collateral in the form of cash, letters of credit or other securities. To determine whether
the market value of the underlying collateral remains sufficient, collateral is generally valued
daily, and the Corporation may be required to deposit additional collateral or may receive or return
collateral pledged when appropriate. Repurchase agreements and securities loaned transactions are
generally either overnight, continuous (i.e., no stated term) or short-term. The Corporation manages
liquidity risks related to these agreements by sourcing funding from a diverse group of
counterparties, providing a range of securities collateral and pursuing longer durations, when
appropriate. Short-term Bank Notes Bank of America, N.A. maintains a global program to offer up to a
maximum of $ 75.0billion outstanding at any one time, of bank notes with fixed or floating rates and
maturities of at least seven daysfrom the date of issue. Short-term bank notes outstanding under this
program totaled $ 1.8billion and $ 3.9billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020. These short-term bank
notes, along with Federal Home Loan Bank advances, U.S. Treasury tax and loan notes, and term federal
funds purchased, are included in short-term borrowings on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Restricted
Cash At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation held restricted cash included within cash and
cash equivalents on the Consolidated Balance Sheet of $ 5.9billion and $ 7.0billion, predominantly
related to cash segregated in compliance with securities regulations and cash held on deposit with
central banks to meet reserve requirements.
 Bank of America132 
 NOTE 11 
 Long-term Debt 
Long-term debt consists of borrowings having an original maturity of one year or more. The table
below presents the balance of long-term debt at December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the related
contractual rates and maturity dates as of December 31, 2021.
 (Dol… 
 in 
 mill… 
 Notes 
 issu… 
 by 
 Bank 
 of 
 Amer… 
 Corp… Dece… 
 Seni… Weigh… Inter… Matu… 31 
 note… Rate Rates Dates 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fixed 2.85 % 0.25-… % 2022 - $ 194,… $ 174,3… 
 2052 
 Floa… 0.64 0.02-… 2023 - 18,7… 16,788 
 2044 
 Seni… 
 stru… 15,0… 17,033 
 notes 
 Subo… 
 note… 
 Fixed 4.88 2.94-… 2024 - 22,3… 23,337 
 2045 
 Floa… 2.18 0.82-… 2026 - 2,371 799 
 2036 
 Juni… 
 subo… 
 note… 
 Fixed 6.71 6.45-… 2027 - 741 738 
 2066 
 Floa… 0.97 0.97 2056 1 1 
 Total 
 notes 
 issu… 
 by 253,… 233,0… 
 Bank 
 of 
 Amer… 
 Corp… 
 Notes 
 issu… 
 by 
 Bank 
 of 
 Amer… 
 N.A. 
 Seni… 
 note… 
 Fixed 3.34 3.34 2023 501 511 
 Floa… 0.26 0.20-… 2022 - 3,173 2,323 
 2023 
 Subo… 6.00 6.00 2036 1,780 1,883 
 notes 
 Adva… 
 from 
 Fede… 
 Home 
 Loan 
 Bank… 
 Fixed 1.54 0.01-… 2022 - 290 599 
 2034 
 Secu… 
 and 
 other 3,338 6,296 
 BANA 
 VIEs… 
 Other 680 683 
 Total 
 notes 
 issu… 
 by 9,762 12,295 
 Bank 
 of 
 Amer… 
 N.A. 
 Other 
 debt 
 Stru… 16,5… 16,792 
 liab… 
 Nonb… 249 757 
 VIEs… 
 Other 53 9 
 Total 
 notes 
 issu… 
 by 16,9… 17,558 
 nonb… 
 and 
 other 
 enti… 
 Total 
 long… $ 280,… $ 262,9… 
 debt 
(1) Includes total loss-absorbing capacity compliant debt.
(2) Represents liabilities of consolidated VIEs included in total long-term debt on the Consolidated
Balance Sheet. Long-term debt of VIEs is collateralized by the assets of the VIEs. At December 31,
2021, amount includes debt predominantly from credit card securitization and other VIEs of $
3.2billion and $ 211million. For more information, see Note 6 – Securitizations and Other Variable
Interest Entities.
(3) Includes debt outstanding of $ 5.4billion and $ 4.8billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020 that was
issued by BofA Finance LLC, a consolidated finance subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation, the
parent company, and is fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the parent company.
During 2021, the Corporation issued $ 76.7billion of long-term debt consisting of $ 56.2billion of
notes issued by Bank of America Corporation, $ 8.0billion of notes issued by Bank of America, N.A.
and $ 12.5billion of other debt. During 2020, the Corporation issued $ 56.9billion of long-term debt
consisting of $ 43.8billion of notes issued by Bank of America Corporation, $ 4.8billion of notes
issued by Bank of America, N.A. and $ 8.3billion of other debt. During 2021, the Corporation had
total long-term debt maturities and redemptions in the aggregate of $ 46.4billion consisting of $
24.4billion for Bank of America Corporation, $ 10.4billion for Bank of America, N.A. and $
11.6billion of other debt. During 2020, the Corporation had total long-term debt maturities and
redemptions in the aggregate of $ 47.1billion consisting of $ 22.6billion for Bank of America
Corporation, $ 11.5billion for Bank of America, N.A. and $ 13.0billion of other debt. Bank of America
Corporation and Bank of America, N.A. maintain various U.S. and non-U.S. debt programs to offer both
senior and subordinated notes. The notes may be denominated in U.S. dollars or foreign currencies. At
December 31, 2021 and 2020, the amount of foreign currency-denominated debt translated into U.S.
dollars included in total long-term debt was $ 53.1billion and $ 54.6billion. Foreign currency
contracts may be used to convert certain foreign currency-denominated debt into U.S. dollars. The
weighted-average effective interest rates for total long-term debt (excluding senior structured
notes), total fixed-rate debt and total floating-rate debt were 2.83percent, 3.08percent and
0.75percent, respectively, at December 31, 2021, and 3.02percent, 3.29percent and 0.71percent,
respectively, at December 31, 2020. The Corporation’s ALM activities maintain an overall interest
rate risk management strategy that incorporates the use of interest rate contracts to manage
fluctuations in earnings caused by interest rate volatility. The Corporation’s goal is to manage
interest rate sensitivity so that movements in interest rates do not have a significantly adverse
effect on earnings and capital. The weighted-average rates are the contractual interest rates on the
debt and do not reflect the impacts of derivative transactions. The following table shows the
carrying value for aggregate annual contractual maturities of long-term debt as of December 31, 2021.
Included in the table are certain structured notes issued by the Corporation that contain provisions
whereby the borrowings are redeemable at the option of the holder (put options) at specified dates
prior to maturity. Other structured notes have coupon or repayment terms linked to the performance of
debt or equity securities, indices, currencies or commodities, and the maturity may be accelerated
based on the value of a referenced index or security. In both cases, the Corporation or a subsidiary
may be required to settle the obligation for cash or other securities prior to the contractual
maturity date. These borrowings are reflected in the table as maturing at their contractual maturity
date.
 133Bank of America 
 Long… 
 Debt 
 by 
 Matu… 
 (Dol… 
 in 
 mill… 
 Bank 
 of 
 Amer… 
 Corp… 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Therea… Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Seni… $ 3,217 $ 23,326 $ 23,462 $ 21,534 $ 17,968 $ 123,437 $ 212,9… 
 notes 
 Seni… 
 stru… 1,937 572 396 398 819 10,964 15,086 
 notes 
 Subo… — — 3,283 5,379 5,171 10,849 24,682 
 notes 
 Juni… 
 subo… — — — — — 742 742 
 notes 
 Total 
 Bank 
 of 5,154 23,898 27,141 27,311 23,958 145,992 253,4… 
 Amer… 
 Corp… 
 Bank 
 of 
 Amer… 
 N.A. 
 Seni… 1,600 2,074 — — — — 3,674 
 notes 
 Subo… — — — — — 1,780 1,780 
 notes 
 Adva… 
 from 
 Fede… 202 1 — 16 10 61 290 
 Home 
 Loan 
 Banks 
 Secu… 
 and 
 other 1,259 988 1,000 1 — 90 3,338 
 Bank 
 VIEs… 
 Other 102 386 32 143 7 10 680 
 Total 
 Bank 
 of 3,163 3,449 1,032 160 17 1,941 9,762 
 Amer… 
 N.A. 
 Other 
 debt 
 Stru… 3,586 2,823 1,996 668 1,621 5,905 16,599 
 Liab… 
 Nonb… 2 51 — — — 196 249 
 VIEs… 
 Other — — — — — 53 53 
 Total 
 other 3,588 2,874 1,996 668 1,621 6,154 16,901 
 debt 
 Total 
 long… $ 11,905 $ 30,221 $ 30,169 $ 28,139 $ 25,596 $ 154,087 $ 280,1… 
 debt 
(1) Represents liabilities of consolidated VIEs included in total long-term debt on the Consolidated
Balance Sheet.
NOTE 12 Commitments and Contingencies
In the normal course of business, the Corporation
enters into a number of off-balance sheet
commitments. These commitments expose the
Corporation to varying degrees of credit and
market risk and are subject to the same credit
and market risk limitation reviews as those
instruments recorded on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet. Credit Extension Commitments The
Corporation enters into commitments to extend
credit such as loan commitments, SBLCs and
commercial letters of credit to meet the
financing needs of its customers. The following
table includes the notional amount of unfunded
legally binding lending commitments net of
amounts distributed (i.e., syndicated or
participated) to other financial institutions.
The distributed amounts were $ 10.7billion and $
10.5billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020. The
carrying value of the Corporation’s credit
extension commitments at December 31, 2021 and
2020, excluding commitments accounted for under
the fair value option, was $ 1.5billion and $
1.9billion, which predominantly related to the
reserve for unfunded lending commitments. The
carrying value of these commitments is classified
in accrued expenses and other liabilities on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet. Legally binding
commitments to extend credit generally have
specified rates and maturities. Certain of these
commitments have adverse change clauses that help
to protect the Corporation against deterioration
in the borrower’s ability to pay. The following
table includes the notional amount of commitments
of $ 4.8billion and $ 4.0billion at December 31,
2021 and 2020 that are accounted for under the
fair value option. However, the table excludes
the cumulative net fair value for these
commitments of $ 97million and $ 99million at
December 31, 2021 and 2020, which is classified
in accrued expenses and other liabilities. For
more information regarding the Corporation’s loan
commitments accounted for under the fair value
option, see Note 21 – Fair Value Option.
 Bank of America134 
 Credit Expire in 
 Extension One Expire 
 Commitmen… Year or After One Expire After 
 (Dollars Less Year Three Years Expire 
 in December Through Through After 
 millions) 31, 2021 Three Years Five Years Five Years Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Notional 
 amount of 
 credit 
 extension 
 commitmen… 
 Loan $ 102,464 $ 190,687 $ 174,978 $ 26,635 $ 494,764 
 commitmen… 
 Home 
 equity 890 5,097 10,268 24,276 40,531 
 lines of 
 credit 
 Standby 
 letters of 
 credit and 22,359 10,742 2,017 422 35,540 
 financial 
 guarantee… 
 Letters of 1,145 124 56 98 1,423 
 credit 
 Other 18 59 81 1,233 1,391 
 commitmen… 
 Legally 
 binding 126,876 206,709 187,400 52,664 573,649 
 commitmen… 
 Credit 
 card 406,169 — — — 406,169 
 lines(4) 
 Total 
 credit $ 533,045 $ 206,709 $ 187,400 $ 52,664 $ 979,818 
 extension 
 commitmen… 
 December 
 31, 2020 
 Notional 
 amount of 
 credit 
 extension 
 commitmen… 
 Loan $ 109,406 $ 171,887 $ 139,508 $ 16,091 $ 436,892 
 commitmen… 
 Home 
 equity 710 2,992 8,738 29,892 42,332 
 lines of 
 credit 
 Standby 
 letters of 
 credit and 19,962 12,038 2,397 1,257 35,654 
 financial 
 guarantee… 
 Letters of 886 197 25 27 1,135 
 credit 
 Other 22 132 125 1,219 1,498 
 commitmen… 
 Legally 
 binding 130,986 187,246 150,793 48,486 517,511 
 commitmen… 
 Credit 
 card 384,955 — — — 384,955 
 lines(4) 
 Total 
 credit $ 515,941 $ 187,246 $ 150,793 $ 48,486 $ 902,466 
 extension 
 commitmen… 
(1) At December 31, 2021 and 2020, $ 4.6billion and $ 4.8billion of these loan commitments were held
in the form of a security.
(2) The notional amounts of SBLCs and financial guarantees classified as investment grade and non-
investment grade based on the credit quality of the underlying reference name within the instrument
were $ 26.3billion and $ 8.7billion at December 31, 2021, and $ 25.0billion and $ 10.2billion at
December 31, 2020. Amounts in the table include consumer SBLCs of $ 512million and $ 500million at
December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(3) Primarily includes second-loss positions on lease-end residual value guarantees.
(4) Includes business card unused lines of credit.
Other Commitments At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation had commitments to purchase loans
(e.g., residential mortgage and commercial real estate) of $ 181million and $ 93million, which upon
settlement will be included in trading account assets, loans or LHFS, and commitments to purchase
commercial loans of $ 518million and $ 645million, which upon settlement will be included in trading
account assets. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation had commitments to purchase
commodities, primarily liquefied natural gas, of $ 949million and $ 582million, which upon settlement
will be included in trading account assets. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation had
commitments to enter into resale and forward-dated resale and securities borrowing agreements of $
92.0billion and $ 66.5billion, and commitments to enter into forward-dated repurchase and securities
lending agreements of $ 32.6billion and $ 32.1billion. These commitments generally expire within the
next 12 months. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation had a commitment to originate or
purchase up to $ 4.0billion and $ 3.9billion on a rolling 12-month basis, of auto loans and leases
from a strategic partner. This commitment extends through November 2026 and can be terminated with
12months prior notice. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation had unfunded equity investment
commitments of $ 395million and $ 213million. Other Guarantees Bank-owned Life Insurance Book Value
Protection The Corporation sells products that offer book value protection to insurance carriers who
offer group life insurance policies to corporations, primarily banks. At December 31, 2021 and 2020,
the notional amount of these guarantees totaled $ 6.3billion and $ 7.1billion. At December 31, 2021
and 2020, the Corporation’s maximum exposure related to these guarantees totaled $ 928million and $
1.1billion, with estimated maturity dates between 2033 and 2039. Indemnifications In the ordinary
course of business, the Corporation enters into various agreements that contain indemnifications,
such as tax indemnifications, whereupon payment may become due if certain external events occur, such
as a change in tax law. The indemnification clauses are often standard contractual terms and were
entered into in the normal course of business based on an assessment that the risk of loss would be
remote. These agreements typically contain an early termination clause that permits the Corporation
to exit the agreement upon these events. The maximum potential future payment under indemnification
agreements is difficult to assess for several reasons, including the occurrence of an external event,
the inability to predict future changes in tax and other laws, the difficulty in determining how such
laws would apply to parties in contracts, the absence of exposure limits contained in standard
contract language and the timing of any early termination clauses. Historically, any payments made
under these guarantees have been de minimis. The Corporation has assessed the probability of making
such payments in the future as remote. Merchant Services Prior to July 1, 2020, a significant portion
of the Corporation's merchant processing activity was performed by a joint venture in which the
Corporation held a 49percent ownership interest. Effective July 1, 2020, the Corporation received its
share of the joint venture's merchant contracts and began performing merchant processing services for
these merchants.
 135Bank of America 
The Corporation in its role as merchant acquirer or as a sponsor of other merchant acquirers may be
held liable for any reversed charges that cannot be collected from the merchants, due to, among other
things, merchant fraud or insolvency. If charges are properly reversed after a purchase and cannot be
collected from either the merchants or merchant acquirers, the Corporation may be held liable for
these reversed charges. The ability to reverse a charge is primarily governed by the applicable
regulatory and card network rules, which include, but are not limited to, the type of charge, type of
payment used and time limits. The total amount of transactions processed for the preceding six-month
period, which was $ 476.2billion, is an estimate of the Corporation’s maximum potential exposure as
of December 31, 2021. The Corporation’s risk in this area primarily relates to circumstances where a
cardholder has purchased goods or services for future delivery. The Corporation mitigates this risk
by requiring cash deposits, guarantees, letters of credit or other types of collateral from certain
merchants. The Corporation’s reserves for contingent losses and the losses incurred related to the
merchant processing activity were not significant. The Corporation continues to monitor its exposure
in this area due to the potential economic impacts of the pandemic. Exchange and Clearing House
Member Guarantees The Corporation is a member of various securities and derivative exchanges and
clearinghouses, both in the U.S. and other countries. As a member, the Corporation may be required to
pay a pro-rata share of the losses incurred by some of these organizations as a result of another
member default and under other loss scenarios. The Corporation’s potential obligations may be limited
to its membership interests in such exchanges and clearinghouses, to the amount (or multiple) of the
Corporation’s contribution to the guarantee fund or, in limited instances, to the full pro-rata share
of the residual losses after applying the guarantee fund. The Corporation’s maximum potential
exposure under these membership agreements is difficult to estimate; however, the Corporation has
assessed the probability of making any such payments as remote. Prime Brokerage and Securities
Clearing Services In connection with its prime brokerage and clearing businesses, the Corporation
performs securities clearance and settlement services with other brokerage firms and clearinghouses
on behalf of its clients. Under these arrangements, the Corporation stands ready to meet the
obligations of its clients with respect to securities transactions. The Corporation’s obligations in
this respect are secured by the assets in the clients’ accounts and the accounts of their customers
as well as by any proceeds received from the transactions cleared and settled by the Corporation on
behalf of clients or their customers. The Corporation’s maximum potential exposure under these
arrangements is difficult to estimate; however, the potential for the Corporation to incur material
losses pursuant to these arrangements is remote. Fixed Income Clearing Corporation Sponsored Member
Repo Program The Corporation acts as a sponsoring member in a repo program whereby the Corporation
clears certain eligible resale and repurchase agreements through the Government Securities Division
of the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation on behalf of clients that are sponsored members in
accordance with the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation’s rules. As part of this program, the
Corporation guarantees the payment and performance of its sponsored members to the Fixed Income
Clearing Corporation. The Corporation’s guarantee obligation is secured by a security interest in
cash or high-quality securities collateral placed by clients with the clearinghouse and therefore,
the potential for the Corporation to incur significant losses under this arrangement is remote. The
Corporation’s maximum potential exposure, without taking into consideration the related collateral,
was $ 42.0billion and $ 22.5billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020. Other Guarantees In the normal
course of business, the Corporation periodically guarantees the obligations of its affiliates in a
variety of transactions including ISDA-related transactions and non-ISDA related transactions such as
commodities trading, repurchase agreements, prime brokerage agreements and other transactions.
Guarantees of Certain Long-term Debt The Corporation, as the parent company, fully and
unconditionally guarantees the securities issued by BofA Finance LLC, a consolidated finance
subsidiary of the Corporation, and effectively provides for the full and unconditional guarantee of
trust securities issued by certain statutory trust companies that are 100percent owned finance
subsidiaries of the Corporation. Representations and Warranties Obligations and Corporate Guarantees
The Corporation securitizes first-lien residential mortgage loans generally in the form of RMBS
guaranteed by the GSEs or by GNMA in the case of FHA-insured, VA-guaranteed and Rural Housing
Service-guaranteed mortgage loans, and sells pools of first-lien residential mortgage loans in the
form of whole loans. In addition, in prior years, legacy companies and certain subsidiaries sold
pools of first-lien residential mortgage loans and home equity loans as private-label securitizations
or in the form of whole loans. In connection with these transactions, the Corporation or certain of
its subsidiaries or legacy companies make and have made various representations and warranties.
Breaches of these representations and warranties have resulted in and may continue to result in the
requirement to repurchase mortgage loans or to otherwise make whole or provide indemnification or
other remedies to sponsors, investors, securitization trusts, guarantors, insurers or other parties
(collectively, repurchases). Unresolved Repurchase Claims Unresolved representations and warranties
repurchase claims represent the notional amount of repurchase claims made by counterparties,
typically the outstanding principal balance or the unpaid principal balance at the time of default.
In the case of first-lien mortgages, the claim amount is often significantly greater than the
expected loss amount due to the benefit of collateral and, in some cases, mortgage insurance or
mortgage guarantee payments. The notional amount of unresolved repurchase claims at December 31, 2021
and 2020 was $ 8.4billion and $ 8.5billion. These balances included $ 2.8billion and $ 2.9billion at
December 31, 2021 and 2020 of claims related to loans in specific private-label securitization groups
or tranches where the Corporation owns substantially all of the outstanding securities or will
otherwise realize the benefit of any repurchase claims paid.
 Bank of America136 
During 2021, the Corporation received $ 49million
in new repurchase claims that were not time-
barred. During 2021, $ 141million in claims were
resolved. Reserve and Related Provision The
reserve for representations and warranties
obligations and corporate guarantees was $
1.2billion and $ 1.3billion at December 31, 2021
and 2020 and is included in accrued expenses and
other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet, and the related provision is included in
other income in the Consolidated Statement of
Income. The representations and warranties
reserve represents the Corporation’s best
estimate of probable incurred losses, is based on
its experience in previous negotiations, and is
subject to judgment, a variety of assumptions and
known or unknown uncertainties. Future
representations and warranties losses may occur
in excess of the amounts recorded for these
exposures; however, the Corporation does not
expect such amounts to be material to the
Corporation's financial condition and liquidity.
See Litigation and Regulatory Matters below for
the Corporation's combined range of possible loss
in excess of the reserve for representations and
warranties and the accrued liability for
litigation.
Litigation and Regulatory Matters In the ordinary
course of business, the Corporation and its
subsidiaries are routinely defendants in or
parties to many pending and threatened legal,
regulatory and governmental actions and
proceedings. In view of the inherent difficulty
of predicting the outcome of such matters,
particularly where the claimants seek very large
or indeterminate damages or where the matters
present novel legal theories or involve a large
number of parties, the Corporation generally
cannot predict the eventual outcome of the
pending matters, timing of the ultimate
resolution of these matters, or eventual loss,
fines or penalties related to each pending
matter. As a matter develops, the Corporation, in
conjunction with any outside counsel handling the
matter, evaluates whether such matter presents a
loss contingency that is probable and estimable,
and, for the matters described below whether a
loss in excess of any accrued liability is
reasonably possible in future periods. Once the
loss contingency is deemed to be both probable
and estimable, the Corporation will establish an
accrued liability and record a corresponding
amount of litigation-related expense. The
Corporation continues to monitor the matter for
further developments that could affect the amount
of the accrued liability that has been previously
established. Excluding expenses of internal and
external legal service providers, litigation-
related expense of $ 164million and $ 823million
was recognized in 2021 and 2020. For any matter
disclosed in this Note for which a loss in future
periods is reasonably possible and estimable
(whether in excess of an accrued liability or
where there is no accrued liability) and for
representations and warranties exposures, the
Corporation’s estimated range of possible loss is
$ 0to $ 1.0billion in excess of the accrued
liability, if any, as of December 31, 2021. The
accrued liability and estimated range of possible
loss are based upon currently available
information and subject to significant judgment,
a variety of assumptions and known and unknown
uncertainties. The matters underlying the accrued
liability and estimated range of possible loss
are unpredictable and may change from time to
time, and actual losses may vary significantly
from the current estimate and accrual. The
estimated range of possible loss does not
represent the Corporation’s maximum loss
exposure. Information is provided below regarding
the nature of the litigation and, where
specified, associated claimed damages. Based on
current knowledge, and taking into account
accrued liabilities, management does not believe
that loss contingencies arising from pending
matters, including the matters described below,
will have a material adverse effect on the
consolidated financial condition or liquidity of
the Corporation. However, in light of the
significant judgment, variety of assumptions and
uncertainties involved in these matters, some of
which are beyond the Corporation’s control, and
the very large or indeterminate damages sought in
some of these matters, an adverse outcome in one
or more of these matters could be material to the
Corporation’s business or results of operations
for any particular reporting period, or cause
significant reputational harm. Ambac Bond
Insurance Litigation Ambac Assurance Corporation
and the Segregated Account of Ambac Assurance
Corporation (together, Ambac) have filed
fourseparate lawsuits against the Corporation and
its subsidiaries relating to bond insurance
policies Ambac provided on certain securitized
pools of HELOCs, first-lien subprime home equity
loans, fixed-rate second-lien mortgage loans and
negative amortization pay-option adjustable-rate
mortgage loans. Ambac alleges that they have paid
or will pay claims as a result of defaults in the
underlying loans and asserts that the defendants
misrepresented the characteristics of the
underlying loans and/or breached certain
contractual representations and warranties
regarding the underwriting and servicing of the
loans. In those actions where the Corporation is
named as a defendant, Ambac contends the
Corporation is liable on successor and vicarious
liability theories. These actions are at various
procedural stages with material developments
provided below. Ambac v. Countrywide I Ambac
named the Corporation and several Countrywide
entities as defendants in an action filed on
September 28, 2010 in New York Supreme Court
asserting claims for fraudulent inducement as
well as breach of contract and seeking damages in
excess of $ 2.2billion, plus punitive damages.
The Supreme Court dismissed Ambac’s fraudulent
inducement claim, and on May 11, 2021, the First
Department, a New York State appellate court
(First Department), affirmed the dismissal. The
Supreme Court has scheduled a non-jury trial for
September 7, 2022 on the contract claim that
remains. Ambac v. Countrywide II On December 30,
2014, Ambac filed a complaint in New York Supreme
Court against the same defendants, claiming
fraudulent inducement against Countrywide, and
successor and vicarious liability against the
Corporation, while seeking damages in excess of $
600million, plus punitive damages. Ambac v.
Countrywide IV On July 21, 2015, Ambac filed an
action in New York Supreme Court against
Countrywide asserting the same claims for
fraudulent inducement that Ambac asserted in the
now dismissed Ambac v. Countrywide III. The
complaint seeks damages in excess of $
350million, plus punitive damages. On December 8,
2020, the New York Supreme Court dismissed
Ambac’s complaint. On February 8, 2022, the First
Department affirmed the dismissal.
 137Bank of America 
Ambac v. First Franklin On April 16, 2012, Ambac
filed an action against BANA, First Franklin and
various Merrill Lynch entities, including Merrill
Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated, in
New York Supreme Court relating to guaranty
insurance Ambac provided on a First Franklin
securitization sponsored by Merrill Lynch. The
complaint alleges fraudulent inducement and
breach of contract, including breach of contract
claims against BANA based upon its servicing of
the loans in the securitization. Ambac seeks as
damages hundreds of millions of dollars that
Ambac alleges it has paid or will pay in claims.
Deposit Insurance Assessment On January 9, 2017,
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)
filed suit against BANA in the U.S. District
Court for the District of Columbia alleging
failure to pay a December 15, 2016 invoice for
additional deposit insurance assessments and
interest in the amount of $ 542million for the
quarters ending June 30, 2013 through December
31, 2014. On April 7, 2017, the FDIC amended its
complaint to add a claim for additional deposit
insurance and interest in the amount of $
583million for the quarters ending March 31, 2012
through March 31, 2013. The FDIC asserts these
claims based on BANA’s alleged underreporting of
counterparty exposures that resulted in
underpayment of assessments for those quarters
and its Enforcement Section is also conducting a
parallel investigation related to the same
alleged reporting error. BANA disagrees with the
FDIC’s interpretation of the regulations as they
existed during the relevant time period and is
defending itself against the FDIC’s claims.
Pending final resolution, BANA has pledged
security satisfactory to the FDIC related to the
disputed additional assessment amounts. On March
27, 2018, the U.S. District Court for the
District of Columbia denied BANA’s partial motion
to dismiss certain of the FDIC’s claims. LIBOR
The Corporation, BANA and certain Merrill Lynch
entities have been named as defendants along with
most of the other LIBOR panel banks in a number
of individual and putative class actions by
persons alleging they sustained losses on U.S.
dollar LIBOR-based financial instruments as a
result of collusion or manipulation by defendants
regarding the setting of U.S. dollar LIBOR.
Plaintiffs assert a variety of claims, including
antitrust, Commodity Exchange Act, Racketeer
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO),
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, common law fraud
and breach of contract claims, and seek
compensatory, treble and punitive damages, and
injunctive relief. All but one of the cases
naming the Corporation and its affiliates
relating to U.S. dollar LIBOR are pending in the
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of
New York (“District Court”). The District Court
has dismissed all RICO claims, and dismissed all
manipulation claims against Bank of America
entities based on alleged trader conduct. The
District Court has also substantially limited the
scope of antitrust, Commodity Exchange Act and
various other claims, including by dismissing in
their entirety certain individual and putative
class plaintiffs’ antitrust claims for lack of
standing. On December 30, 2021, the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the
dismissal of these antitrust claims for lack of
standing. Certain individual and putative class
actions remain pending against the Corporation,
BANA and certain Merrill Lynch entities. On
February 28, 2018, the District Court granted
certification of a
class of persons that purchased OTC swaps and
notes that referenced U.S. dollar LIBOR from one
of the U.S. dollar LIBOR panel banks, limited to
claims under Section 1 of the Sherman Act. U.S.
Bank - Harborview and SURF/OWNIT Repurchase
Litigation Beginning in 2011, U.S. Bank, National
Association (U.S. Bank), as trustee for the
HarborView Mortgage Loan Trust 2005-10 and
various SURF/OWNIT RMBS trusts filed complaints
against the Corporation, Countrywide entities,
Merrill Lynch entities and other affiliates in
New York Supreme Court alleging breaches of
representations and warranties. The defendants
and certain certificate-holders in the trusts
agreed to settle the respective matters in
amounts not material to the Corporation, subject
to acceptance by U.S. Bank. The litigations have
been stayed pending finalization of the
settlements. NOTE 13 Shareholders’ Equity
Common Stock
 Declared Quarterly Cash 
 Dividends on Common Stock(1) 
 Declaration Date Record Date Payment Date Dividend Per Share 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 February 2, 2022 March 4, 2022 March 25, 2022 $ 0.21 
 October 20, 2021 December 3, 2021 December 31, 2021 0.21 
 July 21, 2021 September 3, 2021 September 24, 2021 0.21 
 April 22, 2021 June 4, 2021 June 25, 2021 0.18 
 January 19, 2021 March 5, 2021 March 26, 2021 0.18 
(1) In 2021, and through February 22, 2022.
The cash dividends paid per share of common stock
were $ 0.78$ 0.72and $ 0.66for 2021, 2020 and
2019, respectively.
The table below summarizes common stock
repurchases during 2021, 2020 and 2019.
 Common Stock Repurchase Summary 
 (in millions) 
 Total share repurchases, including CCAR capital plan 
 repurchases 2021 2020 2019 
 Purchase price of shares repurchased and retired 615 227 956 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 CCAR capital plan repurchases $ 25,126 $ 7,025 $ 25,644 
 Other authorized repurchases — — 2,500 
 Total shares repurchased $ 25,126 $ 7,025 $ 28,144 
Due to uncertainty resulting from the pandemic,
the Federal Reserve imposed various restrictions
on share repurchase programs and dividends during
2020 and the first half of 2021. Those
restrictions ended as of July 1, 2021 for large
banks, including the Corporation, and large banks
returned to the normal restrictions under the
Federal Reserve’s stress capital buffer (SCB)
framework.
During 2021, in connection with employee stock
plans, the Corporation issued 68million shares of
its common stock and, to satisfy tax withholding
obligations, repurchased 26million shares of its
common stock. At December 31, 2021, the
Corporation had reserved 562million unissued
shares of common stock for future issuances under
employee stock plans, convertible notes and
preferred stock.
 Bank of America138 
Preferred Stock The cash dividends declared on preferred stock were $ 1.4billion in each of 2021,
2020 and 2019. On January 28, 2021, the Corporation issued approximately 37,000shares of 4.125% Non-
Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series PP for $ 915million, with quarterly dividends commencing in May
2021. The Series PP preferred stock has a liquidation preference of $ 25,000per share and is subject
to certain restrictions in the event the Corporation fails to declare and pay full dividends. On
October 26, 2021, the Corporation issued 52,000shares of 4.250% Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock,
Series QQ for $ 1.3billion, with quarterly dividends commencing in February 2022. The Series QQ
preferred stock has a liquidation preference of $ 25,000per share and is subject to certain
restrictions in the event the Corporation fails to declare and pay full dividends. On January 25,
2022, the Corporation issued 70,000shares of 4.375% Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series RR for $
1.8billion. The Series RR preferred stock has a liquidation preference of $ 25,000per share and is
subject to certain restrictions in the event the Corporation fails to declare and pay full dividends.
On January 31, 2022, the Corporation issued 28,000shares of 4.75% Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock,
Series SS for $ 700million. The Series SS preferred stock has a liquidation preference of $ 25,000per
share and is subject to certain restrictions in the event the Corporation fails to declare and pay
full dividends. In 2021, the Corporation fully redeemed Series CC, Series EE and Series T preferred
stock at their liquidation preference values for a total of $ 2.0billion. All series of preferred
stock in the Preferred Stock Summary table have a par value of $ 0.01per share, are not subject to
the operation of a sinking fund, have no participation rights, and with the exception of the Series L
Preferred Stock, are not convertible. The holders of the Series B Preferred Stock and Series 1
through 5 Preferred Stock have general voting rights and vote together with the common stock. The
holders of the other series included in the table have no general voting rights. All outstanding
series of preferred stock of the Corporation have preference over the Corporation’s common stock with
respect to the payment of dividends and distribution of the Corporation’s assets in the event of a
liquidation or dissolution. With the exception of the Series B, F and G Preferred Stock, if any
dividend payable on these series is in arrears for threeor more semi-annual or sixor more quarterly
dividend periods, as applicable (whether consecutive or not), the holders of these series and any
other class or series of preferred stock ranking equally as to payment of dividends and upon which
equivalent voting rights have been conferred and are exercisable (voting as a single class) will be
entitled to vote for the election of twoadditional directors. These voting rights terminate when the
Corporation has paid in full dividends on these series for at least twosemi-annual or fourquarterly
dividend periods, as applicable, following the dividend arrearage. The 7.25% Non-Cumulative Perpetual
Convertible Preferred Stock, Series L (Series L Preferred Stock) does not have early redemption/call
rights. Each share of the Series L Preferred Stock may be converted at any time, at the option of the
holder, into 20shares of the Corporation’s common stock plus cash in lieu of fractional shares. The
Corporation may cause some or all of the Series L Preferred Stock, at its option, at any time or from
time to time, to be converted into shares of common stock at the then-applicable conversion rate if,
for 20trading days during any period of 30consecutive trading days, the closing price of common stock
exceeds 130percent of the then-applicable conversion price of the Series L Preferred Stock. If a
conversion of Series L Preferred Stock occurs at the option of the holder, subsequent to a dividend
record date but prior to the dividend payment date, the Corporation will still pay any accrued
dividends payable.
 139Bank of America 
The table below presents a summary of perpetual preferred stock outstanding at December 31, 2021 .
 P… 
 S… 
 S… 
 (… 
 in Li… 
 m… Pr… D… 
 e… per Per p… 
 as I… T… Sh… An… S… 
 n… I… S… (in C… Di… (… An… R… 
 S… De… D… O… do… V… Ra… d… Di… P… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 S… 7% Ju… 
 B Cu… 19… 7… $ 100 $ 1 7.… % $ 7 $ — n/a 
 Re… 
 On 
 Fl… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… No… 1… 25… 3… LI… 1… 13 af… 
 E… No… 20… +3… No… 
 15, 
 20… 
 On 
 Fl… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… Ma… 1… 10… 1… LI… 4… 6 af… 
 F No… 20… +4… Ma… 
 15, 
 20… 
 On 
 Ad… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… Ma… 4… 10… 4… LI… 4… 20 af… 
 G No… 20… +4… Ma… 
 15, 
 20… 
 7.… 
 S… No… Ja… 3… 1,… 3… 7.… % 7… 223 n/a 
 L Pe… 20… 
 Co… 
 5.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… May ex… af… 
 U… Ra… 20… 4… 25… 1… 6/… 5… 52 Ju… 
 No… 3-… 1, 
 LI… 20… 
 +3… 
 th… 
 6.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… Se… ex… af… 
 X… Ra… 20… 8… 25… 2… 9/… 6… 125 Se… 
 No… 3-… 5, 
 LI… 20… 
 +3… 
 th… 
 6.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… Oc… ex… af… 
 Z… Ra… 20… 5… 25… 1… 10… 6… 91 Oc… 
 No… 3-… 23, 
 LI… 20… 
 +4… 
 th… 
 6.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… Ma… ex… af… 
 A… Ra… 20… 7… 25… 1… 3/… 6… 116 Ma… 
 No… 3-… 17, 
 LI… 20… 
 +3… 
 th… 
 6.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… Ma… ex… af… 
 D… Ra… 20… 4… 25… 1… 3/… 6… 63 Ma… 
 No… 3-… 10, 
 LI… 20… 
 +4… 
 th… 
 5.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… Ma… ex… af… 
 F… Ra… 20… 9… 25… 2… 3/… 5… 138 Ma… 
 No… 3-… 15, 
 LI… 20… 
 +2… 
 th… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 6.… May 5… 25… 1… 6.… % 1… 81 af… 
 G… No… 20… May 
 16, 
 20… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 5.… Ju… 3… 25… 8… 5.… % 1… 50 af… 
 H… No… 20… Ju… 
 24, 
 20… 
 5.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… Ju… ex… af… 
 J… Ra… 20… 4… 25… 1… 6/… 5… 51 Ju… 
 No… 3-… 20, 
 LI… 20… 
 +3… 
 th… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 5.… Ju… 5… 25… 1… 5.… % 1… 75 af… 
 K… No… 20… Ju… 
 25, 
 20… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 5.… Se… 5… 25… 1… 5.… % 1… 66 af… 
 L… No… 20… Se… 
 17, 
 20… 
 On 
 Fi… or 
 S… Ra… Ja… 4… 25… 1… 4.… % 4… 47 af… 
 M… No… 20… Ja… 
 28, 
 20… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 4.… Oc… 4… 25… 1… 4.… % 1… 48 af… 
 N… No… 20… No… 
 3, 
 20… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 4.… 4.… Ja… 3… 25… 9… 4.… % 1… 38 af… 
 P… No… 20… Fe… 
 2, 
 20… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 4.… 4.… Oc… 5… 25… 1… 4.… % — — af… 
 Q… No… 20… No… 
 17, 
 20… 
 On 
 Fl… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… No… 3… 30… 98 LI… 0… 3 af… 
 1… No… 20… +7… No… 
 28, 
 20… 
 On 
 Fl… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… Ma… 9… 30… 2… LI… 0… 9 af… 
 2… No… 20… +6… No… 
 28, 
 20… 
 On 
 Fl… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… No… 7… 30… 2… LI… 1… 9 af… 
 4… No… 20… +7… No… 
 28, 
 20… 
 On 
 Fl… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… Ma… 1… 30… 4… LI… 1… 17 af… 
 5… No… 20… +5… May 
 21, 
 20… 
 I… 
 c… 
 a… -… 
 c… 
 a… 
 T… 3… $ 2… 
(1) The Corporation may redeem series of preferred stock on or after the redemption date, in whole or
in part, at its option, at the liquidation preference plus declared and unpaid dividends. Series B
and Series L Preferred Stock do not have early redemption/call rights.
(2) Ownership is held in the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,000th interest in a
share of preferred stock, paying a quarterly cash dividend, if and when declared.
(3) Subject to 4.00% minimum rate per annum.
(4) Ownership is held in the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/25th interest in a
share of preferred stock, paying a semi-annual cash dividend, if and when declared, until the first
redemption date at which time, it adjusts to a quarterly cash dividend, if and when declared,
thereafter.
(5) Ownership is held in the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,200th interest in a
share of preferred stock, paying a quarterly cash dividend, if and when declared.
(6) Subject to 3.00% minimum rate per annum.
n/a = not applicable
 Bank of America140 
NOTE 14 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
The table below presents the changes in accumulated OCI after-tax for 2021, 2020 and 2019.
 (Dolla… Debit Employee 
 in Debt Valuati… Benefit Foreign 
 millio… Securit… Adjustm… Derivati… Plans Currency Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balanc… 
 Decemb… $ -5,552 $ -531 $ -1,016 $ -4,304 $ -808 $ -12,211 
 31, 
 2018 
 Net 5,875 -963 616 136 -86 5,578 
 change 
 Balanc… 
 Decemb… $ 323 $ -1,494 $ -400 $ -4,168 $ -894 $ -6,633 
 31, 
 2019 
 Net 4,799 -498 826 -98 -52 4,977 
 change 
 Balanc… 
 Decemb… $ 5,122 $ -1,992 $ 426 $ -4,266 $ -946 $ -1,656 
 31, 
 2020 
 Net -2,077 356 -2,306 624 -45 -3,448 
 change 
 Balanc… 
 Decemb… $ 3,045 $ -1,636 $ -1,880 $ -3,642 $ -991 $ -5,104 
 31, 
 2021 
The table below presents the net change in fair value recorded in accumulated OCI, net realized gains
and losses reclassified into earnings and other changes for each component of OCI pre- and after-tax
for 2021, 2020 and 2019.
 (D… 
 in 
 mi… 
 De… Pr… Tax Af… Pre… Tax Aft… Pr… Tax Af… 
 se… 20… eff… tax 2020 ef… tax 20… eff… tax 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net 
 in… 
 (d… $ -2… $ 689 $ -2… $ 6,8… $ -1… $ 5,1… $ 8,… $ -2,… $ 6,… 
 in 
 fa… 
 va… 
 Net 
 re… 
 ga… -22 5 -17 -411 103 -308 -1… 48 -1… 
 re… 
 in… 
 ea… 
 Net -2… 694 -2… 6,4… -1… 4,7… 7,… -1,… 5,… 
 ch… 
 De… 
 va… 
 ad… 
 Net 
 in… 
 (d… 449 -103 346 -669 156 -513 -1… 289 -9… 
 in 
 fa… 
 va… 
 Net 
 re… 
 lo… 13 -3 10 19 -4 15 18 6 24 
 re… 
 in… 
 ea… 
 Net 462 -106 356 -650 152 -498 -1… 295 -9… 
 ch… 
 De… 
 Net 
 in… 
 (d… -2… 703 -2… 1,0… -2… 830 692 -156 536 
 in 
 fa… 
 va… 
 Re… 
 in… 
 ea… 
 Net 
 in… -1… 48 -1… 6 -1 5 104 -26 78 
 in… 
 Co… 
 and -55 13 -42 -12 3 -9 2 — 2 
 be… 
 ex… 
 Net 
 re… 
 (g… 
 lo… -2… 61 -1… -6 2 -4 106 -26 80 
 re… 
 in… 
 ea… 
 Net -3… 764 -2… 1,0… -2… 826 798 -182 616 
 ch… 
 Em… 
 be… 
 pl… 
 Net 
 in… 
 (d… 463 -72 391 -381 80 -301 41 -21 20 
 in 
 fa… 
 va… 
 Net 
 ac… 
 lo… 
 and 295 -67 228 261 -63 198 150 -36 114 
 ot… 
 re… 
 in… 
 ea… 
 Se… 
 cu… 5 — 5 5 — 5 3 -1 2 
 and 
 ot… 
 Net 763 -139 624 -115 17 -98 194 -58 136 
 ch… 
 Fo… 
 cu… 
 Net 
 in… 
 (d… 296 -341 -45 -251 199 -52 -13 -52 -65 
 in 
 fa… 
 va… 
 Net 
 re… 
 (g… -5 5 — -1 1 — -1… 89 -21 
 re… 
 in… 
 ea… 
 Net 291 -336 -45 -252 200 -52 -1… 37 -86 
 ch… 
 To… 
 ot… 
 co… $ -4… $ 877 $ -3… $ 6,4… $ -1… $ 4,9… $ 7,… $ -1,… $ 5,… 
 in… 
 (l… 
(1) Reclassifications of pretax debt securities, DVA and foreign currency (gains) losses are recorded
in other income in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
(2) Reclassifications of pretax employee benefit plan costs are recorded in other general operating
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
 NOTE 15 
 Earnings Per Common Share 
The calculation of EPS and diluted EPS for 2021, 2020 and 2019 is presented below. For more
information on the calculation of EPS, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles .
 (In millions, except per share information) 
 Earnings per common share 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 31,978 $ 17,894 $ 27,430 
 Preferred stock dividends -1,421 -1,421 -1,432 
 Net income applicable to common $ 30,557 $ 16,473 $ 25,998 
 shareholders 
 Average common shares issued and 8,493.3 8,753.2 9,390.5 
 outstanding 
 Earnings per common share $ 3.60 $ 1.88 $ 2.77 
 Diluted earnings per common share 
 Net income applicable to common $ 30,557 $ 16,473 $ 25,998 
 shareholders 
 Average common shares issued and 8,493.3 8,753.2 9,390.5 
 outstanding 
 Dilutive potential common shares(1) 65.1 43.7 52.4 
 Total diluted average common shares 8,558.4 8,796.9 9,442.9 
 issued and outstanding 
 Diluted earnings per common share $ 3.57 $ 1.87 $ 2.75 
(1) Includes incremental dilutive shares from preferred stock, RSUs, restricted stock and warrants.
 141Bank of America 
For 2021, 2020 and 2019, 62million average
dilutive potential common shares associated with
the Series L preferred stock were not included in
the diluted share count because the result would
have been antidilutive under the “if-converted”
method. For 2019, average warrants to purchase
three millionshares of common stock, were
included in the diluted EPS calculation under the
treasury stock method. Substantially all of these
warrants were exercised on or before their
expiration date of January 16, 2019.
NOTE 16 Regulatory Requirements and Restrictions
The Federal Reserve, Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency (OCC) and FDIC (collectively, U.S.
banking regulators) jointly establish regulatory
capital adequacy rules, including Basel 3, for
U.S. banking organizations. As a financial
holding company, the Corporation is subject to
capital adequacy rules issued by the Federal
Reserve. The Corporation’s banking entity
affiliates are subject to capital adequacy rules
issued by the OCC.
The Corporation and its primary banking entity
affiliate, BANA, are Advanced approaches
institutions under Basel 3. As Advanced
approaches institutions, the Corporation and its
banking entity affiliates are required to report
regulatory risk-based capital ratios and risk-
weighted assets under both the Standardized and
Advanced approaches. The approach that yields the
lower ratio is used to assess capital adequacy,
including under the Prompt Corrective Action
(PCA) framework. The Corporation is required to
maintain a minimum supplementary leverage ratio
(SLR) of 3.0 percent plus a leverage buffer of
2.0 percent in order to avoid certain
restrictions on capital distributions and
discretionary bonus payments. The Corporation’s
insured depository institution subsidiaries are
required to maintain a minimum 6.0 percent SLR to
be considered well capitalized under the PCA
framework. The table below presents capital
ratios and related information in accordance with
Basel 3 Standardized and Advanced approaches as
measured at December 31, 2021 and 2020 for the
Corporation and BANA.
 Regu… 
 Capi… 
 under 
 Basel 
 3 
 (Dol… Bank 
 in of 
 mill… Ameri… 
 exce… Corpo… Bank 
 as Stand… of 
 note… Appro… Ameri… 
 Risk… Decem… N.A. 
 capi… 31, Advan… Regula… Stand… Advanc… Regul… 
 metr… 2021 Appro… Minimu… Appro… Approa… Minim… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Comm… 
 equi… 
 tier $ 171,7… $ 171,7… $ 182,5… $ 182,526 
 1 
 capi… 
 Tier 
 1 196,4… 196,4… 182,5… 182,526 
 capi… 
 Total 227,5… 220,6… 194,7… 188,091 
 capi… 
 Risk… 
 asse… 1,618 1,399 1,352 1,048 
 (in 
 bill… 
 Comm… 
 equi… 
 tier 10.6 % 12.3 % 9.5 % 13.5 % 17.4 % 7.0 % 
 1 
 capi… 
 ratio 
 Tier 
 1 12.1 14.0 11.0 13.5 17.4 8.5 
 capi… 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capi… 14.1 15.8 13.0 14.4 17.9 10.5 
 ratio 
 Leve… 
 metr… 
 Adju… 
 quar… 
 aver… $ 3,087 $ 3,087 $ 2,414 $ 2,414 
 asse… 
 (in 
 bill… 
 Tier 
 1 6.4 % 6.4 % 4.0 7.6 % 7.6 % 5.0 
 leve… 
 ratio 
 Supp… 
 leve… 
 expo… $ 3,604 $ 2,824 
 (in 
 bill… 
 Supp… 
 leve… 5.5 % 5.0 6.5 % 6.0 
 ratio 
 Decem… 
 31, 
 2020 
 Risk… 
 capi… 
 metr… 
 Comm… 
 equi… 
 tier $ 176,6… $ 176,6… $ 164,5… $ 164,593 
 1 
 capi… 
 Tier 
 1 200,0… 200,0… 164,5… 164,593 
 capi… 
 Total 237,9… 227,6… 181,3… 170,922 
 capi… 
 Risk… 
 asse… 1,480 1,371 1,221 1,014 
 (in 
 bill… 
 Comm… 
 equi… 
 tier 11.9 % 12.9 % 9.5 % 13.5 % 16.2 % 7.0 % 
 1 
 capi… 
 ratio 
 Tier 
 1 13.5 14.6 11.0 13.5 16.2 8.5 
 capi… 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capi… 16.1 16.6 13.0 14.9 16.9 10.5 
 ratio 
 Leve… 
 metr… 
 Adju… 
 quar… 
 aver… $ 2,719 $ 2,719 $ 2,143 $ 2,143 
 asse… 
 (in 
 bill… 
 Tier 
 1 7.4 % 7.4 % 4.0 7.7 % 7.7 % 5.0 
 leve… 
 ratio 
 Supp… 
 leve… 
 expo… $ 2,786 $ 2,525 
 (in 
 bill… 
 Supp… 
 leve… 7.2 % 5.0 6.5 % 6.0 
 ratio 
(1) As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, capital ratios are calculated using the regulatory capital rule
that allows a five-year transition period related to the adoption of the CECL accounting standard.
(2) The capital conservation buffer and global systemically important bank (G-SIB) surcharge were
2.5percent at both December 31, 2021 and 2020. At December 31, 2021 and 2020 the Corporation's stress
capital buffer of 2.5 percent was applied in place of the capital conservation buffer under the
Standardized approach. The countercyclical capital buffer for both periods was zero. The CET1 capital
regulatory minimum is the sum of the CET1 capital ratio minimum of 4.5 percent, the Corporation’s
G-SIB surcharge of 2.5 percent and the Corporation’s SCB or the capital conservation buffer, as
applicable, of 2.5 percent. The SLR regulatory minimum includes a leverage buffer of 2.0 percent.
(3) Risk-based capital regulatory minimums at December 31, 2021 and 2020 are the minimum ratios under
Basel 3, including a capital conservation buffer of 2.5 percent. The regulatory minimums for the
leverage ratios as of both period ends are the percent required to be considered well capitalized
under the PCA framework.
(4) Total capital under the Advanced approaches differs from the Standardized approach due to
differences in the amount permitted in Tier 2 capital related to the qualifying allowance for credit
losses.
(5) Reflects total average assets adjusted for certain Tier 1 capital deductions.
(6) Supplementary leverage exposure for the Corporation at December 31, 2020 reflects the temporary
exclusion of U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at Federal Reserve Banks. The temporary relief
expired after March 31, 2021 and is not reflected in supplementary leverage exposure at December 31,
2021.
 Bank of America142 
The capital adequacy rules issued by the U.S.
banking regulators require institutions to meet
the established minimums outlined in the table
above. Failure to meet the minimum requirements
can lead to certain mandatory and discretionary
actions by regulators that could have a material
adverse impact on the Corporation’s financial
position. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the
Corporation and its banking entity affiliates
were well capitalized. Due to uncertainty from
the pandemic, the Federal Reserve imposed various
restrictions on share repurchase programs and
dividends during 2020 and the first half of 2021.
In conjunction with its release of 2021 CCAR
supervisory stress test results, the Federal
Reserve announced those restrictions would end as
of July 1, 2021 for large banks, including the
Corporation, and large banks would be subject to
the normal restrictions under the Federal
Reserve’s SCB framework. For more information,
see Note 13 – Shareholders’ Equity . Other
Regulatory Matters The Federal Reserve requires
the Corporation’s bank subsidiaries to maintain
reserve requirements based on a percentage of
certain deposit liabilities. The average daily
reserve balance requirements, in excess of vault
cash, maintained by the Corporation with the
Federal Reserve Bank were $ 0for 2021 and $
3.8billion for 2020. At December 31, 2021 and
2020, the Corporation had cash and cash
equivalents in the amount of $ 4.0billion and $
4.9billion, and securities with a fair value of $
10.6billion and $ 16.8billion that were
segregated in compliance with securities
regulations. Cash held on deposit with the
Federal Reserve Bank to meet reserve requirements
and cash and cash equivalents segregated in
compliance with securities regulations are
components of restricted cash. For more
information, see Note 10 – Securities Financing
Agreements, Short-term Borrowings and Restricted
Cash . In addition, at December 31, 2021 and
2020, the Corporation had cash deposited with
clearing organizations of $ 28.6billion and $
10.9billion primarily recorded in other assets on
the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Bank Subsidiary
Distributions The primary sources of funds for
cash distributions by the Corporation to its
shareholders are capital distributions received
from its bank subsidiaries, BANA and Bank of
America California, N.A. In 2021, the Corporation
received dividends of $ 15.6billion from BANA and
$ 29million from Bank of America California, N.A.
The amount of dividends that a subsidiary bank
may declare in a calendar year without OCC
approval is the subsidiary bank’s net profits for
that year combined with its retained net profits
for the preceding two years. Retained net
profits, as defined by the OCC, consist of net
income less dividends declared during the period.
In 2022, BANA can declare and pay dividends of
approximately $ 14.7billion to the Corporation
plus an additional amount equal to its retained
net profits for 2022 up to the date of any such
dividend declaration. Bank of America California,
N.A. can pay dividends of $ 234million in 2022
plus an additional amount equal to its retained
net profits for 2022 up to the date of any such
dividend declaration.
NOTE 17 Employee Benefit Plans
Pension and Postretirement Plans The Corporation
sponsors a qualified noncontributory trusteed
pension plan (Qualified Pension Plan), a number
of noncontributory nonqualified pension plans and
postretirement health and life plans that cover
eligible employees. Non-U.S. pension plans
sponsored by the Corporation vary based on the
country and local practices. The Qualified
Pension Plan has a balance guarantee feature for
account balances with participant-selected
investments, applied at the time a benefit
payment is made from the plan that effectively
provides principal protection for participant
balances transferred and certain compensation
credits. The Corporation is responsible for
funding any shortfall on the guarantee feature.
Benefits earned under the Qualified Pension Plan
have been frozen. Thereafter, the cash balance
accounts continue to earn investment credits or
interest credits in accordance with the terms of
the plan document. The Corporation has an annuity
contract that guarantees the payment of benefits
vested under a terminated U.S. pension plan
(Other Pension Plan). The Corporation, under a
supplemental agreement, may be responsible for or
benefit from actual experience and investment
performance of the annuity assets. The
Corporation made nocontribution under this
agreement in 2021 or 2020. Contributions may be
required in the future under this agreement. The
Corporation’s noncontributory, nonqualified
pension plans are unfunded and provide
supplemental defined pension benefits to certain
eligible employees. In addition to retirement
pension benefits, certain benefits-eligible
employees may become eligible to continue
participation as retirees in health care and/or
life insurance plans sponsored by the
Corporation. These plans are referred to as the
Postretirement Health and Life Plans. The Pension
and Postretirement Plans table summarizes the
changes in the fair value of plan assets, changes
in the projected benefit obligation (PBO), the
funded status of both the accumulated benefit
obligation (ABO) and the PBO, and the weighted-
average assumptions used to determine benefit
obligations for the pension plans and
postretirement plans at December 31, 2021 and
2020. The estimate of the Corporation’s PBO
associated with these plans considers various
actuarial assumptions, including assumptions for
mortality rates and discount rates. The discount
rate assumptions are derived from a cash flow
matching technique that utilizes rates that are
based on Aa-rated corporate bonds with cash flows
that match estimated benefit payments of each of
the plans. The increases in the weighted-average
discount rates in 2021 resulted in a decrease to
the PBO of $ 895million at December 31, 2021. The
decreases in the weighted-average discount rates
in 2020 resulted in an increase to the PBO of
approximately $ 1.9billion at December 31, 2020.
Significant gains and losses related to changes
in the PBO for 2021 and 2020 primarily resulted
from changes in the discount rate.
 143Bank of America 
 … 
 … … … 
 … … … 
 … … … … … 
 … … … … … 
 … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … 
 … 
 1 
 … 
 … 
 … … … … … … … — 1 
 … 
 … 
 … — — … … … … … 6 
 … 
 … 
 … — — 1 1 — — … … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — … … — — — — 
 … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … n… n… n… n… n… n… — 1 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … n… n… … … n… n… n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … 
 … 
 1 
 … — — … … — 1 5 5 
 … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — 1 1 — — … … 
 … 
 … — — — 3 — — — — 
 … 
 … 
 … — — … … — — — — 
 … 
 … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … n… n… n… n… n… n… — 1 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … n… n… … … n… n… — — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ — $ — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — … … … … … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … … — … … … n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — … … — — n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … … … … … … $ … $ … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … % 2… … % 1… … % 2… … % 2… 
 … % % % % 
 … 
 … n… n… … … … … n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … … % … % … … … … n… n… 
 … 
(1) The measurement date for all of the above plans was December 31 of each year reported.
n/a = not applicable
The Corporation’s estimate of its contributions to be made to the Non-U.S. Pension Plans,
Nonqualified and Other Pension Plans, and Postretirement Health and Life Plans in 2022 is $
30million, $ 91million and $ 42million, respectively. The Corporation does not expect to make a
contribution to the Qualified Pension Plan in 2022. It is the policy of the Corporation to fund no
less than the minimum funding amount required by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
(ERISA). Pension Plans with ABO and PBO in excess of plan assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 are
presented in the table below. For these plans, funding strategies vary due to legal requirements and
local practices.
 Nonqualified 
 Plans with ABO and PBO in and Other 
 Excess of Plan Assets Non-U.S. Pension Plans 
 (Dollars in millions) Pension Plans 2021 2020 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 PBO $ 841 $ 900 $ 945 $ 1,028 
 ABO 780 841 945 1,028 
 Fair value of plan assets 207 211 1 1 
 Bank of America144 
 Co… 
 of 
 Net 
 Pe… 
 Be… 
 Co… 
 (D… 
 in 
 mi… 
 Co… 
 of 
 net 
 pe… Qua… Non… 
 be… Pen… Pen… 
 co… Plan Pla… 
 (i… 2021 20… 20… 2021 20… 20… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Se… $ — $ — $ — $ 28 $ 20 $ 17 
 co… 
 In… 414 500 593 45 49 65 
 co… 
 Ex… 
 re… 
 on -1,… -1… -1… -70 -66 -99 
 pl… 
 as… 
 Am… 
 of 
 net 193 173 135 19 9 6 
 ac… 
 lo… 
 Ot… — — — 5 8 4 
 Net 
 pe… 
 be… $ -566 $ -4… $ -3… $ 27 $ 20 $ -7 
 co… 
 (i… 
 We… 
 as… 
 us… 
 to 
 de… 
 net 
 co… 
 for 
 ye… 
 en… 
 De… 
 31 
 Di… 2.57 % 3.32 4.… % 1.35 % 1.81 2.… % 
 ra… % % 
 Ex… 
 re… 
 on 5.75 6.… 6.… 2.30 2.… 4.… 
 pl… 
 as… 
 Ra… 
 of n/a n/a n/a 4.11 4.… 4.… 
 co… 
 in… 
 Non… Pos… 
 and Hea… 
 Oth… and 
 Pen… Life 
 Pla… Pla… 
 (D… 
 in 2021 20… 20… 2021 20… 20… 
 mi… 
 Co… 
 of 
 net 
 pe… 
 be… 
 co… 
 (i… 
 Se… $ — $ 1 $ 1 $ 5 $ 5 $ 5 
 co… 
 In… 67 90 113 24 32 38 
 co… 
 Ex… 
 re… 
 on -49 -71 -95 -3 -4 -5 
 pl… 
 as… 
 Am… 
 of 
 net 63 50 34 20 29 -24 
 ac… 
 lo… 
 (g… 
 Ot… — — — — -2 -2 
 Net 
 pe… 
 be… $ 81 $ 70 $ 53 $ 46 $ 60 $ 12 
 co… 
 (i… 
 We… 
 as… 
 us… 
 to 
 de… 
 net 
 co… 
 for 
 ye… 
 en… 
 De… 
 31 
 Di… 2.33 % 3.20 4.… % 2.48 % 3.27 4.… % 
 ra… % % 
 Ex… 
 re… 
 on 1.88 2.… 3.… 2.00 2.… 2.… 
 pl… 
 as… 
 Ra… 
 of 4.00 4.… 4.… n/a n/a n/a 
 co… 
 in… 
n/a = not applicable
The asset valuation method used to calculate the expected return on plan assets component of net
periodic benefit cost for the Qualified Pension Plan recognizes 60percent of the prior year’s market
gains or losses at the next measurement date with the remaining 40percent spread equally over the
subsequent four years. Gains and losses for all benefit plans except postretirement health care are
recognized in accordance with the standard amortization provisions of the applicable accounting
guidance. Net periodic postretirement health and life expense was determined using the “projected
unit credit” actuarial method. For the Postretirement Health and Life Plans, 50percent of the
unrecognized gain or loss at the beginning of the year (or at subsequent remeasurement) is recognized
on a level basis during the year. Assumed health care cost trend rates affect the postretirement
benefit obligation and benefit cost reported for the Postretirement Health and Life Plans. The
assumed health care cost trend rate used to measure the expected cost of benefits covered by the
Postretirement Health and Life Plans is 6.25percent for 2022, reducing in steps to 5.00percent in
2027 and later years. The Corporation’s net periodic benefit cost (income) recognized for the plans
is sensitive to the discount rate and expected return on plan assets. For the Qualified Pension Plan,
Non-U.S. Pension Plans, Nonqualified and Other Pension Plans, and Postretirement Health and Life
Plans, a 25 bp decline in discount rates and expected return on assets would not have had a
significant impact on the net periodic benefit cost for 2021.
 P… 
 A… 
 i… 
 in 
 A… 
 O… N… P… 
 a… a… H… 
 O… Q… N… O… a… 
 (… P… P… P… L… 
 in P… P… P… P… T… 
 m… 2… 20… 2… 20… 2… 20… 2… 20… 2… 20… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 N… 
 a… $ 3… $ 3,… $ 4… $ 628 $ 9… $ 987 $ 4 $ 66 $ 4… $ 5,… 
 l… 
 (… 
 P… 
 s… — — 17 18 — — -3 -4 14 14 
 c… 
 (… 
 A… 
 r… 
 in $ 3… $ 3,… $ 4… $ 646 $ 9… $ 987 $ 1 $ 62 $ 4… $ 5,… 
 a… 
 O… 
 C… 
 y… 
 a… $ -… $ 219 $ -… $ 79 $ 21 $ 29 $ -… $ 47 $ -… $ 374 
 l… 
 (… 
 A… 
 of 
 a… 
 g… 
 (… -… -1… -… -12 -… -50 -… -27 -… -2… 
 a… 
 p… 
 s… 
 c… 
 C… 
 y… 
 p… — — — 3 — — — — — 3 
 s… 
 c… 
 (… 
 A… 
 r… $ -… $ 46 $ -… $ 70 $ -… $ -21 $ -… $ 20 $ -… $ 115 
 in 
 O… 
 145Bank of America 
Plan Assets The Qualified Pension Plan has been established as a retirement vehicle for participants,
and trusts have been established to secure benefits promised under the Qualified Pension Plan. The
Corporation’s policy is to invest the trust assets in a prudent manner for the exclusive purpose of
providing benefits to participants and defraying reasonable expenses of administration. The
Corporation’s investment strategy is designed to provide a total return that, over the long term,
increases the ratio of assets to liabilities. The strategy attempts to maximize the investment return
on assets at a level of risk deemed appropriate by the Corporation while complying with ERISA and any
applicable regulations and laws. The investment strategy utilizes asset allocation as a principal
determinant for establishing the risk/return profile of the assets. Asset allocation ranges are
established, periodically reviewed and adjusted as funding levels and liability characteristics
change. Active and passive investment managers are employed to help enhance the risk/return profile
of the assets. An additional aspect of the investment strategy used to minimize risk (part of the
asset allocation plan) includes matching the exposure of participant-selected investment measures.
The assets of the Non-U.S. Pension Plans are primarily attributable to a U.K. pension plan. This U.K.
pension plan’s assets are invested prudently so that the benefits promised to members are provided
with consideration given to the nature and the duration of the plans' liabilities. The selected asset
allocation strategy is designed to achieve a higher return than the lowest risk strategy. The
expected rate of return on plan assets assumption was developed through analysis of historical market
returns, historical asset class volatility and correlations, current market conditions, anticipated
future asset allocations, the funds’ past experience and expectations on potential future market
returns. The expected return on plan assets assumption is determined using the calculated market-
related value for the Qualified Pension Plan and the Other Pension Plan and the fair value for the
Non-U.S. Pension Plans and Postretirement Health and Life Plans. The expected return on plan assets
assumption represents a long-term average view of the performance of the assets in the Qualified
Pension Plan, the Non-U.S. Pension Plans, the Other Pension Plan, and Postretirement Health and Life
Plans, a return that may or may not be achieved during any one calendar year. The Other Pension Plan
is invested solely in an annuity contract, which is primarily invested in fixed-income securities
structured such that asset maturities match the duration of the plan’s obligations. The target
allocations for 2022 by asset category for the Qualified Pension Plan, Non-U.S. Pension Plans, and
Nonqualified and Other Pension Plans are presented in the table below. Equity securities for the
Qualified Pension Plan include common stock of the Corporation in the amounts of $ 398million (
1.80percent of total plan assets) and $ 274million ( 1.26percent of total plan assets) at December
31, 2021 and 2020.
 2022 Target Allocation 
 Percentage 
 Qualified Non-U.S. Nonqualified 
 Asset Category Pension Plan Pension Plans and Other 
 Pension Plans 
 Equity securities 15-50% 0-25% 0-5% 
 Debt securities 45-80% 40-70% 95-100% 
 Real estate 0-10% 0-15% 0-5% 
 Other 0-5% 10-40% 0-5% 
Fair Value Measurements
For more information on fair value measurements, including descriptions of Level 1, 2 and 3 of the
fair value hierarchy and the valuation methods employed by the Corporation, see Note 1 – Summary of
Significant Accounting Principles and Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements . Combined plan investment
assets measured at fair value by level and in total at December 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized in
the Fair Value Measurements table.
 Bank of America146 
 Fair 
 Val… Level Lev… 
 Mea… 1 1 
 (Do… Dece… Dec… 
 in 31, Level Lev… 31, Level Lev… 
 mil… 2021 2 3 Total 2020 2 3 Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Mon… 
 mar… 
 and $ 1,339 $ — $ — $ 1,339 $ 1,3… $ — $ — $ 1,380 
 int… 
 cash 
 U.S. 
 gov… 
 and 4,948 934 6 5,888 4,5… 1,238 7 5,835 
 gov… 
 age… 
 obl… 
 Cor… — 4,900 — 4,900 — 5,021 — 5,021 
 debt 
 Non… 
 debt 925 1,165 — 2,090 1,0… 1,122 — 2,143 
 sec… 
 Ass… — 1,485 — 1,485 — 1,967 — 1,967 
 sec… 
 Mut… 
 and 
 exc… 1,395 — — 1,395 1,3… — — 1,362 
 tra… 
 fun… 
 Col… 
 inv… — 3,419 — 3,419 — 3,199 — 3,199 
 fun… 
 Com… 
 and 4,826 — — 4,826 4,4… — — 4,438 
 pre… 
 sto… 
 Real 
 est… 87 — — 87 73 — — 73 
 inv… 
 tru… 
 Par… — — 7 7 — — 7 7 
 loa… 
 Oth… 1 29 630 660 1 29 684 714 
 inv… 
 Tot… 
 plan 
 inv… 
 ass… $ 13,5… $ 11,9… $ 643 $ 26,0… $ 12,… $ 12,5… $ 698 $ 26,1… 
 at 
 fair 
 val… 
(1) Other investments includes insurance annuity contracts of $ 612million and $ 664million and other
various investments of $ 48million and $ 50million at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(2) At December 31, 2021 and 2020, excludes $ 1.7billion and $ 1.6billion of certain investments that
are measured at fair value using the net asset value per share (or its equivalent) as a practical
expedient and are not required to be classified in the fair value hierarchy. Prior period has been
revised to conform to current-period presentation.
The Level 3 Fair Value Measurements table presents a reconciliation of all plan investment assets
measured at fair value using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) during 2021, 2020 and 2019.
 Level 3 Fair 
 Value Actual Return on 
 Measurements Balance Plan Assets Still Purchases, Sales 
 (Dollars in January 1 Held at the and Balance 
 millions) 2021 Reporting Date Settlements December 31 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. government 
 and government $ 7 $ — $ -1 $ 6 
 agency 
 obligations 
 Participant 7 — — 7 
 Loans 
 Other 684 -5 -49 630 
 investments 
 Total $ 698 $ -5 $ -50 $ 643 
 2020 
 U.S. government 
 and government $ 8 $ — $ -1 $ 7 
 agency 
 obligations 
 Participant 8 — -1 7 
 Loans 
 Other 628 6 50 684 
 investments 
 Total $ 644 $ 6 $ 48 $ 698 
 2019 
 U.S. government 
 and government $ 9 $ — $ -1 $ 8 
 agency 
 obligations 
 Private real 5 — -5 — 
 estate 
 Participant 12 — -4 8 
 loans 
 Other 576 6 46 628 
 investments 
 Total $ 602 $ 6 $ 36 $ 644 
Projected Benefit Payments
Benefit payments projected to be made from the Qualified Pension Plan, Non-U.S. Pension Plans,
Nonqualified and Other Pension Plans, and Postretirement Health and Life Plans are presented in the
table below.
 Projected 
 Benefit Nonqualified 
 Payments Qualified Non-U.S. and Other Postretirement 
 (Dollars in Pension Pension Pension Health and 
 millions) Plan(1) Plans(2) Plans(2) Life Plans(3) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2022 $ 948 $ 134 $ 239 $ 78 
 2023 938 142 244 74 
 2024 949 135 225 71 
 2025 936 142 223 67 
 2026 941 140 218 64 
 2027 - 2031 4,395 668 940 275 
(1) Benefit payments expected to be made from the plan’s assets.
(2) Benefit payments expected to be made from a combination of the plans’ and the Corporation’s
assets.
(3) Benefit payments (net of retiree contributions) expected to be made from a combination of the
plans’ and the Corporation’s assets.
 147Bank of America 
Defined Contribution Plans The Corporation
maintains qualified and non-qualified defined
contribution retirement plans. The Corporation
recorded expense of $ 1.2billion in both 2021 and
2020 and $ 1.0billion in 2019 related to the
qualified defined contribution plans. At December
31, 2021 and 2020, 173million and 189million
shares of the Corporation’s common stock were
held by these plans. Payments to the plans for
dividends on common stock were $ 139million, $
138million and $ 133million in 2021, 2020 and
2019, respectively. Certain non-U.S. employees
are covered under defined contribution pension
plans that are separately administered in
accordance with local laws. NOTE 18 Stock-based
Compensation Plans The Corporation administers a
number of equity compensation plans, with awards
being granted predominantly from the Bank of
America Key Employee Equity Plan (KEEP). On April
20, 2021, Bank of America’s shareholders approved
the amendment and restatement of the KEEP,
changing its name to the “Bank of America
Corporation Equity Plan” and increasing the
number of shares available for grant by
115million. Subsequent to the amendment and
restatement, 715million shares of the
Corporation’s common stock are authorized to be
used for grants of awards under this plan. During
2021 and 2020, the Corporation granted 99million
and 86million RSU awards to certain employees
under the KEEP. These RSUs were authorized to
settle predominantly in shares of common stock of
the Corporation. Certain RSUs will be settled in
cash or contain settlement provisions that
subject these awards to variable accounting
whereby compensation expense is adjusted to fair
value based on changes in the share price of the
Corporation’s common stock up to the settlement
date. Of the RSUs granted in 2021 and 2020,
81million and 29million will generally vest over
four yearsand 18million and 57million will vest
over three years. The four-year awards vest
primarily in one-fourth increments on each of the
first four anniversaries of the grant date while
the three-year awards vest primarily in one-third
increments on each of the first three
anniversaries of the grant date, provided that
the employee remains continuously employed with
the Corporation during that time, and will be
expensed ratably over the vesting period, net of
estimated forfeitures, for non-retirement
eligible employees based on the grant-date fair
value of the shares. Of the RSUs granted in 2021
and 2020 that vest over four years, 27million and
25million do not include retirement eligibility.
For all other RSUs granted to employees who are
retirement eligible, they are deemed authorized
as of the beginning of the year preceding the
grant date when the incentive award plans are
generally approved. As a result, the estimated
value is expensed ratably over the year preceding
the grant date. The compensation cost for the
stock-based plans was $ 3.0billion, $ 2.1billion
and $ 2.1billion, and the related income tax
benefit was $ 723million, $ 505million and $
511million for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
At December 31, 2021, there was an estimated $
2.3billion of total unrecognized compensation
cost related to certain share-based compensation
awards that is expected to be recognized over a
period of up to four years, with a weighted-
average period of 2.4years.
Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units
The total fair value of restricted stock and
restricted stock units vested in 2021, 2020 and
2019 was $ 2.3billion, $ 2.3billion and $
2.6billion, respectively. The table below
presents the status at December 31, 2021 of the
share-settled restricted stock and restricted
stock units and changes during 2021.
 Stock-settled Restricted Stock and Weighted- 
 Restricted Stock Units Shares/Units average Grant Date Fair Value 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstanding at January 1, 2021 167,953,229 $ 30.60 
 Granted 96,804,487 32.32 
 Vested -69,337,350 30.19 
 Canceled -10,369,524 32.58 
 Outstanding at December 31, 2021 185,050,842 31.54 
Cash-settled Restricted Units
At December 31, 2021, approximately twomillion
cash-settled restricted units remain outstanding.
In 2021, 2020 and 2019, the amount of cash paid
to settle the RSUs that vested was $ 72million, $
81million and $ 84million, respectively.
NOTE 19 Income Taxes
The components of income tax expense for 2021,
2020 and 2019 are presented in the table below.
 Income Tax Expense 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Current income tax expense 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. federal $ 1,076 $ 1,092 $ 1,136 
 U.S. state and local 775 1,076 901 
 Non-U.S. 985 670 852 
 Total current expense 2,836 2,838 2,889 
 Deferred income tax expense 
 U.S. federal 962 -799 2,001 
 U.S. state and local 491 -233 223 
 Non-U.S. -2,291 -705 211 
 Total deferred expense -838 -1,737 2,435 
 Total income tax expense $ 1,998 $ 1,101 $ 5,324 
Total income tax expense does not reflect the tax
effects of items that are included in OCI each
period. For more information, see Note 14 –
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) .
Other tax effects included in OCI each period
resulted in a benefit of $ 877million in 2021 and
expense of $ 1.5billion, and $ 1.9billion in 2020
and 2019.
Income tax expense for 2021, 2020 and 2019 varied
from the amount computed by applying the
statutory income tax rate to income before income
taxes. The Corporation’s federal statutory tax
rate was 21 percent for 2021, 2020 and 2019. A
reconciliation of the expected U.S. federal
income tax expense, calculated by applying the
federal statutory tax rate, to the Corporation’s
actual income tax expense, and the effective tax
rates for 2021, 2020 and 2019 are presented in
the following table.
 Bank of America148 
 Reconciliation 
 of Income Tax 
 Expense 
 (Dollars in Amount Amount Amount 
 millions) 2021 Percent 2020 Percent 2019 Percent 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Expected U.S. 
 federal income $ 7,135 21.0 % $ 3,989 21.0 % $ 6,878 21.0 % 
 tax expense 
 Increase 
 (decrease) in 
 taxes resulting 
 from: 
 State tax 
 expense, net of 1,087 3.2 728 3.8 1,283 3.9 
 federal 
 benefit 
 Affordable 
 housing/energy/… -3,795 -11.2 -2,869 -15.1 -2,365 -7.2 
 credits 
 Tax law changes -2,050 -6.0 -699 -3.7 — — 
 Tax-exempt 
 income, -352 -1.0 -346 -1.8 -433 -1.3 
 including 
 dividends 
 Changes in 
 prior-period -155 -0.5 -41 -0.2 -613 -1.9 
 UTBs, including 
 interest 
 Nondeductible 206 0.6 324 1.7 290 0.9 
 expenses 
 Rate 
 differential on 45 0.1 218 1.1 504 1.5 
 non-U.S. 
 earnings 
 Other -123 -0.3 -203 -1.0 -220 -0.6 
 Total income tax $ 1,998 5.9 % $ 1,101 5.8 % $ 5,324 16.3 % 
 expense 
The reconciliation of the beginning unrecognized
tax benefits (UTB) balance to the ending balance
is presented in the table below.
 Reconciliation of the Change in Unrecognized Tax Benefits 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance, January 1 $ 1,340 $ 1,175 $ 2,197 
 Increases related to positions taken 208 238 238 
 during the current year 
 Increases related to positions taken 265 99 401 
 during prior years(1) 
 Decreases related to positions taken -413 -172 -1,102 
 during prior years(1) 
 Settlements -23 — -541 
 Expiration of statute of limitations -55 — -18 
 Balance, December 31 $ 1,322 $ 1,340 $ 1,175 
(1) The sum of the positions taken during prior
years differs from the $( 155) million, $( 41)
million and $( 613) million in the Reconciliation
of Income Tax Expense table due to temporary
items, state items and jurisdictional offsets, as
well as the inclusion of interest in the
Reconciliation of Income Tax Expense table.
At December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the balance
of the Corporation’s UTBs which would, if
recognized, affect the Corporation’s effective
tax rate was $ 959million, $ 976million and $
814million, respectively. Included in the UTB
balance are some items the recognition of which
would not affect the effective tax rate, such as
the tax effect of certain temporary differences,
the portion of gross state UTBs that would be
offset by the tax benefit of the associated
federal deduction and the portion of gross
non-U.S. UTBs that would be offset by tax
reductions in other jurisdictions. It is
reasonably possible that the UTB balance may
decrease by as much as $ 398million during the
next 12 months, since resolved items will be
removed from the balance whether their resolution
results in payment or recognition. The
Corporation recognized interest expense of $
32million and $ 9million in 2021 and 2020 and an
interest benefit of $ 19million in 2019. At
December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation’s
accrual for interest and penalties that related
to income taxes, net of taxes and remittances,
was $ 167million and $ 130million. The
Corporation files income tax returns in more than
100state and non-U.S. jurisdictions each year.
The IRS and other tax authorities in countries
and states in which the Corporation has
significant business operations examine tax
returns
periodically (continuously in some
jurisdictions). The table below summarizes the
status of examinations by major jurisdiction for
the Corporation and various subsidiaries at
December 31, 2021.
 Tax Examination Status 
 Years under Status at December 31 
 Examination(1) 2021 
 United States 2017-2021 Field Examination 
 California 2012-2014 Appeals 
 California 2015-2017 Field Examination 
 New York 2016-2018 Field Examination 
 United Kingdom(2) 2019 Field Examination 
(1) All tax years subsequent to the years shown
remain subject to examination.
(2) Field examination for tax year 2020 to begin
in 2022.
Significant components of the Corporation’s net
deferred tax assets and liabilities at December
31, 2021 and 2020 are presented in the table
below.
 Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities 
 (Dollars in millions) December 31 
 Deferred tax assets 2021 2020 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net operating loss carryforwards $ 9,360 $ 7,717 
 Allowance for credit losses 3,097 4,701 
 Security, loan and debt valuations 2,746 2,571 
 Lease liability 2,508 2,400 
 Accrued expenses 1,626 1,481 
 Employee compensation and retirement 1,392 1,582 
 benefits 
 Credit carryforwards 705 484 
 Other 1,160 1,412 
 Gross deferred tax assets 22,594 22,348 
 Valuation allowance -1,988 -2,346 
 Total deferred tax assets, net of valuation 20,606 20,002 
 allowance 
 Deferred tax liabilities 
 Equipment lease financing 3,083 3,101 
 Right-to-use asset 2,358 2,296 
 Fixed assets 2,082 1,957 
 ESG-related tax credit investments 1,387 1,930 
 Available-for-sale securities 1,016 1,701 
 Other 1,527 1,570 
 Gross deferred tax liabilities 11,453 12,555 
 Net deferred tax assets $ 9,153 $ 7,447 
 149Bank of America 
The table below summarizes the deferred tax
assets and related valuation allowances
recognized for the net operating loss (NOL) and
tax credit carryforwards at December 31, 2021.
 Net Operating Loss and 
 Tax Credit Carryforward Net 
 Deferred Tax Assets Deferred Valuation Deferred First Year 
 (Dollars in millions) Tax Asset Allowance Tax Asset Expiring 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net operating losses - $ 7,713 $ — $ 7,713 None 
 U.K.(1) 
 Net operating losses - 494 -253 241 Various 
 other non-U.S. 
 Net operating losses - 1,153 -610 543 Various 
 U.S. states(2) 
 Foreign tax credits 705 -705 — After 2028 
(1) Represents U.K. broker-dealer net operating
losses that may be carried forward indefinitely.
(2) The net operating losses and related
valuation allowances for U.S. states before
considering the benefit of federal deductions
were $ 1.5billion and $ 772million.
Management concluded that novaluation allowance
was necessary to reduce the deferred tax assets
related to the U.K. NOL carryforwards and U.S.
federal and certain state NOL carryforwards since
estimated future taxable income will be
sufficient to utilize these assets prior to their
expiration. The majority of the Corporation’s
U.K. net deferred tax assets, which consist
primarily of NOLs, are expected to be realized by
certain subsidiaries over an extended number of
years. Management’s conclusion is supported by
financial results, profit forecasts for the
relevant entities and the indefinite period to
carry forward NOLs. However, a material change in
those estimates could lead management to reassess
such valuation allowance conclusions.
At December 31, 2021, U.S. federal income taxes
had not been provided on approximately $
5.0billion of temporary differences associated
with investments in non-U.S. subsidiaries that
are essentially permanent in duration. If the
Corporation were to record the associated
deferred tax liability, the amount would be
approximately $ 1.0billion.
NOTE 20 Fair Value Measurements Under applicable accounting standards, fair value is defined as the
exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in
the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants on the measurement date. The Corporation determines the fair values of
its financial instruments under applicable accounting standards that require an entity to maximize
the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. The Corporation categorizes
its financial instruments into three levels based on the established fair value hierarchy and
conducts a review of fair value hierarchy classifications on a quarterly basis. Transfers into or out
of fair value hierarchy classifications are made if the significant inputs used in the financial
models measuring the fair values of the assets and liabilities become unobservable or observable in
the current marketplace. For more information regarding the fair value hierarchy and how the
Corporation measures fair value, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles . The
Corporation accounts for certain financial instruments under the
fair value option. For more information, see Note 21 – Fair Value Option. Valuation Techniques The
following sections outline the valuation methodologies for the Corporation’s assets and liabilities.
While the Corporation believes its valuation methods are appropriate and consistent with other market
participants, the use of different methodologies or assumptions to determine the fair value of
certain financial instruments could result in a different estimate of fair value at the reporting
date. During 2021, there were no significant changes to valuation approaches or techniques that had,
or are expected to have, a material impact on the Corporation’s consolidated financial position or
results of operations. Trading Account Assets and Liabilities and Debt Securities The fair values of
trading account assets and liabilities are primarily based on actively traded markets where prices
are based on either direct market quotes or observed transactions. The fair values of debt securities
are generally based on quoted market prices or market prices for similar assets. Liquidity is a
significant factor in the determination of the fair values of trading account assets and liabilities
and debt securities. Market price quotes may not be readily available for some positions such as
positions within a market sector where trading activity has slowed significantly or ceased. Some of
these instruments are valued using a discounted cash flow model, which estimates the fair value of
the securities using internal credit risk, and interest rate and prepayment risk models that
incorporate management’s best estimate of current key assumptions such as default rates, loss
severity and prepayment rates. Principal and interest cash flows are discounted using an observable
discount rate for similar instruments with adjustments that management believes a market participant
would consider in determining fair value for the specific security. Other instruments are valued
using a net asset value approach which considers the value of the underlying securities. Underlying
assets are valued using external pricing services, where available, or matrix pricing based on the
vintages and ratings. Situations of illiquidity generally are triggered by the market’s perception of
credit uncertainty regarding a single company or a specific market sector. In these instances, fair
value is determined based on limited available market information and other factors, principally from
reviewing the issuer’s financial statements and changes in credit ratings made by one or more rating
agencies. Derivative Assets and Liabilities The fair values of derivative assets and liabilities
traded in the OTC market are determined using quantitative models that utilize multiple market inputs
including interest rates, prices and indices to generate continuous yield or pricing curves and
volatility factors to value the position. The majority of market inputs are actively quoted and can
be validated through external sources, including brokers, market transactions and third-party pricing
services. When third-party pricing services are used, the methods and assumptions are reviewed by the
Corporation. Estimation risk is greater for derivative asset and liability positions that are either
option-based or have longer maturity
 Bank of America150 
dates where observable market inputs are less readily available, or are unobservable, in which case,
quantitative-based extrapolations of rate, price or index scenarios are used in determining fair
values. The fair values of derivative assets and liabilities include adjustments for market
liquidity, counterparty credit quality and other instrument-specific factors, where appropriate. In
addition, the Corporation incorporates within its fair value measurements of OTC derivatives a
valuation adjustment to reflect the credit risk associated with the net position. Positions are
netted by counterparty, and fair value for net long exposures is adjusted for counterparty credit
risk while the fair value for net short exposures is adjusted for the Corporation’s own credit risk.
The Corporation also incorporates FVA within its fair value measurements to include funding costs on
uncollateralized derivatives and derivatives where the Corporation is not permitted to use the
collateral it receives. An estimate of severity of loss is also used in the determination of fair
value, primarily based on market data. Loans and Loan Commitments The fair values of loans and loan
commitments are based on market prices, where available, or discounted cash flow analyses using
market-based credit spreads of comparable debt instruments or credit derivatives of the specific
borrower or comparable borrowers. Results of discounted cash flow analyses may be adjusted, as
appropriate, to reflect other market conditions or the perceived credit risk of the borrower.
Mortgage Servicing Rights The fair values of MSRs are primarily determined using an option-adjusted
spread valuation approach, which factors in prepayment risk to determine the fair value of MSRs. This
approach consists of projecting servicing cash flows under multiple interest rate scenarios and
discounting these cash flows using risk-adjusted discount rates. Loans Held-for-sale The fair values
of LHFS are based on quoted market prices, where available, or are determined by discounting
estimated cash flows using interest rates approximating the Corporation’s current origination rates
for similar loans adjusted to reflect the inherent credit risk. The borrower-specific credit risk is
embedded within the quoted market prices or is implied by considering loan performance when selecting
comparables. Short-term Borrowings and Long-term Debt The Corporation issues structured liabilities
that have coupons or repayment terms linked to the performance of debt or equity securities, interest
rates, indices, currencies or commodities. The fair values of these structured liabilities are
estimated using quantitative models for the combined derivative and debt portions of the notes. These
models incorporate observable and, in some instances, unobservable inputs including security prices,
interest rate yield curves, option volatility, currency, commodity or equity rates and correlations
among these inputs. The Corporation also considers the impact of its own credit spread in determining
the discount rate used to value these liabilities. The credit spread is determined by reference to
observable spreads in the secondary bond market. Securities Financing Agreements The fair values of
certain reverse repurchase agreements, repurchase agreements and securities borrowed transactions are
determined using quantitative models, including discounted cash flow models that require the use of
multiple market inputs including interest rates and spreads to generate continuous yield or pricing
curves, and volatility factors. The majority of market inputs are actively quoted and can be
validated through external sources, including brokers, market transactions and third-party pricing
services. Deposits The fair values of deposits are determined using quantitative models, including
discounted cash flow models that require the use of multiple market inputs including interest rates
and spreads to generate continuous yield or pricing curves, and volatility factors. The majority of
market inputs are actively quoted and can be validated through external sources, including brokers,
market transactions and third-party pricing services. The Corporation considers the impact of its own
credit spread in the valuation of these liabilities. The credit risk is determined by reference to
observable credit spreads in the secondary cash market. Asset-backed Secured Financings The fair
values of asset-backed secured financings are based on external broker bids, where available, or are
determined by discounting estimated cash flows using interest rates approximating the Corporation’s
current origination rates for similar loans adjusted to reflect the inherent credit risk.
 151Bank of America 
Recurring Fair Value
Assets and liabilities carried at fair value on a recurring basis at December 31, 2021 and 2020,
including financial instruments that the Corporation accounts for under the fair value option, are
summarized in the following tables.
 December 31, 
 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fair Value 
 Measurements 
 (Dollars in Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Netting Assets/Liabi… 
 millions) Adjustments… at Fair Value 
 Assets 
 Time 
 deposits 
 placed and $ 707 $ — $ — $ — $ 707 
 other 
 short-term 
 investments 
 Federal 
 funds sold 
 and 
 securities 
 borrowed or — 150,665 — — 150,665 
 purchased 
 under 
 agreements 
 to resell 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets: 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 44,599 803 — — 45,402 
 government 
 agencies 
 Corporate 
 securities, 
 trading — 31,601 2,110 — 33,711 
 loans and 
 other 
 Equity 61,425 38,383 190 — 99,998 
 securities 
 Non-U.S. 
 sovereign 3,822 25,612 396 — 29,830 
 debt 
 Mortgage 
 trading 
 loans, MBS 
 and ABS: 
 U.S. 
 government… — 25,645 109 — 25,754 
 agency 
 guaranteed 
 Mortgage 
 trading 
 loans, ABS — 10,967 1,418 — 12,385 
 and other 
 MBS 
 Total 
 trading 109,846 133,011 4,223 — 247,080 
 account 
 assets(2) 
 Derivative 34,748 310,581 3,133 -313,118 35,344 
 assets 
 AFS debt 
 securities: 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 198,071 1,074 — — 199,145 
 government 
 agencies 
 Mortgage-b… 
 securities: 
 Agency — 46,339 — — 46,339 
 Agency-col… 
 mortgage — 3,380 — — 3,380 
 obligations 
 Non-agency — 267 316 — 583 
 residential 
 Commercial — 19,604 — — 19,604 
 Non-U.S. — 11,933 — — 11,933 
 securities 
 Other 
 taxable — 2,690 71 — 2,761 
 securities 
 Tax-exempt — 15,381 52 — 15,433 
 securities 
 Total AFS 
 debt 198,071 100,668 439 — 299,178 
 securities 
 Other debt 
 securities 
 carried at 
 fair 
 value: 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 575 — — — 575 
 government 
 agencies 
 Non-agency 
 residential — 343 242 — 585 
 MBS 
 Non-U.S. 
 and other 2,580 5,155 — — 7,735 
 securities 
 Total other 
 debt 
 securities 3,155 5,498 242 — 8,895 
 carried at 
 fair value 
 Loans and — 7,071 748 — 7,819 
 leases 
 Loans — 4,138 317 — 4,455 
 held-for-s… 
 Other 7,657 2,915 1,572 — 12,144 
 assets(3) 
 Total $ 354,184 $ 714,547 $ 10,674 $ -313,118 $ 766,287 
 assets(4) 
 Liabilities 
 Interest-b… 
 deposits in $ — $ 408 $ — $ — $ 408 
 U.S. 
 offices 
 Federal 
 funds 
 purchased 
 and 
 securities — 139,641 — — 139,641 
 loaned or 
 sold under 
 agreements 
 to 
 repurchase 
 Trading 
 account 
 liabilitie… 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 19,826 313 — — 20,139 
 government 
 agencies 
 Equity 41,744 6,491 — — 48,235 
 securities 
 Non-U.S. 
 sovereign 10,400 13,781 — — 24,181 
 debt 
 Corporate 
 securities — 8,124 11 — 8,135 
 and other 
 Total 
 trading 71,970 28,709 11 — 100,690 
 account 
 liabilities 
 Derivative 35,282 314,380 5,795 -317,782 37,675 
 liabilities 
 Short-term — 4,279 — — 4,279 
 borrowings 
 Accrued 
 expenses 8,359 3,130 — — 11,489 
 and other 
 liabilities 
 Long-term — 28,633 1,075 — 29,708 
 debt 
 Total $ 115,611 $ 519,180 $ 6,881 $ -317,782 $ 323,890 
 liabilitie… 
(1) Amounts represent the impact of legally enforceable master netting agreements and also cash
collateral held or placed with the same counterparties.
(2) Includes securities with a fair value of $ 10.6billion that were segregated in compliance with
securities regulations or deposited with clearing organizations. This amount is included in the
parenthetical disclosure on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Trading account assets also includes
certain commodities inventory of $ 752million that is accounted for at the lower of cost or net
realizable value, which is the current selling price less any costs to sell.
(3) Includes MSRs of $ 818million which are classified as Level 3 assets.
(4) Total recurring Level 3 assets were 0.34percent of total consolidated assets, and total recurring
Level 3 liabilities were 0.24percent of total consolidated liabilities.
 Bank of America152 
 December 31, 
 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fair Value 
 Measurements 
 (Dollars in Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Netting Assets/Liabi… 
 millions) Adjustments… at Fair Value 
 Assets 
 Time 
 deposits 
 placed and $ 1,649 $ — $ — $ — $ 1,649 
 other 
 short-term 
 investments 
 Federal 
 funds sold 
 and 
 securities 
 borrowed or — 108,856 — — 108,856 
 purchased 
 under 
 agreements 
 to resell 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets: 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 45,219 3,051 — — 48,270 
 government 
 agencies 
 Corporate 
 securities, 
 trading — 22,817 1,359 — 24,176 
 loans and 
 other 
 Equity 36,372 31,372 227 — 67,971 
 securities 
 Non-U.S. 
 sovereign 5,753 20,884 354 — 26,991 
 debt 
 Mortgage 
 trading 
 loans, MBS 
 and ABS: 
 U.S. 
 government… — 21,566 75 — 21,641 
 agency 
 guaranteed 
 Mortgage 
 trading 
 loans, ABS — 8,440 1,365 — 9,805 
 and other 
 MBS 
 Total 
 trading 87,344 108,130 3,380 — 198,854 
 account 
 assets(2) 
 Derivative 15,624 416,175 2,751 -387,371 47,179 
 assets 
 AFS debt 
 securities: 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 115,266 1,114 — — 116,380 
 government 
 agencies 
 Mortgage-b… 
 securities: 
 Agency — 61,849 — — 61,849 
 Agency-col… 
 mortgage — 5,260 — — 5,260 
 obligations 
 Non-agency — 631 378 — 1,009 
 residential 
 Commercial — 16,491 — — 16,491 
 Non-U.S. — 13,999 18 — 14,017 
 securities 
 Other 
 taxable — 2,640 71 — 2,711 
 securities 
 Tax-exempt — 16,598 176 — 16,774 
 securities 
 Total AFS 
 debt 115,266 118,582 643 — 234,491 
 securities 
 Other debt 
 securities 
 carried at 
 fair 
 value: 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 93 — — — 93 
 government 
 agencies 
 Non-agency 
 residential — 506 267 — 773 
 MBS 
 Non-U.S. 
 and other 2,619 8,625 — — 11,244 
 securities 
 Total other 
 debt 
 securities 2,712 9,131 267 — 12,110 
 carried at 
 fair value 
 Loans and — 5,964 717 — 6,681 
 leases 
 Loans — 1,349 236 — 1,585 
 held-for-s… 
 Other 9,898 3,850 1,970 — 15,718 
 assets(3) 
 Total $ 232,493 $ 772,037 $ 9,964 $ -387,371 $ 627,123 
 assets(4) 
 Liabilities 
 Interest-b… 
 deposits in $ — $ 481 $ — $ — $ 481 
 U.S. 
 offices 
 Federal 
 funds 
 purchased 
 and 
 securities — 135,391 — — 135,391 
 loaned or 
 sold under 
 agreements 
 to 
 repurchase 
 Trading 
 account 
 liabilitie… 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 9,425 139 — — 9,564 
 government 
 agencies 
 Equity 38,189 4,235 — — 42,424 
 securities 
 Non-U.S. 
 sovereign 5,853 8,043 — — 13,896 
 debt 
 Corporate 
 securities — 5,420 16 — 5,436 
 and other 
 Total 
 trading 53,467 17,837 16 — 71,320 
 account 
 liabilities 
 Derivative 14,907 412,881 6,219 -388,481 45,526 
 liabilities 
 Short-term — 5,874 — — 5,874 
 borrowings 
 Accrued 
 expenses 12,297 4,014 — — 16,311 
 and other 
 liabilities 
 Long-term — 31,036 1,164 — 32,200 
 debt 
 Total $ 80,671 $ 607,514 $ 7,399 $ -388,481 $ 307,103 
 liabilitie… 
(1) Amounts represent the impact of legally enforceable master netting agreements and also cash
collateral held or placed with the same counterparties.
(2) Includes securities with a fair value of $ 16.8billion that were segregated in compliance with
securities regulations or deposited with clearing organizations. This amount is included in the
parenthetical disclosure on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Trading account assets also includes
certain commodities inventory of $ 576million that is accounted for at the lower of cost or net
realizable value, which is the current selling price less any costs to sell.
(3) Includes MSRs of $ 1.0billion which are classified as Level 3 assets.
(4) Total recurring Level 3 assets were 0.35percent of total consolidated assets, and total recurring
Level 3 liabilities were 0.29percent of total consolidated liabilities.
 153Bank of America 
The following tables present a reconciliation of all assets and liabilities measured at fair value on
a recurring basis using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) during 2021, 2020 and 2019,
including net realized and unrealized gains (losses) included in earnings and accumulated OCI.
Transfers into Level 3 occur primarily due to decreased price observability, and transfers out of
Level 3 occur primarily due to increased price observability. Transfers occur on a regular basis for
long-term debt instruments due to changes in the impact of unobservable inputs on the value of the
embedded derivative in relation to the instrument as a whole.
 C… 
 in 
 U… 
 G… 
 (… 
 in 
 … N… 
 … I… 
 … G… R… 
 … … T… to 
 … … o… F… 
 … … … … of … I… 
 … … … … … L… … S… 
 1 … … … … 3 3 … H… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 $ … $ … $ — $ … $ -… $ — $ -… $ … $ -… $ … $ -… 
 … … — … -… — — … -… … -… 
 … … … … — — -… … — … 34 
 … … — … -… 7 -… … -… … -… 
 … … … … -… 7 -… … -… … -… 
 … … — … -… — 2… … -… … 8… 
 … … … — -… — -… … -… … 8 
 … … — — -… — -4 — — — — 
 … — … 8 — — — — -1 … — 
 … … — — — — -2 — -… … -… 
 … 5 … 8 -… — -… … -… … -… 
 … 1 — — -… — -… … -… … 10 
 … … — … -… … -… … -… … 65 
 … … … … -1 — -… … -4 … 18 
 … 7 3 … -… … -… 9 -2 … 3 
 … 6 — — — … — — — … — 
 … … … … 15 … 98 … 1… … -… 
 $ … $ … $ … $ … $ -… $ … $ -… $ … $ -… $ … $ -… 
 … … — … -… — -3 … -… … -… 
 … … … … -… — -… … -… … 47 
 … … … … -… … -… … -… … -… 
 … … … … -… … -… … -… … -… 
 … … — … -… — -… … 1… … -… 
 … … 3 … -… — -… … -… … -2 
 2 1 — — -1 — -1 … — … 1 
 … — — 9 -4 — — 1 — … — 
 … … 3 — — — -… … -… … -… 
 … … 6 … -… — -… … -… … -… 
 … … — — -… — -… … -… … 3 
 … … — … -… … -… … — … 9 
 … … … — -… … -… … -… … -5 
 … … 3 … -4 … -… 5 -2 … -… 
 … 1 — — — — — — 1 — — 
 … 8 — … -3 — 1 — — … — 
 … … 2 … — … 2… … 14 … -5 
(1) Assets (liabilities). For assets, increase (decrease) to Level 3 and for liabilities, (increase)
decrease to Level 3.
(2) Includes gains (losses) reported in earnings in the following income statement line items:
Trading account assets/liabilities - predominantly market making and similar activities; Net
derivative assets (liabilities) - market making and similar activities and other income; AFS debt
securities - other income; Other debt securities carried at fair value - other income; Loans and
leases - market making and similar activities and other income; Loans held-for-sale - other income;
Other assets - primarily market making and similar activities and other income related to MSRs; Long-
term debt - market making and similar activities.
(3) Includes unrealized gains (losses) in OCI on AFS debt securities, foreign currency translation
adjustments and the impact of changes in the Corporation’s credit spreads on long-term debt accounted
for under the fair value option. Amounts include net unrealized losses of $ 19million and $ 41million
related to financial instruments still held at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(4) Net derivative assets (liabilities) include derivative assets of $ 3.1billion and $ 2.8billion
and derivative liabilities of $ 5.8billion and $ 6.2billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(5) Amounts represent instruments that are accounted for under the fair value option.
(6) Issuances represent loan originations and MSRs recognized following securitizations or whole-loan
sales.
(7) Settlements primarily represent the net change in fair value of the MSR asset due to the
recognition of modeled cash flows and the passage of time.
 Bank of America154 
 … 
 3 
 – 
 … 
 … C… 
 … in 
 … U… 
 … G… 
 … (… 
 … in 
 … T… N… 
 … R… I… 
 … G… G… R… 
 … (… G… … T… to 
 … B… in (… … o… F… 
 … J… N… in … of … I… 
 … 1 I… O… … L… … S… 
 … S… I… S… G… 3 3 … H… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 1… $ 1… $ — $ 5… $ -… $ … $ -… $ … $ -… $ … $ 29 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… -… — 38 -… — -9 … -… … -… 
 … 
 … 
 … 4… 46 -… 1 — — -… … -6 … 47 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… 99 -2 6… -… — -… … -… … 26 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 3… 2… -… 1… -… … -… … -… … 84 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … -… -… — 2… -… — -… … -… … 2… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 5… 13 64 — -… — -… … -… … — 
 … 
 … 2 — — — — — — — — 2 — 
 … 
 … 
 … 7 2 — — — — -5 … — … — 
 … 
 … — — — — — — — … — … — 
 … 
 … 
 … 6… 15 64 — -… — -… … -… … — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… 36 — — — — -… … -… … 38 
 … 
 - 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 3… — — 2… -… … -… — — … -1 
 … 
 … 5… 48 -6 12 -… … -… … — … 22 
 … 
 … 2… -… 19 — -… … -… 5 -1 … -… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … — -2 — — — — — — — … -2 
 – 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 – -… 8 — -1 -3 … — — — … — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … -… -… -… — — … 1… … 1 … -… 
 … 
(1) Assets (liabilities). For assets, increase (decrease) to Level 3 and for liabilities, (increase)
decrease to Level 3.
(2) Includes gains/losses reported in earnings in the following income statement line items: Trading
account assets/liabilities - predominantly market making and similar activities; Net derivative
assets (liabilities) - market making and similar activities and other income; AFS debt securities -
predominantly other income; Other debt securities carried at fair value - other income; Loans and
leases - market making and similar activities and other income; Loans held-for-sale - other income;
Other assets - primarily other income related to MSRs; Long-term debt - market making and similar
activities.
(3) Includes unrealized gains (losses) in OCI on AFS debt securities, foreign currency translation
adjustments and the impact of changes in the Corporation’s credit spreads on long-term debt accounted
for under the fair value option. Amounts include net unrealized gains of $ 3million related to
financial instruments still held at December 31, 2019.
(4) Net derivative assets (liabilities) include derivative assets of $ 2.2billion and derivative
liabilities of $ 4.8billion at December 31, 2019.
(5) Amounts represent instruments that are accounted for under the fair value option.
(6) Issuances represent loan originations and MSRs recognized following securitizations or whole-loan
sales.
(7) Settlements primarily represent the net change in fair value of the MSR asset due to the
recognition of modeled cash flows and the passage of time.
(8) Transfers into long-term debt include a $ 1.4billion transfer in of Level 3 derivative assets to
reflect the Corporation's change to present bifurcated embedded derivatives with their respective
host instruments.
 155Bank of America 
The following tables present information about significant unobservable inputs related to the
Corporation’s material categories of Level 3 financial assets and liabilities at December 31, 2021
and 2020.
 Quantitat… 
 Informati… 
 about 
 Level 3 
 Fair Value 
 Measureme… 
 at 
 December 
 31, 
 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Dollars 
 in Inputs 
 millions) 
 Financial Fair Valuation Significant Ranges of Weighted 
 Instrument Value Technique Unobservab… Inputs Average(1) 
 Inputs 
 Loans and 
 Securitie… 
 Instrumen… 
 backed by Discounted 
 residenti… $ 1,269 cash flow, Yield 0% to25% 6 % 
 real Market 
 estate comparables 
 assets 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Mortgage 338 Prepayment 1% to40% 19% CPR 
 trading speed CPR 
 loans, ABS 
 and other 
 MBS 
 Loans and 373 Default 0% to3% CDR 1% CDR 
 leases rate 
 AFS debt 
 securities 
 – 316 Price $0to $168 $92 
 Non-agency 
 residenti… 
 Other debt 
 securities 
 carried at Loss 
 fair 242 severity 0% to43% 13 % 
 value – 
 Non-agency 
 residenti… 
 Instrumen… 
 backed by Discounted 
 commercial $ 298 cash Yield 0% to25% 4 % 
 real flow 
 estate 
 assets 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Corporate 138 Price $0to $101 $57 
 securitie… 
 trading 
 loans and 
 other 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Mortgage 77 
 trading 
 loans, ABS 
 and other 
 MBS 
 AFS debt 
 securities 
 – Other 71 
 taxable 
 securities 
 Loans 12 
 held-for-… 
 Commercial 
 loans, Discounted 
 debt $ 4,212 cash flow, Yield 0% to19% 10 % 
 securities Market 
 and comparables 
 other 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Corporate 1,972 Prepayment 10% to20% 16 % 
 securitie… speed 
 trading 
 loans and 
 other 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 396 Default 3% to4% 4 % 
 Non-U.S. rate 
 sovereign 
 debt 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Mortgage 1,112 Loss 35% to40% 37 % 
 trading severity 
 loans, ABS 
 and other 
 MBS 
 AFS debt 
 securities 
 – 52 Price $0to $189 $73 
 Tax-exempt 
 securities 
 Loans and Long-dated 
 leases 375 equity 45% n/a 
 volatiliti… 
 Loans 305 
 held-for-… 
 Other 
 assets, Discounted 
 primarily $ 754 cash flow, Price $10to $96 $91 
 auction Market 
 rate comparables 
 securities 
 Discount 9 % n/a 
 rate 
 Discounted Weighted-a… 
 MSRs $ 818 cash life, fixed 0to14years 4years 
 flow rate(5) 
 Weighted-a… 
 life, 0to10years 3years 
 variable 
 rate(5) 
 Option-adj… 
 spread, 7% to14% 9 % 
 fixed rate 
 Option-adj… 
 spread, 9% to15% 12 % 
 variable 
 rate 
 Structured 
 liabiliti… 
 Discounted 
 cash flow, 
 Market 
 Long-term $ -1,075 comparable… Yield 0% to19% 18 % 
 debt Industry 
 standard 
 derivative 
 pricing(3) 
 Equity 3% to100% 80 % 
 correlation 
 Long-dated 
 equity 5% to78% 36 % 
 volatiliti… 
 Price $0to $125 $82 
 Natural gas $2/MMBtu to 
 forward $8/MMBtu $4/MMBtu 
 price 
 Net 
 derivative 
 assets 
 (liabilit… 
 Discounted 
 cash flow, 
 Credit $ -104 Stochastic Credit 7to155bps 61bps 
 derivativ… recovery spreads 
 correlation 
 model 
 Upfront 16to100poi… 68points 
 points 
 Prepayment 15% CPR n/a 
 speed 
 Default 2% CDR n/a 
 rate 
 Credit 20% to60% 55 % 
 correlation 
 Price $0to $120 $53 
 Industry 
 Equity $ -1,710 standard Equity 3% to100% 80 % 
 derivativ… derivative correlation 
 pricing(3) 
 Long-dated 
 equity 5% to78% 36 % 
 volatiliti… 
 Discounted 
 cash flow, Natural gas 
 Commodity $ -976 Industry forward $2/MMBtu to $4/MMBtu 
 derivativ… standard price $8/MMBtu 
 derivative 
 pricing(3) 
 Correlation 65% to85% 76 % 
 Power 
 forward $11to $103 $32 
 price 
 Volatiliti… 41% to69% 63 % 
 Interest Industry 
 rate $ 128 standard Correlation (1)% to90% 54 % 
 derivativ… derivative (IR/IR) 
 pricing(4) 
 Correlation (1)% to58% 44 % 
 (FX/IR) 
 Long-dated 
 inflation (10)% to11% 3 % 
 rates 
 Long-dated 
 inflation 0% to2% 2 % 
 volatiliti… 
 Interest 
 rate 0% to2% 1 % 
 volatiliti… 
 Total net 
 derivative $ -2,662 
 assets 
 (liabilit… 
(1) For loans and securities, structured liabilities and net derivative assets (liabilities), the
weighted average is calculated based upon the absolute fair value of the instruments.
(2) The categories are aggregated based upon product type which differs from financial statement
classification. The following is a reconciliation to the line items in the table on page 152: Trading
account assets – Corporate securities, trading loans and other of $ 2.1billion, Trading account
assets – Non-U.S. sovereign debt of $ 396million, Trading account assets – Mortgage trading loans,
MBS and ABS of $ 1.5billion, AFS debt securities of $ 439million, Other debt securities carried at
fair value - Non-agency residential of $ 242million, Other assets, including MSRs, of $ 1.6billion,
Loans and leases of $ 748million and LHFS of $ 317million.
(3) Includes models such as Monte Carlo simulation and Black-Scholes.
(4) Includes models such as Monte Carlo simulation, Black-Scholes and other methods that model the
joint dynamics of interest, inflation and foreign exchange rates.
(5) The weighted-average life is a product of changes in market rates of interest, prepayment rates
and other model and cash flow assumptions.
CPR = Constant Prepayment Rate
CDR = Constant Default Rate
MMBtu = Million British thermal units
IR = Interest Rate
FX = Foreign Exchange
n/a = not applicable
 Bank of America156 
 Quantitati… 
 Information 
 about Level 
 3 
 Fair Value 
 Measuremen… 
 at December 
 31, 
 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Dollars in Inputs 
 millions) 
 Financial Fair Valuation Significant Ranges of Weighted 
 Instrument Value Technique Unobservable Inputs Average(1) 
 Inputs 
 Loans and 
 Securities… 
 Instruments Discounted 
 backed by cash 
 residential $ 1,543 flow, Yield (3)% to25% 6 % 
 real Market 
 estate comparables 
 assets 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Mortgage 467 Prepayment 1% to56% CPR 20% CPR 
 trading speed 
 loans, ABS 
 and other 
 MBS 
 Loans and 431 Default 0% to3% CDR 1% CDR 
 leases rate 
 AFS debt 
 securities 
 - 378 Price $0to $168 $110 
 Non-agency 
 residential 
 Other debt 
 securities 
 carried at Loss 
 fair 267 severity 0% to47% 18 % 
 value - 
 Non-agency 
 residential 
 Instruments 
 backed by Discounted 
 commercial $ 407 cash Yield 0% to25% 4 % 
 real flow 
 estate 
 assets 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Corporate 262 Price $0to $100 $52 
 securities, 
 trading 
 loans and 
 other 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Mortgage 43 
 trading 
 loans, ABS 
 and other 
 MBS 
 AFS debt 
 securities, 
 primarily 89 
 other 
 taxable 
 securities 
 Loans 13 
 held-for-s… 
 Commercial Discounted 
 loans, debt cash flow, 
 securities $ 3,066 Market Yield 0% to26% 9 % 
 and comparables 
 other 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Corporate 1,097 Prepayment 10% to20% 14 % 
 securities, speed 
 trading 
 loans and 
 other 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 354 Default 3% to4% 4 % 
 Non-U.S. rate 
 sovereign 
 debt 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Mortgage 930 Loss 35% to40% 38 % 
 trading severity 
 loans, ABS 
 and other 
 MBS 
 AFS debt 
 securities 
 – 176 Price $0to $142 $66 
 Tax-exempt 
 securities 
 Loans and Long-dated 
 leases 286 equity 77% n/a 
 volatiliti… 
 Loans 223 
 held-for-s… 
 Other 
 assets, Discounted 
 primarily $ 937 cash flow, Price $10to $97 $91 
 auction Market 
 rate comparables 
 securities 
 Discount 8% n/a 
 rate 
 Discounted Weighted-av… 
 MSRs $ 1,033 cash life, fixed 0to13years 4years 
 flow rate(5) 
 Weighted-a… 
 life, 0to10years 3years 
 variable 
 rate(5) 
 Option-adj… 
 spread, 7% to14% 9 % 
 fixed rate 
 Option-adj… 
 spread, 9% to15% 12 % 
 variable 
 rate 
 Structured 
 liabilities 
 Discounted 
 cash flow, 
 Market 
 Long-term $ -1,164 comparable… Yield 0% to11% 9 % 
 debt Industry 
 standard 
 derivative 
 pricing(3) 
 Equity 2% to100% 64 % 
 correlation 
 Long-dated 
 equity 7% to64% 32 % 
 volatiliti… 
 Price $0to $124 $86 
 Natural gas $1/MMBtu to 
 forward $4/MMBtu $3/MMBtu 
 price 
 Net 
 derivative 
 assets 
 (liabiliti… 
 Discounted 
 cash flow, 
 Credit $ -112 Stochastic Yield 5% n/a 
 derivatives recovery 
 correlation 
 model 
 Upfront 0to100points 75points 
 points 
 Prepayment 15% to100% 22% CPR 
 speed CPR 
 Default 2% CDR n/a 
 rate 
 Credit 21% to64% 57 % 
 correlation 
 Price $0to $122 $69 
 Industry 
 Equity $ -1,904 standard Equity 2% to100% 64 % 
 derivatives derivative correlation 
 pricing(3) 
 Long-dated 
 equity 7% to64% 32 % 
 volatiliti… 
 Discounted 
 cash flow, Natural gas 
 Commodity $ -1,426 Industry forward $1/MMBtu to $3/MMBtu 
 derivatives standard price $4/MMBtu 
 derivative 
 pricing(3) 
 Correlation 39% to85% 73 % 
 Volatiliti… 23% to70% 39 % 
 Interest Industry 
 rate $ -26 standard Correlation 15% to96% 34 % 
 derivatives derivative (IR/IR) 
 pricing(4) 
 Correlation 0% to46% 3 % 
 (FX/IR) 
 Long-dated 
 inflation G(7)% to84% 14 % 
 rates 
 Long-dated 
 inflation 0% to1% 1 % 
 volatiliti… 
 Interest 
 rates 0% to2% 1 % 
 volatiliti… 
 Total net 
 derivative $ -3,468 
 assets 
 (liabiliti… 
(1) For loans and securities, structured liabilities and net derivative assets (liabilities), the
weighted average is calculated based upon the absolute fair value of the instruments.
(2) The categories are aggregated based upon product type which differs from financial statement
classification. The following is a reconciliation to the line items in the table on page 153: Trading
account assets – Corporate securities, trading loans and other of $ 1.4billion, Trading account
assets – Non-U.S. sovereign debt of $ 354million, Trading account assets – Mortgage trading loans,
MBS and ABS of $ 1.4billion, AFS debt securities of $ 643million, Other debt securities carried at
fair value - Non-agency residential of $ 267million, Other assets, including MSRs, of $ 2.0billion,
Loans and leases of $ 717million and LHFS of $ 236million.
(3) Includes models such as Monte Carlo simulation and Black-Scholes.
(4) Includes models such as Monte Carlo simulation, Black-Scholes and other methods that model the
joint dynamics of interest, inflation and foreign exchange rates.
(5) The weighted-average life is a product of changes in market rates of interest, prepayment rates
and other model and cash flow assumptions.
CPR = Constant Prepayment Rate
CDR = Constant Default Rate
MMBtu = Million British thermal units
IR = Interest Rate
FX = Foreign Exchange
n/a = not applicable
 157Bank of America 
In the previous tables, instruments backed by residential and commercial real estate assets include
RMBS, commercial MBS, whole loans and mortgage CDOs. Commercial loans, debt securities and other
include corporate CLOs and CDOs, commercial loans and bonds, and securities backed by non-real estate
assets. Structured liabilities primarily include equity-linked notes that are accounted for under the
fair value option. The Corporation uses multiple market approaches in valuing certain of its Level 3
financial instruments. For example, market comparables and discounted cash flows are used together.
For a given product, such as corporate debt securities, market comparables may be used to estimate
some of the unobservable inputs and then these inputs are incorporated into a discounted cash flow
model. Therefore, the balances disclosed encompass both of these techniques. The levels of
aggregation and diversity within the products disclosed in the tables result in certain ranges of
inputs being wide and unevenly distributed across asset and liability categories. Uncertainty of Fair
Value Measurements from Unobservable Inputs Loans and Securities A significant increase in market
yields, default rates, loss severities or duration would have resulted in a significantly lower fair
value for long positions. Short positions would have been impacted in a directionally opposite way.
The impact of changes in prepayment speeds would have resulted in differing impacts depending on the
seniority of the instrument and, in the case of CLOs, whether prepayments can be reinvested. A
significant increase in price would have resulted in a significantly higher fair value for long
positions, and short positions would have been impacted in a directionally opposite way. Structured
Liabilities and Derivatives For credit derivatives, a significant increase in market yield, upfront
points (i.e., a single upfront payment made by a protection buyer at inception), credit spreads,
default rates or loss severities would have resulted in a significantly lower fair value for
protection sellers and higher fair value for protection buyers. The impact of changes in prepayment
speeds would have resulted in differing impacts depending on the seniority of the instrument.
Structured credit derivatives are impacted by credit correlation. Default correlation is a parameter
that describes the degree of dependence among credit default rates within a credit portfolio that
underlies a credit derivative instrument. The sensitivity of this input on the fair value varies
depending on the level of subordination of the tranche. For senior tranches that are net purchases of
protection, a significant increase in default correlation would have resulted in a significantly
higher fair value. Net short protection positions would have been impacted in a directionally
opposite way. For equity derivatives, commodity derivatives, interest rate derivatives and structured
liabilities, a significant change in long-dated rates and volatilities and correlation inputs (i.e.,
the degree of correlation between an equity security and an index, between two different commodities,
between two different interest rates, or between interest rates and foreign exchange rates) would
have resulted in a significant impact to the fair value; however, the magnitude and direction of the
impact depend on whether the Corporation is long or short the exposure. For structured liabilities, a
significant increase in yield or decrease in price would have resulted in a significantly lower fair
value. Nonrecurring Fair Value The Corporation holds certain assets that are measured at fair value
only in certain situations (e.g., the impairment of an asset), and these measurements are referred to
herein as nonrecurring. The amounts below represent assets still held as of the reporting date for
which a nonrecurring fair value adjustment was recorded during 2021, 2020 and 2019.
 Assets Measured 
 at Fair Value 
 on a 
 Nonrecurring December 31, 
 Basis December 31, 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Dollars in Level 2 Level 3 Level 2 Level 3 
 millions) 
 Assets 
 Loans $ 634 $ 24 $ 1,020 $ 792 
 held-for-sale 
 Loans and — 213 — 301 
 leases(1) 
 Foreclosed 
 properties(2, — 5 — 17 
 3) 
 Other assets 256 2,046 323 576 
 Gains (Losses) 
 2021 2020 2019 
 Assets 
 Loans $ -44 $ -79 $ -14 
 held-for-sale 
 Loans and -60 -73 -81 
 leases(1) 
 Foreclosed -2 -6 -9 
 properties 
 Other assets -492 -98 -2,145 
(1) Includes $ 24million, $ 30million and $ 36million of losses on loans that were written down to a
collateral value of zero during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2) Amounts are included in other assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheet and represent the carrying
value of foreclosed properties that were written down subsequent to their initial classification as
foreclosed properties. Losses on foreclosed properties include losses recorded during the first 90
days after transfer of a loan to foreclosed properties.
(3) Excludes $ 52million and $ 119million of properties acquired upon foreclosure of certain
government-guaranteed loans (principally FHA-insured loans) at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 Bank of America158 
The table below presents information about significant unobservable inputs utilized in the
Corporation's nonrecurring Level 3 fair value measurements at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
 Quantitati… 
 Information 
 about 
 Nonrecurri… 
 Level 3 
 Fair Value 
 Measuremen… 
 Financial Fair Value Inputs 
 Instrument Year Ended Significant 
 (Dollars in December Valuation Unobservab… Ranges of Weighted 
 millions) 31, 2021 Technique Inputs Inputs Average(1) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans and $ 213 Market OREO 13% to59% 24 % 
 leases(2) comparables discount 
 Costs to 8% to26% 9 % 
 sell 
 Other 1,875 Discounted Discount 7 % n/a 
 assets(3) cash flow rate 
 Market Estimated 
 166 comparables appraisal n/a n/a 
 value 
 Year Ended 
 December 
 31, 2020 
 Loans $ 792 Discounted Price $8to $99 $95 
 held-for-s… cash flow 
 Loans and 301 Market OREO 13% to59% 24 % 
 leases(2) comparables discount 
 Costs to 8% to26% 9 % 
 sell 
 Other 576 Discounted Revenue 2% to19% 7 % 
 assets(4) cash flow attrition 
 Discount 11% to14% 12 % 
 rate 
(1) The weighted average is calculated based upon the fair value of the loans.
(2) Represents residential mortgages where the loan has been written down to the fair value of the
underlying collateral.
(3) Represents the fair value of certain impaired renewable energy investments and impaired assets
related to the Corporation’s real estate rationalization.
(4) Represents the fair value of the intangible asset related to the merchant contracts received from
the dissolution of the Corporation's merchant services joint venture.
n/a = not applicable
NOTE 21 Fair Value Option
Loans and Loan Commitments The Corporation elects
to account for certain loans and loan commitments
that exceed the Corporation’s single-name credit
risk concentration guidelines under the fair
value option. Lending commitments are actively
managed and, as appropriate, credit risk for
these lending relationships may be mitigated
through the use of credit derivatives, with the
Corporation’s public side credit view and market
perspectives determining the size and timing of
the hedging activity. These credit derivatives do
not meet the requirements for designation as
accounting hedges and are carried at fair value.
The fair value option allows the Corporation to
carry these loans and loan commitments at fair
value, which is more consistent with management’s
view of the underlying economics and the manner
in which they are managed. In addition, the fair
value option allows the Corporation to reduce the
accounting volatility that would otherwise result
from the asymmetry created by accounting for the
financial instruments at historical cost and the
credit derivatives at fair value. Loans Held-for-
sale The Corporation elects to account for
residential mortgage LHFS, commercial mortgage
LHFS and certain other LHFS under the fair value
option. These loans are actively managed and
monitored and, as appropriate, certain market
risks of the loans may be mitigated through the
use of derivatives. The Corporation has elected
not to designate the derivatives as qualifying
accounting hedges, and therefore, they are
carried at fair value. The changes in fair value
of the loans are largely offset by changes in the
fair value of the derivatives. The fair value
option allows the Corporation to reduce the
accounting volatility that would otherwise result
from the asymmetry created by accounting for the
financial instruments at the lower of cost or
fair value and the derivatives at fair value. The
Corporation has not elected to account for
certain other LHFS under the fair value option
primarily because these loans are floating-rate
loans that are not hedged using derivative
instruments.
Loans Reported as Trading Account Assets The
Corporation elects to account for certain loans
that are held for the purpose of trading and are
risk-managed on a fair value basis under the fair
value option. Other Assets The Corporation elects
to account for certain long-term fixed-rate
margin loans that are hedged with derivatives
under the fair value option. Election of the fair
value option allows the Corporation to reduce the
accounting volatility that would otherwise result
from the asymmetry created by accounting for the
financial instruments at historical cost and the
derivatives at fair value. Securities Financing
Agreements The Corporation elects to account for
certain securities financing agreements,
including resale and repurchase agreements, under
the fair value option. These elections include
certain agreements collateralized by the U.S.
government and its agencies, which are generally
short-dated and have minimal interest rate risk.
Long-term Deposits The Corporation elects to
account for certain long-term fixed-rate and
rate-linked deposits that are hedged with
derivatives that do not qualify for hedge
accounting. Election of the fair value option
allows the Corporation to reduce the accounting
volatility that would otherwise result from the
asymmetry created by accounting for the financial
instruments at historical cost and the
derivatives at fair value. The Corporation has
not elected to carry other long-term deposits at
fair value because they are not hedged using
derivatives. Short-term Borrowings The
Corporation elects to account for certain short-
term borrowings, primarily short-term structured
liabilities, under the fair value option because
this debt is risk-managed on a fair value basis.
 159Bank of America 
The Corporation also elects to account for certain asset-backed secured financings, which are also
classified in short-term borrowings, under the fair value option. Election of the fair value option
allows the Corporation to reduce the accounting volatility that would otherwise result from the
asymmetry created by accounting for the asset-backed secured financings at historical cost and the
corresponding mortgage LHFS securing these financings at fair value. Long-term Debt The Corporation
elects to account for certain long-term debt, primarily structured liabilities, under the fair value
option. This long-term debt is either risk-managed on a fair value basis or the related hedges do not
qualify for hedge accounting. Fair Value Option Elections The following tables provide information
about the fair value carrying amount and the contractual principal outstanding of assets and
liabilities accounted for under the fair value option at December 31, 2021 and 2020, and information
about where changes in the fair value of assets and liabilities accounted for under the fair value
option are included in the Consolidated Statement of Income for 2021, 2020 and 2019.
 Fair 
 Val… Dece… Dece… 
 Opt… 31, 31, 
 Ele… 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fair Fair 
 Fair Value Fair Value 
 (Do… Value Cont… Carr… Value Cont… Carry… 
 in Carr… Prin… Amou… Carr… Prin… Amount 
 mil… Amou… Outs… Less Amou… Outs… Less 
 Unpa… Unpaid 
 Prin… Princ… 
 Fed… 
 fun… 
 sold 
 and 
 sec… 
 bor… $ 150,… $ 150,… $ -12 $ 108,… $ 108,… $ 45 
 or 
 pur… 
 und… 
 agr… 
 to 
 res… 
 Loa… 
 rep… 
 as 10,8… 18,8… -8,0… 7,967 17,3… -9,405 
 tra… 
 acc… 
 ass… 
 Tra… 
 inv… 21,9… n/a n/a 22,7… n/a n/a 
 – 
 oth… 
 Con… 
 and 7,819 7,888 -69 6,681 6,778 -97 
 com… 
 loa… 
 Loa… 4,455 5,343 -888 1,585 2,521 -936 
 hel… 
 Oth… 544 n/a n/a 200 n/a n/a 
 ass… 
 Lon… 408 401 7 481 448 33 
 dep… 
 Fed… 
 fun… 
 pur… 
 and 
 sec… 
 loa… 139,… 139,… -41 135,… 135,… 1 
 or 
 sold 
 und… 
 agr… 
 to 
 rep… 
 Sho… 4,279 4,127 152 5,874 5,178 696 
 bor… 
 Unf… 
 loan 97 n/a n/a 99 n/a n/a 
 com… 
 Lon… 29,7… 30,9… -1,1… 32,2… 33,4… -1,270 
 debt 
(1) A significant portion of the loans reported as trading account assets and LHFS are distressed
loans that were purchased at a deep discount to par, and the remainder are loans with a fair value
near contractual principal outstanding.
n/a = not applicable
 Bank of America160 
 Market making 
 Gains (Losses) Related to Assets and Liabilities and similar 
 Accounted for Under the Fair Value Option activities Other 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 Income Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans reported as trading account assets $ 275 $ — $ 275 
 Trading inventory – other(1) -211 — -211 
 Consumer and commercial loans 78 40 118 
 Loans held-for-sale(2) — 58 58 
 Short-term borrowings 883 — 883 
 Long-term debt(3) -604 -41 -645 
 Other(4) 18 -23 -5 
 Total(5) $ 439 $ 34 $ 473 
 2020 
 Loans reported as trading account assets $ 107 $ — $ 107 
 Trading inventory – other(1) 3,216 — 3,216 
 Consumer and commercial loans 22 -3 19 
 Loans held-for-sale(2) — 103 103 
 Short-term borrowings -170 — -170 
 Unfunded loan commitments — -65 -65 
 Long-term debt(3) -2,175 -53 -2,228 
 Other(4) 35 -22 13 
 Total(5) $ 1,035 $ -40 $ 995 
 2019 
 Loans reported as trading account assets $ 203 $ — $ 203 
 Trading inventory – other(1) 5,795 — 5,795 
 Consumer and commercial loans 92 12 104 
 Loans held-for-sale(2) — 98 98 
 Short-term borrowings -24 — -24 
 Unfunded loan commitments — 79 79 
 Long-term debt(3) -1,098 -78 -1,176 
 Other(4) 9 -27 -18 
 Total(5) $ 4,977 $ 84 $ 5,061 
(1) The gains (losses) in market making and
similar activities are primarily offset by
(losses) gains on trading liabilities that hedge
these assets.
(2) Includes the value of IRLCs on funded loans,
including those sold during the period.
(3) The net losses in market making and similar
activities relate to the embedded derivatives in
structured liabilities and are typically offset
by gains on derivatives and securities that hedge
these liabilities. For the cumulative impact of
changes in the Corporation’s own credit spreads
and the amount recognized in accumulated OCI, see
Note 14 – Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
(Loss) . For more information on how the
Corporation’s own credit spread is determined,
see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements.
(4) Includes gains (losses) on federal funds sold
and securities borrowed or purchased under
agreements to resell, other assets, long-term
deposits and federal funds purchased and
securities loaned or sold under agreements to
repurchase.
(5) Gains (losses) related to borrower-specific
credit risk were $ 162million, $( 361) million
and $ 194million in 2021, 2020 and 2019,
respectively.
NOTE 22 Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Financial instruments are classified within the
fair value hierarchy using the methodologies
described in Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements .
Certain loans, deposits, long-term debt, unfunded
lending commitments and other financial
instruments are accounted for under the fair
value option. For more information, see Note 21 –
Fair Value Option . The following disclosures
include financial instruments that are not
carried at fair value or only a portion of the
ending balance is carried at fair value on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet. Short-term Financial
Instruments The carrying value of short-term
financial instruments, including cash and cash
equivalents, certain time deposits placed and
other short-term investments, federal funds sold
and purchased, certain resale and repurchase
agreements and short-term borrowings,
approximates the fair value of these instruments.
These financial instruments generally expose the
Corporation to
limited credit risk and have no stated maturities
or have short-term maturities and carry interest
rates that approximate market. The Corporation
accounts for certain resale and repurchase
agreements under the fair value option. Under the
fair value hierarchy, cash and cash equivalents
are classified as Level 1. Time deposits placed
and other short-term investments, such as U.S.
government securities and short-term commercial
paper, are classified as Level 1 or Level 2.
Federal funds sold and purchased are classified
as Level 2. Resale and repurchase agreements are
classified as Level 2 because they are generally
short-dated and/or variable-rate instruments
collateralized by U.S. government or agency
securities. Short-term borrowings are classified
as Level 2. Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The carrying values and fair values by fair value
hierarchy of certain financial instruments where
only a portion of the ending balance was carried
at fair value at December 31, 2021 and 2020 are
presented in the following table.
 161Bank of America 
 Fair Value of Financial 
 Instruments 
 (Dollars in millions) Carrying Value Fair Value 
 Financial assets December 31, 2021 Level 2 Level 3 Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans $ 946,142 $ 53,544 $ 919,980 $ 973,524 
 Loans held-for-sale 15,635 15,016 627 15,643 
 Financial liabilities 
 Deposits(1) 2,064,446 2,064,438 — 2,064,438 
 Long-term debt 280,117 286,802 1,288 288,090 
 Commercial unfunded 
 lending 1,554 97 6,384 6,481 
 commitments(2) 
 December 31, 2020 
 Financial assets 
 Loans $ 887,289 $ 49,372 $ 877,682 $ 927,054 
 Loans held-for-sale 9,243 7,864 1,379 9,243 
 Financial liabilities 
 Deposits(1) 1,795,480 1,795,545 — 1,795,545 
 Long-term debt 262,934 271,315 1,164 272,479 
 Commercial unfunded 
 lending 1,977 99 5,159 5,258 
 commitments(2) 
(1) Includes demand deposits of $ 1.0trillion and
$ 799.0billion with nostated maturities at
December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(2) The carrying value of commercial unfunded
lending commitments is included in accrued
expenses and other liabilities on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet. The Corporation does
not estimate the fair value of consumer unfunded
lending commitments because, in many instances,
the Corporation can reduce or cancel these
commitments by providing notice to the borrower.
For more information on commitments, see Note 12
– Commitments and Contingencies .
NOTE 23 Business Segment Information The Corporation reports its results of operations through the
following fourbusiness segments: Consumer Banking , GWIM Global Banking and Global Markets , with the
remaining operations recorded in All Other . Consumer Banking Consumer Banking offers a diversified
range of credit, banking and investment products and services to consumers and small businesses.
Consumer Banking product offerings include traditional savings accounts, money market savings
accounts, CDs and IRAs, checking accounts, and investment accounts and products, as well as credit
and debit cards, residential mortgages and home equity loans, and direct and indirect loans to
consumers and small businesses in the U.S. Consumer Banking includes the impact of servicing
residential mortgages and home equity loans. Global Wealth & Investment Management GWIM provides a
high-touch client experience through a network of financial advisors focused on clients with over
$250,000 in total investable assets, including tailored solutions to meet clients’ needs through a
full set of investment management, brokerage, banking and retirement products. GWIM also provides
comprehensive wealth management solutions targeted to high net worth and ultra high net worth
clients, as well as customized solutions to meet clients’ wealth structuring, investment management,
trust and banking needs, including specialty asset management services. Global Banking Global Banking
provides a wide range of lending-related products and services, integrated working capital management
and treasury solutions, and underwriting and advisory services through the Corporation’s network of
offices and client
relationship teams. Global Banking also provides investment banking products to clients. The
economics of certain investment banking and underwriting activities are shared primarily between
Global Banking and Global Markets under an internal revenue-sharing arrangement. Global Banking
clients generally include middle-market companies, commercial real estate firms, not-for-profit
companies, large global corporations, financial institutions, leasing clients, and mid-sized
U.S.-based businesses requiring customized and integrated financial advice and solutions. Global
Markets Global Markets offers sales and trading services and research services to institutional
clients across fixed-income, credit, currency, commodity and equity businesses. Global Markets
provides market-making, financing, securities clearing, settlement and custody services globally to
institutional investor clients in support of their investing and trading activities. Global Markets
product coverage includes securities and derivative products in both the primary and secondary
markets. Global Markets also works with commercial and corporate clients to provide risk management
products. As a result of market-making activities, Global Markets may be required to manage risk in a
broad range of financial products. In addition, the economics of certain investment banking and
underwriting activities are shared primarily between Global Markets and Global Banking under an
internal revenue-sharing arrangement. All Other All Other primarily consists of ALM activities,
liquidating businesses and certain expenses not otherwise allocated to a business segment. ALM
activities encompass interest rate and foreign currency risk management activities for which
substantially all of the results are allocated to the business segments. Basis of Presentation The
management accounting and reporting process derives segment and business results by utilizing
allocation methodologies for revenue and expense. The net income derived for the businesses is
dependent upon revenue and cost allocations using an activity-based costing model, funds transfer
pricing, and other methodologies and assumptions management believes are appropriate to reflect the
results of the business. Total revenue, net of interest expense, includes net interest income on an
FTE basis and noninterest income. The adjustment of net interest income to an FTE basis results in a
corresponding increase in income tax expense. The segment results also reflect certain revenue and
expense methodologies that are utilized to determine net income. The net interest income of the
businesses includes the results of a funds transfer pricing process that matches assets and
liabilities with similar interest rate sensitivity and maturity characteristics. In segments where
the total of liabilities and equity exceeds assets, which are generally deposit-taking segments, the
Corporation allocates assets to match liabilities. Net interest income of the business segments also
includes an allocation of net interest income generated by certain of the Corporation’s ALM
activities. The Corporation’s ALM activities include an overall interest rate risk management
strategy that incorporates the use of various derivatives and cash instruments to manage fluctuations
in earnings and capital that are caused by interest rate volatility. The Corporation’s goal is to
manage interest rate sensitivity so that movements in interest rates do not significantly adversely
affect earnings and capital. The results of
 Bank of America162 
substantially all of the Corporation’s ALM activities are allocated to the business segments and
fluctuate based on the performance of the ALM activities. ALM activities include external product
pricing decisions including deposit pricing strategies, the effects of the Corporation’s internal
funds transfer pricing process and the net effects of other ALM activities. Certain expenses not
directly attributable to a specific business segment are allocated to the segments. The costs of
certain centralized or shared functions are allocated based on methodologies that reflect
utilization. Effective October 1, 2021, a business activity previously included in the Global Markets
segment is being reported as a liquidating business in All Other , consistent with a realignment in
performance reporting to senior management. While this activity was not material to Global Markets’
results of operations and historical results have not been restated, this activity’s noninterest
expense of $ 309million and $ 473million for the three months ended September 30, 2021 and June 30,
2021 was elevated and would have been excluded from Global Markets’ results of operations for those
periods under the new basis of presentation. The table below presents net income (loss) and the
components thereto (with net interest income on an FTE basis for the business segments, All Other and
the total Corporation) for 2021, 2020 and 2019, and total assets at December 31, 2021 and 2020 for
each business segment, as well as All Other.
 Resul… 
 of 
 Busin… 
 Segme… 
 and 
 All 
 Other 
 At and 
 for 
 the 
 year 
 ended 
 Decem… 
 31 
 (Doll… Consu… 
 in Total Banki… 
 milli… Corpor… 2021 2020 2019 2021 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net 
 inter… $ 43,361 $ 43,859 $ 49,486 $ 24,929 $ 24,698 $ 28,158 
 income 
 Nonin… 46,179 42,168 42,353 9,076 8,564 10,429 
 income 
 Total 
 reven… 
 net of 89,540 86,027 91,839 34,005 33,262 38,587 
 inter… 
 expen… 
 Provi… 
 for -4,594 11,320 3,590 -1,035 5,765 3,772 
 credit 
 losses 
 Nonin… 59,731 55,213 54,900 19,290 18,882 17,646 
 expen… 
 Income 
 before 34,403 19,494 33,349 15,750 8,615 17,169 
 income 
 taxes 
 Income 
 tax 2,425 1,600 5,919 3,859 2,111 4,207 
 expen… 
 Net $ 31,978 $ 17,894 $ 27,430 $ 11,891 $ 6,504 $ 12,962 
 income 
 Perio… 
 total $ 3,169… $ 2,819,… $ 1,131,… $ 988,5… 
 assets 
 Global 
 Wealth Global 
 & Banki… 
 Invest… 
 Manage… 
 2021 2020 2019 2021 2020 2019 
 Net 
 inter… $ 5,664 $ 5,468 $ 6,504 $ 8,511 $ 9,013 $ 10,675 
 income 
 Nonin… 15,084 13,116 13,034 12,364 9,974 9,808 
 income 
 Total 
 reven… 
 net of 20,748 18,584 19,538 20,875 18,987 20,483 
 inter… 
 expen… 
 Provi… 
 for -241 357 82 -3,201 4,897 414 
 credit 
 losses 
 Nonin… 15,258 14,160 13,825 10,632 9,342 9,011 
 expen… 
 Income 
 before 5,731 4,067 5,631 13,444 4,748 11,058 
 income 
 taxes 
 Income 
 tax 1,404 996 1,380 3,630 1,282 2,985 
 expen… 
 Net $ 4,327 $ 3,071 $ 4,251 $ 9,814 $ 3,466 $ 8,073 
 income 
 Perio… 
 total $ 438,2… $ 369,736 $ 638,131 $ 580,5… 
 assets 
 Global All 
 Markets Other 
 2021 2020 2019 2021 2020 2019 
 Net 
 inter… $ 4,011 $ 4,646 $ 3,915 $ 246 $ 34 $ 234 
 income 
 Nonin… 15,244 14,119 11,699 -5,589 -3,605 -2,617 
 income 
 Total 
 reven… 
 net of 19,255 18,765 15,614 -5,343 -3,571 -2,383 
 inter… 
 expen… 
 Provi… 
 for 65 251 -9 -182 50 -669 
 credit 
 losses 
 Nonin… 13,032 11,417 10,728 1,519 1,412 3,690 
 expen… 
 Income 
 (loss) 
 before 6,158 7,097 4,895 -6,680 -5,033 -5,404 
 income 
 taxes 
 Income 
 tax 1,601 1,845 1,395 -8,069 -4,634 -4,048 
 expen… 
 (bene… 
 Net 
 income $ 4,557 $ 5,252 $ 3,500 $ 1,389 $ -399 $ -1,356 
 (loss) 
 Perio… 
 total $ 747,7… $ 616,609 $ 214,153 $ 264,1… 
 assets 
(1) There were no material intersegment revenues
 163Bank of America 
The tables below present noninterest income and the associated components for 2021, 2020 and 2019 for
each business segment, All Other and the total Corporation. For more information, see Note 2 – Net
Interest Income and Noninterest Income.
 No… 
 In… 
 by 
 Bu… 
 Se… 
 and 
 All 
 Ot… 
 (D… 
 in 
 mi… Gl… 
 Fe… We… 
 and & 
 co… To… Con… In… 
 Ca… Co… Ban… Ma… 
 in… 20… 2020 20… 2021 20… 2019 20… 2020 20… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 In… $ 4,… $ 3,9… $ 3,… $ 3,5… $ 3,… $ 3,1… $ 43 $ 36 $ 59 
 fe… 
 Ot… 
 ca… 1,… 1,7… 1,… 1,5… 1,… 1,9… 42 42 42 
 in… 
 To… 
 ca… 6,… 5,6… 5,… 5,1… 4,… 5,0… 85 78 101 
 in… 
 Se… 
 ch… 
 De… 6,… 5,9… 6,… 3,5… 3,… 4,2… 72 67 68 
 fe… 
 Le… 1,… 1,1… 1,… — — — — — — 
 fe… 
 To… 
 se… 7,… 7,1… 7,… 3,5… 3,… 4,2… 72 67 68 
 ch… 
 In… 
 and 
 br… 
 se… 
 As… 
 ma… 12… 10,… 10… 188 146 144 12… 10,… 10… 
 fe… 
 Br… 3,… 3,8… 3,… 132 127 149 1,… 1,6… 1,… 
 fe… 
 To… 
 in… 
 and 16… 14,… 13… 320 273 293 14… 12,… 11… 
 br… 
 se… 
 In… 
 ba… 
 fe… 
 Un… 5,… 4,6… 2,… — — — 388 391 401 
 in… 
 Sy… 1,… 861 1,… — — — — — — 
 fe… 
 Fi… 
 ad… 2,… 1,6… 1,… — — — — — — 
 se… 
 To… 
 in… 8,… 7,1… 5,… — — — 388 391 401 
 ba… 
 fe… 
 To… 
 fe… 39… 34,… 33… 9,0… 8,… 9,5… 14… 12,… 12… 
 and 
 co… 
 Ma… 
 ma… 
 and 8,… 8,3… 9,… 1 2 6 40 63 113 
 si… 
 ac… 
 Ot… 
 in… -1… -738 304 45 199 828 187 247 481 
 (l… 
 To… 
 no… $ 46… $ 42,… $ 42… $ 9,0… $ 8,… $ 10,… $ 15… $ 13,… $ 13… 
 in… 
 Gl… Glo… All 
 Ba… Mar… Ot… 
 20… 2020 20… 2021 20… 2019 20… 2020 20… 
 Fe… 
 and 
 co… 
 Ca… 
 in… 
 In… $ 700 $ 499 $ 519 $ 220 $ 391 $ 81 $ — $ 1 $ 1 
 fe… 
 Ot… 
 ca… 13 14 13 — — -1 28 — -1 
 in… 
 To… 
 ca… 713 513 532 220 391 80 28 1 — 
 in… 
 Se… 
 ch… 
 De… 2,… 2,2… 2,… 146 177 156 7 32 25 
 fe… 
 Le… 1,… 940 894 218 210 192 — — — 
 fe… 
 To… 
 se… 3,… 3,2… 3,… 364 387 348 7 32 25 
 ch… 
 In… 
 and 
 br… 
 se… 
 As… 
 ma… — — — — — — — -16 -33 
 fe… 
 Br… 104 74 34 1,9… 1,… 1,7… -25 — — 
 fe… 
 To… 
 in… 
 and 104 74 34 1,9… 1,… 1,7… -25 -16 -33 
 br… 
 se… 
 In… 
 ba… 
 fe… 
 Un… 2,… 2,0… 1,… 2,7… 2,… 1,5… -2… -212 -1… 
 in… 
 Sy… 781 482 574 718 379 610 — — — 
 fe… 
 Fi… 
 ad… 2,… 1,4… 1,… 173 163 123 -1 — 1 
 se… 
 To… 
 in… 5,… 4,0… 3,… 3,6… 2,… 2,2… -2… -212 -1… 
 ba… 
 fe… 
 To… 
 fe… 9,… 7,8… 6,… 6,1… 5,… 4,4… -2… -195 -1… 
 and 
 co… 
 Ma… 
 ma… 
 and 145 103 235 8,7… 8,… 7,0… -2… -284 1,… 
 si… 
 ac… 
 Ot… 
 in… 2,… 2,0… 2,… 305 -94 180 -5… -3,… -4… 
 (l… 
 To… 
 no… $ 12… $ 9,9… $ 9,… $ 15,… $ 14… $ 11,… $ -5… $ -3,… $ -2… 
 in… 
(1) All Other includes eliminations of intercompany transactions.
 Bank of America164 
 Business Segment Reconciliations 
 (Dollars in millions) 2021 2020 2019 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Segments’ total revenue, net of interest $ 94,883 $ 89,598 $ 94,222 
 expense 
 Adjustments(1): 
 Asset and liability management -4 375 241 
 activities 
 Liquidating businesses, eliminations and -5,339 -3,946 -2,624 
 other 
 FTE basis adjustment -427 -499 -595 
 Consolidated revenue, net of interest $ 89,113 $ 85,528 $ 91,244 
 expense 
 Segments’ total net income 30,589 18,293 28,786 
 Adjustments, net-of-tax(1): 
 Asset and liability management 11 279 202 
 activities 
 Liquidating businesses, eliminations and 1,378 -678 -1,558 
 other 
 Consolidated net income $ 31,978 $ 17,894 $ 27,430 
 December 31 
 2021 2020 
 Segments’ total assets $ 2,955,342 $ 2,555,486 
 Adjustments(1): 
 Asset and liability management 
 activities, including securities 1,363,626 1,176,071 
 portfolio 
 Elimination of segment asset allocations -1,216,891 -977,685 
 to match liabilities 
 Other 67,418 65,755 
 Consolidated total assets $ 3,169,495 $ 2,819,627 
(1) Adjustments include consolidated income, expense and asset amounts not specifically allocated to
individual business segments.
 NOTE 24 
 Parent Company Information 
The following tables present the Parent Company-only financial information.
 Condensed Statement of Income 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Income 
 Dividends from subsidiaries: 2021 2020 2019 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Bank holding companies and related $ 15,621 $ 10,352 $ 27,820 
 subsidiaries 
 Interest from subsidiaries 8,362 8,825 9,502 
 Other income (loss) -114 -138 74 
 Total income 23,869 19,039 37,396 
 Expense 
 Interest on borrowed funds from 54 136 451 
 subsidiaries 
 Other interest expense 3,383 4,119 5,899 
 Noninterest expense 1,531 1,651 1,641 
 Total expense 4,968 5,906 7,991 
 Income before income taxes and equity in 18,901 13,133 29,405 
 undistributed earnings of subsidiaries 
 Income tax expense 886 649 341 
 Income before equity in undistributed 18,015 12,484 29,064 
 earnings of subsidiaries 
 Equity in undistributed earnings 
 (losses) of subsidiaries: 
 Bank holding companies and related 14,078 5,372 -1,717 
 subsidiaries 
 Nonbank companies and related -115 38 83 
 subsidiaries 
 Total equity in undistributed earnings 13,963 5,410 -1,634 
 (losses) of subsidiaries 
 Net income $ 31,978 $ 17,894 $ 27,430 
 165Bank of America 
 Condensed Balance Sheet 
 (Dollars in millions) December 31 
 Assets 2021 2020 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash held at bank subsidiaries $ 5,011 $ 5,893 
 Securities 671 701 
 Receivables from subsidiaries: 
 Bank holding companies and related 217,447 206,566 
 subsidiaries 
 Banks and related subsidiaries 347 213 
 Nonbank companies and related 368 410 
 subsidiaries 
 Investments in subsidiaries: 
 Bank holding companies and related 316,497 305,818 
 subsidiaries 
 Nonbank companies and related 3,645 3,715 
 subsidiaries 
 Other assets 8,602 9,850 
 Total assets $ 552,588 $ 533,166 
 Liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
 Accrued expenses and other liabilities $ 17,394 $ 15,965 
 Payables to subsidiaries: 
 Banks and related subsidiaries 107 129 
 Bank holding companies and related 3 — 
 subsidiaries 
 Nonbank companies and related 11,564 11,067 
 subsidiaries 
 Long-term debt 253,454 233,081 
 Total liabilities 282,522 260,242 
 Shareholders’ equity 270,066 272,924 
 Total liabilities and shareholders’ $ 552,588 $ 533,166 
 equity 
 Condensed Statement of Cash Flows 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Operating activities 2021 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 31,978 $ 17,894 $ 27,430 
 Reconciliation of net income (loss) to 
 net cash provided by (used in) operating 
 activities: 
 Equity in undistributed (earnings) -13,963 -5,410 1,634 
 losses of subsidiaries 
 Other operating activities, net -7,144 14,303 16,973 
 Net cash provided by operating 10,871 26,787 46,037 
 activities 
 Investing activities 
 Net purchases of securities -14 -4 -17 
 Net payments to subsidiaries -10,796 -33,111 -19,121 
 Other investing activities, net -26 -7 7 
 Net cash used in investing activities -10,836 -33,122 -19,131 
 Financing activities 
 Net increase (decrease) in other 503 -422 -1,625 
 advances 
 Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt 56,106 43,766 29,315 
 Retirement of long-term debt -24,544 -23,168 -21,039 
 Proceeds from issuance of preferred 2,170 2,181 3,643 
 stock and warrants 
 Redemption of preferred stock -1,971 -1,072 -2,568 
 Common stock repurchased -25,126 -7,025 -28,144 
 Cash dividends paid -8,055 -7,727 -5,934 
 Net cash provided by (used in) financing -917 6,533 -26,352 
 activities 
 Net increase (decrease) in cash held at -882 198 554 
 bank subsidiaries 
 Cash held at bank subsidiaries at 5,893 5,695 5,141 
 January 1 
 Cash held at bank subsidiaries at $ 5,011 $ 5,893 $ 5,695 
 December 31 
 Bank of America166 
NOTE 25 Performance by Geographical Area
The Corporation’s operations are highly
integrated with operations in both U.S. and
non-U.S. markets. The non-U.S. business
activities are largely conducted in Europe, the
Middle East and Africa and in Asia. The
Corporation identifies its geographic performance
based on the business unit structure used to
manage the capital or expense deployed in the
region
as applicable. This requires certain judgments
related to the allocation of revenue so that
revenue can be appropriately matched with the
related capital or expense deployed in the
region. Certain asset, liability, income and
expense amounts have been allocated to arrive at
total assets, total revenue, net of interest
expense, income before income taxes and net
income by geographic area as presented below.
 Total 
 Revenue, Net 
 Total Assets of 
 (Dollars in at Year Interest Income Before 
 millions) End(1) Expense(2) Income Taxes Net Income 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S.(3) 2021 $ 2,789,862 $ 78,012 $ 31,392 $ 27,781 
 2020 2,490,247 75,576 18,247 16,692 
 2019 81,236 30,699 25,937 
 Asia 2021 117,085 4,439 988 733 
 2020 99,283 4,232 1,051 788 
 2019 3,491 765 570 
 Europe, 
 Middle East 2021 233,356 5,423 1,097 3,134 
 and Africa 
 2020 202,701 4,491 -596 264 
 2019 5,310 921 672 
 Latin 
 America and 2021 29,192 1,239 499 330 
 the 
 Caribbean 
 2020 27,396 1,229 293 150 
 2019 1,207 369 251 
 Total 2021 379,633 11,101 2,584 4,197 
 Non-U.S. 
 2020 329,380 9,952 748 1,202 
 2019 10,008 2,055 1,493 
 Total 2021 $ 3,169,495 $ 89,113 $ 33,976 $ 31,978 
 Consolidated 
 2020 2,819,627 85,528 18,995 17,894 
 2019 91,244 32,754 27,430 
(1) Total assets include long-lived assets, which are primarily located in the U.S.
(2) There were no material intercompany revenues between geographic regions for any of the periods
presented.
(3) Substantially reflects the U.S.
 167Bank of America 
 Glossary 
Alt-A Mortgage – A type of U.S. mortgage that is
considered riskier than A-paper, or “prime,” and
less risky than “subprime,” the riskiest
category. Typically, Alt-A mortgages are
characterized by borrowers with less than full
documentation, lower credit scores and higher
LTVs.
Assets Under Management (AUM) – The total market
value of assets under the investment advisory
and/or discretion of GWIM which generate asset
management fees based on a percentage of the
assets’ market values. AUM reflects assets that
are generally managed for institutional, high net
worth and retail clients, and are distributed
through various investment products including
mutual funds, other commingled vehicles and
separate accounts.
Banking Book – All on- and off-balance sheet
financial instruments of the Corporation except
for those positions that are held for trading
purposes.
Brokerage and Other Assets – Non-discretionary
client assets which are held in brokerage
accounts or held for safekeeping.
Committed Credit Exposure – Any funded portion of
a facility plus the unfunded portion of a
facility on which the lender is legally bound to
advance funds during a specified period under
prescribed conditions.
Credit Derivatives – Contractual agreements that
provide protection against a specified credit
event on one or more referenced obligations.
Credit Valuation Adjustment (CVA) – A portfolio
adjustment required to properly reflect the
counterparty credit risk exposure as part of the
fair value of derivative instruments.
Debit Valuation Adjustment (DVA) – A portfolio
adjustment required to properly reflect the
Corporation’s own credit risk exposure as part of
the fair value of derivative instruments and/or
structured liabilities.
Funding Valuation Adjustment (FVA) – A portfolio
adjustment required to include funding costs on
uncollateralized derivatives and derivatives
where the Corporation is not permitted to use the
collateral it receives.
Interest Rate Lock Commitment (IRLC) – Commitment
with a loan applicant in which the loan terms are
guaranteed for a designated period of time
subject to credit approval.
Letter of Credit – A document issued on behalf of
a customer to a third party promising to pay the
third party upon presentation of specified
documents. A letter of credit effectively
substitutes the issuer’s credit for that of the
customer.
Loan-to-value (LTV) – A commonly used credit
quality metric. LTV is calculated as the
outstanding carrying value of the loan divided by
the estimated value of the property securing the
loan.
Margin Receivable – An extension of credit
secured by eligible securities in certain
brokerage accounts.
Matched Book – Repurchase and resale agreements
or securities borrowed and loaned transactions
where the overall asset and liability position is
similar in size and/or maturity. Generally, these
are entered into to accommodate customers where
the Corporation earns the interest rate spread.
Mortgage Servicing Rights (MSR) – The right to
service a mortgage loan when the underlying loan
is sold or securitized. Servicing includes
collections for principal, interest and escrow
payments from borrowers and accounting for and
remitting principal and interest payments to
investors.
Nonperforming Loans and Leases – Includes loans
and leases that have been placed on nonaccrual
status, including nonaccruing loans whose
contractual terms have been restructured in a
manner that grants a concession to a borrower
experiencing financial difficulties.
Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) – A framework
established by the U.S. banking regulators
requiring banks to maintain certain levels of
regulatory capital ratios, comprised of five
categories of capitalization: “well capitalized,”
“adequately capitalized,” “undercapitalized,”
“significantly undercapitalized” and “critically
undercapitalized.” Insured depository
institutions that fail to meet certain of these
capital levels are subject to increasingly strict
limits on their activities, including their
ability to make capital distributions, pay
management compensation, grow assets and take
other actions.
Subprime Loans – Although a standard industry
definition for subprime loans (including subprime
mortgage loans) does not exist, the Corporation
defines subprime loans as specific product
offerings for higher risk borrowers.
Troubled Debt Restructurings (TDRs) – Loans whose
contractual terms have been restructured in a
manner that grants a concession to a borrower
experiencing financial difficulties. Certain
consumer loans for which a binding offer to
restructure has been extended are also classified
as TDRs.
Value-at-Risk (VaR) – VaR is a model that
simulates the value of a portfolio under a range
of hypothetical scenarios in order to generate a
distribution of potential gains and losses. VaR
represents the loss the portfolio is expected to
experience with a given confidence level based on
historical data. A VaR model is an effective tool
in estimating ranges of potential gains and
losses on our trading portfolios.
 Bank of America168 
 Key Metrics 
Active Digital Banking Users – Mobile and/or
online active users over the past 90 days.
Active Mobile Banking Users – Mobile active users
over the past 90 days.
Book Value – Ending common shareholders’ equity
divided by ending common shares outstanding.
Deposit Spread – Annualized net interest income
divided by average deposits.
Dividend Payout Ratio – Common dividends declared
divided by net income applicable to common
shareholders.
Efficiency Ratio – Noninterest expense divided by
total revenue, net of interest expense.
Gross Interest Yield – Effective annual
percentage rate divided by average loans.
Net Interest Yield – Net interest income divided
by average total interest-earning assets.
Operating Margin – Income before income taxes
divided by total revenue, net of interest
expense.
Return on Average Allocated Capital – Adjusted
net income divided by allocated capital.
Return on Average Assets – Net income divided by
total average assets.
Return on Average Common Shareholders ’ Equity –
Net income applicable to common shareholders
divided by average common shareholders’ equity.
Return on Average Shareholders ’ Equity – Net
income divided by average shareholders’ equity.
Risk-adjusted Margi n – Difference between total
revenue, net of interest expense, and net credit
losses divided by average loans.
 169Bank of America 
 Acronyms 
 ABS Asset-backed securities 
 AFS Available-for-sale 
 AI Artificial intelligence 
 ALM Asset and liability management 
 ARR Alternative reference rates 
 AUM Assets under management 
 AVM Automated valuation model 
 BANA Bank of America, National Association 
 BHC Bank holding company 
 BofAS BofA Securities, Inc. 
 BofASE BofA Securities Europe SA 
 bps Basis points 
 CAE Chief Audit Executive 
 CAO Chief Administrative Officer 
 CCAR Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 
 CDO Collateralized debt obligation 
 CDS Credit default swap 
 CECL Current expected credit losses 
 CET1 Common equity tier 1 
 CFPB Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
 CFTC Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
 CLO Collateralized loan obligation 
 CLTV Combined loan-to-value 
 CRO Chief Risk Officer 
 CVA Credit valuation adjustment 
 DIF Deposit Insurance Fund 
 DVA Debit valuation adjustment 
 ECL Expected credit losses 
 EMRC Enterprise Model Risk Committee 
 EPS Earnings per common share 
 ERC Enterprise Risk Committee 
 ESG Environmental, social and governance 
 EU European Union 
 FCA Financial Conduct Authority 
 FDIC Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
 FDICIA Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 
 FHA Federal Housing Administration 
 FHLB Federal Home Loan Bank 
 FHLMC Freddie Mac 
 FICC Fixed income, currencies and commodities 
 FICO Fair Isaac Corporation (credit score) 
 FLUs Front line units 
 FNMA Fannie Mae 
 FTE Fully taxable-equivalent 
 FVA Funding valuation adjustment 
 GAAP Accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America 
 GDPR General Data Protection Regulation 
 GLS Global Liquidity Sources 
 GNMA Government National Mortgage Association 
 GRM Global Risk Management 
 GSE Government-sponsored enterprise 
 G-SIB Global systemically important bank 
 GWIM Global Wealth & Investment Management 
 HELOC Home equity line of credit 
 HQLA High Quality Liquid Assets 
 HTM Held-to-maturity 
 IBOR Interbank Offered Rates 
 ICAAP Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process 
 IRLC Interest rate lock commitment 
 ISDA International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc. 
 LCR Liquidity Coverage Ratio 
 LHFS Loans held-for-sale 
 LIBOR London Interbank Offered Rate 
 LTV Loan-to-value 
 MBS Mortgage-backed securities 
 MD&A Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 
 MLI Merrill Lynch International 
 MLPCC Merrill Lynch Professional Clearing Corp 
 MLPF&S Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated 
 MRC Management Risk Committee 
 MSA Metropolitan Statistical Area 
 MSR Mortgage servicing right 
 MWM Merrill Wealth Management 
 NOL Net operating loss 
 NSFR Net Stable Funding Ratio 
 OCC Office of the Comptroller of the Currency 
 OCI Other comprehensive income 
 OREO Other real estate owned 
 OTC Over-the-counter 
 PCA Prompt Corrective Action 
 PPP Paycheck Protection Program 
 RMBS Residential mortgage-backed securities 
 RSU Restricted stock unit 
 RWA Risk-weighted assets 
 SBA Small Business Administration 
 SBLC Standby letter of credit 
 SCB Stress capital buffer 
 SEC Securities and Exchange Commission 
 SLR Supplementary leverage ratio 
 SOFR Secured Overnight Financing Rate 
 TDR Troubled debt restructurings 
 TLAC Total loss-absorbing capacity 
 UDAAP Unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or practices 
 VA U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs 
 VaR Value-at-Risk 
 VIE Variable interest entity 
 Bank of America170 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial │
│ DisclosureNoneItem 9A. Controls and ProceduresDisclosure Controls and ProceduresAs of the end │
│ of the period covered by this report and pursuant to Rule 13a-15 of the Securities Exchange Act │
│ of 1934, as amended (Exchange Act), Bank of America’s management, including the Chief Executive │
│ Officer and Chief Financial Officer, conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness and design of │
│ our disclosure controls and procedures (as that term is defined in Rule 13a-15(e) of the │
│ Exchange Act). Based upon that evaluation, Bank of America’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief │
│ Financial Officer concluded that Bank of America’s disclosure controls and procedures were │
│ effective, as of the end of the period covered by this report.Report of Management on Internal │
│ Control Over Financial ReportingThe Report of Management on Internal Control over Financial │
│ Reporting is set forth on page 87 and incorporated herein by reference. The Report of │
│ Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm with respect to the Corporation’s internal │
│ control over financial reporting is set forth on pages 88 and 89 and incorporated herein by │
│ reference.Changes in Internal Control Over Financial ReportingThere have been no changes in our │
│ internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) of the Exchange Act) │
│ during the quarter ended December 31, 2021, that materially affected, or are reasonably likely │
│ to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.Item 9B. Other │
│ InformationAmendment to the Bylaws of Bank of America CorporationOn February 22, 2022, the │
│ Board approved and adopted an amendment to the Bylaws of Bank of America Corporation, as │
│ amended and restated by the Board on September 23, 2020 (Bylaws). The amendment to the Bylaws │
│ was effective as of the date approved by the Board.As part of the amendment, the Board adopted │
│ a new Article IX, Section 6 designating the Delaware Court of Chancery as the exclusive forum │
│ for certain legal actions (Delaware exclusive forum provision). The Delaware exclusive forum │
│ provision provides that, unless the Corporation consents in writing to the selection of an │
│ alternative forum, the following actions shall be solely and exclusively brought in the Court │
│ of Chancery of the State of Delaware (or, if the Delaware Court of Chancery in the State of │
│ Delaware determines that it lacks jurisdiction over any such action or proceeding, another │
│ state or federal court located within the State of Delaware): (i) any derivative action or │
│ proceeding brought on behalf of the Corporation, (ii) any action asserting a claim of breach of │
│ a fiduciary duty owed by any current or former director, officer, or other employee or agent or │
│ stockholder of the Corporation to the Corporation or the Corporation’s stockholders, including │
│ a claim alleging the aiding and abetting of such a breach of fiduciary duty, (iii) any action │
│ asserting a claim against the Corporation or any current or former director, officer or other │
│ employee or agent of the Corporation arising pursuant to any provision of the Delaware │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ General Corporation Law (DGCL) or the Corporation’s Certificate of Incorporation or Bylaws, or │
│ as to which the DGCL confers jurisdiction on the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware; │
│ (iv) any action asserting a claim governed by the internal affairs doctrine of the State of │
│ Delaware; or (v) any action asserting an “internal corporate claim” as that term is defined in │
│ Section 115 of the DGCL.Although the Delaware exclusive forum provision took effect immediately │
│ upon adoption by the Board, the Board determined, including based on input from our │
│ shareholders during our engagement process, that it would be beneficial in this instance, to │
│ submit it to shareholders for voluntary ratification at the Corporation’s 2022 annual meeting │
│ of shareholders with the understanding that, if shareholders fail to ratify the Delaware │
│ exclusive forum provision, the Board will amend the Bylaws to remove it.The Bylaws amendment │
│ also related to other governance practices, including the following:●Adoption of gender-neutral │
│ language throughout the Bylaws, including using the title “Chair” in place of │
│ “Chairman”●Clarification that the notice to stockholder requirements apply except as otherwise │
│ provided within the bylaws or as permitted by law (Article III. Stockholders, Section 4. Notice │
│ to Stockholders)●Clarification that exemption from the majority voting standard refers to the │
│ chair of a stockholders’ meeting and that the election of directors and of the chair of a │
│ stockholders’ meeting are excluded from the Voting of Shares provision because they are covered │
│ elsewhere within the Bylaws (Article III. Stockholders, Section 9. Voting of │
│ Shares)●Clarification to specify the delivery method of notice for nominations or other │
│ business to be properly brought before an annual meeting(Article III. Stockholders, Section 12. │
│ Notice of Stockholder Business and Nominations)●Clarification that Board committees may │
│ exercise the authority of the Board to the extent and as provided by the Board (Article IV. │
│ Board of Directors, Section 6. Committees)●Revision to specify the method of delivery for the │
│ notice of director nomination and to clarify that any notification by a stockholder to correct │
│ any inaccuracy or omission in their submission does not cure any defect or limit the │
│ Corporation’s rights to omit a stockholder nominee from its proxy materials (Article IV. Board │
│ of Directors, Section 9. Inclusion of Director Nominations by Stockholders in the Corporation’s │
│ Proxy Materials)●Clarification that if a quorum is not present, a directors’ meeting may be │
│ adjourned by a majority of directors present(Article V. Meetings of Directors, Section 5. │
│ Quorum)●Clarification that duly authorized Board committees may elect officers (Article VI. │
│ Officers, Section 2. Appointment and Term)●Clarification that officers may specify by │
│ electronic transmission the effective date of resignation and that duly authorized Board │
│ committees may remove officers. (Article VI. Officers, Section 4. Resignation and Removal of │
│ Officers)The amendment also includes certain other technical and conforming revisions and │
│ clarifications. The foregoing summary is qualified in its entirety by reference to the Bylaws │
│ of Bank of America Corporation, as Amended and Restated by the Board of Directors on February │
│ 22, 2022, a copy of which (marked to show changes from the prior version) is attached hereto as │
│ Exhibit 3.2 and is incorporated in this Item 9B by reference. │
 171Bank of America 
Disclosure Pursuant to Section 13(r) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Pursuant to Section 13(r) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (Exchange Act),
an issuer is required to disclose in its annual
or quarterly reports, as applicable, whether it
or any of its affiliates knowingly engaged in
certain activities, transactions or dealings
relating to Iran or with individuals or entities
designated pursuant to certain Executive Orders.
Disclosure may be required even where the
activities, transactions or dealings were
conducted in compliance with applicable law.
Except as set forth below, as of the date of this
Annual Report on Form 10-K, the Corporation is
not aware of any other activity, transaction or
dealing by any of its affiliates during the
quarter ended December 31, 2021 that requires
disclosure under Section 13(r) of the Exchange
Act.
Pursuant to a specific license from the U.S.
Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign Assets
Control issued on May 28, 2021, during the fourth
quarter of 2021, Bank of America, National
Association (BANA), a U.S. subsidiary of Bank of
America Corporation, processed one authorized
wire deposit totaling $327,257 on behalf of a
U.S. client into its account at BANA. The wire
deposit settled invoices owed to the U.S. client
and consisted of unblocked funds belonging to
Jammal Trust Bank, which at the time of the
deposit was designated pursuant to Executive
Order 13224. There was no measurable gross
revenue or net profit to the Corporation relating
to this transaction. The Corporation may in the
future engage in similar transactions for its
clients to the extent permitted by U.S. law.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections │
Not applicable.
║ Part III ║
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance │
 Information about our Executive Officers 
The name, age, position and office, and business
experience of our current executive officers are:
Dean C. Athanasia (55) President, Regional
Banking since October 2021; President, Retail and
Preferred & Small Business Banking from January
2019 to October 2021 ; Co-Head -- Consumer
Banking from September 2014 to January 2019; and
Preferred and Small Business Banking Executive
from April 2011 to September 2014.
Aditya Bhasin (48) Chief Technology & Information
Officer since October 2021; Chief Information
Officer and Head of Technology for Consumer,
Small Business, Wealth Management and Employee
Technology from October 2017 to October 2021;
CIO, Retail, Preferred & Wealth Management
Technology, and Wealth Management Operations from
June 2015 to October 2017.
Darrin Steve Boland (53) Chief Administrative
Officer since October 2021 ; President, Retail
from February 2020 to October 2021; Head of
Consumer Lending from May 2017 to February 2020;
Consumer Lending Executive from May 2015 to May
2017.
Alastair M. Borthwick (53) Chief Financial
Officer since November 2021; President of Global
Commercial Banking from October 2012 to October
2021.
Sheri Bronstein (53) Chief Human Resources
Officer since January 2019; Global Human
Resources Executive from July 2015 to January
2019; and HR Executive for Global Banking &
Markets from March 2010 to July 2015.
James P. DeMare (52) President, Global Markets
since September 2020; Global Co-Head of FICC
Trading and Commercial Real Estate Banking from
February 2015 to September 2020.
Paul M. Donofrio (61) Vice Chair since November
2021; Chief Financial Officer from August 2015 to
November 2021; Strategic Finance Executive from
April 2015 to August 2015; and Head of Global
Corporate Credit and Transaction Banking from
January 2012 to April 2015.
Geoffrey S. Greener (57) Chief Risk Officer since
April 2014; Head of Enterprise Capital Management
from April 2011 to April 2014.
Matthew M. Koder (50) President, Global Corporate
& Investment Banking since December 2018;
President of APAC from March 2012 to December
2018.
Kathleen A. Knox (58) President, The Private Bank
since November 2017; Head of Business Banking
from October 2014 to November 2017; and Retail
Banking & Distribution Executive from June 2011
to October 2014.
Bernard A. Mensah (53) President, International,
CEO of Merrill Lynch International (MLI), BANA
London Branch Head since August 2020. President
of UK and Central and Eastern Europe, the Middle
East, Africa, CEO of MLI, BANA London Branch and
Co-Head of Global Fixed Income Currency and
Commodities (FICC) Trading from September 2019 to
August 2020; Co-Head of Global FICC Trading from
March 2015 to September 2019.
Lauren A. Mogensen (59) Global General Counsel
since November 2021; Head of Global Compliance &
Operational Risk, and Reputational Risk from
December 2013 to October 2021.
Brian T. Moynihan (62) Chair of the Board since
October 2014, and President, Chief Executive
Officer, and member of the Board of Directors
since January 2010.
Thong M. Nguyen (63) Vice Chair, Head of Global
Strategy & Enterprise Platforms since October
2021; Vice Chairman from January 2019 to October
2021; Co-Head -- Consumer Banking from September
2014 to January 2019; Retail Banking Executive
from April 2014 to September 2014; and Retail
Strategy, and Operations & Digital Banking
Executive from September 2012 to April 2014.
Thomas M. Scrivener (50) Chief Operations
Executive since October 2021; Head of Consumer,
Small Business & Wealth Management Operations
from October 2019 to October 2021; Global Real
Estate and Enterprise Initiatives Executive from
September 2018 to October 2019; Enterprise
Scenario Planning and Execution Executive from
May 2016 to September 2018; Enterprise Stress
Testing, Recovery & Resolution Planning Executive
from June 2014 to March 2016.
Andrew M. Sieg (54) President, Merrill Wealth
Management since January 2017; and Head of Global
Wealth & Retirement Solutions with Merrill Lynch
from October 2011 to January 2017.
Bruce R. Thompson (57) Vice Chair , Head of
Enterprise Credit since October 2021; Vice
Chairman, Head of Institutional Credit Exposure
Management (from December 2020) and Wholesale
Credit Underwriting and Monitoring (from May
2021) to October 2021; Vice Chairman, President
of the EU & Switzerland and CEO of Bank of
America Europe DAC from May 2018 to
 Bank of America172 
December 2020; Vice Chairman of Bank of America
Corporation from March 2016 to May 2018; Managing
Director from July 2015 to March 2016; Chief
Financial Officer from July 2011 to July 2015.
Information included under the following captions
in the Corporation’s proxy statement relating to
its 2022 annual meeting of shareholders (the 2022
Proxy Statement) is incorporated herein by
reference:
● “Proposal 1: Electing directors – Our director
nominees;”
● “Corporate governance – Additional corporate
governance information;”
● “Corporate governance – Committees and
membership;” and
● “Corporate governance – Board meetings and
attendance.”
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 11. Executive Compensation │
Information included under the following captions
in the 2022 Proxy Statement is incorporated
herein by reference:
● “Compensation discussion and analysis;”
● “Compensation and Human Capital Committee
report;”
● “Executive compensation;”
● “Corporate governance;” and
● “Director compensation.”
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder │
│ Matters │
Information included under the following caption in the 2022 Proxy Statement is incorporated herein
by reference:
● “Stock ownership of directors, executive officers, and certain beneficial owners.”
The table below presents information on equity compensation plans at December 31, 2021:
 -c) 
 -a) -b) Number of Shares 
 Number of Shares tobe Weighted-average Remaining for Future 
 Plan Category(1) Issued Exercise Price of Issuance Under Equity 
 UnderOutstanding Outstanding Options, Compensation Plans 
 Options, Warrants and Warrants and Rights(3 (excluding securities 
 Rights(2 reflected in column 
 (a))(4 
 Plans approved by 188,687,164 — 254,845,261 
 shareholders 
 Plans not approved — — — 
 by shareholders 
 Total 188,687,164 — 254,845,261 
(1) This table does not include 593,890 vested restricted stock units and stock option gain deferrals
at December 31, 2021 that were assumed by the Corporation in connection with prior acquisitions under
whose plans the awards were originally granted.
(2) Consists of outstanding restricted stock units. Includes 3,671,576 vested restricted stock units
subject to a required twelve-month holding period.
(3) Restricted stock units do not have an exercise price and are delivered without any payment or
consideration.
(4) Amount represents shares of common stock available for future issuance under the Bank of America
Corporation Equity Plan.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director IndependenceInformation │
│ included under the following captions in the 2022 Proxy Statement is incorporated herein by │
│ reference:●“Related person and certain other transactions;” and●“Corporate governance – │
│ Director independence.” │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 14.Principal Accounting Fees and ServicesInformation included under the following caption │
│ in the 2022 Proxy Statement is incorporated herein by reference:●“Proposal 3: Ratifying the │
│ appointment of our independent registered public accounting firm for 2022.” │
 173Bank of America 
║ Part IV ║
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules │
The following documents are filed as part of this report:
(1) Financial Statements:
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (PCAOB ID 238)
Consolidated Statement of Income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2021 and 2020
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020
and 2019
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(2) Schedules:
None
(3) Index to Exhibits
With the exception of the information expressly incorporated herein by reference, the 2022 Proxy
Statement shall not be deemed filed as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 Incorporated 
 by Reference 
 Exhibit No. Description Notes Form Exhibit Filing Date File No. 
 Restated 
 Certificate of 
 3.1 Incorporation, 1 
 as amended and 
 in effect on 
 the date hereof 
 Amended and 
 Restated Bylaws 
 3.2 of the 1 
 Corporation as 
 in effect on 
 the date hereof 
 Indenture dated 
 as of January  
 1, 1995(for 
 senior debt 
 securities)bet… 
 4.1 registrant S-3 4.1 2/1/95 33-57533 
 (successor to 
 NationsBank 
 Corporation) 
 and BankAmerica 
 National Trust  
 Company 
 First 
 Supplemental 
 Indenture dated 
 as of September 
 18, 1998 
 between 
 registrant and 
 U.S. Bank Trust 
 4.2 National 8-K 4.3 11/18/98 1-6523 
 Association 
 (successor to 
 BankAmerica 
 National Trust  
 Company) to the 
 indenture dated 
 as of January  
 1, 1995 (See 
 Exhibit 4.1) 
 Second 
 Supplemental 
 Indenture dated 
 as of May 7, 
 2001 between 
 registrant, 
 U.S. Bank Trust 
 National 
 4.3 Association, as 8-K 4.4 6/14/01 1-6523 
 Prior Trustee, 
 and The Bank of 
 New York, as 
 Successor 
 Trustee to the 
 indenture dated 
 as of January  
 1, 1995 (See 
 Exhibit 4.1) 
 Third 
 Supplemental 
 Indenture dated 
 as of July 28, 
 2004 between 
 4.4 registrant and 8-K 4.2 8/27/04 1-6523 
 The Bank of New 
 York to the 
 indenture dated 
 as of January  
 1, 1995 (See 
 Exhibit 4.1) 
 Fourth 
 Supplemental 
 Indenture dated 
 as of April 28, 
 2006 between 
 4.5 the registrant S-3 4.6 5/5/06 333-133852 
 and The Bank of 
 New York to the 
 indenture dated 
 as of January  
 1, 1995 (See 
 Exhibit 4.1) 
 Fifth 
 Supplemental 
 Indenture dated 
 as of December  
 1, 2008 between 
 registrant and 
 The Bank of New 
 York Mellon 
 4.6 Trust Company, 8-K 4.1 12/5/08 1-6523 
 N.A. (successor 
 to The Bank of 
 New York) to 
 the indenture 
 dated as of 
 January 1, 1995 
 (See Exhibit 
 4.1) 
 Sixth 
 Supplemental 
 Indenture dated 
 as of February 
 23, 2011 
 between 
 registrant and 
 4.7 The Bank of New 10-K 4(ee) 2/25/11 1-6523 
 York Mellon 
 Trust Company, 
 N.A. to the 
 indenture dated 
 as of January  
 1, 1995 (See 
 Exhibit 4.1) 
 Seventh 
 Supplemental 
 Indenture dated 
 as of January 
 13, 2017 
 between 
 registrant and 
 4.8 The Bank of New 8-K 4.1 1/13/17 1-6523 
 York Mellon 
 Trust Company, 
 N.A. to the 
 indenture dated 
 as of January  
 1, 1995 (See 
 Exhibit 4.1) 
 Eighth 
 Supplemental 
 Indenture dated 
 as of February 
 23, 2017 
 between 
 registrant and 
 4.9 the Bank of New 10-K 4(a) 2/23/17 1-6523 
 York Mellon 
 Trust Company, 
 N.A. to the 
 indenture dated 
 as of January  
 1, 1995 (See 
 Exhibit 4.1) 
 Successor 
 Trustee 
 Agreement 
 effective 
 December 15, 
 1995 between 
 registrant 
 (successor to 
 NationsBank 
 4.10 Corporation) S-3 4.2 6/28/96 333-07229 
 and First Trust 
 of New York, 
 National 
 Association, as 
 successor 
 trustee to 
 BankAmerica 
 National Trust 
 Company 
 Agreement of 
 Appointment and 
 Acceptance 
 dated as of 
 4.11 December 29, 10-K 4(aaa) 2/28/07 1-6523 
 2006 between 
 registrant and 
 The Bank of New 
 York Trust  
 Company, N.A. 
 4.12 Form of Senior S-3 4.12 5/1/15 333-202354 
 Registered Note 
 Form 
 ofRegisteredGl… 
 4.13 Senior S-3 4.13 5/1/15 333-202354 
 Medium-Term 
 Note, Series L 
 Form of 
 MasterRegister… 
 4.14 Senior S-3 4.14 5/1/15 333-202354 
 Medium-Term 
 Note, Series L 
 Form 
 ofRegisteredGl… 
 4.15 Senior 8-K 4.2 1/13/17 1-6523 
 Medium-Term 
 Note, Series M 
 Form of 
 MasterRegister… 
 4.16 Senior 8-K 4.3 1/13/17 1-6523 
 Medium-Term 
 Note, Series M 
 Indenture dated 
 as of January 
 1, 1995(for 
 subordinated 
 debt 
 4.17 securities)bet… S-3 4.5 2/1/95 33-57533 
 registrant 
 (successor to 
 NationsBank 
 Corporation) 
 and The Bank of 
 New York 
 First 
 Supplemental 
 Indenture dated 
 as of August 
 28, 1998 
 between 
 4.18 registrant and 8-K 4.8 11/18/98 1-6523 
 The Bank of New 
 York to the 
 indenture dated 
 as of January  
 1, 1995 (See 
 Exhibit 4.17) 
 Bank of America174 
 Incorpor… 
 by 
 Reference 
 Exhibit Descript… Notes Form Exhibit Filing File No. 
 No. Date 
 Second 
 Suppleme… 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of 
 January 
 25, 2007 
 between 
 registra… 
 and The 
 Bank of 
 New York 
 Trust 
 4.19 Company, S-4 4.3 3/16/07 333-1413… 
 N.A. 
 (success… 
 to The 
 Bank of 
 New York) 
 to the 
 indenture 
 dated as 
 of 
 January  
 1, 1995 
 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.17) 
 Third 
 Suppleme… 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of 
 February 
 23, 2011 
 between 
 registra… 
 and The 
 Bank of 
 New York 
 Mellon 
 Trust 
 Company, 
 4.20 N.A. 10-K 4(ff) 2/25/11 1-6523 
 (formerly 
 The Bank 
 of New 
 York 
 Trust 
 Company, 
 N.A.) to 
 the 
 indenture 
 dated as 
 of 
 January  
 1, 1995 
 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.17) 
 Fourth 
 Suppleme… 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of 
 February 
 23, 2017 
 between 
 registra… 
 and The 
 Bank of 
 New York 
 4.21 Mellon 10-K 4(i) 2/23/17 1-6523 
 Trust 
 Company, 
 N.A. to 
 the 
 indenture 
 dated as 
 of 
 January  
 1, 1995 
 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.17) 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of June 
 27, 
 2018(for 
 senior 
 debt 
 securiti… 
 4.22 the S-3 4.3 6/27/18 333-2245… 
 registra… 
 and The 
 Bank of 
 New York 
 Mellon 
 Trust 
 Company, 
 N.A. 
 Form 
 ofRegist… 
 Senior 
 Medium-T… 
 4.23 Note, S-3 4.4 6/27/18 333-2245… 
 Series 
 N(prior 
 to August 
 2021) 
 Form of 
 MasterRe… 
 Senior 
 Medium-T… 
 4.24 Note, S-3 4.5 6/27/18 333-2245… 
 Series 
 N(prior 
 to August 
 2021) 
 Form of 
 Register… 
 Global 
 Senior 
 4.25 Medium-T… S-3 4.4 8/2/21 333-2573… 
 Note, 
 Series 
 N(from 
 August 
 2021) 
 Form of 
 Master 
 Register… 
 Global 
 Senior 
 4.26 Medium-T… S-3 4.5 8/2/21 333-2573… 
 Note, 
 Series 
 N(from 
 August 
 2021) 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of June 
 27, 
 2018(for 
 subordin… 
 debt 
 securiti… 
 4.27 the S-3 4.6 6/27/18 333-2245… 
 registra… 
 and The 
 Bank of 
 New York 
 Mellon 
 Trust 
 Company, 
 N.A. 
 Form of 
 Register… 
 Global 
 Subordin… 
 4.28 Medium-T… S-3 4.7 6/27/18 333-2245… 
 Note, 
 Series 
 N(prior 
 to August 
 2021) 
 Form of 
 Register… 
 Global 
 Subordin… 
 4.29 Medium-T… S-3 4.7 8/2/21 333-2573… 
 Note, 
 Series 
 N(from 
 August 
 2021) 
 Registra… 
 and its 
 subsidia… 
 have 
 other 
 long-term 
 debt 
 agreemen… 
 but these 
 are 
 omitted 
 pursuant 
 to Item 
 601(b)(4… 
 of 
 Regulati… 
 S-K. 
 Copies of 
 these 
 agreemen… 
 will be 
 furnished 
 to the 
 Commissi… 
 on 
 request 
 Descript… 
 4.30 of the 1 
 Corporat… 
 Securiti… 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Pension 
 Restorat… 
 Plan, as 
 amended 
 10.1 and 2 10-K 10(c) 2/27/09 1-6523 
 restated 
 effective 
 January  
 1, 2009 
 (Pension 
 Restorat… 
 Plan) 
 First 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 Pension 
 10.2 Restorat… 2 10-K 10(c) 2/26/10 1-6523 
 Plan 
 dated 
 December 
 18, 2009 
 Second 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 Pension 
 10.3 Restorat… 2 10-K 10(a) 2/28/13 1-6523 
 Plan 
 dated 
 June 29, 
 2012 
 Third 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 Pension 
 10.4 Restorat… 2 10-K 10.4 2/19/20 1-6523 
 Plan 
 dated 
 March 26, 
 2013 
 Fourth 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 Pension 
 10.5 Restorat… 2 10-K 10.5 2/19/20 1-6523 
 Plan 
 dated 
 August 
 22, 2013 
 Fifth 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 Pension 
 10.6 Restorat… 2 10-K 10.6 2/19/20 1-6523 
 Plan 
 dated 
 December 
 5, 2014 
 Sixth 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 Pension 
 10.7 Restorat… 2 10-K 10.7 2/19/20 1-6523 
 Plan 
 dated 
 December 
 15, 2016 
 NationsB… 
 Corporat… 
 Benefit 
 10.8 Security 2 10-K 10(t) 3/27/91 1-6523 
 Trust 
 dated as 
 of June  
 27, 1990 
 First 
 Suppleme… 
 to 
 NationsB… 
 Corporat… 
 10.9 Benefit 2 10-K 10(v) 3/24/93 1-6523 
 Security 
 Trust 
 dated as 
 of 
 November  
 30, 1992 
 NationsB… 
 Corporat… 
 Benefit 
 Security 
 Trust 
 10.10 Trustee 2 10-K 10(o) 3/29/96 1-6523 
 Removal/… 
 Agreement 
 dated as 
 of 
 December  
 19, 1995 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Deferred 
 Compensa… 
 Plan 
 (formerly 
 known as 
 the Bank 
 of 
 10.11 America 2 10-K 10(c) 2/25/15 1-6523 
 401(k) 
 Restorat… 
 Plan) as 
 amended 
 and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January  
 1, 2015 
 First 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Deferred 
 Compensa… 
 Plan 
 (formerly 
 known as 
 10.12 the Bank 2 10-K 10(vv) 2/24/16 1-6523 
 of 
 America 
 401(k) 
 Restorat… 
 Plan), as 
 amended 
 and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 
 1, 2015 
 Second 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Deferred 
 Compensa… 
 Plan 
 (formerly 
 known as 
 10.13 the Bank 2 S-8 4(c) 11/19/19 333-2347… 
 of 
 America 
 401(k) 
 Restorat… 
 Plan), as 
 amended 
 and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 
 1, 2015 
 Third 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Deferred 
 Compensa… 
 Plan 
 (formerly 
 known as 
 10.14 the Bank 2 10-K 10.14 2/19/20 1-6523 
 of 
 America 
 401(k) 
 Restorat… 
 Plan), as 
 amended 
 and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 
 1, 2015 
 Fourth 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Deferred 
 Compensa… 
 Plan 
 (formerly 
 known as 
 10.15 the Bank 2 10-K 10.15 2/24/21 1-6523 
 of 
 America 
 401(k) 
 Restorat… 
 Plan), as 
 amended 
 and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 
 1, 2015 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Executive 
 Incentive 
 Compensa… 
 10.16 Plan, as 2 10-K 10(g) 3/3/03 1-6523 
 amended 
 and 
 restated 
 effective 
 December 
 10, 2002 
 Amendment 
 to Bank 
 of 
 America 
 Executive 
 10.17 Incentive 2 10-K 10(d) 2/28/13 1-6523 
 Compensa… 
 Plan, 
 dated 
 January 
 23, 2013 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Director 
 Deferral 
 Plan, as 
 10.18 amended 2 10-K 10(g) 2/28/07 1-6523 
 and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January  
 1, 2005 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Director 
 Deferral 
 Plan, as 
 10.19 amended 2 10-K 10(f) 2/26/19 1-6523 
 and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 
 1, 2019 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Corporat… 
 Key 
 Employee 
 Equity 
 Plan 
 (formerly 
 known as 
 the Key 
 10.20 Associate 2 8-K 10.2 5/7/15 1-6523 
 Stock 
 Plan), as 
 amended 
 and 
 restated 
 effective 
 May 6, 
 2015 
 (2015 
 KEEP) 
 First 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 10.21 2015 KEEP 2 10-K 10(mm) 2/26/19 1-6523 
 dated 
 December 
 19, 2018 
 Second 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 10.22 2015 KEEP 2 8-K 10.1 4/24/19 1-6523 
 dated 
 April 24, 
 2019 
 175Bank of America 
 Incorporated 
 by Reference 
 Exhibit No. Description Notes Form Exhibit Filing Date File No. 
 Bank of America 
 Corporation 
 Equity Plan 
 (formerly known 
 as the Key 
 10.23 Employee Equity 2 8-K 10.1 4/22/21 1-6523 
 Plan), as 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective April 
 20, 2021 (2021 
 BACEP) 
 Form of 
 Cash-settled 
 Restricted 
 Stock Units 
 10.24 Award Agreement 2 10-Q 10(a) 5/2/16 1-6523 
 (February 2016 
 and subsequent 
 grants) under 
 the 2015 KEEP 
 Form of 
 Restricted 
 Stock Award 
 Agreement for 
 10.25 Non-Employee 2 10-K 10(h) 2/26/19 1-6523 
 Directors under 
 the 2015 KEEP 
 and the 2021 
 BACEP 
 Form of 
 Time-based 
 Restricted 
 10.26 Stock Units 2 10-Q 10(a) 4/26/19 1-6523 
 Award Agreement 
 (February 2019) 
 under the 2015 
 KEEP 
 Form of 
 Performance 
 Restricted 
 10.27 Stock Units 2 10-Q 10(b) 4/26/19 1-6523 
 Award Agreement 
 (February 2019) 
 under the 2015 
 KEEP 
 Form of 
 Time-based 
 Restricted 
 10.28 Stock Units 2 10-Q 10.1 5/1/20 1-6523 
 Award Agreement 
 (February 2020) 
 under the 2015 
 KEEP 
 Form of 
 Performance 
 Restricted 
 10.29 Stock Units 2 10-Q 10.2 5/1/20 1-6523 
 Award Agreement 
 (February 2020) 
 under the 2015 
 KEEP 
 Form of 
 Time-based 
 Restricted 
 10.30 Stock Units 2 10-Q 10.1 4/29/21 1-6523 
 Award Agreement 
 (February 2021) 
 under the 2015 
 KEEP 
 Form of 
 Performance 
 Restricted 
 10.31 Stock Units 2 10-Q 10.2 4/29/21 1-6523 
 Award Agreement 
 (February 2021) 
 under the 2015 
 KEEP 
 Form of 
 Cash-settled 
 Restricted 
 10.32 Stock Units 1, 2 
 Award Agreement 
 under the 2021 
 BACEP 
 Form of 
 Time-Based 
 Restricted 
 10.33 Stock Units 1, 2 
 Award Agreement 
 under the 2021 
 BACEP 
 Form of 
 Performance-Ba… 
 10.34 Stock Units 1, 2 
 Award Agreement 
 under the 2021 
 BACEP 
 Form of 
 10.35 PhantomRestric… 1, 2 
 StockUnits 
 Award Agreement 
 ESA Retention 
 Agreement dated 
 March 15, 2004 
 10.36 between the 2 10-Q 10(c) 4/26/19 1-6523 
 Corporation and 
 Dean C. 
 Athanasia 
 Amendment to 
 various plans 
 in connection 
 with 
 10.37 FleetBoston 2 10-K 10(v) 3/1/04 1-6523 
 Financial 
 Corporation 
 merger dated 
 October 27, 
 2003 
 FleetBoston 
 Supplemental 
 Executive 
 10.38 Retirement Plan 2 10-K 10(r) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 effective 
 December 31, 
 2004 
 FleetBoston 
 Executive 
 Deferred 
 10.39 Compensation 2 10-K 10(u) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Plan No. 2 
 effective 
 December 16, 
 2003 
 FleetBoston 
 Executive 
 10.40 Supplemental 2 10-K 10(v) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Plan effective 
 December 31, 
 2004 
 Retirement 
 Income 
 Assurance Plan 
 for Legacy 
 10.41 Fleet, as 2 10-K 10(p) 2/26/10 1-6523 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 1, 2009 
 First Amendment 
 to the 
 Retirement 
 Income 
 Assurance Plan 
 10.42 for Legacy 2 10-K 10(I) 2/28/13 1-6523 
 Fleet, as 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 1, 2009 
 Officer's 
 Certificate of 
 Global 
 Compensation, 
 10.43 Benefits and 2 10-K 10(c) 2/25/11 1-6523 
 Shared Services 
 Executive 
 Regarding 
 Wanger 
 Divestiture 
 Trust Agreement 
 for the 
 FleetBoston 
 Executive 
 10.44 Deferred 2 10-K 10(x) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Compensation 
 Plans No. 1 and 
 2 dated 
 December 17, 
 1997 
 Trust Agreement 
 for the 
 FleetBoston 
 10.45 Executive 2 10-K 10(y) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Supplemental 
 Plan dated June 
 19, 1996 
 Trust Agreement 
 for the 
 FleetBoston 
 Retirement 
 Income 
 Assurance Plan 
 10.46 and the 2 10-K 10(z) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 FleetBoston 
 Supplemental 
 Executive 
 Retirement Plan 
 dated June 19, 
 1996 
 FleetBoston 
 Directors 
 Deferred 
 10.47 Compensation 2 10-K 10(aa) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 and Stock Unit 
 Plan effective 
 January 1, 2004 
 BankBoston 
 Corporation and 
 its 
 Subsidiaries 
 10.48 Deferred 2 10-K 10(cc) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Compensation 
 Plan dated 
 December 24, 
 2001 
 BankBoston 
 Director Stock 
 10.49 Award Plan 2 10-K 10(hh) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 effective July 
 1, 1998 
 BankBoston 
 Corporation 
 Directors’ 
 10.50 Deferred 2 10-K 10(ii) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Compensation 
 Plan effective 
 March 1, 1988 
 BankBoston, 
 N.A. Directors’ 
 10.51 Deferred 2 10-K 10(jj) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Compensation 
 Plan effective 
 March 1, 1988 
 Description of 
 BankBoston 
 Director 
 10.52 Retirement 2 10-K 10(ll) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Benefits 
 Exchange 
 Program 
 Global 
 amendment to 
 definition of 
 “change in 
 control” or 
 10.53 “change of 2 10-K 10(oo) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 control,” 
 together with a 
 list of plans 
 affected by 
 such amendment 
 Employment 
 Agreement dated 
 October 27, 
 10.54 2003 between 2 S-4 10(d) 12/4/03 333-110924 
 registrant and 
 Brian T. 
 Moynihan 
 Cancellation 
 Agreement dated 
 October 26, 
 10.55 2005 between 2 8-K 10.1 10/26/05 1-6523 
 registrant and 
 Brian T. 
 Moynihan 
 Agreement 
 Regarding 
 Participation 
 in the Fleet 
 Boston 
 Supplemental 
 10.56 Executive 2 8-K 10.2 10/26/05 1-6523 
 Retirement Plan 
 dated October  
 26, 2005 
 between 
 registrant and 
 Brian T. 
 Moynihan 
 Employment 
 Letter dated 
 May 1, 2008 
 between Merrill 
 Lynch & Co., 
 Inc. and Thomas 
 10.57 K. Montag and 2 10-K 10(bbb) 2/26/10 1-6523 
 Summary of 
 Agreement with 
 respect to 
 Post-Employment 
 Medical 
 Coverage 
 Bank of America176 
 Incorporated by 
 Reference 
 Exhibit No. Description Notes Form Exhibit Filing Date File No. 
 Securities 
 Purchase 
 Agreement dated 
 August 25, 2011 
 between 
 registrant and 
 Berkshire 
 10.58 Hathaway Inc. 8-K 1.1 8/25/11 1-6523 
 (including 
 forms of the 
 certificate of 
 Designations, 
 Warrant and 
 Registration 
 Rights 
 Agreement) 
 Amended and 
 Restated 
 Aircraft Time 
 Sharing 
 Agreement 
 10.59 (Multiple 2 10-Q 10 7/30/18 1-6523 
 Aircraft) dated 
 June 26, 2018 
 between Bank of 
 America, N.A. 
 and Brian T. 
 Moynihan 
 Form of 
 Aircraft Time 
 Sharing 
 Agreement 
 (Multiple 
 Aircraft) 
 between Bank of 
 10.60 America, N.A. 2 10-Q 10(b) 6/30/19 1-6523 
 and certain 
 executive 
 officers of the 
 Corporation, 
 including 
 certain Named 
 Executive 
 Officers 
 Direct and 
 Indirect 
 Subsidiaries of 
 21 Bank of America 1 
 CorporationAs 
 of December 31, 
 2021 
 Subsidiary 
 22 Issuers of 10-Q 22 10/29/21 1-6523 
 Guaranteed 
 Securities 
 Consent of 
 23 Pricewaterhous… 1 
 LLP 
 24 Power of 1 
 Attorney 
 Certification 
 of the Chief 
 Executive 
 Officer 
 31.1 pursuant to 1 
 Section 302 of 
 the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley 
 Act of 2002 
 Certification 
 of the Chief 
 Financial 
 Officer 
 31.2 pursuant to 1 
 Section 302 of 
 the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley 
 Act of 2002 
 Certification 
 of the Chief 
 Executive 
 Officer 
 pursuant to 18  
 U.S.C. Section  
 32.1 1350, as 1 
 adopted 
 pursuant to 
 Section 906 of 
 the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley 
 Act of 2002 
 Certification 
 of the Chief 
 Financial 
 Officer 
 pursuant to 18  
 U.S.C. Section  
 32.2 1350, as 1 
 adopted 
 pursuant to 
 Section 906 of 
 the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley 
 Act of 2002 
 Inline XBRL 
 101.INS Instance 3 
 Document 
 Inline XBRL 
 101.SCH Taxonomy 1 
 Extension 
 Schema Document 
 Inline XBRL 
 Taxonomy 
 101.CAL Extension 1 
 Calculation 
 Linkbase 
 Document 
 Inline XBRL 
 Taxonomy 
 101.LAB Extension Label 1 
 Linkbase 
 Document 
 Inline XBRL 
 Taxonomy 
 101.PRE Extension 1 
 Presentation 
 Linkbase 
 Document 
 Inline XBRL 
 Taxonomy 
 101.DEF Extension 1 
 Definitions 
 Linkbase 
 Document 
 Cover Page 
 Interactive 
 Data File 
 104 (formatted as 
 Inline XBRL and 
 contained in 
 Exhibit 101) 
(1) Filed Herewith.
(2) Exhibit is a management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
(3) The instance document does not appear in the interactive data file because its XBRL tags are
embedded within the inline XBRL document.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 16. Form 10-K Summary │
Not applicable.
 177Bank of America 
 Signatures 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has
duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
Date: February 22, 2022
 Bank of America Corporation 
 By: /s/ Brian T.Moynihan 
 Brian T.Moynihan 
 Chief Executive Officer 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates
indicated.
 Title 
 Chief Executive Officer, President, Chair and 
 Signature Director Date 
 /s/ Brian T.Moynihan (Principal Executive Officer) February 22, 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Brian T.Moynihan 
 */s/ Alastair M. Borthwick Chief Financial Officer February 22, 2022 
 (Principal Financial Officer) 
 Alastair M. Borthwick 
 */s/ Rudolf A. Bless Chief Accounting Officer February 22, 2022 
 (Principal Accounting Officer) 
 Rudolf A. Bless 
 */s/ Sharon L. Allen Director February 22, 2022 
 Sharon L. Allen 
 */s/ Susan S. Bies Director February 22, 2022 
 Susan S. Bies 
 */s/ Frank P.Bramble, Sr. Director February 22, 2022 
 Frank P.Bramble, Sr. 
 */s/ Pierre J. P. de Weck Director February 22, 2022 
 Pierre J. P. de Weck 
 */s/ Arnold W. Donald Director February 22, 2022 
 Arnold W. Donald 
 */s/ Linda P.Hudson Director February 22, 2022 
 Linda P.Hudson 
 */s/ Monica C. Lozano Director February 22, 2022 
 Monica C. Lozano 
 */s/ Thomas J. May Director February 22, 2022 
 Thomas J. May 
 */s/ Lionel L. Nowell, III Director February 22, 2022 
 Lionel L. Nowell, III 
 Bank of America178 
 Signature Title Date 
 */s/ Denise L. Ramos Director February 22, 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Denise L. Ramos 
 */s/ Clayton S. Rose Director February 22, 2022 
 Clayton S. Rose 
 */s/ Michael D. White Director February 22, 2022 
 Michael D. White 
 */s/ Thomas D. Woods Director February 22, 2022 
 Thomas D. Woods 
 */s/ R. David Yost Director February 22, 2022 
 R. David Yost 
 */s/ Maria T.Zuber Director February 22, 2022 
 Maria T.Zuber 
 *By /s/ Ross E. Jeffries, Jr. 
 Ross E. Jeffries, Jr. 
 Attorney-in-Fact 
 179Bank of America