UNITED STATES 
 SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
 Washington, D.C. 20549 
 FORM 10-K 
 (Mark One) 
 ☑ ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES 
 EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2022 
 or 
 ☐TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES 
 EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 For the transition period from to 
 Commission file number: 
 1-6523 
 Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter: 
 Bank of America Corporation 
 State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization: 
 Delaware 
 IRS Employer Identification No.: 
 56-0906609 
 Address of principal executive offices: 
 Bank of America Corporate Center 
 100 N. Tryon Street 
 Charlotte, North Carolina 28255 
 Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: 
 ( 704) 386-5681 
 Securities registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the Act: 
 Title of each class Trading Symbol(s) Name of each exchange on which 
 registered 
 Common Stock, par value $0.01 per BAC New York Stock Exchange 
 share 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrE New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of Floating Rate Non-Cumulative 
 Preferred Stock, Series E 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrB New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 6.000% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series GG 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrK New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 5.875% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series HH 
 7.25% Non-Cumulative Perpetual 
 Convertible Preferred Stock, Series BAC PrL New York Stock Exchange 
 L 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BML PrG New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,200th interest in a share 
 of Bank of America Corporation 
 Floating 
 Rate 
 Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 Series 1 
 Title of each class Trading Symbol(s) Name of each exchange on which 
 registered 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BML PrH New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,200th interest in a share 
 of Bank of America Corporation 
 Floating 
 Rate 
 Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 Series 2 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BML PrJ New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,200th interest in a share 
 of Bank of America Corporation 
 Floating 
 Rate 
 Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 Series 4 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BML PrL New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,200th interest in a share 
 of Bank of America Corporation 
 Floating 
 Rate 
 Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 Series 5 
 Floating Rate Preferred Hybrid 
 Income BAC/PF New York Stock Exchange 
 Term Securities of BAC Capital 
 Trust XIII (and the guarantee 
 related 
 thereto) 
 5.63% Fixed to Floating Rate 
 Preferred BAC/PG New York Stock Exchange 
 Hybrid Income Term Securities 
 of BAC Capital Trust XIV (and the 
 guarantee related thereto) 
 Income Capital Obligation Notes MER PrK New York Stock Exchange 
 initially due December 15, 2066 of 
 Bank of America Corporation 
 Senior Medium-Term Notes, Series A, 
 Step BAC/31B New York Stock Exchange 
 Up Callable Notes, due 
 November 28, 2031 of BofA Finance 
 LLC 
 (and the guarantee 
 of the Registrant with respect 
 thereto) 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrM New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 5.375% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series KK 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrN New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 5.000% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series LL 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrO New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 4.375% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series NN 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrP New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 4.125% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series PP 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrQ New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 4.250% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series QQ 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a BAC PrS New York Stock Exchange 
 1/1,000th interest in a share 
 of 4.750% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, Series SS 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of
the Securities Act. Yes ☑ No ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or
Section 15(d) of the Act. Yes ☐ No ☑
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant: (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for
such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject
to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes ☑ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data
File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter)
during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit
such files). Yes ☑ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company or an emerging growth company. See the definitions
of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company” and “emerging growth
company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
 Large Accelerated Non-accelerated Smaller 
 accelerated ☑ filer ☐ filer ☐ reporting ☐ 
 filer company 
Emerging growth company ☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the
extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards
provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its
management's assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting under
Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm
that prepared or issued its audit report. ☑
If securities are registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act, indicate by check mark whether the
financial statements of the registrant included in the filing reflect the correction of an error to
previously issued financial statements. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether any of those error corrections are restatements that required a
recovery analysis of incentive-based compensation received by any of the registrant’s executive
officers during the relevant recovery period pursuant to §240.10D-1(b) . ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Act). Yes ☐ No ☑
As of June 30, 2022, the aggregate market value of the registrant’s common stock (“Common Stock”)
held by non-affiliates was approximately $ 250,136,457,342. At February 21, 2023, there were
8,003,839,222shares of Common Stock outstanding.
Documents incorporated by reference: Portions of the definitive proxy statement relating to the
registrant’s 2023 annual meeting of shareholders are incorporated by reference in this Form 10-K in
response to Items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 of Part III.
 Table of Contents 
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
 Part I Page 
 Item 1. Business 2 
 Item 1A. Risk Factors 8 
 Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments 23 
 Item 2. Properties 23 
 Item 3. Legal Proceedings 23 
 Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures 23 
 Part II 
 Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer 23 
 Purchases of Equity Securities 
 Item 6. [Reserved] 24 
 Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of 25 
 Operations 
 Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk 86 
 Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 86 
 Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial 169 
 Disclosure 
 Item 9A. Controls and Procedures 169 
 Item 9B. Other Information 169 
 Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections 169 
 Part III 
 Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance 169 
 Item 11. Executive Compensation 170 
 Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related 170 
 Stockholder Matters 
 Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence 170 
 Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services 170 
 Part IV 
 Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules 171 
 Item 16. Form 10-K Summary 174 
 1Bank of America 
║ Part I ║
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 1. BusinessBank of America Corporation is a Delaware corporation, a bank holding company │
│ (BHC) and a financial holding company. When used in this report, “Bank of America,” “the │
│ Corporation,” “we,” “us” and “our” may refer to Bank of America Corporation individually, Bank │
│ of America Corporation and its subsidiaries, or certain of Bank of America Corporation’s │
│ subsidiaries or affiliates. As part of our efforts to streamline the Corporation’s │
│ organizational structure and reduce complexity and costs, the Corporation has reduced and │
│ intends to continue to reduce the number of its corporate subsidiaries, including through │
│ intercompany mergers.Bank of America is one of the world’s largest financial institutions, │
│ serving individual consumers, small- and middle-market businesses, institutional investors, │
│ large corporations and governments with a full range of banking, investing, asset management │
│ and other financial and risk management products and services. Our principal executive offices │
│ are located in the Bank of America Corporate Center, 100 North Tryon Street, Charlotte, North │
│ Carolina 28255.Bank of America’s website is www.bankofamerica.com, and the Investor Relations │
│ portion of our website is https://investor.bankofamerica.com. We use our website to distribute │
│ company information, including as a means of disclosing material, non-public information and │
│ for complying with our disclosure obligations under Regulation FD. We routinely post and make │
│ accessible financial and other information, including environmental, social and governance │
│ (ESG) information, regarding the Corporation on our website. Investors should monitor our │
│ website, including the Investor Relations portion of our website, in addition to our press │
│ releases, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filings, public conference calls and │
│ webcasts. Our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on │
│ Form 8-K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) │
│ of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (Exchange Act) are available on the Investor Relations │
│ portion of our website as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such │
│ reports with, or furnish them to, the SEC and at the SEC’s website, www.sec.gov. │
│ Notwithstanding the foregoing, the information contained on our website as referenced in this │
│ paragraph, or otherwise in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, is not incorporated by reference │
│ into this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Also, we make available on the Investor Relations portion │
│ of our website: (i) our Code of Conduct; (ii) our Corporate Governance Guidelines; and (iii) │
│ the charter of each active committee of our Board of Directors (the Board). Our Code of Conduct │
│ constitutes a “code of ethics” and a “code of business conduct and ethics” that applies │
│ to the required │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ individuals associated with the Corporation for purposes of the respective rules of the SEC and │
│ the New York Stock Exchange. We also intend to disclose any amendments to our Code of Conduct │
│ and waivers of our Code of Conduct required to be disclosed by the rules of the SEC and the New │
│ York Stock Exchange on the Investor Relations portion of our website. All of these corporate │
│ governance materials are also available free of charge in print to shareholders who request │
│ them in writing to: Bank of America Corporation, Attention: Office of the Corporate Secretary, │
│ Bank of America Corporate Center, 100 North Tryon Street, NC1-007-56-06, Charlotte, North │
│ Carolina 28255.SegmentsThrough our various bank and nonbank subsidiaries throughout the U.S. │
│ and in international markets, we provide a diversified range of banking and nonbank financial │
│ services and products through four business segments:Consumer Banking,Global Wealth & │
│ Investment Management (GWIM),Global BankingandGlobal Markets, with the remaining operations │
│ recorded inAll Other. Additional information related to our business segments and the products │
│ and services they provide is included in the information set forth on pages 37 through 46 of │
│ Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations │
│ (MD&A) andNote 23 – Business Segment Informationto the Consolidated Financial │
│ Statements.CompetitionWe operate in a highly competitive environment. Our competitors include │
│ banks, thrifts, credit unions, investment banking firms, investment advisory firms, brokerage │
│ firms, investment companies, insurance companies, mortgage banking companies, credit card │
│ issuers, mutual fund companies, hedge funds, private equity firms, and e-commerce and other │
│ internet-based companies, including merchant banks and companies providing nonbank financial │
│ services. We compete with some of these competitors globally and with others on a regional or │
│ product-specific basis. We are increasingly competing with firms offering products solely over │
│ the internet and with non-financial companies, including firms utilizing emerging technologies, │
│ such as digital assets, rather than, or in addition to, traditional banking │
│ products.Competition is based on a number of factors including, among others, customer service │
│ and convenience, the pricing, quality and range of products and services offered, lending │
│ limits, the quality and delivery of our technology and our reputation, experience and │
│ relationships in relevant markets. Our ability to continue to compete effectively also depends │
│ in large part on our ability to attract new employees and develop, retain and motivate our │
│ existing employees, while managing compensation and other costs. │
 Bank of America2 
Human Capital Resources We strive to make Bank of America a great place to work for our employees. We
value our employees and seek to establish and maintain human resource policies that are consistent
with our core values and help to realize the power of our people. Our Board and its Compensation and
Human Capital Committee provide oversight of our human capital management strategies, programs and
practices. The Corporation’s senior management provides regular briefings on human capital matters to
the Board and its Committees to facilitate the Board’s oversight. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the
Corporation employed approximately 217,000 and 208,000 employees, of which 79 percent and 80 percent
were located in the U.S. None of our U.S. employees are subject to a collective bargaining agreement.
Additionally, in 2022 and 2021, the Corporation’s compensation and benefits expense was $36.4 billion
and $36.1 billion, or 59 percent and 61 percent, of total noninterest expense. Diversity and
Inclusion The Corporation’s commitment to diversity and inclusion starts at the top with oversight
from our Board and CEO. The Corporation’s senior management sets the diversity and inclusion goals,
and the Chief Human Resources Officer and Chief Diversity & Inclusion Officer partner with our CEO
and senior management to drive our diversity and inclusion strategy, programs, initiatives and
policies. The Global Diversity and Inclusion Council, which consists of senior executives from every
line of business and region, is chaired by our CEO and has been in place for over 20 years. The
Council sponsors and supports business, operating unit and regional diversity and inclusion councils
to align with enterprise diversity strategies and goals. Our practices and policies have resulted in
strong representation across the Corporation where our broad employee population mirrors the clients
and communities we serve. We have a Board and senior management team that are 53 percent and 55
percent racially, ethnically and gender diverse. The following table presents diversity metrics for
our global employees who self-identified as women and our U.S.-based employees who self-identified as
people of color, including those who self-identified as Asian, Black/African American and
Hispanic/Latino. These workforce diversity metrics are reported regularly to the senior management
team and to the Board.
 Diversity Metrics as 
 of December 31, 
 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total Employees Top Three Management Managers at All 
 Levels Levels 
 Global employees 
 Women 50 % 42 % 42 % 
 U.S.-based employees 
 People of color 50 26 42 
 Asian 14 11 14 
 Black/African 14 8 10 
 American 
 Hispanic/Latino 19 6 16 
We invest in our talent by offering a range of
development programs and resources that allow
employees to develop and progress in their
careers. We reinforce our commitment to diversity
and inclusion by investing internally in our
employee networks and by facilitating enterprise-
wide learning and conversations about various
diversity and inclusion topics and issues.
Further, we partner with various external
organizations, which focus on advancing diverse
talent. We also have practices in place for
attracting and retaining diverse talent,
including campus recruitment. For example, in
2022, 44 percent of our global campus hires were
women and, in the U.S., 59 percent were people of
color. Employee Engagement and Talent Retention
As part of our ongoing efforts to make the
Corporation a great place to work, we have
conducted a confidential annual Employee
Engagement Survey (Survey) for nearly two
decades. The Survey results are reviewed by the
Board and senior management and used to assist in
reviewing the Corporation’s human capital
strategies, programs and practices. In 2022, 85
percent of the Corporation’s employees
participated in the Survey, and our Employee
Engagement Index, an overall measure of employee
satisfaction with the Corporation, was 85
percent. Our turnover among employees was 13
percent in 2022 and 12 percent in 2021.
Additionally, the Corporation provides a variety
of resources to help employees grow in their
current roles and build new skills, including
resources to help employees find new
opportunities, re-skill and seek leadership
positions. The learning and development strategy
is grounded in the development of horizontal
skills delivered throughout the organization.
Senior leaders, managers and teammates are
onboarded and build horizontal skills, as well as
role-specific skills, to help drive high
performance. This approach also helps facilitate
internal mobility and promotion of talent to
build a bench of qualified managers and leaders.
In 2022, more than 30,000 employees found new
roles within the Corporation, and we delivered
more than 11 million hours of training and
development to our teammates through Bank of
America Academy. Additionally, our Board oversees
CEO and senior management succession planning,
which is formally reviewed at least annually.
 3Bank of America 
 Fair and Equitable Compensation 
The Corporation is committed to racial and gender
pay equity by striving to compensate all of our
employees fairly and equitably. We maintain
robust policies and practices that reinforce our
commitment, including reviews conducted by a
third-party consultant with oversight from our
Board and senior management. In 2022, our review
covered our regional hubs (U.S., U.K., France,
Ireland, Hong Kong and Singapore) and India and
showed that compensation received by women, on
average, was greater than 99 percent of that
received by men in comparable positions. In the
U.S., compensation received by people of color
was, on average, greater than 99 percent of that
received by teammates who are not people of color
in comparable positions.
We also strive to pay our employees fairly based
on market rates for their roles, experience and
how they perform. We regularly benchmark against
other companies both within and outside our
industry to help confirm our pay is competitive.
In 2021, the Corporation announced it would
increase its minimum hourly wage for U.S.
employees to $25 per hour by 2025. In June 2022,
as a next step, the Corporation increased its
hourly minimum wage for U.S. employees to $22 per
hour. In addition, in January 2023, for the sixth
year since 2017, we announced that we recognized
our teammates with Sharing Success compensation
awards for their efforts during 2022.
Approximately 96 percent of employees globally
will receive an award in the first quarter of
2023.
 Health and Wellness – 2022 Focus 
The Corporation is also committed to supporting
employees’ physical, emotional and financial
wellness by offering flexible and competitive
benefits, including comprehensive health and
insurance benefits and wellness resources. During
2022, we continued efforts to support our
employees through the ongoing health crisis
resulting from Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19). We provided no-cost COVID-19 testing
and teammates with incentives for getting the
vaccine and booster. We also held on-site flu and
COVID-19 vaccine and booster clinics.
We continued our efforts around providing
affordable access to healthcare, including
offering no-cost, 24/7 access to virtual general
medical and behavioral health resources to help
our enrolled U.S. teammates stay healthy, both
physically and emotionally. We kept U.S. health
insurance premiums unchanged for teammates
earning less than $50,000 for the tenth year in a
row, and had nominal premium increases for
teammates earning from $50,000 up to $100,000 for
the sixth year in a row. We provided in-network
generic prescription medications at no cost for
teammates enrolled in a U.S. bank medical PPO or
Consumer Direct plan, along with continuing
preventative care medications at no cost for all
U.S. medical plans.
We offer an extensive benefit package and support
work-life balance for our teammates, which
includes in the U.S., 16 weeks of paid parental
leave for both primary and secondary
caregivers and backup dependent care (50 days of
child and adult backup care per year). We doubled
the number of no-cost confidential counseling
sessions from six to 12 for all employees and
family members and now offer 12 globally.
For more information about our human capital
management, see the Corporation’s website and
2022 Annual Report to shareholders that will be
available on the Investor Relations portion of
our website in March 2023 (the content of which
is not incorporated by reference into this Annual
Report on Form 10-K).
 Government Supervision and Regulation 
The following discussion describes, among other
things, elements of an extensive regulatory
framework applicable to BHCs, financial holding
companies, banks and broker-dealers, including
specific information about Bank of America.
We are subject to an extensive regulatory
framework applicable to BHCs, financial holding
companies and banks and other financial services
entities. U.S. federal regulation of banks, BHCs
and financial holding companies is intended
primarily for the protection of depositors and
the Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF) rather than for
the protection of shareholders and creditors.
As a registered financial holding company and
BHC, the Corporation is subject to the
supervision of, and regular inspection by, the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(Federal Reserve). Our U.S. bank subsidiaries
(the Banks), organized as national banking
associations, are subject to regulation,
supervision and examination by the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the
Federal Reserve. In addition, the Federal Reserve
and the OCC have adopted guidelines that
establish minimum standards for the design,
implementation and board oversight of BHCs’ and
national banks’ risk governance frameworks. U.S.
financial holding companies, and the companies
under their control, are permitted to engage in
activities considered “financial in nature” as
defined by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and related
Federal Reserve interpretations. The
Corporation's status as a financial holding
company is conditioned upon maintaining certain
eligibility requirements for both the Corporation
and its U.S. depository institution subsidiaries,
including minimum capital ratios, supervisory
ratings and, in the case of the depository
institutions, at least satisfactory Community
Reinvestment Act ratings. Failure to be an
eligible financial holding company could result
in the Federal Reserve limiting Bank of America's
activities, including potential acquisitions.
Additionally, we are subject to a significant
number of laws, rules and regulations that govern
our businesses in the U.S. and in the other
jurisdictions in which we operate, including
permissible activities, minimum levels of capital
and liquidity, compliance risk management,
consumer products and sales practices, anti-money
laundering and anti-corruption, government
sanctions, privacy, data protection and executive
compensation, among others.
 Bank of America4 
The scope of the laws and regulations and the
intensity of the supervision to which we are
subject have increased over the past several
years, beginning with the response to the 2008
financial crisis, as well as other factors such
as technological and market changes. In addition,
the banking and financial services sector is
subject to substantial regulatory enforcement and
fines. Many of these changes have occurred as a
result of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform
and Consumer Protection Act (the Financial Reform
Act). We cannot assess whether there will be any
additional major changes in the regulatory
environment and expect that our business will
remain subject to continuing and extensive
regulation and supervision.
We are also subject to various other laws and
regulations, as well as supervision and
examination by other regulatory agencies, all of
which directly or indirectly affect our entities,
management and ability to make distributions to
shareholders. For instance, our broker-dealer
subsidiaries are subject to both U.S. and
international regulation, including supervision
by the SEC, Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority and New York Stock Exchange, among
others; our futures commission merchant
subsidiaries supporting commodities and
derivatives businesses in the U.S. are subject to
regulation by and supervision of the U.S.
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC),
National Futures Association, the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange, and in the case of the
Banks, certain banking regulators; our insurance
activities are subject to licensing and
regulation by state insurance regulatory
agencies; and our consumer financial products and
services are regulated by the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau (CFPB).
Our non-U.S. businesses are also subject to
extensive regulation by various non-U.S.
regulators, including governments, securities
exchanges, prudential regulators, central banks
and other regulatory bodies, in the jurisdictions
in which those businesses operate. For example,
our financial services entities in the United
Kingdom (U.K.), Ireland and France are subject to
regulation by the Prudential Regulatory Authority
and Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), the
European Central Bank and Central Bank of
Ireland, and the Autorité de Contrôle Prudentiel
et de Résolution and Autorité des Marchés
Financiers, respectively.
 Source of Strength 
Under the Financial Reform Act and Federal
Reserve policy, BHCs are expected to act as a
source of financial strength to each subsidiary
bank and to commit resources to support each such
subsidiary. Similarly, under the cross-guarantee
provisions of the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA), in
the event of a loss suffered or anticipated by
the FDIC, either as a result of default of a bank
subsidiary or related to FDIC assistance provided
to such a subsidiary in danger of default, the
affiliate banks of such a subsidiary may be
assessed for the FDIC’s loss, subject to certain
exceptions.
 Transactions with Affiliates 
Pursuant to Section 23A and 23B of the Federal
Reserve Act, as implemented by the Federal
Reserve’s Regulation W, the Banks are subject to
restrictions that limit certain types of
transactions between the Banks and their nonbank
affiliates. In general, U.S.
banks are subject to quantitative and qualitative
limits on extensions of credit, purchases of
assets and certain other transactions involving
their nonbank affiliates. Additionally,
transactions between U.S. banks and their nonbank
affiliates are required to be on arm’s length
terms and must be consistent with standards of
safety and soundness.
 Deposit Insurance 
Deposits placed at U.S. domiciled banks are
insured by the FDIC, subject to limits and
conditions of applicable law and the FDIC’s
regulations. Pursuant to the Financial Reform
Act, FDIC insurance coverage limits are $250,000
per depositor, per insured bank for each account
ownership category. All insured depository
institutions are required to pay assessments to
the FDIC in order to fund the DIF.
The FDIC is required to maintain a statutory
minimum ratio of the DIF to insured deposits in
the U.S. of at least 1.35 percent and has
established a long-term goal of a two percent DIF
ratio. As of the date of this report, the DIF is
below the statutory minimum ratio and the FDIC’s
long-term goal. In October 2022, the FDIC adopted
a restoration plan that includes an increase in
deposit insurance assessments across the industry
of two basis points (bps). The FDIC has indicated
that it intends to maintain such assessment rates
for the foreseeable future. Deposit insurance
assessment rates are subject to change by the
FDIC and will be impacted by the overall economy
and the stability of the banking industry as a
whole. For more information regarding deposit
insurance, see Item 1A. Risk Factors –
Regulatory, Compliance and Legal on page 17.
 Capital, Liquidity and Operational Requirements 
As a financial holding company, we and our bank
subsidiaries are subject to the regulatory
capital and liquidity rules issued by the Federal
Reserve and other U.S. banking regulators,
including the OCC and the FDIC. These rules are
complex and are evolving as U.S. and
international regulatory authorities propose and
enact amendments to these rules. The Corporation
seeks to manage its capital position to maintain
sufficient capital to satisfy these regulatory
rules and to support our business activities.
These continually evolving rules are likely to
influence our planning processes and may require
additional regulatory capital and liquidity, as
well as impose additional operational and
compliance costs on the Corporation.
For more information on regulatory capital rules,
capital composition and pending or proposed
regulatory capital changes, see Capital
Management on page 49, and Note 16 – Regulatory
Requirements and Restrictions to the Consolidated
Financial Statements, which are incorporated by
reference in this Item 1.
 Distributions 
We are subject to various regulatory policies and
requirements relating to capital actions,
including payment of dividends and common stock
repurchases. For instance, Federal Reserve
regulations require major U.S. BHCs to submit a
capital plan as part of an annual Comprehensive
Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR).
 5Bank of America 
Our ability to pay dividends and make common
stock repurchases depends in part on our ability
to maintain regulatory capital levels above
minimum requirements plus buffers and non-capital
standards established under the FDICIA. To the
extent that the Federal Reserve increases our
stress capital buffer (SCB), global systemically
important bank (G-SIB) surcharge or
countercyclical capital buffer, our returns of
capital to shareholders, including dividends and
common stock repurchases, could decrease. As part
of its CCAR, the Federal Reserve conducts stress
testing on parts of our business using
hypothetical economic scenarios prepared by the
Federal Reserve. Those scenarios may affect our
CCAR stress test results, which may impact the
level of our SCB. For example, based on the
results of our 2022 CCAR stress test, the
Corporation’s SCB increased to 3.4 percent, and
the Corporation’s G-SIB surcharge is expected to
increase to 3.0 percent on January 1, 2024.
Additionally, the Federal Reserve could impose
limitations or prohibitions on taking capital
actions such as paying or increasing dividends or
repurchasing common stock. For example, as a
result of the economic uncertainty resulting from
the pandemic, in the second half of 2020, the
Federal Reserve introduced certain limitations to
capital distributions for all large banks,
including the Corporation, which were removed
effective July 1, 2021.
If the Federal Reserve finds that any of our
Banks are not “well-capitalized” or “well-
managed,” we would be required to enter into an
agreement with the Federal Reserve to comply with
all applicable capital and management
requirements, which may contain additional
limitations or conditions relating to our
activities. Additionally, the applicable federal
regulatory authority is authorized to determine,
under certain circumstances relating to the
financial condition of a bank or BHC, that the
payment of dividends would be an unsafe or
unsound practice and to prohibit payment thereof.
For more information regarding the requirements
relating to the payment of dividends, including
the minimum capital requirements, see Note 13 –
Shareholders’ Equity and Note 16 – Regulatory
Requirements and Restrictions to the Consolidated
Financial Statements.
Many of our subsidiaries, including our bank and
broker-dealer subsidiaries, are subject to laws
that restrict dividend payments, or authorize
regulatory bodies to block or reduce the flow of
funds from those subsidiaries to the parent
company or other subsidiaries. The rights of the
Corporation, our shareholders and our creditors
to participate in any distribution of the assets
or earnings of our subsidiaries are further
subject to the prior claims of creditors of the
respective subsidiaries.
 Resolution Planning 
As a BHC with greater than $250 billion of
assets, the Corporation is required by the
Federal Reserve and the FDIC to periodically
submit a plan for a rapid and orderly resolution
in the event of material financial distress or
failure.
Such resolution plan is intended to be a detailed
roadmap for the orderly resolution of the BHC,
including the continued operations or solvent
wind down of its material entities, pursuant to
the U.S. Bankruptcy Code under one or more
hypothetical scenarios assuming no extraordinary
government assistance.
If both the Federal Reserve and the FDIC
determine that the BHC’s plan is not credible,
the Federal Reserve and the FDIC may jointly
impose more stringent capital, leverage or
liquidity requirements or restrictions on growth,
activities or operations. A summary of our plan
is available on the Federal Reserve and FDIC
websites.
The FDIC also requires the submission of a
resolution plan for Bank of America, National
Association, which must describe how the insured
depository institution would be resolved under
the bank resolution provisions of the Federal
Deposit Insurance Act. A description of this plan
is available on the FDIC’s website.
We continue to make substantial progress to
enhance our resolvability, which includes
continued improvements to our preparedness
capabilities to implement our resolution plan,
both from a financial and operational standpoint.
Across international jurisdictions, resolution
planning is the responsibility of national
resolution authorities (RA). Among those, the
jurisdictions with the greatest impact to the
Corporation’s subsidiaries are the U.K., Ireland
and France, where rules have been issued
requiring the submission of significant
information about locally incorporated
subsidiaries as well as the Corporation’s banking
branches located in those jurisdictions that are
deemed to be material for resolution planning
purposes. As a result of the RA's review of the
submitted information, we could be required to
take certain actions over the next several years
that could increase operating costs and
potentially result in the restructuring of
certain businesses and subsidiaries.
For more information regarding our resolution
plan, see Item 1A. Risk Factors – Liquidity on
page 9.
 Insolvency and the Orderly Liquidation Authority 
Under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, the FDIC
may be appointed receiver of an insured
depository institution if it is insolvent or in
certain other circumstances. In addition, under
the Financial Reform Act, when a systemically
important financial institution (SIFI) such as
the Corporation is in default or danger of
default, the FDIC may be appointed receiver in
order to conduct an orderly liquidation of such
institution. In the event of such appointment,
the FDIC could, among other things, invoke the
orderly liquidation authority, instead of the
U.S. Bankruptcy Code, if the Secretary of the
Treasury makes certain financial distress and
systemic risk determinations. The orderly
liquidation authority is modeled in part on the
Federal Deposit Insurance Act, but also adopts
certain concepts from the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
The orderly liquidation authority contains
certain differences from the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code. For example, in certain circumstances, the
FDIC could permit payment of obligations it
determines to be systemically significant (e.g.,
short-term creditors or operating creditors) in
lieu of paying other obligations (e.g., long-term
creditors) without the need to obtain creditors’
consent or prior court review. The insolvency and
resolution process could also lead to a large
reduction or total elimination of the value of a
BHC’s outstanding equity, as well as impairment
or elimination of certain debt.
Under the FDIC’s “single point of entry” strategy
for resolving SIFIs, the FDIC could replace a
distressed BHC with a bridge holding company,
which could continue operations and result in an
orderly resolution of the underlying bank, but
whose equity is held solely for the benefit of
creditors of the original BHC.
Furthermore, the Federal Reserve requires that
BHCs maintain minimum levels of long-term debt
required to provide adequate loss absorbing
capacity in the event of a resolution.
For more information regarding our resolution,
see Item 1A. Risk Factors – Liquidity on page 9.
 Bank of America6 
 Limitations on Acquisitions 
The Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching
Efficiency Act of 1994 permits a BHC to acquire
banks located in states other than its home state
without regard to state law, subject to certain
conditions, including the condition that the BHC,
after and as a result of the acquisition,
controls no more than 10 percent of the total
amount of deposits of insured depository
institutions in the U.S. and no more than 30
percent or such lesser or greater amount set by
state law of such deposits in that state. At June
30, 2022, we held greater than 10 percent of the
total amount of deposits of insured depository
institutions in the U.S.
In addition, the Financial Reform Act restricts
acquisitions by a financial institution if, as a
result of the acquisition, the total liabilities
of the financial institution would exceed 10
percent of the total liabilities of all financial
institutions in the U.S. At June 30, 2022, our
liabilities did not exceed 10 percent of the
total liabilities of all financial institutions
in the U.S.
 The Volcker Rule 
The Volcker Rule prohibits insured depository
institutions and companies affiliated with
insured depository institutions (collectively,
banking entities) from engaging in short-term
proprietary trading of certain securities,
derivatives, commodity futures and options for
their own account. The Volcker Rule also imposes
limits on banking entities’ investments in, and
other relationships with, hedge funds and private
equity funds. The Volcker Rule provides
exemptions for certain activities, including
market making, underwriting, hedging, trading in
government obligations, insurance company
activities and organizing and offering hedge
funds and private equity funds. The Volcker Rule
also clarifies that certain activities are not
prohibited, including acting as agent, broker or
custodian. A banking entity with significant
trading operations, such as the Corporation, is
required to maintain a detailed compliance
program to comply with the restrictions of the
Volcker Rule.
 Derivatives 
Our derivatives operations are subject to
extensive regulation globally. These operations
are subject to regulation under the Financial
Reform Act, the European Union (EU) Markets in
Financial Instruments Directive and Regulation,
the European Market Infrastructure Regulation,
analogous U.K. regulatory regimes and similar
regulatory regimes in other jurisdictions that
regulate or will regulate the derivatives markets
in which we operate by, among other things:
requiring clearing and exchange trading of
certain derivatives; enforcing existing or
imposing new capital, margin, reporting,
registration and business conduct requirements
for certain market participants; imposing
position limits on certain derivatives; and
imposing derivatives trading transparency
requirements. These regulations are already in
effect in many markets in which we operate.
In addition, many G-20 jurisdictions, including
the U.S., U.K., and Japan, have adopted
resolution stay regulations to address concerns
that the close-out of derivatives and other
financial contracts in resolution could impede
orderly resolution of G-SIBs, and additional
jurisdictions are expected to follow suit. In
addition, the EU has implemented EU-wide
resolution stay requirements. Generally, these
resolution stay regulations require amendment of
certain financial contracts to provide for
contractual recognition of stays of termination
rights under
various statutory resolution regimes and a stay
on the exercise of cross-default rights based on
an affiliate’s entry into insolvency proceedings.
Resolution regulations may also require
contractual recognition by the counterparty that
amounts owed may be written down or converted
into equity as part of a bail in. As resolution
stay regulations of a particular jurisdiction
applicable to us go into effect, we amend
impacted financial contracts in compliance with
such regulations either as a regulated entity or
as a counterparty facing a regulated entity in
such jurisdiction.
 Consumer Regulations 
Our consumer businesses are subject to extensive
regulation and oversight by federal and state
regulators. Certain federal consumer finance laws
to which we are subject, including the Equal
Credit Opportunity Act, Home Mortgage Disclosure
Act, Electronic Fund Transfer Act, Fair Credit
Reporting Act, Real Estate Settlement Procedures
Act, unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or
practices (UDAAP), Truth in Lending Act and Truth
in Savings Act, are enforced by the CFPB. Other
federal consumer finance laws, such as the
Servicemembers Civil Relief Act, are enforced by
the OCC.
 Privacy and Information Security 
We are subject to many U.S. federal, state and
international laws and regulations governing
requirements for maintaining policies and
procedures regarding the disclosure, use and
protection of the non-public confidential
information of our customers and employees. The
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act requires us to
periodically disclose Bank of America’s privacy
policies and practices relating to sharing such
information and enables retail customers to opt
out of our ability to share information with
unaffiliated third parties, under certain
circumstances. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and
other laws also require us to implement a
comprehensive information security program that
includes administrative, technical and physical
safeguards to provide the security and
confidentiality of customer records and
information. Security and privacy policies and
procedures for the protection of personal and
confidential information are in effect across all
businesses and geographic locations.
Other laws and regulations, at the international,
federal and state level, impact our ability to
share certain information with affiliates and
non-affiliates for marketing and/or non-marketing
purposes, or contact customers with marketing
offers and establish certain rights of consumers
in connection with their personal information.
For example, California’s Consumer Privacy Act
(CCPA), as modified by the California Privacy
Rights Act (CPRA), provides consumers with the
right to know what personal data is being
collected, know whether their personal data is
sold or disclosed and to whom and opt out of the
sale of their personal data, among other rights.
In addition, in the EU, the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) replaced the Data
Protection Directive and related implementing
national laws in its member states. The CCPA's,
CPRA's and GDPR’s impact on the Corporation was
assessed and addressed through comprehensive
compliance implementation programs. These
existing and evolving legal requirements in the
U.S. and abroad, as well as court proceedings and
changing guidance from regulatory bodies with
respect to the validity of cross-border data
transfer mechanisms from the EU, continue to lend
uncertainty to privacy compliance globally.
 7Bank of America 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 1A. Risk FactorsThe discussion below addresses our material risk factors of which we are │
│ aware. Any risk factor, either by itself or together with other risk factors, could materially │
│ and adversely affect our businesses, results of operations, cash flows and/or financial │
│ condition. References to third parties may include their upstream and downstream service │
│ providers who may also contribute to our risks. Other factors not currently known to us or that │
│ we currently deem immaterial could also adversely affect our businesses, results of operations, │
│ cash flows and/or financial condition. Therefore, the risk factors below should not be │
│ considered all of the potential risks that we may face. For more information on how we manage │
│ risks, see Managing Risk in the MD&A on page 46. For more information about the risks contained │
│ in the Risk Factors section, see Item 1. Business on page 2, MD&A on page 26 and Notes to │
│ Consolidated Financial Statements on page 94.MarketWe may be adversely affected by the │
│ financial markets, fiscal, monetary, and regulatory policies, and economic conditions.General │
│ economic, political, social and health conditions in the U.S. and abroad affect financial │
│ markets and our business. In particular, global markets may be affected by the level and │
│ volatility of interest rates, availability and market conditions of financing, changes in gross │
│ domestic product (GDP), economic growth or its sustainability, inflation, supply chain │
│ disruptions, consumer spending, employment levels, labor shortages, challenging labor market │
│ conditions, wage stagnation, federal government shutdowns, energy prices, home prices, │
│ commercial property values, bankruptcies, a default by a significant market participant or │
│ class of counterparties, including companies in emerging markets, fluctuations or other │
│ significant changes in both debt and equity capital markets and currencies, liquidity, the │
│ continued transition from InterBank Offered Rates (IBORs) and other benchmark rates to │
│ alternative reference rates (ARRs), the impact of volatility of digital assets on the broader │
│ market, the growth of global trade and commerce, trade policies, the availability and cost of │
│ capital and credit, disruption of communication, transportation or energy infrastructure, │
│ recessionary fears and investor sentiment. Global markets, including energy and commodity │
│ markets, may be adversely affected by the current or anticipated impact of climate change, │
│ acute and/or chronic extreme weather events or natural disasters, the emergence or continuation │
│ of widespread health emergencies or pandemics, cyberattacks, military conflict, terrorism, or │
│ other geopolitical events. Market fluctuations may impact our margin requirements and affect │
│ our liquidity. Any sudden or prolonged market downturn, as a result of the above factors or │
│ otherwise, could result in a decline in net interest income and noninterest income and │
│ adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition, including capital and │
│ liquidity levels. High inflation, elevated interest rate levels, supply chain disruptions, and │
│ the Russia/Ukraine conflict, including the related energy impact in Europe, have adversely │
│ impacted and may continue to adversely impact financial markets and macroeconomic conditions │
│ and could result in additional market volatility and disruptions.Global uncertainties regarding │
│ fiscal and monetary policies present economic challenges. Actions taken by the Federal Reserve │
│ or other central banks, including changes in target rates, balance sheet management and lending │
│ facilities, are beyond our control and difficult to predict, particularly in a high inflation │
│ environment. This can affect interest rates and the value of financial instruments and other │
│ assets, such as debt │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ securities, and impact our borrowers and potentially increase delinquency rates and may also │
│ raise government debt levels, adversely affect businesses and household incomes and increase │
│ uncertainty surrounding monetary policy. Monetary policy in response to high inflation has led │
│ to a significant increase in market interest rates and a flattening and/or inversion of the │
│ yield curve. This has resulted in and may continue to result in volatility of equity and other │
│ markets, further volatility of the U.S. dollar, a widening in credit spreads and higher │
│ interest rates and recessionary concerns, and could result in elevated unemployment, which │
│ could impact investor risk appetite and our borrowers, potentially increasing delinquency │
│ rates. It is also possible that high inflation may limit the scope of monetary support, │
│ including cuts to the federal funds rate, in the event of an economic downturn, resulting in a │
│ more protracted period of a flat and/or inverted yield curve.Any future change in monetary │
│ policy by the Federal Reserve, in an effort to stimulate the economy or otherwise, resulting in │
│ lower interest rates would likely result in lower revenue through lower net interest income, │
│ which could adversely affect our results of operations. Additionally, changes to existing U.S. │
│ laws and regulatory policies and evolving priorities, including those related to financial │
│ regulation, taxation, international trade, fiscal policy, climate change (including efforts to │
│ transition to a low-carbon economy) and healthcare, may adversely impact U.S. or global │
│ economic activity and our customers', our counterparties' and our earnings and operations. │
│ Globally, many central banks are simultaneously reducing monetary accommodation through │
│ interest rate or balance sheet policy, which has contributed and may continue to contribute to │
│ elevated financial and capital market volatility and significant changes to asset values. While │
│ higher interest rates have positively impacted our net interest income, higher interest rates │
│ have negatively impacted and could continue to negatively impact deposits, loan demand and │
│ funding costs. If the U.S. government’s debt ceiling limit is not raised, the ramifications │
│ could result in market volatility, ratings downgrades and limit fiscal policy responses to │
│ recessionary conditions. This could have a negative and potentially severe impact on the U.S. │
│ and world economy and financial and capital markets, including higher interest rates, higher │
│ volatility, lower asset values, lower liquidity, downgrades to U.S. debt, and a weakened U.S. │
│ dollar.Changes to international trade and investment policies by the U.S. could negatively │
│ impact financial markets. Escalation of tensions between the U.S. and the People’s Republic of │
│ China (China) could lead to further U.S. measures that adversely affect financial markets, │
│ disrupt world trade and commerce and lead to trade retaliation, including through the use of │
│ tariffs, foreign exchange measures or the large-scale sale of U.S. Treasury bonds. Any │
│ restrictions on the activities of businesses, could also negatively affect financial │
│ markets.These developments could adversely affect our businesses, customers, securities and │
│ derivatives portfolios, including the risk of lower re-investment rates within those │
│ portfolios, our level of charge-offs and provision for credit losses, the carrying value of our │
│ deferred tax assets, our capital levels, our liquidity and our results of operations.Increased │
│ market volatility and adverse changes in financial or capital market conditions may increase │
│ our market risk.Our liquidity, competitive position, business, results of operations and │
│ financial condition are affected by market risks such as changes in interest and currency │
│ exchange rates, fluctuations in equity, commodity and futures prices, trading volumes and │
│ prices of securitized products, the implied volatility of interest rates and credit spreads and │
│ other economic and │
 Bank of America8 
business factors. These market risks may
adversely affect, among other things, the value
of our securities, including our on- and off-
balance sheet securities, trading assets and
other financial instruments, the cost of debt
capital and our access to credit markets, the
value of assets under management (AUM), fee
income relating to AUM, customer allocation of
capital among investment alternatives, the volume
of client activity in our trading operations,
investment banking, underwriting and other
capital market fees, which have already been
negatively impacted, the general profitability
and risk level of the transactions in which we
engage and our competitiveness with respect to
deposit pricing. The value of certain of our
assets is sensitive to changes in market interest
rates. If the Federal Reserve or a non-U.S.
central bank changes or signals a change in
monetary policy, market interest rates or credit
spreads could be affected, which could adversely
impact the value of such assets. Changes to
fiscal policy, including expansion of U.S.
federal deficit spending and resultant debt
issuance, could also affect market interest
rates. If interest rates decrease, our results of
operations could be negatively impacted,
including future revenue and earnings growth. The
continued flattening and/or inversion of the
yield curve could also negatively impact our
results of operations, including revenue and
earnings.
Our models and strategies to assess and control
our market risk exposures are subject to inherent
limitations. In times of market stress or other
unforeseen circumstances, previously uncorrelated
indicators may become correlated and vice versa.
Such changes to the relationship between market
parameters may limit the effectiveness of our
hedging strategies and cause us to incur
significant losses. Changes in correlation can be
exacerbated where market participants use risk or
trading models with assumptions or algorithms
similar to ours. In these and other cases, it may
be difficult to reduce our risk positions due to
activity of other market participants or
widespread market dislocations, including
circumstances where asset values are declining
significantly or no market exists. Where we own
securities that do not have an established liquid
trading market or are otherwise subject to
restrictions on sale or hedging, or where the
degree of accessible liquidity declines
significantly, we may not be able to reduce our
positions and risks associated with such
holdings, so we may suffer larger than expected
losses when adverse price movements take place.
This risk can be exacerbated where we hold a
position that is large relative to the available
liquidity.
If asset values decline, we may incur losses and
negative impacts to capital and liquidity
requirements.
We have a large portfolio of financial
instruments, including loans and loan
commitments, securities financing agreements,
asset-backed secured financings, derivative
assets and liabilities, debt securities,
marketable equity securities and certain other
assets and liabilities that we measure at fair
value and are subject to valuation and impairment
assessments. We determine these values based on
applicable accounting guidance, which, for
financial instruments measured at fair value,
requires an entity to base fair value on exit
price and to maximize the use of observable
inputs and minimize the use of unobservable
inputs in fair value measurements. The fair
values of these financial instruments include
adjustments for market liquidity, credit quality,
funding impact on certain derivatives and other
transaction-specific factors, where appropriate.
Gains or losses on these instruments can have a
direct impact on our results of operations,
unless we have effectively hedged our exposures.
Increases in interest rates may result in further
decreases in residential mortgage loan
originations and could impact the origination of
corporate debt. In addition,
increases in interest rates or changes in spreads
may continue to adversely impact the fair value
of debt securities and, accordingly, for debt
securities classified as available for sale, may
continue to adversely affect accumulated other
comprehensive income and, thus, capital levels.
These market moves could also adversely impact
our regulatory liquidity requirements. Any
decreases in interest rates may increase
prepayment speeds of certain assets, and,
therefore, could adversely affect net interest
income. Changes in interest rates also may impact
the value of mortgage service rights retained.
Fair values may be impacted by declining values
of the underlying assets or the prices at which
observable market transactions occur and the
continued availability of these transactions or
indices. The financial strength of
counterparties, with whom we have economically
hedged some of our exposure to these assets, also
will affect the fair value of these assets.
Sudden declines and volatility in the prices of
assets may curtail or eliminate trading
activities in these assets, which may make it
difficult to sell, hedge or value these assets.
The inability to sell or effectively hedge assets
reduces our ability to limit losses in such
positions, and the difficulty in valuing assets
may increase our risk-weighted assets (RWA),
which requires us to maintain additional capital
and increases our funding costs. Values of AUM
also impact revenues in our wealth management and
related advisory businesses for asset-based
management and performance fees. Declines in
values of AUM can result in lower fees earned for
managing such assets.
 Liquidity 
If we are unable to access the capital markets,
have prolonged net deposits outflows, or our
borrowing costs increase, our liquidity and
competitive position will be negatively affected.
Liquidity is essential to our businesses. We fund
our assets primarily with globally sourced
deposits in our bank entities, as well as secured
and unsecured liabilities transacted in the
capital markets. We rely on certain secured
funding sources, such as repo markets, which are
typically short-term and credit-sensitive. We
also engage in asset securitization transactions,
including with the government-sponsored
enterprises (GSEs), to fund consumer lending
activities. Our liquidity could be adversely
affected by any inability to access the capital
markets, illiquidity or volatility in the capital
markets, the decrease in value of eligible
collateral or increased collateral requirements
(including as a result of credit concerns for
short-term borrowing), changes to our
relationships with our funding providers based on
real or perceived changes in our risk profile,
prolonged federal government shutdowns, or
changes in regulations, guidance or GSE status
that impact our funding. Additionally, our
liquidity or cost of funds may be negatively
impacted by the unwillingness or inability of the
Federal Reserve to act as lender of last resort,
unexpected simultaneous draws on lines of credit,
slower customer payment rates, restricted access
to the assets of prime brokerage clients, the
withdrawal of or failure to attract customer
deposits or invested funds (which could result
from attrition driven by customers seeking higher
yielding deposits or securities products,
customer desire to utilize an alternative
financial institution perceived to be safer,
changes in customer spending behavior due to
inflation, decline in the economy or other
drivers resulting in an increased need for cash),
increased regulatory liquidity, capital and
margin requirements for our U.S. or international
banks and their nonbank subsidiaries, which could
result in the inability to transfer liquidity
internally and inefficient funding, changes in
patterns of intraday liquidity usage resulting
from a counterparty or technology failure or
other idiosyncratic event or failure or
 9Bank of America 
default by a significant market participant or
third party (including clearing agents,
custodians, central banks or central counterparty
clearinghouses (CCPs)). These factors also have
the potential to increase our borrowing costs and
negatively impact our liquidity.
Several of these factors may arise due to
circumstances beyond our control, such as general
market volatility, disruption, shock or stress,
the emergence or continuation of widespread
health emergencies or pandemics, Federal Reserve
policy decisions (including fluctuations in
interest rates or Federal Reserve balance sheet
composition), negative views or loss of
confidence about us or the financial services
industry generally or due to a specific news
event, changes in the regulatory environment or
governmental fiscal or monetary policies, actions
by credit rating agencies or an operational
problem that affects third parties or us. The
impact of these potentially sudden events,
whether within our control or not, could include
an inability to sell assets or redeem
investments, unforeseen outflows of cash, the
need to draw on liquidity facilities, the
reduction of financing balances and the loss of
equity secured funding, debt repurchases to
support the secondary market or meet client
requests, the need for additional funding for
commitments and contingencies and unexpected
collateral calls, among other things, the result
of which could be increased costs, a liquidity
shortfall and/or impact on our liquidity coverage
ratio.
Our liquidity and cost of obtaining funding may
be directly related to investor behavior, debt
market disruption, firm specific concerns or
prevailing market conditions, including changes
in interest and currency exchange rates,
significant fluctuations in equity and futures
prices, lower trading volumes and prices of
securitized products and our credit spreads.
Increases in interest rates and our credit
spreads can increase the cost of our funding and
result in mark-to-market or credit valuation
adjustment exposures. Changes in our credit
spreads are market driven and may be influenced
by market perceptions of our creditworthiness,
including changes in our credit ratings or
changes in broader financial market and
macroeconomic conditions. Changes to interest
rates and our credit spreads occur continuously
and may be unpredictable and highly volatile. We
may also experience net interest margin
compression as a result of offering higher than
expected deposit rates in order to attract and
maintain deposits. Concentrations within our
funding profile, such as maturities, currencies
or counterparties, can reduce our funding
efficiency.
Reduction in our credit ratings could limit our
access to funding or the capital markets,
increase borrowing costs or trigger additional
collateral or funding requirements.
Our borrowing costs and ability to raise funds
are directly impacted by our credit ratings.
Credit ratings may also be important to
investors, customers or counterparties when we
compete in certain markets and seek to engage in
certain transactions, including over-the-counter
(OTC) derivatives. Our credit ratings are subject
to ongoing review by rating agencies, which
consider a number of financial and non-financial
factors, including our franchise, financial
strength, performance and prospects, management,
governance, risk management practices, capital
adequacy, asset quality and operations, among
other criteria, as well as factors not under our
control, such as regulatory developments, the
macroeconomic and geopolitical environment and
changes to the methodologies used to determine
our ratings, or ratings generally.
Rating agencies could make adjustments to our
credit ratings at any time and there can be no
assurance as to whether or when any downgrades
could occur. A reduction in our
credit ratings could result in a wider credit
spread and negatively affect our liquidity,
access to credit markets, the related cost of
funds, our businesses and certain trading
revenues, particularly in those businesses where
counterparty creditworthiness is critical. If the
short-term credit ratings of our parent company,
or bank or broker-dealer subsidiaries, were
downgraded by one or more levels, we may
experience loss of access to short-term funding
sources such as repo financing, and/or incur
increased cost of funds and increased collateral
requirements. Under the terms of certain OTC
derivative contracts and other trading
agreements, if our or our subsidiaries’ credit
ratings are downgraded, the counterparties may
require additional collateral or terminate these
contracts or agreements.
While certain potential impacts are contractual
and quantifiable, the full consequences of a
credit rating downgrade are inherently uncertain
and depend upon numerous dynamic, complex and
inter-related factors and assumptions, including
the relationship between long-term and short-term
credit ratings and the behaviors of customers,
investors and counterparties.
Bank of America Corporation is a holding company,
is dependent on its subsidiaries for liquidity
and may be restricted from transferring funds
from subsidiaries.
Bank of America Corporation, as the parent
company, is a separate and distinct legal entity
from our bank and nonbank subsidiaries. We
evaluate and manage liquidity on a legal entity
basis. Legal entity liquidity is an important
consideration as there are legal, regulatory,
contractual and other limitations on our ability
to utilize liquidity from one legal entity to
satisfy the liquidity requirements of another,
including the parent company, which could result
in adverse liquidity events. The parent company
depends on dividends, distributions, loans and
other payments from our bank and nonbank
subsidiaries to fund dividend payments on our
preferred stock and common stock and to fund all
payments on our other obligations, including debt
obligations. Any inability of our subsidiaries to
transfer funds, pay dividends or make payments to
us may adversely affect our cash flow and
financial condition.
Many of our subsidiaries, including our bank and
broker-dealer subsidiaries, are subject to laws
that restrict dividend payments, or authorize
regulatory bodies to block or reduce the flow of
funds from those subsidiaries to the parent
company or other subsidiaries. Our bank and
broker-dealer subsidiaries are subject to
restrictions on their ability to lend or transact
with affiliates, minimum regulatory capital and
liquidity requirements and restrictions on their
ability to use funds deposited with them in bank
or brokerage accounts to fund their businesses.
Intercompany arrangements we entered into in
connection with our resolution planning
submissions could restrict the amount of funding
available to the parent company from our
subsidiaries under certain adverse conditions.
Additional restrictions on related party
transactions, increased capital and liquidity
requirements and additional limitations on the
use of funds on deposit in bank or brokerage
accounts, as well as lower earnings, can reduce
the amount of funds available to meet the
obligations of the parent company and even
require the parent company to provide additional
funding to such subsidiaries. Also, regulatory
action that requires additional liquidity at each
of our subsidiaries could impede access to funds
we need to pay our obligations or pay dividends.
In addition, our right to participate in a
distribution of assets upon a subsidiary’s
liquidation or reorganization is subject to prior
claims of the subsidiary’s creditors.
 Bank of America10 
Bank of America Corporation’s liquidity and
financial condition, and the ability to pay
dividends and obligations, could be adversely
affected in the event of a resolution.
Bank of America Corporation, our parent holding
company, is required to periodically submit a
plan to the FDIC and Federal Reserve describing
its resolution strategy under the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code in the event of material financial distress
or failure. Bank of America Corporation’s
preferred resolution strategy is a “single point
of entry” strategy, whereby only the parent
holding company would file for bankruptcy under
the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. Certain key operating
subsidiaries would be provided with sufficient
capital and liquidity to operate through severe
stress and to enable such subsidiaries to
continue operating or be wound down in a solvent
manner following a bankruptcy of the parent
holding company. Bank of America Corporation has
entered into intercompany arrangements resulting
in the contribution of most of its capital and
liquidity to key subsidiaries. Pursuant to these
arrangements, if Bank of America Corporation’s
liquidity resources deteriorate so severely that
resolution becomes imminent, it will no longer be
able to draw liquidity from its key subsidiaries
and will be required to contribute its remaining
financial assets to a wholly-owned holding
company subsidiary. This could adversely affect
our liquidity and financial condition, including
the ability to meet our payment obligations and
the ability to return capital to shareholders,
including through the payment of dividends and
repurchase of the Corporation’s common stock.
If the FDIC and Federal Reserve jointly determine
that Bank of America Corporation’s resolution
plan is not credible, they could impose more
stringent capital, leverage or liquidity
requirements or restrictions on our growth,
activities or operations. We could also be
required to take certain actions that could
impose operating costs and result in the
divestiture of assets or restructuring of
businesses and subsidiaries.
When a G-SIB such as Bank of America Corporation
is in default or danger of default, the FDIC may
be appointed receiver to conduct an orderly
liquidation, and could, among other things,
invoke the orderly liquidation authority, instead
of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, if the Secretary of
the Treasury makes certain financial distress and
systemic risk determinations. Additionally, the
FDIC could replace Bank of America Corporation
with a bridge holding company, which could
continue operations and result in an orderly
resolution of the underlying bank, but whose
equity would be held solely for the benefit of
our creditors. The FDIC’s “single point of entry”
strategy may result in our security holders
suffering greater losses than would have been the
case under a bankruptcy proceeding or a different
resolution strategy.
If the Corporation is resolved under the U.S.
Bankruptcy Code or the FDIC’s orderly liquidation
authority, third-party creditors of the
Corporation’s subsidiaries may receive
significant or full recoveries on their claims
while security holders of Bank of America
Corporation could face significant or complete
losses.
 Credit 
Economic or market disruptions and insufficient
credit loss reserves may result in a higher
provision for credit losses.
A number of our products expose us to credit
risk, including loans, letters of credit,
derivatives, debt securities, trading account
assets and assets held-for-sale. Deterioration in
the financial condition of our consumer and
commercial borrowers, counterparties or
underlying collateral could adversely affect our
financial condition and results of operations.
Our credit portfolios may be impacted by U.S. and
global macroeconomic and market conditions,
events and disruptions,
including declines in GDP, consumer spending or
property values, asset price corrections,
increasing consumer and corporate leverage,
increases in corporate bond spreads, government
shutdowns, tax changes, rising or elevated
unemployment levels, inflation, fluctuations in
foreign exchange or interest rates, as well as
the emergence or continuation of widespread
health emergencies or pandemics, extreme weather
events and the impacts of climate change,
including acute and/or chronic extreme weather
events and efforts to transition to a low-carbon
economy. Significant economic or market stresses
and disruptions typically have a negative impact
on the business environment and financial
markets, which could impact the underlying credit
quality of our borrowers, counterparties and
assets. Property value declines or asset price
corrections could increase the risk of borrowers
or counterparties defaulting or becoming
delinquent in their obligations to us, and could
decrease the value of the collateral we hold,
which could increase credit losses. Credit risk
could also be magnified by lending to leveraged
borrowers or declining asset prices, including
property or collateral values, unrelated to
macroeconomic stress. Simultaneous drawdowns on
lines of credit and/or an increase in a
borrower’s leverage in a weakening economic
environment, or otherwise, could result in
deterioration in our credit portfolio, should
borrowers be unable to fulfill competing
financial obligations. Increased delinquency and
default rates could adversely affect our credit
portfolios, including consumer credit card, home
equity and residential mortgage portfolios
through increased charge-offs and provisions for
credit losses.
A recessionary environment and/or a rise in
unemployment could adversely impact the ability
of our consumer and/or commercial borrowers or
counterparties to meet their financial
obligations and negatively impact our credit
portfolio. Consumers have been and may continue
to be negatively impacted by inflation, resulting
in drawdowns of savings or increases in household
debt. Higher interest rates, which have increased
debt servicing costs for some businesses and
households, may adversely impact credit quality,
particularly in a recessionary environment.
Certain sectors also remain at risk (e.g.,
commercial real estate office exposure, consumer
discretionary industries) as a result of shifts
in demand from the pandemic. Globally, conditions
of slow growth or recession could further
contribute to weaker credit conditions. If the
macroeconomic environment worsens, our credit
portfolio and allowance for credit losses could
be adversely impacted.
We establish an allowance for credit losses,
which includes the allowance for loan and lease
losses and the reserve for unfunded lending
commitments, based on management's best estimate
of lifetime expected credit losses (ECL) inherent
in our relevant financial assets. The process to
determine the allowance for credit losses uses
models and assumptions that require us to make
difficult and complex judgments that are often
interrelated, including forecasting how borrowers
or counterparties may perform in changing
economic conditions. The ability of our borrowers
or counterparties to repay their obligations may
be impacted by changes in future economic
conditions, which in turn could impact the
accuracy of our loss forecasts and allowance
estimates. There is also the possibility that we
have failed or will fail to accurately identify
the appropriate economic indicators or accurately
estimate their impacts to our borrowers or
counterparties, which could impact the accuracy
of our loss forecasts and allowance estimates.
If the models, estimates and assumptions we use
to establish reserves or the judgments we make in
extending credit to our borrowers or
counterparties, which are more sensitive
 11Bank of America 
due to the current uncertain macroeconomic and
geopolitical environment, prove inaccurate in
predicting future events, we may suffer losses in
excess of our ECL. In addition, changes to
external factors can negatively impact our
recognition of credit losses in our portfolios
and allowance for credit losses.
The allowance for credit losses is our best
estimate of ECL; however, there is no guarantee
that it will be sufficient to address credit
losses, particularly if the economic outlook
deteriorates significantly and quickly, or
unexpectedly. As circumstances change, we may
increase our allowance, which would reduce our
earnings. If economic conditions worsen,
impacting our consumer and commercial borrowers,
counterparties or underlying collateral, and
credit losses are worse than expected, we may
increase our provision for credit losses, which
could adversely affect our results of operations
and financial condition.
Our concentrations of credit risk could adversely
affect our credit losses, results of operations
and financial condition.
We may be subject to concentrations of credit
risk because of a common characteristic or common
sensitivity to economic, financial, public health
or business developments. Concentrations of
credit risk may reside in a particular industry,
geography, product, asset class, counterparty or
within any pool of exposures with a common risk
characteristic. A deterioration in the financial
condition or prospects of a particular industry,
geographic location, product or asset class, or a
failure or downgrade of, or default by, any
particular entity or group of entities could
negatively affect our businesses, and it is
possible our limits and credit monitoring
exposure controls will not function as
anticipated.
We execute a high volume of transactions and have
significant credit concentrations with respect to
the financial services industry, predominantly
comprised of broker-dealers, commercial banks,
investment banks, insurance companies, mutual
funds, hedge funds, CCPs and other institutional
clients. Financial services institutions and
other counterparties are inter-related because of
trading, funding, clearing or other
relationships. Defaults by one or more
counterparties, or market uncertainty about the
financial stability of one or more financial
services institutions, or the financial services
industry generally, could lead to market-wide
liquidity disruptions, losses, defaults and
related disputes and litigation.
Our credit risk may also be heightened by market
risk when the collateral held by us cannot be
liquidated or is liquidated at prices not
sufficient to recover the full amount of the loan
or derivatives exposure due to us, which may
occur as a result of events that impact the value
of the collateral, such as an asset price
correction or fraud. Disputes with obligors as to
the valuation of collateral could increase in
times of significant market stress, volatility or
illiquidity, and we could suffer losses during
such periods if we are unable to realize the fair
value of the collateral or manage declines in the
value of collateral.
We have concentrations of credit risk with
respect to our consumer real estate and consumer
credit card, and our commercial real estate and
asset managers and funds portfolios, which
represent a significant percentage of our overall
credit portfolio. Declining home price valuations
and demand where we have large concentrations
could result in increased servicing advances and
expenses, defaults, delinquencies or credit
losses. The impacts of earthquakes, as well as
climate change, such as rising average global
temperatures and sea levels, and the increasing
frequency and severity of extreme weather events
and natural disasters, including droughts,
floods, wildfires and hurricanes, could
negatively impact collateral, the valuations of
home or
commercial real estate or our customers’ ability
and/or willingness to pay fees, outstanding loans
or afford new products. This could also cause
insurability risk and/or increased insurance
costs to customers.
Economic weaknesses, sustained elevated
inflation, adverse business conditions, market
disruptions, adverse economic or market events,
rising interest or capitalization rates,
declining asset prices, greater volatility in
areas where we have concentrated credit risk or
deterioration in real estate values or household
incomes may cause us to experience a decrease in
cash flow and higher credit losses in our
portfolios or cause us to write down the value of
certain assets. We could also experience
continued and long-term negative impacts to our
commercial credit exposure and an increase in
credit losses within those industries that may be
permanently impacted by a change in consumer
preferences resulting from COVID-19 (e.g.,
commercial real estate exposure) or other
industry disruptions.
We also enter into transactions with sovereign
nations, U.S. states and municipalities.
Unfavorable economic or political conditions
(such as those arising from the Russia/Ukraine
conflict), disruptions to capital markets,
currency fluctuations, changes in oil prices,
social instability and changes in government or
monetary policies could adversely impact the
operating budgets or credit ratings of these
government entities and expose us to credit and
liquidity risk.
Liquidity disruptions in the financial markets
may result in our inability to sell, syndicate or
realize the value of our positions, increasing
concentrations, which could increase RWA and the
credit and market risk associated with our
positions.
We may be adversely affected by weaknesses in the
U.S. housing market.
U.S. home prices declined and housing demand
slowed in the second half of 2022, including in
certain markets where we have large
concentrations of loans, driven in part by higher
mortgage rates, including 30-year fixed-rate
mortgages that more than doubled from 2021. This
has negatively impacted the demand in some cases
and underlying collateral for many of our
products. Additionally, our mortgage loan
production volume is generally influenced by the
rate of growth in residential mortgage debt
outstanding and the size of the residential
mortgage market, both of which have slowed due to
rising interest rates and reduced affordability.
A deeper downturn in the condition of the U.S.
housing market could result in both significant
write-downs of asset values in several asset
classes, notably mortgage-backed securities
(MBS). If the U.S. housing market were to further
weaken, the value of real estate could decline,
which could result in increased credit losses and
delinquent servicing expenses, negatively affect
our representations and warranties exposures, and
adversely affect our financial condition and
results of operations.
Our derivatives businesses may expose us to
unexpected risks and potential losses.
We are party to a large number of derivatives
transactions that may expose us to unexpected
market, credit and operational risks that could
cause us to suffer unexpected losses. Severe
declines in asset values or an unanticipated
credit event, including unforeseen circumstances
that may cause previously uncorrelated factors to
become correlated and vice versa, may create
losses resulting from risks not appropriately
taken into account or anticipated in the
development, structuring or pricing of a
derivative instrument. Certain OTC derivative
contracts and other trading agreements provide
that upon the occurrence of certain specified
events, such as a change to our or our
affiliates’ credit ratings, we may be required to
provide additional collateral or take other
 Bank of America12 
remedial actions, and we could experience
increased difficulty obtaining funding or hedging
risks. In some cases our counterparties may have
the right to terminate or otherwise diminish our
rights under these contracts or agreements.
We are also a member of various CCPs, which
potentially increases our credit risk exposures
to those CCPs. In the event that one or more
members of a CCP default on their obligations, we
may be required to pay a portion of any losses
incurred by the CCP as a result of that default.
A CCP may also, at its discretion, modify the
margin we are required to post, which could mean
unexpected and increased funding costs and
exposure to that CCP. As a clearing member, we
are exposed to the risk of non-performance by our
clients for which we clear transactions, which
may not be covered by available collateral.
Additionally, default by a significant market
participant may result in further risk and
potential losses.
 Geopolitical 
We are subject to numerous political, economic,
market, reputational, operational, compliance,
legal, regulatory and other risks in the
jurisdictions in which we operate.
We do business throughout the world, including in
emerging markets. Economic or geopolitical stress
in one or more countries could have a negative
impact regionally or globally, resulting in,
among other things, market volatility, reduced
market value and economic output. Our liquidity
and credit risk could be adversely impacted by,
and our businesses and revenues derived from
non-U.S. jurisdictions are subject to, risk of
loss from financial, social or judicial
instability, economic sanctions, changes in
government leadership, including as a result of
electoral outcomes or otherwise, changes in
governmental policies or policies of central
banks, expropriation, nationalization and/or
confiscation of assets, price controls, high
inflation, natural disasters, the emergence or
continuation of widespread health emergencies or
pandemics, capital controls, currency re-
denomination risk from a country exiting the EU
or otherwise, currency fluctuations, foreign
exchange controls or movements (caused by
devaluation or de-pegging), unfavorable political
and diplomatic developments, oil price
fluctuations and changes in legislation. These
risks are especially elevated in emerging
markets.
Continued tensions between the U.S. and important
trading partners, particularly China, may result
in sanctions, further tariff increases or other
restrictive actions on cross-border trade,
investment, and transfer of information
technology that weigh on trade volumes, raise
costs for producers, and adversely affect our
businesses and revenues, as well as our customers
and counterparties, including their credit
quality.
Slowing growth, recessionary conditions, market
volatility and/or political or civil unrest,
global supply chain disruptions, labor shortages,
wage pressures and elevated inflation in many
countries pose additional challenges, including
in the form of volatility in financial markets.
Foreign exchange rates against the U.S. dollar
remain an area of uncertainty and potential
volatility as the Federal Reserve and other
central banks raise interest rates, and
depreciation could increase our financial risks
with clients that deal in non-U.S. currencies but
have U.S. dollar-denominated debt.
We invest or trade in the securities of
corporations and governments located in non-U.S.
jurisdictions, including emerging markets.
Revenues from the trading of non-U.S. securities
may be subject to negative fluctuations as a
result of the above factors. Furthermore, the
impact of these fluctuations could be magnified
because non-U.S. trading markets, particularly in
emerging markets, are generally smaller, less
liquid and more volatile than U.S. trading
markets. Risks in one nation can limit our
opportunities for portfolio growth and negatively
affect our operations in other nations, including
our U.S. operations. Market and economic
disruptions may affect consumer confidence levels
and spending, corporate investment and job
creation, bankruptcy rates, levels of incurrence
and default on consumer and corporate debt,
economic growth rates and asset values, among
other factors.
Elevated government debt levels raise the risk of
volatility, significant valuation changes,
political tensions among EU members regarding
fiscal policy or defaults on or devaluation of
sovereign debt, which could expose us to
substantial losses. Financial markets have been
and may continue to be sensitive to government
plans to lower taxes or increase spending.
Our non-U.S. businesses are also subject to
extensive regulation by governments, securities
exchanges and regulators, central banks and other
regulatory bodies. In many countries, the laws
and regulations applicable to the financial
services and securities industries are less
predictable, prone to change and uncertainty and
evolving, and it may be difficult to determine
the requirements of local laws in every market or
manage our relationships with multiple regulators
in various jurisdictions. Significant resources
are spent on understanding and monitoring foreign
laws, rules and regulations. Our inability to
remain in compliance with local laws and manage
our relationships with regulators could result in
increased expenses, changes to our organizational
structure and adversely affect our businesses,
reputation and results of operations in that
market.
We are also subject to complex and extensive U.S.
and non-U.S. laws, rules and regulations, which
subject us to costs and risks relating to bribery
and corruption, anti-money laundering, embargo
programs and economic sanctions, which can vary
by jurisdiction and require implementation of
complex operational capabilities and compliance
programs. Non-compliance and/or violations could
result in an increase in operational and
compliance costs, and enforcement actions and
civil and criminal penalties against us and
individual employees. The increasing speed and
novel ways in which funds circulate could make it
more challenging to track the movement of funds
and heighten financial crimes risk. Compliance
with these evolving regulatory regimes and legal
requirements depends on our ability to improve
our processes, controls, surveillance, detection
and reporting and analytic capabilities.
In connection with the U.K.’s exit from the EU,
we are now subject to different laws and
regulations, which are expected to diverge
further over time, and are subject to the
oversight of additional regulatory authorities.
As political and regulatory environments evolve,
further changes to the legal and regulatory
framework under which our subsidiaries provide
products and services in the U.K. and in the EU
may result in additional compliance costs and
have negative tax consequences or an adverse
impact on our results of operations.
In the U.S., the government’s debt ceiling and
budget deficit concerns have increased the
possibility of U.S. government defaults on its
debt and/or downgrades to its credit ratings, and
prolonged government shutdowns, which could
weaken the U.S. dollar, cause market volatility,
negatively impact the global economy and banking
system and adversely affect our financial
condition, including our liquidity. Additionally,
changes in fiscal, monetary or regulatory policy,
including as a result of labor shortages, wage
pressures, supply chain disruptions and higher
inflation, could increase our compliance costs
and adversely affect our business operations,
organizational structure and results of
operations. Monetary policy has contributed to a
significant depreciation of many foreign
currencies over the past
 13Bank of America 
year. Emerging markets are particularly
vulnerable to tighter U.S. monetary policy, and
many have responded by tightening monetary policy
and intervening in foreign exchange markets.
Further monetary tightening by the Federal
Reserve risks creating additional currency
volatility and recessionary conditions in a
number of non-U.S. markets.
We are also subject to geopolitical risks,
including economic sanctions, acts or threats of
international or domestic terrorism, including
responses by the U.S. or other governments
thereto, increased risk of state-sponsored
cyberattacks or campaigns, civil unrest and/or
military conflicts, including the escalation of
tensions between China and Taiwan, which could
adversely affect business, market trade and
general economic conditions abroad and in the
U.S. The Russia/Ukraine conflict has magnified
such risks and resulted in regional instability
and adversely impacted commodity and other
financial markets, as well as economic
conditions, especially in Europe where there is
significant risk of recession in some countries.
The disruption of energy supplies and other goods
and sanctions have contributed to inflationary
pressures in Europe and other regions, which has
resulted in greater monetary tightening by
policymakers, and could adversely impact the
profitability of businesses and our credit risk.
Military escalation resulting in the involvement
of neighboring countries and/or North Atlantic
Treaty Organization member countries or new
sanctions could result in additional economic
disruptions, financial market volatility, and
changes to asset valuations, which could disrupt
our operations and adversely affect our results
of operations.
 Business Operations 
A failure in or breach of our operational or
security systems or infrastructure, or those of
third parties or the financial services industry,
could cause disruptions, adversely impact our
results of operations and financial condition,
and cause legal or reputational harm.
Operational risk exposure exists throughout our
organization and as a result of our interactions
with, and reliance on, third parties and the
financial services industry infrastructure. Our
operational and security systems infrastructure,
including our computer systems, emerging
technologies, data management and internal
processes and controls, as well as those of third
parties, are integral to our performance.
Our financial, accounting, data processing and
transmission, storage, backup and other operating
or security systems and infrastructure, or those
of third parties, may be ineffective or fail to
operate properly or become disabled or damaged as
a result of a number of factors, including events
that are wholly or partially beyond our or such
third party’s control, which could adversely
affect our ability to process transactions or
provide services. Prolonged disruptions to our
critical business operations and customer
services are possible due to computer,
telecommunications, network, utility, electronic
or physical infrastructure outages, including
from abuse or failure of our electronic trading
and algorithmic platforms, significant unplanned
increases in customer transactions, newly
identified vulnerabilities in key hardware and
software, failure of aging infrastructure or
manual processes, retired or redundant software
and/or hardware, technology project
implementation challenges and supply chain
disruptions. Operational disruptions and
prolonged operational outages could also result
from events arising from natural disasters,
including acute and chronic weather events, such
as wildfires, tornadoes, hurricanes and floods,
some of which are happening with more frequency
and severity, and earthquakes, as well as local
or larger scale
political or social matters, including civil
unrest, terrorist acts and military conflict.
We continue to have greater reliance on remote
access tools and technology and employees’
personal systems (and our third parties’
employees’ personal systems) and increased data
utilization and are increasingly dependent upon
our information technology infrastructure to
operate our businesses remotely due to the
increased number of employees who work from home
and evolving customer preferences, including
increased reliance on digital banking and other
digital services provided by our businesses.
Effective management of our business continuity
increasingly depends on the security, reliability
and adequacy of such systems.
We also rely on our employees, representatives
and third parties in our day-to-day operations,
who may, due to illness, unavailability, human
error, misconduct (including errors in judgment,
malice, fraudulent or illegal activity),
malfeasance or a failure or breach of systems or
infrastructure cause disruptions to our
organization and expose us to operational losses,
regulatory risk and reputational harm. Our and
our third parties’ inability to properly
introduce, deploy and manage changes to internal
financial and governance processes, existing
products, services and technology, and new
product innovations and technology could also
result in additional operational and regulatory
risk.
Regardless of the measures we have taken to
implement training, procedures, backup systems
and other safeguards to support our operations
and bolster our operational resilience, our
ability to conduct business may be adversely
affected by significant disruptions to us or to
third parties with whom we interact or upon whom
we rely, including systemic cyber events that
result in system outages and unavailability of
part or all of the internet, cloud services
and/or the financial services industry
infrastructure (including electronic trading
platforms and critical banking activities). Our
ability to implement backup systems and other
safeguards with respect to third-party systems
and the financial services industry
infrastructure is more limited than with our own
systems.
Any backup systems may not process data as
quickly as our primary systems and some data
might not have been backed up. We regularly
update the systems we rely on to support our
operations and growth and to remain compliant
with all applicable laws, rules and regulations
globally. This updating entails significant costs
and creates risks associated with implementing
new systems and integrating them with existing
ones, including business interruptions.
A failure or breach of our operational or
security systems or infrastructure resulting in
disruption to our critical business operations
and customer services and/or failure to identify,
effectively respond to operational risks in a
timely manner, and continue to deliver our
services through an operational disruption could
expose us to a number of risks, including market
abuse, regulatory, market, privacy and liquidity
risk, and adversely impact our results of
operations and financial condition, and cause
legal or reputational harm.
A cyberattack, information or security breach, or
a technology failure of ours or of a third party
could adversely affect our ability to conduct our
business, result in the misuse or disclosure of
information, result in additional costs, damage
to our reputation, increase our regulatory and
legal risks and cause financial losses.
Our business is highly dependent on the security,
controls and efficacy of our infrastructure,
computer and data management systems, and those
of our customers, suppliers, counterparties and
other third parties, the financial services
 Bank of America14 
industry and financial data aggregators, with
whom we interact, on whom we rely or who have
access to our customers' personal or account
information. We rely on effective access
management and the secure collection, processing,
transmission, storage and retrieval of
confidential, proprietary, personally
identifiable and other information in our and our
third parties’ computer and data management
systems and networks.
Our cybersecurity risk and exposure remains
heightened because of, among other things, our
prominent size and scale, high-profile brand,
geographic footprint and international presence
and role in the financial services industry and
the broader economy. The proliferation of third-
party financial data aggregators and emerging
technologies, including our use of automation,
artificial intelligence (AI) and robotics,
increase our cybersecurity risks and exposure.
We, our employees, customers, regulators and
third parties are regularly the target of an
increasing number of cyber threats and attacks.
Cyber threats and techniques used in cyberattacks
are pervasive, sophisticated and difficult to
prevent, including computer viruses, malicious or
destructive code (such as ransomware), social
engineering (including phishing, vishing and
smishing), denial of service or information or
other security breach tactics that could result
in disruptions to our businesses and operations,
the loss of our funds and/or our clients’ and the
unauthorized disclosure, release, gathering,
monitoring, misuse, loss or destruction or theft
of confidential, proprietary and other
information, including intellectual property, of
ours, our employees, our customers or of third
parties. Cyberattacks may be carried out on a
worldwide scale and by a growing number of cyber
actors, including organized crime groups,
hackers, terrorist organizations, extremist
parties, hostile foreign governments, state-
sponsored actors, activists, disgruntled
employees and other third parties, including
those involved in corporate espionage.
Cyber threats and the techniques used in
cyberattacks change, develop and evolve rapidly,
including from emerging technologies, such as
advanced forms of AI and quantum computing.
Despite substantial efforts to protect the
integrity and resilience of our systems and
implement controls, processes, policies, employee
training and other protective measures, we may
not be able to anticipate or detect cyberattacks
or information or security breaches and/or
develop or implement effective preventive or
defensive measures to address or mitigate such
attacks or breaches. Internal access management
failures could result in the compromise or
unauthorized exposure of confidential data.
Additionally, the failure of our employees to
exercise sound judgment and vigilance when
targeted with social engineering cyberattacks may
increase our vulnerability.
Our risk and exposure to cyberattacks and
security breaches continue to increase due to the
acceptance and use of digital banking products
and services, including mobile banking products,
and reliance on remote access tools and
technology, which have increased our reliance on
virtual/digital interactions and a larger number
of access points to our networks that must be
secured. This increased risk of unauthorized
access to our networks results in greater amounts
of information being available for access.
Employees working remotely away from the office
(whether on personal or our devices) also
represent inherently greater risk than employees
working in our offices. Greater demand on our
information technology infrastructure and
security tools and processes will likely
continue.
We also face indirect technology, cybersecurity
and operational risks relating to the customers,
clients and other
third parties with whom we do business and the
financial services industry, upon whom we rely to
facilitate or enable our business activities or
upon whom our customers rely. Other indirect
risks relate to providers of products and/or
services, financial counterparties, financial
data aggregators, financial intermediaries, such
as clearing agents, exchanges and clearing
houses, regulators, providers of critical
infrastructure, such as internet access and
electrical power, and retailers for whom we
process transactions. We are also at additional
risk resulting from critical third-party
information security and open-source software
vulnerabilities.
We have exposure to cyber threats due to our
continuous transmission of sensitive information
to, and storage of such information by, third
parties, including providers of products and/or
services, and regulators, the outsourcing of some
of our business operations, and system and
customer account updates and conversions.
Further, any such event may not be disclosed to
us in a timely manner. Any failure, cyberattack
or other information or security breach that
significantly degrades, deletes or compromises
our systems or data could adversely impact third
parties, counterparties and the critical
infrastructure of the financial services
industry.
Due to increasing consolidation, interdependence
and complexity of financial entities and
technology systems, a technology failure,
cyberattack or other information or security
vulnerability, failure or breach that
significantly exposes, degrades, deletes or
compromises the systems or data of one or more
financial entities or third parties could
adversely impact us and increase the risk of
operational failure, as disparate systems need to
be integrated, often on an accelerated basis.
Cyberattacks or security breaches could persist
for an extended period of time before being
detected and take additional time to determine
the scope, extent, amount, and type of
information compromised, following which the
impact and measures to recover and restore to a
business-as-usual state may be difficult to
assess. We continue to expend significant
additional money and resources to modify or
enhance our protective measures, investigate and
remediate any information security, software or
network vulnerabilities or incidents whether
specific to us, a third party, the industry or
businesses in general, and develop our
capabilities to respond and recover.
While we have experienced cyberattacks and
security breaches, and expect to continue to, we
have not experienced any material losses or other
material consequences relating to technology
failure, cyberattacks or other information or
security breaches, whether directed at us or
third parties. There can be no assurance that our
controls and procedures in place to monitor and
mitigate the risks of cyber threats, including
the remediation of critical information security
and software vulnerabilities, will be sufficient
and/or timely and that we will not suffer
material losses or consequences in the future.
Successful penetration or circumvention of system
security could result in negative consequences,
including loss of customers and business
opportunities, the withdrawal of customer
deposits, misappropriation or destruction of our
intellectual property, proprietary information or
confidential information and/or the confidential,
proprietary or personally identifiable
information of certain parties, such as our
employees, customers, providers of products and
services, counterparties and other third parties,
or damage to their computers or systems. Any
future technology failure, cyberattack or breach
could adversely affect our ability to conduct
day-to-day business activities, effect
transactions, service our clients, manage our
exposure to risk or expand our
 15Bank of America 
businesses, result in fraudulent or unauthorized
transactions or cause prolonged computer and
network outages resulting in material disruptions
to our or our customers’ or other third parties’
network access or critical business operations
and customer services, in the U.S. and/or
globally.
Any cyberattack or breach, whether directed at us
or third parties, may result in significant lost
revenue, give rise to losses and claims brought
by third parties, litigation exposure, regulatory
sanctions, enforcement actions, government fines,
penalties or intervention and other negative
consequences. The actual or perceived success of
a cyberattack on our systems may damage our
reputation with customers and third parties with
whom we do business and/or result in the loss of
confidence in our security measures.
Additionally, our failure to disclose or
communicate cyber incidents appropriately to
relevant parties could result in regulatory,
privacy, operational and reputational risk.
Although we maintain cyber insurance, there can
be no assurance that liabilities or losses we may
incur will be covered under such policies or that
the amount of insurance will be adequate.
Cyberattacks or other information or security
breaches could also result in a violation of
applicable privacy and other laws, reimbursement
or other compensatory costs, additional
compliance costs, and our internal controls or
disclosure controls being rendered ineffective.
The occurrence of any of these events could
adversely impact our businesses, results of
operations, liquidity and financial condition.
Failure to satisfy our obligations as servicer
for residential mortgage securitizations, loans
owned by other entities and other related losses
could adversely impact our reputation, servicing
costs or results of operations.
We and our legacy companies service mortgage
loans on behalf of third-party securitization
vehicles and other investors. If we commit a
material breach of our obligations as servicer or
master servicer, we may be subject to termination
if the breach is not cured within a specified
period of time following notice, which could
cause us to lose servicing income. We may also
have liability for any failure by us, as a
servicer or master servicer, for any act or
omission on our part that involves willful
misfeasance, bad faith, gross negligence or
reckless disregard of our duties. If any such
breach was found to have occurred, it may harm
our reputation, increase our servicing costs or
losses due to potential indemnification
obligations, result in litigation or regulatory
action or adversely impact our results of
operations. Additionally, foreclosures may result
in costs, litigation or losses due to
irregularities in the underlying documentation,
or if the validity of a foreclosure action is
challenged by a borrower or overturned by a court
because of errors or deficiencies in the
foreclosure process. We may also incur costs or
losses relating to delays or alleged deficiencies
in processing documents necessary to comply with
state law governing foreclosure.
Changes in the structure of and relationship
among the GSEs could adversely impact our
business.
We rely on the GSEs to guarantee or purchase
mortgage loans that meet their conforming loan
requirements. During 2022, we sold approximately
$4.1 billion of loans to GSEs, primarily Freddie
Mac (FHLMC). FHLMC and Fannie Mae (FNMA) are
currently in conservatorship, with the Federal
Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) acting as
conservator. In 2019, the Treasury Department
published a proposal to recapitalize FHLMC and
FNMA and remove them from conservatorship and
reduce their role in the marketplace. In January
2021, the Treasury Department further amended the
agreement that
governs the conservatorship of FHLMC and FNMA and
delineated the continued objective to remove the
GSEs from conservatorship. However, we cannot
predict the future prospects of the GSEs, timing
of the recapitalization or release from
conservatorship, or content of legislative or
rulemaking proposals regarding the future status
of the GSEs in the housing market. If the GSEs
take a reduced role in the marketplace, including
by limiting the mortgage products they offer, we
could be required to seek alternative funding
sources, retain additional loans on our balance
sheet, secure funding through the Federal Home
Loan Bank system, or securitize the loans through
Private Label Securitization, which could
increase our cost of funds related to the
origination of new mortgage loans, increase
credit risk and/or impact our capacity to
originate new mortgage loans. Uncertainty
regarding their future and the MBS they guarantee
continues to exist for the foreseeable future.
These developments could adversely affect our
securities portfolios, capital levels, liquidity
and results of operations.
Our risk management framework may not be
effective in mitigating risk and reducing the
potential for losses.
Our risk management framework is designed to
minimize risk and loss to us. We seek to
effectively and consistently identify, measure,
monitor, report and control the key types of risk
to which we are subject, including strategic,
credit, market, liquidity, compliance,
operational and reputational risks. Additionally,
risks may span across multiple key risk types,
including climate risk and legal risk. While we
employ a broad and diversified set of controls
and risk mitigation techniques, including
modeling and forecasting, hedging strategies and
techniques that seek to balance our ability to
profit from trading positions with our exposure
to potential losses, our ability to control and
mitigate risks that result in losses is
inherently limited by our ability to identify and
measure all risks, including emerging and unknown
risks, anticipate the timing and impact of risks,
apply effective hedging strategies, make correct
assumptions, manage and aggregate data correctly
and efficiently, identify changes in markets or
client behaviors not yet inherent in historical
data and develop risk management models and
forecasts to assess and control risk.
Our ability to manage risk is dependent on our
ability to consistently execute all elements of
our risk management program and develop and
maintain a culture of managing risk well
throughout the Corporation and manage risks
associated with third parties, including
providers of products and/or services, enable
effective risk management and help confirm that
risks are appropriately considered, evaluated and
responded to in a timely manner. Uncertain
economic and geopolitical conditions, heightened
legislative and regulatory scrutiny of and change
within the financial services industry, the pace
of technological changes, accounting and market
developments, the failure of employees,
representatives and third parties to comply with
our policies and Risk Framework and the overall
complexity of our operations, among other
developments, have in the past and may in the
future result in a heightened level of risk. For
example, we have experienced increased
operational, reputational and compliance risk as
a result of the prior need to rapidly deploy and
implement multiple and varying pandemic relief
programs, including the processing of
unemployment benefits for California and certain
other states, which have resulted in and will
continue to result in losses. Our failure to
manage evolving risks or properly anticipate,
manage, control or mitigate risks could result in
additional losses.
 Bank of America16 
 Regulatory, Compliance and Legal 
We are subject to evolving government legislation
and regulations and certain settlements, orders
and agreements with government authorities from
time to time.
We are subject to evolving and comprehensive
regulation under federal and state laws in the
U.S. and the laws of the various jurisdictions in
which we operate, including increasing and
complex regulatory sanctions regimes. These laws
and regulations significantly affect and have the
potential to restrict the scope of our existing
businesses, limit our ability to pursue certain
business opportunities, including the products
and services we offer, reduce certain fees and
rates or make our products and services more
expensive for our clients. We are also required
to file various financial and non-financial
regulatory reports to comply with laws, rules and
regulations in the jurisdictions in which we
operate.
We continue to adjust our business and
operations, legal entity structure, disclosure
and policies, processes, procedures and controls,
including with regard to capital and liquidity
management, risk management and data management,
to comply with laws, rules and regulations, as
well as guidance and interpretation by regulatory
authorities, including the Department of Treasury
(including the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)),
Federal Reserve, OCC, CFPB, Financial Stability
Oversight Council, FDIC, Department of Labor, SEC
and CFTC in the U.S., foreign regulators, other
government authorities and self-regulatory
organizations. Further, we could become subject
to future laws, rules and regulations beyond
those currently proposed, adopted or contemplated
in the U.S. or abroad, including policies and
rulemaking related to emerging technologies,
cybersecurity and data, and climate risk
management and ESG governance and reporting,
including emissions and sustainability
disclosure. The cumulative effect of all of the
current and possible future legislation and
regulations on our litigation and regulatory
exposure, businesses, operations and
profitability remains uncertain and necessitates
that we make certain assumptions with respect to
the scope and requirements of prospective and
proposed laws, rules and regulations in our
business planning. If these assumptions prove
incorrect, we could be subject to increased
regulatory, legal and compliance risks and costs
as well as potential reputational harm. Also,
U.S. and regulatory initiatives abroad may
overlap, and non-U.S. regulation and initiatives
may be inconsistent or may conflict with current
or proposed U.S. regulations, which could lead to
compliance risks and increased costs.
Our regulators’ prudential and supervisory
authority gives them broad power and discretion
to direct our actions, and they have assumed an
active oversight, inspection and investigatory
role across the financial services industry.
Regulatory focus is not limited to laws, rules
and regulations applicable to the financial
services industry, but includes other significant
laws, rules and regulations that apply across
industries and jurisdictions, including those
related to anti-money laundering, anti-bribery,
anti-corruption and regulatory sanctions.
We are also subject to laws, rules and
regulations in the U.S. and abroad, including the
GDPR and CCPA as modified by the CPRA, and a
number of additional jurisdictions enacting or
considering similar laws, regarding privacy and
the disclosure, collection, use, sharing and
safeguarding of personally identifiable
information, including our employees, customers,
suppliers, counterparties and other third
parties, the violation of which could result in
litigation, regulatory fines, enforcement actions
and operational loss. The complexity and risk of
compliance has been magnified by the collection
of employee health and/or other information in
response to the pandemic. Additionally, we will
likely be subject to new and evolving data
privacy laws in the U.S. and abroad, which could
result in additional costs of compliance,
litigation, regulatory fines and enforcement
actions. There remains complexity and
uncertainty, including potential suspension or
prohibition, regarding data transfer because of
concerns over compliance with laws, rules and
regulations for cross-border flows and transfers
of personal data from the European Economic Area
(EEA) to the U.S. and other jurisdictions outside
of the EEA, resulting from judicial and
regulatory guidance. To the extent that a new
EU-U.S. Data Privacy Framework leads to a
relaxation of applicable legislation and
regulations, regardless of transfer mechanism,
challenges are expected from consumer advocacy
groups. Other jurisdictions, including China,
Russia and India, have commenced consultation
efforts or enacted new legislation or regulations
to establish standards for personal data
transfers. If cross-border personal data
transfers are suspended or restricted or we are
required to implement distinct processes for each
jurisdiction’s standards, this could result in
operational disruptions to our businesses,
additional costs, increased enforcement activity,
new contract negotiations with third parties,
and/or modification of such data management.
As part of their enforcement authority, our
regulators and other government authorities have
the authority to, among other things, conduct
investigations and assess significant civil or
criminal monetary fines, penalties or
restitution, issue cease and desist orders,
initiate injunctive action, apply regulatory
sanctions or enter into consent orders. The
amounts paid by us and other financial
institutions to settle proceedings or
investigations have, in some instances, been
substantial and may increase. In some cases,
governmental authorities have required criminal
pleas or other extraordinary terms as part of
such resolutions, which could have significant
consequences, including reputational harm, loss
of customers, restrictions on the ability to
access capital markets, and the inability to
operate certain businesses or offer certain
products. Our response to regulators and other
government authorities may be time-consuming, be
expensive and divert management attention from
our business. The outcome of any matter, which
may last years, may be difficult to predict or
estimate.
Additionally, the terms of settlements, orders
and agreements that we have entered into with
government entities and regulatory authorities
have imposed, or could impose, significant
operational and compliance costs on us with
respect to enhancements to our procedures and
controls, losses with respect to fraudulent
transactions perpetrated against our customers,
expansion of our risk and control functions
within our lines of business, investment in
technology and the hiring of significant numbers
of additional risk, control and compliance
personnel. If we fail to meet the requirements of
the regulatory settlements, orders or agreements
to which we are subject, or, more generally, fail
to maintain risk and control procedures and
processes that meet the heightened standards
established by our regulators and other
government authorities, we could be required to
enter into further settlements, orders or
agreements and pay additional fines, penalties or
judgments, or accept material regulatory
restrictions on our businesses.
Improper actions, behaviors or practices by us,
our employees or representatives that are
illegal, unethical or contrary to our core values
could harm us, our shareholders or customers or
damage the integrity of the financial markets,
and are subject to regulatory scrutiny across
jurisdictions. The complexity of the regulatory
and enforcement regimes in the
 17Bank of America 
U.S., coupled with the global scope of our
operations and the regulatory environment
worldwide, also means that a single event or
practice or a series of related events or
practices may give rise to a significant number
of overlapping investigations and regulatory
proceedings, either by multiple federal and state
agencies in the U.S. or by multiple regulators
and other governmental entities in different
jurisdictions. Actions by other members of the
financial services industry related to business
activities in which we participate may result in
investigations by regulators or other government
authorities.
While we believe that we have adopted appropriate
risk management and compliance programs,
compliance risks will continue to exist,
particularly as we anticipate and adapt to new
and evolving laws, rules and regulations. We also
rely upon third parties who may expose us to
compliance and legal risk. Future legislative or
regulatory actions, and any required changes to
our business or operations, or those of third
parties upon whom we rely, resulting from such
developments and actions could result in a
significant loss of revenue, impose additional
compliance and other costs or otherwise reduce
our profitability, limit the products and
services that we offer or our ability to pursue
certain business opportunities, require us to
dispose of certain businesses or assets, require
us to curtail certain businesses, affect the
value of assets that we hold, require us to
increase our prices and therefore reduce demand
for our products, or otherwise adversely affect
our businesses.
We are subject to risks from potential liability
arising from lawsuits and regulatory and
government action.
We face significant legal risks in our business,
with a high volume of claims against us and other
financial institutions. The amount of damages,
penalties and fines that litigants and regulators
seek from us and other financial institutions
continues to be significant. This includes
disputes with consumers, customers and other
counterparties.
Financial institutions, including us, continue to
be the subject of claims alleging anti-
competitive conduct with respect to various
products and markets, including U.S. antitrust
class actions claiming joint and several
liability for treble damages. As disclosed in
Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies to the
Consolidated Financial Statements, we also face
contractual indemnification and loan-repurchase
claims arising from alleged breaches of
representations and warranties in the sale of
residential mortgages by legacy companies, which
may result in a requirement that we repurchase
the mortgage loans, or make whole or provide
other remedies to counterparties.
U.S. regulators and government agencies regularly
pursue enforcement claims against financial
institutions including the Corporation for
alleged violations of law and customer harm under
the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and
Enforcement Act, the federal securities laws, the
False Claims Act, fair lending laws and
regulations (including the Equal Credit
Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act),
antitrust laws, and consumer protection laws and
regulations related to products and services such
as overdraft and sales practices, including
prohibitions on unfair, deceptive, and/or abusive
acts and practices under the Consumer Financial
Protection Act and the Federal Trade Commission
Act. Such claims may carry significant penalties,
restitution and, in certain cases, treble
damages, and the ultimate resolution of
regulatory inquiries, investigations and other
proceedings to which we are subject from time-to-
time is difficult to predict.
T here is also an increased focus on compliance
with U.S. and global laws, rules and regulations
related to the collection, use, sharing and
safeguarding of personally identifiable
information and corporate data, as well as the
implementation,
use and management of emerging technologies,
including AI and machine learning. Additionally,
misconduct by our employees and representatives,
including unethical, fraudulent, improper or
illegal conduct, unfair, deceptive, abusive or
discriminatory business practices, or violations
of policies, procedures, laws, rules or
regulations, including conduct that affects
compliance with books and records requirements,
can result in litigation and/or government
investigations and enforcement actions, and cause
significant reputational harm. We are also
subject to litigation and regulatory and
government actions regarding fraud perpetrated
against our customers in connection with the use
of our products and services and increased
scrutiny of sustainability-related policies,
goals, targets and disclosure, which could result
in litigation, regulatory investigations and
actions and reputational harm.
The global environment of extensive
investigations, regulation, regulatory compliance
burdens, litigation and regulatory enforcement,
combined with uncertainty related to the
continually evolving regulatory environment, have
affected and will likely continue to affect
operational and compliance costs and risks,
including the limitation or cessation of our
ability or feasibility to continue providing
certain products and services. Lawsuits and
regulatory actions have resulted in and will
likely continue to result in judgments, orders,
settlements, penalties and fines adverse to us.
Further, we entered into orders with government
authorities regarding our participation in
implementing government relief measures related
to the pandemic and other federal and state
government assistance programs, including the
processing of unemployment benefits for
California and certain other states, and continue
to be involved in related litigation which may
result in judgments and/or settlements.
Litigation and investigation costs, substantial
legal liability or significant regulatory or
government action against us could have material
adverse effects on our business, financial
condition, including liquidity, and results of
operations, and/or cause significant reputational
harm.
U.S. federal banking agencies may require us to
increase our regulatory capital, total loss-
absorbing capacity (TLAC), long-term debt or
liquidity requirements.
We are subject to U.S. regulatory capital and
liquidity rules. These rules, among other things,
establish minimum requirements to qualify as a
well-capitalized institution. If any of our
subsidiary insured depository institutions fail
to maintain their status as well capitalized
under the applicable regulatory capital rules,
the Federal Reserve will require us to agree to
bring the insured depository institution back to
well-capitalized status. For the duration of such
an agreement, the Federal Reserve may impose
restrictions on our activities. If we were to
fail to enter into or comply with such an
agreement, the Federal Reserve may impose more
severe restrictions on our activities, including
requiring us to cease and desist activities
permitted under the Bank Holding Company Act of
1956.
Capital and liquidity requirements are frequently
introduced and amended. It is possible that
regulators may increase regulatory capital
requirements including TLAC and long-term debt
requirements, change how regulatory capital or
RWA is calculated or increase liquidity
requirements. Our ability to return capital to
our shareholders depends in part on our ability
to maintain regulatory capital levels above
minimum requirements plus buffers. To the extent
that increases occur in our SCB, G-SIB surcharge
or countercyclical capital buffer, our returns of
capital to shareholders, including common stock
dividends and common stock repurchases, could
decrease. For example, our G-SIB surcharge is
expected to increase by 50 bps to 3.0 percent on
January 1, 2024. The Federal Reserve could
 Bank of America18 
also limit or prohibit capital actions, such as
paying or increasing dividends or repurchasing
common stock, as a result of economic disruptions
or events.
As part of its CCAR, the Federal Reserve conducts
stress testing on parts of our business using
hypothetical economic scenarios prepared by the
Federal Reserve. Those scenarios may affect our
CCAR stress test results, which may impact the
level of our SCB, requiring us to hold additional
capital. For example, based on CCAR 2022 stress
test results, our SCB increased 90 bps to 3.4
percent on October 1, 2022.
A significant component of regulatory capital
ratios is calculating our RWA and our leverage
exposure, which may increase. The Basel Committee
on Banking Supervision has also revised several
key methodologies for measuring RWA that have not
yet been implemented in the U.S., including a
standardized approach for operational risk,
revised market risk requirements and constraints
on the use of internal models, as well as a
capital floor based on the revised standardized
approaches. It is expected in 2023 that U.S.
banking regulators will propose updates to the
U.S. capital framework to incorporate the Basel
Committee revisions. Economic disruptions or
events may also cause an increase in our balance
sheet, RWA or leverage exposures, increasing
required regulatory capital and liquidity
amounts.
Changes to and compliance with the regulatory
capital and liquidity requirements may impact our
operations by requiring us to liquidate assets,
increase borrowings, issue additional equity or
other securities, reduce the amount of common
stock repurchases or dividends, cease or alter
certain operations and business activities or
hold highly liquid assets, which may adversely
affect our results of operations.
Changes in accounting standards or assumptions in
applying accounting policies could adversely
affect us.
Accounting policies and methods are fundamental
to how we record and report our financial
condition and results of operations. Some of
these policies require use of estimates and
assumptions that may affect the reported value of
our assets or liabilities and results of
operations and are critical because they require
management to make difficult, subjective and
complex judgments about matters that are
inherently uncertain. If assumptions, estimates
or judgments were erroneously applied, we could
be required to correct and restate prior-period
financial statements. Accounting standard-setters
and those who interpret the accounting standards,
including the SEC, banking regulators and our
independent registered public accounting firm may
also amend or even reverse their previous
interpretations or positions on how various
standards should be applied. These changes may be
difficult to predict and could impact the
preparation and reporting of our financial
statements, including the application of new or
revised standards retrospectively, resulting in
revisions to prior-period financial statements.
We may be adversely affected by changes in U.S.
and non-U.S. tax laws and regulations.
It is possible that governmental authorities in
the U.S. and/or other countries could further
change tax laws in a way that would materially
adversely affect us, including changes to the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 and Inflation Reduction
Act of 2022. New guidelines issued by the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development could adversely impact how the global
profits of multinational enterprises are taxed.
Any change in tax laws and regulations or
interpretations of current or future tax laws and
regulations could materially adversely affect our
effective tax rate, tax liabilities and results
of operations. U.S. and foreign tax laws are
complex and our judgments,
interpretations or applications of such tax laws
could differ from that of the relevant
governmental authority. This could result in
additional tax liabilities and interest,
penalties, the reduction of certain tax benefits
and/or the requirement to make adjustments to
amounts recorded, which could be material.
Additionally, we have U.K. net deferred tax
assets (DTA) which consist primarily of net
operating losses that are expected to be realized
by certain subsidiaries over an extended number
of years. Adverse developments with respect to
tax laws or to other material factors, such as
prolonged worsening of Europe’s capital markets
or changes in the ability of our U.K.
subsidiaries to conduct business in the EU, could
lead our management to reassess and/or change its
current conclusion that no valuation allowance is
necessary with respect to our U.K. net DTA.
 Reputation 
Damage to our reputation could harm our
businesses, including our competitive position
and business prospects.
Our ability to attract and retain customers,
clients, investors and employees is impacted by
our reputation. Harm to our reputation can arise
from various sources, including actual or
perceived activities of our officers, directors,
employees, contractors, third parties, clients,
counterparties and other representatives, such as
fraud, misconduct and unethical behavior (such as
employees’ sales practices), adequacy of our
responsiveness to fraud claims perpetrated
against our customers, effectiveness of our
internal controls, litigation or regulatory
matters and their outcomes, compensation
practices, lending practices, suitability or
reasonableness of particular trading or
investment strategies, including the reliability
of our research and models, and prohibiting
clients from engaging in certain transactions.
Our reputation may also be harmed by actual or
perceived failure to deliver the products and
standards of service and quality expected by our
customers, clients and the community, including
the overstatement or mislabeling of the
environmental benefits of our products, services
or transactions, failure to recognize and address
customer complaints, compliance failures,
inability to implement or manage emerging
technologies, including quantum computing, AI,
machine learning and technology change, failure
to maintain effective data management, security
breaches, cyber incidents, prolonged or repeated
system outages, unintended disclosure of
personal, proprietary or confidential
information, breach of fiduciary obligations and
handling of the emergence or continuation of
health emergencies or pandemics. For example, we
entered into orders with certain government
agencies regarding our processing of unemployment
benefits for California and certain other states,
and continue to be involved in related
litigation, which may result in judgments and/or
settlements. Our reputation may also be
negatively impacted by our ESG practices and
disclosures, and those of our customers and third
parties.
Actions by the financial services industry
generally or by certain members or individuals in
the industry also can adversely affect our
reputation. Also, adverse publicity or negative
information posted on social media by employees,
the media or otherwise, whether or not factually
correct, may adversely impact our business
prospects or financial results.
We are subject to complex and evolving laws and
regulations regarding fair lending activity,
UDAAP, electronic funds transfers, know-your-
customer requirements, data protection and
privacy, including the GDPR, CCPA as modified by
the CPRA, cross-border data movement,
cybersecurity and other matters, as well as
evolving and expansive interpretations of these
laws and
 19Bank of America 
regulations. Principles concerning the
appropriate scope of consumer and commercial
privacy vary considerably in different
jurisdictions, and regulatory and public
expectations regarding the definition and scope
of consumer and commercial privacy may remain
fluid. These laws may be interpreted and applied
by various jurisdictions in a manner inconsistent
with our current or future practices, or with one
another. If personal, confidential or proprietary
information of customers in our possession, or in
the possession of third parties or financial data
aggregators, is mishandled, misused or
mismanaged, or if we do not timely or adequately
address such information, we may face regulatory,
legal and operational risks, which could
adversely affect our reputation, financial
condition and results of operations.
We could suffer reputational harm if we fail to
properly identify and manage potential conflicts
of interest. Management of potential conflicts of
interest has become increasingly complex as we
expand our business activities through more
numerous transactions, obligations and interests
with and among our clients. The actual or
perceived failure to adequately address conflicts
of interest could affect the willingness of
clients to use our products and services, or
result in litigation or enforcement actions,
which could adversely affect our business.
Our actual or perceived failure to address these
and other issues, such as operational risks,
gives rise to reputational risk that could harm
us and our business prospects. Failure to
appropriately address any of these issues could
also give rise to additional regulatory
restrictions, legal risks and reputational harm,
which could, among other consequences, increase
the size and number of litigation claims and
damages asserted or subject us to enforcement
actions, fines and penalties, and cause us to
incur related costs and expenses.
 Other 
The impacts of the pandemic have adversely
affected and may in the future adversely affect
us.
The COVID-19 pandemic has directly and indirectly
negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted
global supply chains, adversely affected equity
market valuations, created significant volatility
and disruption in financial and capital markets,
resulted in challenging labor market conditions,
and adversely impacted our financial results to
varying degrees and in various respects. The
future direct and indirect effects of the
pandemic on global health and economic conditions
and activity remain uncertain, continue to evolve
by region, country and state and depend on future
developments that cannot be predicted, including
impacts from the expiration of the federal
COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, surges of
COVID-19 cases and the spread of more dangerous
variants of COVID-19, the availability, usage and
acceptance of effective medical treatments and
vaccines, changing client preferences and
behavior and future public response and
government actions, including travel bans and
restrictions, and limitations on business. Such
evolving impacts of the pandemic could disrupt
the U.S. and global economy, including changes in
financial and capital markets, and adversely
affect our businesses and operations, liquidity,
results of operations and financial condition,
including from increased allowance for credit
losses and noninterest expenses, which are
dependent on the pandemic’s duration and
severity.
Reforms to and replacement of IBORs and certain
other rates or indices may adversely affect our
reputation, business, financial condition and
results of operations.
Though significant progress has been made in the
global financial markets to replace products and
contracts referencing London Interbank Offered
Rate (LIBOR) or other IBORs (IBOR Products), the
aggregate notional amount of these IBOR
Products remains material to our business. Risks
and challenges associated with the transition
from IBORs remain and may result in consequences
that cannot be fully anticipated, which expose us
to various financial, operational, supervisory,
conduct and legal risk.
While there has been significant progress in
market and client adoption of ARRs, usage of ARRs
may vary across or within categories of
contracts, products and services, potentially
resulting in market fragmentation, decreased
trading volumes and liquidity, increased
complexity and modeling and operational risks.
ARRs have compositions and characteristics that
differ from the benchmarks they replace, in some
cases they have limited liquidity, and may
demonstrate less predictable performance over
time than the benchmarks they replace. For
example, certain ARRs are calculated on a
compounded or weighted-average basis and, unlike
IBORs, do not reflect bank credit risk and
therefore typically require a spread adjustment.
There are important differences between the
fallbacks, triggers and calculation methodologies
being implemented in cash and derivatives
markets. Any mismatch between the adoption of
ARRs in loans, securities and derivatives markets
may impact hedging or other financial
arrangements we have implemented, and we may
experience unanticipated market exposures.
Changes resulting from transition to successor or
alternative rates may adversely affect the yield
on loans or securities held by us, amounts paid
on securities we have issued, amounts received
and paid on derivatives we have entered into, the
value of such loans, securities or derivative
instruments, the trading market for such products
and contracts, and our ability to effectively use
hedging instruments to manage risk. There can be
no assurance that existing assets and liabilities
based on or linked to IBORs that have not already
transitioned to ARRs will transition without
delay or potential disputes.
Although a significant majority of the aggregate
notional amount of our remaining IBOR Products
maturing after 2022 include or have been amended
to include fallbacks to ARRs, the transitioning
of certain IBOR Products that do not include
fallback provisions or adequate fallback
mechanisms require additional efforts to modify
their terms. Some outstanding IBOR Products are
particularly challenging to modify due to the
requirement that all impacted parties consent to
such modification. To address outstanding IBOR
Products that are difficult to modify,
legislation has been adopted in the U.S. and in
other jurisdictions. Litigation, disputes or
other action may occur as a result of the
interpretation or application of legislation or
regulations, including if there is an overlap
between laws or regulations in different
jurisdictions or from interactions with any FCA-
compelled “synthetic” LIBOR settings.
Some of our IBOR Products may contain language
giving the calculation agent (which may be us)
discretion to determine the successor rate
(including the applicable spread adjustment) to
the existing benchmark. We may face a risk of
litigation, disputes or other actions from
clients, counterparties, customers, investors or
others based on various claims, for example, that
we incorrectly interpreted or enforced IBOR-based
contract provisions, failed to appropriately
communicate the effect that the transition to
ARRs will have on existing and future products,
treated affected parties unfairly or made
inappropriate product recommendations to or
investments on behalf of its clients, or engaged
in anti-competitive behavior or unlawfully
manipulated markets or benchmarks.
ARR-based products that we develop, launch and/or
support, including products using credit
sensitive rates, may perform differently to IBOR
Products during times of economic stress,
 Bank of America20 
adverse or volatile market conditions and across
the credit and economic cycle, which may impact
the value, return on and profitability of our
ARR-based assets. New financial products linked
to ARRs may have additional legal, financial,
tax, operational, market, compliance,
reputational, competitive or other risks to us,
our clients and other market participants.
Banking regulators in the U.S. and globally have
maintained heightened regulatory scrutiny and
intensified supervisory focus on financial
institution LIBOR transition plans, preparations
and readiness, including our use of credit-
sensitive rates like the Bloomberg Short-Term
Bank Yield Index and ARR-based term rates, which
could result in regulatory action, litigation
and/or the need to change the products offered by
our businesses. Failure to meet industry-wide
IBOR transition milestones and to cease issuance
of IBOR Products by relevant cessation dates may,
subject to certain regulatory exceptions, result
in supervisory enforcement by applicable
regulators, increase our cost of, and access to,
capital or lead to other consequences.
The ongoing market transition has altered, and
additional developments may further alter, some
aspects of our risk profile and risk management
strategies, including derivatives and hedging
strategies, modeling and analytics, valuation
tools, product design and systems, controls,
procedures and operational infrastructure.
Further changes may increase costs and expose us
to potential risks related to regulatory
compliance, requirements or inquiries. Among
other risks, various IBOR Products transition to
ARRs at different times or in different manners,
with the result that we may face unexpected
interest rate, pricing or other exposures across
business or product lines, and we may face
operational risks related to planned processes at
certain CCPs to convert outstanding USD LIBOR-
cleared derivatives to ARR positions. Continuing
reforms to market transition and other factors
may adversely affect our business, including the
ability to serve customers and maintain market
share, financial condition or results of
operations and could result in reputational harm
to us.
We face significant and increasing competition in
the financial services industry.
We operate in a highly competitive environment
and experience intense competition from local and
global financial institutions and new entrants in
domestic and foreign markets. We compete on the
basis of a number of factors, including customer
service and convenience, the pricing, quality and
range of products and services we offer, lending
limits, the quality and delivery of our
technology and our reputation, experience and
relationships in relevant markets. There is
increasing pressure to provide products and
services on more attractive terms, including
lower fees and higher interest rates on deposits,
and lower cost investment strategies, which may
impact our ability to effectively compete. The
changing regulatory environment may also create
competitive disadvantages, including from
different regulatory requirements.
Emerging technologies and the growth of
e-commerce have lowered geographic and monetary
barriers of other financial institutions, made it
easier for non-depository institutions to offer
traditional banking products and services and
allowed non-traditional financial service
providers and technology companies to compete
with traditional financial service companies in
providing electronic and internet-based financial
solutions and services, including electronic
securities trading with low or no fees and
commissions, marketplace lending, financial data
aggregation and payment processing services,
including real-time payment platforms. Further,
clients may choose to conduct business with other
market participants who engage in business or
offer products in areas we deem speculative or
risky as an
alternative to traditional banking products.
Increased competition may reduce our net interest
margin and revenues from our fee-based products
and services and negatively affect our earnings,
including by pressuring us to lower pricing or
credit standards, requiring additional investment
to improve the quality and delivery of our
technology, reducing our market share and/or
affecting the willingness of our clients to do
business with us.
Our inability to adapt our business strategies,
products and services could harm our business.
We rely on a diversified mix of businesses that
deliver a broad range of financial products and
services through multiple distribution channels.
Our success depends on our and our third-party
providers’ of products and services abilities to
adapt our business strategies, products and
services and their respective features in a
timely manner, including available payment
processing services and technology to rapidly
evolving industry standards and consumer
preferences.
The widespread adoption and rapid evolution of
emerging technologies, including analytic
capabilities, self-service digital trading
platforms and automated trading markets, internet
services, and digital assets, such as central
bank digital currencies, cryptocurrencies
(including stablecoins), tokens and other
cryptoassets that utilize distributed ledger
technology (DLT), as well as DLT in payment,
clearing and settlement processes creates
additional risks, could negatively impact our
ability to compete and require substantial
expenditures to the extent we were to modify or
adapt our existing products and services. As such
new technologies evolve and mature, our
businesses and results of operations could be
adversely impacted, including as a result of the
introduction of new competitors to the payment
ecosystem and increased volatility in deposits
and/or significant long-term reduction in
deposits (i.e., financial disintermediation).
Also, we may not be as timely or successful in
developing or introducing new products and
services, integrating new products or services
into our existing offerings, responding, managing
or adapting to changes in consumer behavior,
preferences, spending, investing and/or saving
habits, achieving market acceptance of our
products and services, reducing costs in response
to pressures to deliver products and services at
lower prices or sufficiently developing and
maintaining loyal customers. The Corporation’s,
or its third-party providers’, inability or
resistance to timely innovate or adapt its
operations, products and services to evolving
industry standards and consumer preferences could
result in service disruptions and harm our
business and adversely affect our results of
operations and reputation.
We could suffer operational, reputational and
financial harm if our models fail to properly
anticipate and manage risk.
We use models extensively to forecast losses,
project revenue and expenses, assess and control
our operations and financial condition, assist in
capital planning and measure, forecast and assess
capital and liquidity requirements for credit,
market, operational and strategic risks. Under
our Enterprise Model Risk Policy, Model Risk
Management is required to perform model
oversight, including independent validation
before initial use, ongoing monitoring reviews
through outcomes analysis and benchmarking, and
periodic revalidation. However, models are
subject to inherent limitations from simplifying
assumptions, uncertainty regarding economic and
financial outcomes, and emerging risks from
applications that rely on AI.
Our models may not be sufficiently predictive of
future results due to limited historical
patterns, extreme or unanticipated market
movements or customer behavior and liquidity,
especially during severe market downturns or
stress events (e.g., geopolitical or pandemic
events), which could limit
 21Bank of America 
their effectiveness and require timely
recalibration. The models that we use to assess
and control our market risk exposures also
reflect assumptions about the degree of
correlation among prices of various asset classes
or other market indicators, which may not be
representative of the next downturn and would
magnify the limitations inherent in using
historical data to manage risk. Market conditions
in recent years have involved unprecedented
dislocations and highlight the limitations
inherent in using historical data to manage risk.
Our models may also be adversely impacted by
human error and may not be effective if we fail
to properly oversee and review them at regular
intervals and detect their flaws during our
review and monitoring processes, they contain
erroneous data, assumptions, valuations, formulas
or algorithms or our applications running the
models do not perform as expected. Regardless of
the steps we take to help confirm effective
controls, governance, monitoring and testing, and
implement new technology and automated processes,
we could suffer operational, reputational and
financial harm, including funding or liquidity
shortfalls, if models fail to properly anticipate
and manage risks.
Failure to properly manage data may result in our
inability to manage risk and business needs,
errors in our operations, critical reporting and
strategic decision-making, inaccurate reporting
and non-compliance with laws, rules and
regulations.
We rely on our ability to manage and process data
in an accurate, timely and complete manner,
including capturing, transporting, aggregating,
using, transmitting data externally, and
retaining and protecting data appropriately.
While we continually update our policies,
programs, processes and practices and implement
emerging technologies, such as automation, AI and
robotics, our data management processes may not
be effective and are subject to weaknesses and
failures, including human error, data
limitations, process delays, system failure or
failed controls. Failure to properly manage data
effectively in an accurate, timely and complete
manner may adversely impact its quality and
reliability and our ability to manage current and
emerging risk, produce accurate financial and
non-financial, regulatory and operational
reporting, detect or surveil potential misconduct
or non-compliance with laws, rules and
regulations, as well as to manage changing
business needs, strategic decision-making,
resolution strategy and operations. The failure
to establish and maintain effective, efficient
and controlled data management could adversely
impact our ability to develop our products and
relationships with our customers, increase
regulatory risk and operational losses, and
damage our reputation.
Our operations, businesses and customers could be
adversely affected by the impacts related to
climate change.
Climate change and related environmental
sustainability matters present short-term and
long-term risks to us. The physical risks include
an increase in the frequency and severity of
extreme weather events and natural disasters,
including floods, wildfires, hurricanes and
tornados, as well as chronic longer-term shifts
such as rising average global temperatures and
sea levels. Such disasters could impact our
facilities and employees and disrupt our
operations or the operations of customers or
third parties, and result in market volatility or
negatively impact our customers’ ability to repay
outstanding loans, result in rapid deposit
outflows or drawdowns of credit facilities, cause
supply chain and/or distribution network
disruptions, damage collateral or result in the
deterioration of the value of collateral or
insurance shortfalls.
There is also increasing risk related to the
transition to a low-carbon economy. Changes in
consumer preferences, market pressures,
advancements in technology and additional
legislation, regulatory and legal requirements
could alter the scope of our existing businesses,
limit our ability to pursue certain business
activities and offer certain products and
services, amplify credit and market risks,
negatively impact asset values and increase
expenses, including as a result of legal,
compliance and public disclosure costs in the
U.S. and globally with potential jurisdictional
divergence, strategic planning, required capital
expenditures and changes in technology and
markets, including supply chain and insurance
availability and cost. We have devoted and expect
to continue to devote additional resources as a
result of our response to climate change. Our
climate change strategies, policies, and
disclosures, our ability to achieve our climate-
related goals, targets and commitments, and/or
the environmental or climate impacts attributable
to our products, transactions or services will
likely result in heightened legal and compliance
risk and could result in reputational harm as a
result of negative public sentiment, regulatory
scrutiny, litigation and reduced investor and
stakeholder confidence. Our ability to meet our
climate-related goals, targets and commitments,
including our goal to achieve certain greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions targets by 2030 and net zero
GHG emissions in our financing activities,
operations and supply chain before 2050, is
subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which
are outside of our control, such as technology
advances, clearly defined roadmaps for industry
sectors, public policies and better emissions
data reporting, and ongoing engagement with
customers, suppliers, investors, government
officials and other stakeholders.
There are and will continue to be challenges
related to capturing, verifying, analyzing and
disclosing climate-related data, which includes
nonfinancial data and other information that is
subject to measurement uncertainties, may not be
independently verified, and may result in legal
or reputational harm.
Our ability to attract, develop and retain
qualified employees is critical to our success,
business prospects and competitive position.
Our performance and competitive position is
heavily dependent on the talents, development and
efforts of highly skilled individuals.
Competition for qualified personnel within the
financial services industry and from businesses
outside the financial services industry is
intense.
Our competitors include global institutions and
institutions subject to different compensation
and hiring regulations than those imposed on U.S.
institutions and financial institutions. Also,
our ability to attract, develop and retain
employees could be impacted by changing workforce
concerns, expectations, practices and preferences
(including remote work), and increasing labor
shortages and competition for labor, which could
increase labor costs.
In order to attract and retain qualified
personnel, we must provide market-level
compensation. As a large financial and banking
institution, we are and may become subject to
additional limitations on compensation practices
by the Federal Reserve, the OCC, the FDIC and
other regulators around the world, which may or
may not affect our competitors. Furthermore,
because a substantial portion of our annual
incentive compensation paid to many of our
employees is long-term equity-based awards based
on the value of our common stock, declines in our
profitability or outlook could adversely affect
the ability to attract and retain employees. If
we are unable to continue to attract, develop and
retain qualified individuals, our business
prospects and competitive position could be
adversely affected.
 Bank of America22 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments │
None
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 2. Properties │
As of December 31, 2022, certain principal offices and other materially important properties
consisted of the following:
 General Primary Property 
 Facility Location Character of Business Property Square 
 Name the Physical Segment Status Feet(1) 
 Property 
 Bank of Principal 
 America Charlotte, NC 60 Story Executive Owned 1,212,177 
 Corporate Building Offices 
 Center 
 Bank of GWIM, Global 
 America New York, NY 55 Story Bankingand Leased(2) 1,836,575 
 Tower at One Building Global 
 Bryant Park Markets 
 Bank of Global 
 America London, UK 4 Building BankingandGl… Leased 502,344 
 Financial Campus Markets 
 Centre 
 Cheung Kong 62 Story Global 
 Center Hong Kong Building BankingandGl… Leased 149,790 
 Markets 
(1) For leased properties, property square feet
represents the square footage occupied by the
Corporation.
(2) The Corporation has a 49.9 percent joint
venture interest in this property.
We own or lease approximately 69.5 million square
feet in over 20,000 facilities and ATM locations
globally, including approximately 63.9 million
square feet in the U.S. (all 50 states and the
District of Columbia, the U.S. Virgin Islands,
Puerto Rico and Guam) and approximately 5.6
million square feet in more than 35 countries.
We believe our owned and leased properties are
adequate for our business needs and are well
maintained. We continue to evaluate our owned and
leased real estate and may determine from time to
time that certain of our premises and facilities,
or ownership structures, are no longer necessary
for our
operations. In connection therewith, we regularly
evaluate the sale or sale/leaseback of certain
properties, and we may incur costs in connection
with any such transactions.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 3. Legal Proceedings │
See Litigation and Regulatory Matters in Note 12
– Commitments and Contingencies to the
Consolidated Financial Statements, which is
incorporated herein by reference.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures │
None
║ Part II ║
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases │
│ of Equity Securities │
The principal market on which our common stock is
traded is the New York Stock Exchange under the
symbol “BAC.” As of February 21, 2023, there were
143,301 registered shareholders of common stock.
The table below presents common share repurchase
activity for the three months ended December 31,
2022. The primary source of funds for cash
distributions by the Corporation to its
shareholders is dividends received from its bank
subsidiaries. Each of the bank subsidiaries is
subject to various regulatory policies and
requirements relating to the payment of
dividends, including requirements to maintain
capital above regulatory minimums. All of the
Corporation’s preferred stock outstanding has
preference over the Corporation’s common stock
with respect to payment of dividends.
 (Dollars in 
 millions, 
 except per Total Shares 
 share Purchased as Remaining 
 information; Total Common Part of Publicly Buyback 
 shares in Shares Weighted-Avera… Announced Authority 
 thousands) Purchased(1,2) Per Share Price Programs(2) Amounts(3) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 October 1 - 2,018 $ 34.68 2,018 $ 16,332 
 31, 2022 
 November 1 - 17,085 37.14 16,961 15,949 
 30, 2022 
 December 1 - 9,133 32.67 9,117 15,783 
 31, 2022 
 Three months 
 ended December 28,236 35.52 28,096 
 31, 2022 
(1) Includes 140 thousand shares of the Corporation's common stock acquired by the Corporation in
connection with satisfaction of tax withholding obligations on vested restricted stock or restricted
stock units and certain forfeitures and terminations of employment-related awards and for potential
re-issuance to certain employees under equity incentive plans.
(2) In October 2021, the Corporation’s Board of Directors (Board) authorized the repurchase of up to
$25 billion of common stock over time (October 2021 Authorization). Additionally, the Board
authorized repurchases to offset shares awarded under equity-based compensation plans. During the
three months ended December 31, 2022, pursuant to the Board’s authorizations, the Corporation
repurchased approximately 28 million shares, or $998 million, of its common stock, including
repurchases to offset shares awarded under equity-based compensation plans. For more information, see
Capital Management - CCAR and Capital Planning in the MD&A on page 49 and Note 13 – Shareholders’
Equity to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(3) Remaining Buyback Authority Amounts represents the remaining buyback authority of the October
2021 Authorization. Excludes repurchases to offset shares awarded under equity-based compensation
plans.
 Depositary Share Repurchases 
On December 13, 2022, following the expiration of its cash tender offers, BofA Securities, Inc.
(BofAS), a wholly owned indirect subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation (Parent), acquired
depositary shares representing fractional interests in shares of the Parent’s preferred stock
registered under Section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, in the amounts and
for the per share total price set forth in the following table. Also on December 13, 2022, the Parent
acquired from BofAS such depositary shares that were previously purchased by BofAS for the same per
share price.
 23Bank of America 
 Deposit… 
 Shares 
 Represe… 
 Fractio… 
 Interes… 
 in 
 Series 
 of Bank Total Per 
 of Number of Deposita… 
 America Deposita… Share1 Total 
 Preferr… Shares Purchase Accrued Price 
 Stock Purchased Price Dividends Paid2 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Deposit… 
 Shares, 
 each 
 represe… 
 a 
 1/1,000… 
 interest 
 in a 373,745 $ 19.22 $ 0.0963694 $ 19.31636… 
 share of 
 Floating 
 Rate 
 Non-Cum… 
 Preferr… 
 Stock, 
 Series E 
 Deposit… 
 Shares, 
 each 
 represe… 
 a 
 1/1,000… 
 interest 
 in a 110,762 24.08 0.1999132 24.2799… 
 share of 
 5.875% 
 Non-Cum… 
 Preferr… 
 Stock, 
 Series 
 HH 
 Deposit… 
 Shares, 
 each 
 represe… 
 a 
 1/1,000… 
 interest 
 in a 627,514 22.12 n/a 22.1200… 
 share of 
 5.375% 
 Non-Cum… 
 Preferr… 
 Stock, 
 Series 
 KK 
 Deposit… 
 Shares, 
 each 
 represe… 
 a 
 1/1,000… 
 interest 
 in a 355,040 20.44 n/a 20.4400… 
 share of 
 5.000% 
 Non-Cum… 
 Preferr… 
 Stock, 
 Series 
 LL 
 Deposit… 
 Shares, 
 each 
 represe… 
 a 
 1/1,000… 
 interest 
 in a 1,006,802 18.20 0.1215278 18.3215… 
 share of 
 4.375% 
 Non-Cum… 
 Preferr… 
 Stock, 
 Series 
 NN 
 Deposit… 
 Shares, 
 each 
 represe… 
 a 
 1/1,000… 
 interest 
 in a 99,685 17.27 0.1174479 17.3874… 
 share of 
 4.125% 
 Non-Cum… 
 Preferr… 
 Stock, 
 Series 
 PP 
 Deposit… 
 Shares, 
 each 
 represe… 
 a 
 1/1,000… 
 interest 
 in a 121,078 17.30 0.0767361 17.3767… 
 share of 
 4.250% 
 Non-Cum… 
 Preferr… 
 Stock, 
 Series 
 QQ 
 Deposit… 
 Shares, 
 each 
 represe… 
 a 
 1/1,000… 
 interest 
 in a 537,327 19.90 0.0857639 19.9857… 
 share of 
 4.750% 
 Non-Cum… 
 Preferr… 
 Stock, 
 Series 
 SS 
 Deposit… 
 Shares, 
 each 
 represe… 
 a 
 1/1,200… 
 interest 
 in a 106,361 18.92 0.0571489 18.9771… 
 share of 
 Floating 
 Rate 
 Non-Cum… 
 Preferr… 
 Stock, 
 Series 1 
 Deposit… 
 Shares, 
 each 
 represe… 
 a 
 1/1,200… 
 interest 
 in a 870,231 19.17 0.0790691 19.2490… 
 share of 
 Floating 
 Rate 
 Non-Cum… 
 Preferr… 
 Stock, 
 Series 5 
(1) The liquidation preference attributable to each depositary share is $25.00.
(2) The total price paid per depositary shares equals the applicable Purchase Price for such
depositary shares, plus, if applicable, the Accrued Dividends for such depositary shares.
n/a = not applicable
The Corporation did not have any unregistered sales of equity securities during the three months
ended December 31, 2022.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 6. [Reserved] │
 Bank of America24 
 Item 7. Bank of America Corporation and 
 Subsidiaries 
 Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial 
 Condition and Results of Operations 
 Table of Contents 
 Page 
 Executive Summary 26 
 Recent Developments 27 
 Financial Highlights 28 
 Balance Sheet Overview 30 
 Supplemental Financial Data 32 
 Business Segment Operations 37 
 Consumer Banking 38 
 Global Wealth & Investment Management 40 
 Global Banking 42 
 Global Markets 44 
 All Other 45 
 Managing Risk 46 
 Strategic Risk Management 49 
 Capital Management 49 
 Liquidity Risk 54 
 Credit Risk Management 59 
 Consumer Portfolio Credit Risk Management 59 
 Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management 64 
 Non-U.S. Portfolio 70 
 Loan and Lease Contractual Maturities 71 
 Allowance for Credit Losses 73 
 Market Risk Management 75 
 Trading Risk Management 76 
 Interest Rate Risk Management for the Banking Book 79 
 Mortgage Banking Risk Management 80 
 Compliance and Operational Risk Management 80 
 Reputational Risk Management 81 
 Climate Risk Management 81 
 Complex Accounting Estimates 82 
 Non-GAAP Reconciliations 85 
 25Bank of America 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations
Bank of America Corporation (the Corporation) and
its management may make certain statements that
constitute “forward-looking statements” within
the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation
Reform Act of 1995. These statements can be
identified by the fact that they do not relate
strictly to historical or current facts. Forward-
looking statements often use words such as
“anticipates,” “targets,” “expects,” “hopes,”
“estimates,” “intends,” “plans,” “goals,”
“believes,” “continue” and other similar
expressions or future or conditional verbs such
as “will,” “may,” “might,” “should,” “would” and
“could.” Forward-looking statements represent the
Corporation’s current expectations, plans or
forecasts of its future results, revenues,
provision for credit losses, expenses, efficiency
ratio, capital measures, strategy and future
business and economic conditions more generally,
and other future matters. These statements are
not guarantees of future results or performance
and involve certain known and unknown risks,
uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult
to predict and are often beyond the Corporation’s
control. Actual outcomes and results may differ
materially from those expressed in, or implied
by, any of these forward-looking statements.
You should not place undue reliance on any
forward-looking statement and should consider the
following uncertainties and risks, as well as the
risks and uncertainties more fully discussed
under Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report
on Form 10-K : and in any of the Corporation’s
subsequent Securities and Exchange Commission
filings: the Corporation’s potential judgments,
orders, settlements, penalties, fines and
reputational damage resulting from pending or
future litigation and regulatory investigations,
proceedings and enforcement actions, including as
a result of our participation in and execution of
government programs related to the Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, such as the
processing of unemployment benefits for
California and certain other states; the
possibility that the Corporation’s future
liabilities may be in excess of its recorded
liability and estimated range of possible loss
for litigation, and regulatory and government
actions; the possibility that the Corporation
could face increased claims from one or more
parties involved in mortgage securitizations; the
Corporation’s ability to resolve representations
and warranties repurchase and related claims; the
risks related to the discontinuation of the
London Interbank Offered Rate and other reference
rates, including increased expenses and
litigation and the effectiveness of hedging
strategies; uncertainties about the financial
stability and growth rates of non-U.S.
jurisdictions, the risk that those jurisdictions
may face difficulties servicing their sovereign
debt, and related stresses on financial markets,
currencies and trade, and the Corporation’s
exposures to such risks, including direct,
indirect and operational; the impact of U.S. and
global interest rates, inflation, currency
exchange rates, economic conditions, trade
policies and tensions, including tariffs, and
potential geopolitical instability; the impact of
the interest rate, inflationary and macroeconomic
environment on the Corporation’s business,
financial condition and results of operations;
the possibility that future credit losses may be
higher than currently expected due to changes in
economic assumptions, customer behavior, adverse
developments with respect to U.S. or global
economic conditions and other uncertainties,
including the impact of supply chain disruptions,
inflationary pressures and labor shortages on
economic conditions and our business; potential
losses related to the Corporation's concentration
of credit risk; the Corporation’s ability to
achieve its expense targets and expectations
regarding revenue, net interest income, provision
for credit losses, net
charge-offs, effective tax rate, loan growth or
other projections; adverse changes to the
Corporation’s credit ratings from the major
credit rating agencies; an inability to access
capital markets or maintain deposits or borrowing
costs; estimates of the fair value and other
accounting values, subject to impairment
assessments, of certain of the Corporation’s
assets and liabilities; the estimated or actual
impact of changes in accounting standards or
assumptions in applying those standards;
uncertainty regarding the content, timing and
impact of regulatory capital and liquidity
requirements; the impact of adverse changes to
total loss-absorbing capacity requirements,
stress capital buffer requirements and/or global
systemically important bank surcharges; the
potential impact of actions of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System on the
Corporation’s capital plans; the effect of
changes in or interpretations of income tax laws
and regulations; the impact of implementation and
compliance with U.S. and international laws,
regulations and regulatory interpretations,
including, but not limited to, recovery and
resolution planning requirements, Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation assessments, the Volcker
Rule, fiduciary standards, derivatives
regulations and the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security Act and any similar or related
rules and regulations; a failure or disruption in
or breach of the Corporation’s operational or
security systems or infrastructure, or those of
third parties, including as a result of cyber-
attacks or campaigns; the risks related to the
transition and physical impacts of climate
change; our ability to achieve environmental,
social and governance goals and commitments or
the impact of any changes in the Corporation’s
sustainability strategy or commitments generally;
the impact of any future federal government
shutdown and uncertainty regarding the federal
government’s debt limit or changes in fiscal,
monetary or regulatory policy; the emergence or
continuation of widespread health emergencies or
pandemics, including the magnitude and duration
of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on U.S.
and/or global financial market conditions and our
business, results of operations, financial
condition and prospects; the impact of natural
disasters, extreme weather events, military
conflict (including the Russia/Ukraine conflict,
the possible expansion of such conflict and
potential geopolitical consequences), terrorism
or other geopolitical events; and other matters.
Forward-looking statements speak only as of the
date they are made, and the Corporation
undertakes no obligation to update any forward-
looking statement to reflect the impact of
circumstances or events that arise after the date
the forward-looking statement was made.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
referred to in the Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations (MD&A) are incorporated by reference
into the MD&A. Certain prior-year amounts have
been reclassified to conform to current-year
presentation. Throughout the MD&A, the
Corporation uses certain acronyms and
abbreviations which are defined in the Glossary.
 Executive Summary 
 Business Overview 
The Corporation is a Delaware corporation, a bank
holding company (BHC) and a financial holding
company. When used in this report, “Bank of
America,” “the Corporation,” “we,” “us” and “our”
may refer to Bank of America Corporation
individually, Bank of America Corporation and its
subsidiaries, or certain of Bank of America
Corporation’s subsidiaries or affiliates. Our
 Bank of America26 
principal executive offices are located in
Charlotte, North Carolina. Through our various
bank and nonbank subsidiaries throughout the U.S.
and in international markets, we provide a
diversified range of banking and nonbank
financial services and products through four
business segments: Consumer Banking , Global
Wealth & Investment Management (GWIM) , Global
Banking and Global Markets , with the remaining
operations recorded in All Other . We operate our
banking activities primarily under the Bank of
America, National Association (Bank of America,
N.A. or BANA) charter. At December 31, 2022, the
Corporation had $3.1 trillion in assets and a
headcount of approximately 217,000 employees.
As of December 31, 2022, we served clients
through operations across the U.S., its
territories and more than 35 countries. Our
retail banking footprint covers all major markets
in the U.S., and we serve approximately 67
million consumer and small business clients with
approximately 3,900 retail financial centers,
approximately 16,000 ATMs, and leading digital
banking platforms (www.bankofamerica.com) with
approximately 44 million active users, including
approximately 35 million active mobile users. We
offer industry-leading support to approximately
three million small business households. Our GWIM
businesses, with client balances of $3.4
trillion, provide tailored solutions to meet
client needs through a full set of investment
management, brokerage, banking, trust and
retirement products. We are a global leader in
corporate and investment banking and trading
across a broad range of asset classes serving
corporations, governments, institutions and
individuals around the world.
 Recent Developments 
 Capital Management 
On February 1, 2023, the Corporation’s Board of
Directors (the Board) declared a quarterly common
stock dividend of $0.22 per share, payable on
March 31, 2023 to shareholders of record as of
March 3, 2023.
For more information on our capital resources,
see Capital Management on page 49.
 Changes in U.S. Tax Law 
On August 16, 2022, the U.S. enacted the
Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, which contained
a number of tax-related provisions. The tax
changes included the extension and expansion of
renewable energy tax credit programs, the
establishment of a new 15 percent alternative
minimum tax (AMT) on adjusted financial statement
income for large corporations and a one percent
excise tax on stock repurchases. For more
information, see Financial Highlights – Income
Tax Expense on page 29.
 Russia/Ukraine Conflict 
Due to the Russia/Ukraine conflict, there has
been significant volatility in financial and
commodities markets, and multiple jurisdictions
have implemented various economic sanctions. At
December 31, 2022 and 2021, our direct net
country exposure to Russia was $443 million and
$733 million, primarily consisting of outstanding
loans and leases totaling $391 million and $686
million, and our net country exposure to Ukraine
was not significant. While the Corporation’s
direct exposure to Russia is limited, the
potential duration, course and impact of the
Russia/Ukraine conflict remain uncertain and
could adversely affect macroeconomic and
geopolitical conditions, which could negatively
impact the Corporation's businesses, results of
operations and financial position. For more
information on the risks related to the
Russia/Ukraine conflict, see the Market, Credit
and Geopolitical sections in Item 1A. Risk
Factors on page 8.
 LIBOR and Other Benchmark Rates 
After December 31, 2021, ICE Benchmark
Administration (IBA) ceased publishing British
Pound Sterling (GBP), Euro, Swiss Franc, and
Japanese Yen (JPY) London Interbank Offered Rate
(LIBOR) settings and one-week and two-month U.S.
dollar (USD) LIBOR settings, subject to the
continued publication of certain non-
representative LIBOR settings based on a modified
calculation (i.e., on a “synthetic” basis). The
remaining USD LIBOR settings (i.e., overnight,
one month, three month, six month and 12 month)
will cease or become non-representative
immediately after June 30, 2023, although the
Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) has issued a
consultation seeking views on whether to compel
publication of the one-month, three-month and
six-month USD LIBOR settings on a “synthetic”
basis for a short time after June 30, 2023 (i.e.,
through September 30, 2024). Separately, the
Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC) issued supervisory guidance
encouraging banks to cease entering into new
contracts that use USD LIBOR as a reference rate
by December 31, 2021, subject to certain
regulatory-approved exceptions (USD LIBOR
Guidance).
As a result, a major transition has been and
continues to be in progress in the global
financial markets with respect to the replacement
of Interbank Offered Rates (IBORs). This has been
and continues to be a complex process impacting a
variety of our businesses and operations. IBORs
have historically been used in many of the
Corporation’s products and contracts, including
derivatives, consumer and commercial loans,
mortgages, floating-rate notes and other
adjustable-rate products and financial
instruments. In response, the Corporation
established an enterprise-wide IBOR transition
program, with active involvement of senior
management and regular reports to the Management
Risk Committee (MRC) and Enterprise Risk
Committee (ERC). The program continues to drive
the Corporation's industry and regulatory
engagement, client and financial contract
changes, internal and external communications,
technology and operations modifications,
including updates to its operational models,
systems and processes, introduction of new
products, migration of existing clients, and
program strategy and governance.
As of December 31, 2021, the Corporation
transitioned or otherwise addressed IBOR-based
products and contracts referencing the rates that
ceased or became non-representative after
December 31, 2021, including LIBOR-linked
commercial loans, LIBOR-based adjustable-rate
consumer mortgages, LIBOR-linked derivatives and
interdealer trading of certain USD LIBOR and
other interest rate swaps, and related hedging
arrangements. Additionally, in accordance with
the USD LIBOR Guidance, the Corporation has
ceased entering into new contracts that use USD
LIBOR as a reference rate, subject to limited
exceptions, including those consistent with
supervisory guidance.
The Corporation launched capabilities and
services to support the issuance of and trading
in products indexed to various alternative
reference rates (ARRs) and developed employee
training programs as well as other internal and
external sources of information on the various
challenges and opportunities that the replacement
of IBORs has presented and continues to present.
The Corporation continues to monitor a variety of
market scenarios as part of its transition
efforts, including risks associated with
insufficient preparation by
 27Bank of America 
individual market participants or the overall
market ecosystem, ability of market participants
to meet regulatory and industry-wide recommended
milestones, and access and demand by clients and
market participants to liquidity in certain
products, including LIBOR products. With respect
to the transition of LIBOR products referencing
USD LIBOR settings ceasing or becoming non-
representative as of June 30, 2023, a significant
majority of the Corporation’s notional
contractual exposure to such LIBOR settings, of
which the significant majority is derivatives
contracts, have been remediated (i.e., updated to
include fallback provisions to ARRs based on
market-driven protocols, regulatory guidance and
industry-recommended fallback provisions and
related mechanisms), and the Corporation is
continuing to remediate the remaining USD LIBOR
exposure. For example, during the first half of
2023, certain central counterparties (CCPs)
expect to complete processes to convert
outstanding USD LIBOR-cleared derivatives to ARR
positions. The remaining exposure, a majority of
which is made up of derivatives and commercial
loans and which represents a small minority of
outstanding USD LIBOR notional contractual
exposure of the Corporation, requires active
dialogue with clients to modify the contracts.
For any residual exposures after June 2023 that
continue to have no fallback provisions, the
Corporation continues to assess and plans to
leverage relevant contractual and statutory
solutions, including the Adjustable Interest Rate
(LIBOR) Act in the U.S. (as implemented by the
Federal Reserve) and “synthetic” USD LIBOR (if
the FCA compels such publication), to transition
such exposure. While there remain risks to the
Corporation associated with the transition from
IBORs (as discussed under Item 1A. Risk Factors –
Other on page 20), such risks have been monitored
and, where applicable, managed through the
Corporation’s efforts and dedicated operational
resources to date. In the Corporation’s view, the
potential likelihood and/or impact of transition-
related risks has lessened over time, and the
Corporation anticipates it has devoted
appropriate resources to remaining transition
efforts and will be able to continue to
appropriately monitor and manage such risks as
the transition process continues. The Corporation
expects transition-related risks to further
diminish as certain market developments occur
prior to June 30, 2023. The Corporation has
implemented regulatory, tax and accounting
changes and continues to monitor current and
potential impacts of the transition, including
Internal Revenue Service tax regulations and
guidance and Financial Accounting Standards Board
guidance. In addition, the Corporation has
engaged impacted clients in connection with the
transition by providing education on ARRs and the
timing of transition events. The Corporation is
also working actively with global regulators,
industry working groups and trade associations.
For more information on the expected replacement
of LIBOR and other benchmark rates, see Item 1A.
Risk Factors – Other on page 20.
Financial Highlights
 Table 1 
 (Dollars in millions, 
 except per share Summary Income Statement and 
 information) Selected 
 Income statement Financial Data 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net interest income $ 52,462 $ 42,934 
 Noninterest income 42,488 46,179 
 Total revenue, net of 94,950 89,113 
 interest expense 
 Provision for credit losses 2,543 -4,594 
 Noninterest expense 61,438 59,731 
 Income before income taxes 30,969 33,976 
 Income tax expense 3,441 1,998 
 Net income 27,528 31,978 
 Preferred stock dividends 1,513 1,421 
 and other 
 Net income applicable to 
 common $ 26,015 $ 30,557 
 shareholders 
 Per common share 
 information 
 Earnings $ 3.21 $ 3.60 
 Diluted earnings 3.19 3.57 
 Dividends paid 0.86 0.78 
 Performance ratios 
 Return on average assets(1) 0.88 % 1.05 % 
 Return on average common 
 shareholders’ 10.75 12.23 
 equity(1) 
 Return on average tangible 
 common 15.15 17.02 
 shareholders’ equity(2) 
 Efficiency ratio(1) 64.71 67.03 
 Balance sheet at year end 
 Total loans and leases $ 1,045,747 $ 979,124 
 Total assets 3,051,375 3,169,495 
 Total deposits 1,930,341 2,064,446 
 Total liabilities 2,778,178 2,899,429 
 Total common shareholders’ 244,800 245,358 
 equity 
 Total shareholders’ equity 273,197 270,066 
(1) For definitions, see Key Metrics on page 167.
(2) Return on average tangible common
shareholders’ equity is a non-GAAP financial
measure. For more information and a corresponding
reconciliation to the most closely related
financial measures defined by accounting
principles generally accepted in the United
States of America (GAAP), see Non-GAAP
Reconciliations on page 85. Net income was $27.5
billion, or $3.19 per diluted share in 2022
compared to $32.0 billion, or $3.57 per diluted
share in 2021. The decrease in net income was
primarily due to an increase in provision for
credit losses, lower noninterest income and
higher noninterest expense, partially offset by
higher net interest income. For discussion and
analysis of our consolidated and business segment
results of operations for 2021 compared to 2020,
see Financial Highlights and Business Segment
Operations sections in the MD&A of the
Corporation’s 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Net Interest Income Net interest income increased
$9.5 billion to $52.5 billion in 2022 compared to
2021. Net interest yield on a fully taxable-
equivalent (FTE) basis increased 30 basis points
(bps) to 1.96 percent for 2022. The increase was
primarily driven by benefits from higher interest
rates, including lower premium amortization
expense, and loan growth, partially offset by a
lower amount of accelerated net capitalized loan
fees due to Paycheck Protection Program (PPP)
loan forgiveness, which primarily occurred in
2021. For more information on net interest yield
and the FTE basis, see Supplemental Financial
Data on page 32, and for
 Bank of America28 
more information on interest rate risk
management, see Interest Rate Risk Management for
the Banking Book on page 79. Noninterest Income
 Table 2 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Fees and commissions: Noninterest Income 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Card income $ 6,083 $ 6,218 
 Service charges 6,405 7,504 
 Investment and brokerage services 15,901 16,690 
 Investment banking fees 4,823 8,887 
 Total fees and commissions 33,212 39,299 
 Market making and similar activities 12,075 8,691 
 Other income -2,799 -1,811 
 Total noninterest income $ 42,488 $ 46,179 
Noninterest income decreased $3.7 billion to
$42.5 billion for 2022 compared to 2021. The
following highlights the significant changes. ●
Service charges decreased $1.1 billion primarily
driven by the impact of non-sufficient funds and
overdraft policy changes as well as lower
treasury service charges. ● Investment and
brokerage services decreased $789 million
primarily driven by lower market valuations and
declines in assets under management (AUM)
pricing, partially offset by positive AUM flows.
● Investment banking fees decreased $4.1 billion
primarily driven by a decline in demand resulting
in lower equity and debt issuance fees and lower
advisory fees. ● Market making and similar
activities increased $3.4 billion primarily
driven by improved performance across macro
products in fixed income, currencies and
commodities (FICC) and by the impact of higher
interest rates on client financing activities in
Equities. ● Other income decreased $988 million
primarily due to certain valuation adjustments.
Provision for Credit Losses The provision for
credit losses increased $7.1 billion to $2.5
billion for 2022 compared to 2021. The provision
for credit losses for 2022 was primarily driven
by loan growth and a dampened macroeconomic
outlook, partially offset by a reserve release
for reduced COVID-19 pandemic (the pandemic)
uncertainties. For the same period in the prior
year, the benefit in the provision for credit
losses was due to an improved macroeconomic
outlook. For more information on the provision
for credit losses, see Allowance for Credit
Losses on page 73. Noninterest Expense
 Table 3 
 (Dollars in millions) Noninterest Expense 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Compensation and benefits $ 36,447 $ 36,140 
 Occupancy and equipment 7,071 7,138 
 Information processing and 6,279 5,769 
 communications 
 Product delivery and transaction related 3,653 3,881 
 Marketing 1,825 1,939 
 Professional fees 2,142 1,775 
 Other general operating 4,021 3,089 
 Total noninterest expense $ 61,438 $ 59,731 
Noninterest expense increased $1.7 billion to
$61.4 billion in 2022 compared to 2021. The
increase was primarily due to higher investments
in people and technology, expense associated with
the settlement of the legacy monoline insurance
litigation and expense related to certain
regulatory matters, partially offset by lower net
COVID-19 related costs. Income Tax Expense
 Table 4 
 (Dollars in millions) Income Tax Expense 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Income before income taxes $ 30,969 $ 33,976 
 Income tax expense 3,441 1,998 
 Effective tax rate 11.1 % 5.9 % 
Income tax expense was $3.4 billion for 2022
compared to $2.0 billion in 2021 resulting in an
effective tax rate of 11.1 percent compared to
5.9 percent. The effective tax rates for 2022 and
2021 were primarily driven by our recurring
preference benefits. Also included in the
effective tax rate for 2021 was the impact of the
2021 U.K. tax law change further discussed in
this section. For more information on our
recurring tax preference benefits, see Note 19 –
Income Taxes to the Consolidated Financial
Statements. Absent environmental, social and
governance (ESG) tax credits and discrete tax
benefits, the effective tax rates would have been
approximately 25 percent. On August 16, 2022, the
U.S. enacted the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022,
which contained a number of tax-related
provisions, including the extension and expansion
of renewable energy tax credit programs. In
particular, partnerships are no longer solely
limited to an Investment Tax Credit, but can now
also elect a Production Tax Credit for solar
energy production facilities placed in service
after December 31, 2021. Other notable tax law
changes include the establishment of a new 15
percent AMT on adjusted financial statement
income for large corporations and a one percent
excise tax on net stock repurchases, both of
which were effective for tax years beginning on
or after January 1, 2023. The tax law changes for
the new AMT permit business credits, including
those from ESG investments in renewable energy
and affordable housing, to offset potential AMT
liability. The Corporation has assessed the
potential impacts of these two U.S. tax law
changes and does not expect the changes to have a
significant effect on its future effective tax
rate. On June 10, 2021, the U.K. enacted the 2021
Finance Act, which increased the U.K. corporation
income tax rate to 25 percent from 19 percent.
This change is effective April 1, 2023 and
unfavorably affects income tax expense on future
U.K. earnings. As a result, during the three
months ended June 30, 2021, the Corporation
recorded a positive income tax adjustment of
approximately $2.0 billion with a corresponding
write-up of U.K. net deferred tax assets, which
reflected a reversal of previously recorded
write-downs of net deferred tax assets for prior
changes in the U.K. corporation income tax rate.
 29Bank of America 
 Balance Sheet Overview 
 Table 5 
 (Dollars in Selected 
 millions) Balance December 31 
 Assets Sheet Data 2022 2021 $ Change % Change 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and cash $ 230,203 $ 348,221 $ -118,018 -34 % 
 equivalents 
 Federal funds 
 sold and 
 securities 
 borrowed or 267,574 250,720 16,854 7 
 purchased 
 under 
 agreements 
 to resell 
 Trading 296,108 247,080 49,028 20 
 account assets 
 Debt 862,819 982,627 -119,808 -12 
 securities 
 Loans and 1,045,747 979,124 66,623 7 
 leases 
 Allowance for 
 loan and lease -12,682 -12,387 -295 2 
 losses 
 All other 361,606 374,110 -12,504 -3 
 assets 
 Total assets $ 3,051,375 $ 3,169,495 $ -118,120 -4 
 Liabilities 
 Deposits $ 1,930,341 $ 2,064,446 $ -134,105 -6 
 Federal funds 
 purchased and 
 securities 
 loaned or sold 195,635 192,329 3,306 2 
 under 
 agreements to 
 repurchase 
 Trading 
 account 80,399 100,690 -20,291 -20 
 liabilities 
 Short-term 26,932 23,753 3,179 13 
 borrowings 
 Long-term debt 275,982 280,117 -4,135 -1 
 All other 268,889 238,094 30,795 13 
 liabilities 
 Total 2,778,178 2,899,429 -121,251 -4 
 liabilities 
 Shareholders’ 273,197 270,066 3,131 1 
 equity 
 Total 
 liabilities 
 and $ 3,051,375 $ 3,169,495 $ -118,120 -4 
 shareholders’ 
 equity 
 Assets 
At December 31, 2022, total assets were
approximately $3.1 trillion, down $118.1 billion
from December 31, 2021. The decrease in assets
was primarily due to lower debt securities and
cash and cash equivalents, partially offset by an
increase in loans and leases, trading account
assets and federal funds sold and securities
borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell.
 Cash and Cash Equivalents 
Cash and cash equivalents decreased $118.0
billion primarily driven by lower deposits and
continued loan growth .
Federal Funds Sold and Securities Borrowed or
Purchased Under Agreements to Resell
Federal funds transactions involve lending
reserve balances on a short-term basis.
Securities borrowed or purchased under agreements
to resell are collateralized lending transactions
utilized to accommodate customer transactions,
earn interest rate spreads and obtain securities
for settlement and for collateral. Federal funds
sold and securities borrowed or
purchased under agreements to resell increased
$16.9 billion primarily due to client activity
within Global Markets .
 Trading Account Assets 
Trading account assets consist primarily of long
positions in equity and fixed-income securities
including U.S. government and agency securities,
corporate securities and non-U.S. sovereign debt.
Trading account assets increased $49.0 billion
primarily due to client activity within Global
Markets .
 Debt Securities 
Debt securities primarily include U.S. Treasury
and agency securities, mortgage-backed securities
(MBS), principally agency MBS, non-U.S. bonds,
corporate bonds and municipal debt. We use the
debt securities portfolio primarily to manage
interest rate and liquidity risk and to leverage
market conditions that create economically
attractive returns on these investments. Debt
securities decreased $119.8 billion primarily
driven by lower deposits and continued loan
growth. For more information on debt securities,
see Note 4 – Securities to the Consolidated
Financial Statements.
 Bank of America30 
 Loans and Leases 
Loans and leases increased $66.6 billion
primarily driven by growth in commercial loans,
higher credit card spending and higher
residential mortgages due to lower paydowns and
continued originations. For more information on
the loan portfolio, see Credit Risk Management on
page 59.
 Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses 
The allowance for loan and lease losses increased
$295 million primarily driven by loan growth and
a dampened macroeconomic outlo ok, partially
offset by a reserve release for reduced pandemic
uncertainties. For more information, see
Allowance for Credit Losses on page 73.
 All Other Assets 
All other assets decreased $12.5 billion
primarily driven by a decline in margin loans and
loans held-for-sale (LHFS).
 Liabilities 
At December 31, 2022, total liabilities were
approximately $2.8 trillion, down $121.3 billion
from December 31, 2021, primarily due to lower
deposits.
 Deposits 
Deposits decreased $134.1 billion primarily due
to an increase in customer spending and a shift
to higher yielding accounts.
Federal Funds Purchased and Securities Loaned or
Sold Under Agreements to Repurchase
Federal funds transactions involve borrowing
reserve balances on a short-term basis.
Securities loaned or sold under agreements to
repurchase are collateralized borrowing
transactions utilized to accommodate customer
transactions, earn interest rate spreads and
finance assets on the balance sheet. Federal
funds purchased and securities loaned or sold
under agreements to repurchase increased $3.3
billion primarily driven by an increase in
repurchase agreements to support liquidity.
 Trading Account Liabilities 
Trading account liabilities consist primarily of
short positions in equity and fixed-income
securities including U.S. Treasury and agency
securities, non-U.S. sovereign debt and corporate
securities. Trading account liabilities decreased
$20.3 billion primarily due to lower levels of
short positions within Global Markets .
 Short-term Borrowings 
Short-term borrowings provide an additional
funding source and primarily consist of Federal
Home Loan Bank (FHLB) short-term borrowings,
notes payable and various other borrowings that
generally have maturities of one year or less.
Short-term borrowings increased $3.2 billion
primarily due to an increase in FHLB advances and
commercial paper to manage liquidity needs. For
more information on short-term borrowings, see
Note 10 – Securities Financing Agreements, Short-
term Borrowings, Collateral and Restricted Cash
to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Long-term Debt 
Long-term debt decreased $4.1 billion primarily
due to maturities, redemptions and valuation
adjustments, partially offset by issuances. For
more information on long-term debt, see Note 11 –
Long-term Debt to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
 All Other Liabilities 
All other liabilities increased $30.8 billion
primarily driven by Global Markets client
activity.
 Shareholders’ Equity 
Shareholders’ equity increased $3.1 billion
primarily due to net income and the issuance of
preferred stock, partially offset by market value
decreases on derivatives and debt securities, and
returns of capital to shareholders through common
and preferred stock dividends and common stock
repurchases.
 Cash Flows Overview 
The Corporation’s operating assets and
liabilities support our global markets and
lending activities. We believe that cash flows
from operations, available cash balances and our
ability to generate cash through short- and long-
term debt are sufficient to fund our operating
liquidity needs. Our investing activities
primarily include the debt securities portfolio
and loans and leases. Our financing activities
reflect cash flows primarily related to customer
deposits, securities financing agreements, long-
term debt and common and preferred stock. For
more information on liquidity, see Liquidity Risk
on page 54.
 31Bank of America 
 Supplemental Financial Data 
 Non-GAAP Financial Measures 
In this Form 10-K, we present certain non-GAAP
financial measures. Non-GAAP financial measures
exclude certain items or otherwise include
components that differ from the most directly
comparable measures calculated in accordance with
GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures are provided as
additional useful information to assess our
financial condition, results of operations
(including period-to-period operating
performance) or compliance with prospective
regulatory requirements. These non-GAAP financial
measures are not intended as a substitute for
GAAP financial measures and may not be defined or
calculated the same way as non-GAAP financial
measures used by other companies.
We view net interest income and related ratios
and analyses on an FTE basis, which when
presented on a consolidated basis are non-GAAP
financial measures. To derive the FTE basis, net
interest income is adjusted to reflect tax-exempt
income on an equivalent before-tax basis with a
corresponding increase in income tax expense. For
purposes of this calculation, we use the federal
statutory tax rate of 21 percent and a
representative state tax rate. Net interest
yield, which measures the basis points we earn
over the cost of funds, utilizes net interest
income on an FTE basis. We believe that
presentation of these items on an FTE basis
allows for comparison of amounts from both
taxable and tax-exempt sources and is consistent
with industry practices.
We may present certain key performance indicators
and ratios excluding certain items (e.g., debit
valuation adjustment (DVA) gains (losses)), which
result in non-GAAP financial measures. We believe
that the presentation of measures that exclude
these items is useful because such measures
provide additional information to assess the
underlying operational performance and trends of
our businesses and to allow better comparison of
period-to-period operating performance.
We also evaluate our business based on certain
ratios that utilize tangible equity, a non-GAAP
financial measure. Tangible equity represents
shareholders’ equity or common shareholders’
equity reduced by goodwill and intangible assets
(excluding mortgage servicing rights (MSRs)), net
of related deferred tax liabilities (“adjusted”
shareholders’ equity or common shareholders’
equity). These measures are used to evaluate our
use of equity. In addition, profitability,
relationship and investment models use both
return on average tangible
common shareholders’ equity and return on average
tangible shareholders’ equity as key measures to
support our overall growth objectives. These
ratios are:
● Return on average tangible common shareholders’
equity measures our net income applicable to
common shareholders as a percentage of adjusted
average common shareholders’ equity. The tangible
common equity ratio represents adjusted ending
common shareholders’ equity divided by total
tangible assets.
● Return on average tangible shareholders’ equity
measures our net income as a percentage of
adjusted average total shareholders’ equity. The
tangible equity ratio represents adjusted ending
shareholders’ equity divided by total tangible
assets.
● Tangible book value per common share represents
adjusted ending common shareholders’ equity
divided by ending common shares outstanding.
We believe ratios utilizing tangible equity
provide additional useful information because
they present measures of those assets that can
generate income. Tangible book value per common
share provides additional useful information
about the level of tangible assets in relation to
outstanding shares of common stock.
The aforementioned supplemental data and
performance measures are presented in Tables 6
and 7.
For more information on the reconciliation of
these non-GAAP financial measures to the
corresponding GAAP financial measures, see Non-
GAAP Reconciliations on page 85.
 Key Performance Indicators 
We present certain key financial and nonfinancial
performance indicators (key performance
indicators) that management uses when assessing
our consolidated and/or segment results. We
believe they are useful to investors because they
provide additional information about our
underlying operational performance and trends.
These key performance indicators (KPIs) may not
be defined or calculated in the same way as
similar KPIs used by other companies. For
information on how these metrics are defined, see
Key Metrics on page 167.
Our consolidated key performance indicators,
which include various equity and credit metrics,
are presented in Table 1 on page 28, Table 6 on
page 33 and Table 7 on page 34.
For information on key segment performance
metrics, see Business Segment Operations on page
37.
 Bank of America32 
 Table 6 
 (In millions, except 
 per share 
 information) Selected Annual 
 Income statement Financial Data 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net interest income $ 52,462 $ 42,934 $ 43,360 
 Noninterest income 42,488 46,179 42,168 
 Total revenue, net of 94,950 89,113 85,528 
 interest expense 
 Provision for credit 2,543 -4,594 11,320 
 losses 
 Noninterest expense 61,438 59,731 55,213 
 Income before income 30,969 33,976 18,995 
 taxes 
 Income tax expense 3,441 1,998 1,101 
 Net income 27,528 31,978 17,894 
 Net income applicable 
 to common 26,015 30,557 16,473 
 shareholders 
 Average common shares 
 issued and 8,113.7 8,493.3 8,753.2 
 outstanding 
 Average diluted 
 common shares issued 8,167.5 8,558.4 8,796.9 
 and 
 outstanding 
 Performance ratios 
 Return on average 0.88 % 1.05 % 0.67 % 
 assets(1) 
 Return on average 
 common shareholders’ 10.75 12.23 6.76 
 equity(1) 
 Return on average 
 tangible common 15.15 17.02 9.48 
 shareholders’ 
 equity(1, 2) 
 Return on average 
 shareholders’ 10.18 11.68 6.69 
 equity(1) 
 Return on average 
 tangible 13.76 15.71 9.07 
 shareholders’ 
 equity(1, 2) 
 Total ending equity 
 to total ending 8.95 8.52 9.68 
 assets 
 Common equity 8.02 7.74 8.81 
 ratio(1) 
 Total average equity 
 to total average 8.62 9.02 9.96 
 assets 
 Dividend payout(1) 26.77 21.51 38.18 
 Per common share data 
 Earnings $ 3.21 $ 3.60 $ 1.88 
 Diluted earnings 3.19 3.57 1.87 
 Dividends paid 0.86 0.78 0.72 
 Book value(1) 30.61 30.37 28.72 
 Tangible book 21.83 21.68 20.60 
 value(2) 
 Market capitalization $ 264,853 $ 359,383 $ 262,206 
 Average balance sheet 
 Total loans and $ 1,016,782 $ 920,401 $ 982,467 
 leases 
 Total assets 3,135,894 3,034,623 2,683,122 
 Total deposits 1,986,158 1,914,286 1,632,998 
 Long-term debt 246,479 237,703 220,440 
 Common shareholders’ 241,981 249,787 243,685 
 equity 
 Total shareholders’ 270,299 273,757 267,309 
 equity 
 Asset quality 
 Allowance for credit $ 14,222 $ 13,843 $ 20,680 
 losses(3) 
 Nonperforming loans, 
 leases and 3,978 4,697 5,116 
 foreclosed 
 properties(4) 
 Allowance for loan 
 and lease losses as a 
 percentage of total 1.22 % 1.28 % 2.04 % 
 loans and leases 
 outstanding(4) 
 Allowance for loan 
 and lease losses as a 
 percentage of total 333 271 380 
 nonperforming loans 
 and leases(4) 
 Net charge-offs $ 2,172 $ 2,243 $ 4,121 
 Net charge-offs as a 
 percentage of 0.21 % 0.25 % 0.42 % 
 average loans and 
 leases outstanding(4) 
 Capital ratios at 
 year end(5) 
 Common equity tier 1 11.2 % 10.6 % 11.9 % 
 capital 
 Tier 1 capital 13.0 12.1 13.5 
 Total capital 14.9 14.1 16.1 
 Tier 1 leverage 7.0 6.4 7.4 
 Supplementary 5.9 5.5 7.2 
 leverage ratio 
 Tangible equity(2) 6.8 6.4 7.4 
 Tangible common 5.9 5.7 6.5 
 equity(2) 
(1) For definition, see Key Metrics on page 167.
(2) Tangible equity ratios and tangible book value per share of common stock are non-GAAP financial
measures. For more information on these ratios and corresponding reconciliations to GAAP financial
measures, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 32 and Non-GAAP Reconciliations on page 85.
(3) Includes the allowance for loan and leases losses and the reserve for unfunded lending
commitments.
(4) Balances and ratios do not include loans accounted for under the fair value option. For
additional exclusions from nonperforming loans, leases and foreclosed properties, see Consumer
Portfolio Credit Risk Management – Nonperforming Consumer Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties
Activity on page 63 and corresponding Table 27 and Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management –
Nonperforming Commercial Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties Activity on page 68 and
corresponding Table 34.
(5) For more information, including which approach is used to assess capital adequacy, see Capital
Management on page 49.
 33Bank of America 
 … 
 … … … 
 … … … 
 … … T… … F… … T… … F… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 $ … $ 1… $ … $ 1… $ … $ 1… $ … $ 1… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 2… … 2… … 2… … 2… 
 … 8… … 30 … -… … -… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 8… … 7… … 8… … 9… 
 … 1… … 8… … 1… … 1… 
 … 7… … 7… … 7… … 8… 
 … 6… … 6… … 7… … 7… 
 … 8… … 8… … 8… … 8… 
 … 8… … 8… … 8… … 8… 
 … % 0… % … % 0… % … % 0… % … % 1… % 
 … 0… … 0… … 1… … 0… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 8… … 8… … 8… … 9… 
 … 7… … 7… … 8… … 8… 
 … 8… … 8… … 8… … 9… 
 … 2… … 2… … 2… … 2… 
 $ … $ 0… $ … $ 0… $ … $ 0… $ … $ 0… 
 … 0… … 0… … 0… … 0… 
 … 0… … 0… … 0… … 0… 
 … 2… … 2… … 3… … 2… 
 … 2… … 2… … 2… … 2… 
 $ … $ 2… $ … $ 3… $ … $ 3… $ … $ 3… 
 $ … $ 1… $ … $ 9… $ … $ 9… $ … $ 9… 
 … 3… … 3… … 3… … 2… 
 … 1… … 2… … 1… … 1… 
 … 2… … 2… … 2… … 2… 
 … 2… … 2… … 2… … 2… 
 … 2… … 2… … 2… … 2… 
 $ … $ 1… $ … $ 1… $ … $ 1… $ … $ 1… 
 … 4… … 4… … 4… … 5… 
 … % 1… % … % 1… % … % 1… % … % 1… % 
 … 3… … 2… … 2… … 3… 
 $ … $ 5… $ … $ 3… $ … $ 4… $ … $ 8… 
 … % 0… % … % 0… % … % 0… % … % 0… % 
 … % 1… % … % 1… % … % 1… % … % 1… % 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 6… … 6… … 6… … 7… 
 … 5… … 5… … 5… … 7… 
 … 6… … 6… … 6… … 7… 
 … 5… … 5… … 5… … 6… 
 … % 2… % … % 2… % … % 2… % … % 2… % 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 1… … 1… … 1… … 1… 
 … 6… … 6… … 6… … 6… 
(1) For definitions, see Key Metrics on page 167.
(2) Calculated as total net income for four consecutive quarters divided by annualized average assets
for four consecutive quarters.
(3) Tangible equity ratios and tangible book value per share of common stock are non-GAAP financial
measures. For more information on these ratios and corresponding reconciliations to GAAP financial
measures, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 32 and Non-GAAP Reconciliations on page 85.
(4) Includes the allowance for loan and lease losses and the reserve for unfunded lending
commitments.
(5) Balances and ratios do not include loans accounted for under the fair value option. For
additional exclusions from nonperforming loans, leases and foreclosed properties, see Consumer
Portfolio Credit Risk Management – Nonperforming Consumer Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties
Activity on page 64 and corresponding Table 27 and Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management –
Nonperforming Commercial Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties Activity on page 68 and
corresponding Table 34.
(6) For more information, including which approach is used to assess capital adequacy, see Capital
Management on page 49.
 Bank of America34 
 Av… 
 T… Ba… 
 8 and 
 (… In… 
 in Ra… 
 m… - Av… Av… Av… 
 E… FTE Ba… Yi… Ba… Y… Ba… Yi… 
 a… Ba… 20… In… Ra… 20… In… R… 20… I… Ra… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 I… 
 d… 
 w… 
 t… 
 F… 
 R… 
 n… $ 19… $ 2,… 1.… % $ 25… $ 172 0… % $ 25… $ 3… 0.… % 
 U… 
 c… 
 b… 
 a… 
 o… 
 b… 
 T… 
 d… 
 p… 
 a… 9,… 132 1.… 7,… 15 0… 8,… 29 0.… 
 o… 
 s… 
 i… 
 F… 
 f… 
 s… 
 a… 
 s… 
 b… 29… 4,… 1.… 26… -90 -… 30… 9… 0.… 
 or 
 p… 
 u… 
 a… 
 to 
 r… 
 T… 
 a… 15… 5,… 3.… 14… 3,… 2… 14… 4… 2.… 
 a… 
 D… 92… 17… 1.… 90… 12… 1… 53… 9… 1.… 
 s… 
 L… 
 a… 
 l… 
 R… 22… 6,… 2.… 21… 5,… 2… 23… 7… 3.… 
 m… 
 H… 27… 959 3.… 31… 1,… 3… 38… 1… 3.… 
 e… 
 C… 83… 8,… 10… 75… 7,… 1… 85… 8… 10… 
 c… 
 D… 
 a… 10… 3,… 3.… 96… 2,… 2… 89… 2… 2.… 
 o… 
 c… 
 T… 44… 19… 4.… 41… 17… 4… 44… 1… 4.… 
 c… 
 U… 36… 12… 3.… 32… 8,… 2… 34… 9… 2.… 
 c… 
 N… 12… 3,… 2.… 99… 1,… 1… 10… 2… 2.… 
 c… 
 C… 
 r… 65… 2,… 3.… 60… 1,… 2… 63… 1… 2.… 
 e… 
 C… 
 l… 13… 473 3.… 15… 462 2… 18… 5… 3.… 
 f… 
 T… 57… 19… 3.… 50… 12… 2… 53… 1… 2.… 
 c… 
 T… 
 l… 1,… 38… 3.… 92… 29… 3… 98… 3… 3.… 
 a… 
 l… 
 O… 
 e… 10… 4,… 4.… 11… 2,… 2… 83… 2… 3.… 
 a… 
 T… 
 e… 2,… 73… 2.… 2,… 48… 1… 2,… 5… 2.… 
 a… 
 C… 
 a… 
 d… 28… 31… 31… 
 f… 
 b… 
 O… 
 a… 
 l… 
 a… 
 f… 40… 38… 33… 
 l… 
 a… 
 l… 
 l… 
 T… $ 3,… $ 3,… $ 2,… 
 a… 
 I… 
 l… 
 U… 
 i… 
 d… 
 D… 
 a… 
 m… $ 98… $ 3,… 0.… % $ 92… $ 314 0… % $ 82… $ 9… 0.… % 
 m… 
 d… 
 T… 
 a… 16… 818 0.… 16… 170 0… 17… 7… 0.… 
 s… 
 d… 
 T… 
 U… 1,… 3,… 0.… 1,… 484 0… 1,… 1… 0.… 
 i… 
 d… 
 N… 
 i… 80… 755 0.… 82… 53 0… 77… 2… 0.… 
 d… 
 T… 
 i… 1,… 4,… 0.… 1,… 537 0… 1,… 1… 0.… 
 d… 
 F… 
 f… 
 p… 
 a… 
 s… 
 l… 21… 4,… 1.… 21… 461 0… 18… 1… 0.… 
 or 
 s… 
 u… 
 a… 
 to 
 r… 
 S… 
 b… 
 a… 13… 2,… 2.… 10… -8… -… 10… -… -0… 
 o… 
 i… 
 l… 
 T… 
 a… 51… 1,… 3.… 54… 1,… 2… 41… 9… 2.… 
 l… 
 L… 24… 6,… 2.… 23… 3,… 1… 22… 4… 1.… 
 d… 
 T… 
 i… 1,… 20… 1.… 1,… 4,… 0… 1,… 8… 0.… 
 l… 
 N… 
 s… 
 N… 75… 74… 55… 
 d… 
 O… 23… 23… 22… 
 l… 
 S… 27… 27… 26… 
 e… 
 T… 
 l… 
 a… $ 3,… $ 3,… $ 2,… 
 s… 
 e… 
 N… 
 i… 1.… % 1… % 1.… % 
 s… 
 I… 
 of 0.… 0… 0.… 
 n… 
 s… 
 N… 
 i… 
 i… $ 52… 1.… % $ 43… 1… % $ 4… 1.… % 
 on 
 e… 
 a… 
(1) Includes the impact of interest rate risk management contracts. For more information, see
Interest Rate Risk Management for the Banking Book on page 79.
(2) For more information on negative interest, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(3) Nonperforming loans are included in the respective average loan balances. Income on these
nonperforming loans is generally recognized on a cost recovery basis.
(4) Includes U.S. commercial real estate loans of $61.1 billion, $56.5 billion and $59.8 billion, and
non-U.S. commercial real estate loans of $4.3 billion, $3.8 billion and $3.6 billion for 2022, 2021
and 2020, respectively.
(5) Includes $30.7 billion, $30.4 billion and $34.3 billion of structured notes and liabilities for
2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(6) Net interest income includes FTE adjustments of $438 million, $427 million and $499 million for
2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
 35Bank of America 
 Ta… 
 9 Anal… Due 
 (D… of to Due 
 in Chan… Cha… to 
 mi… in in(… Cha… 
 In… Net Vol… in(… 
 (d… Inte… From From 
 in Inco… 2021 2020 
 in… - FTE to Net to Net 
 in… Basis 2022 Rate Cha… Volu… 2021 Rate Cha… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 In… 
 de… 
 wi… 
 the 
 Fe… 
 Re… $ -35 $ 2,454 $ 2,4… $ -1 $ -186 $ -187 
 no… 
 ce… 
 ba… 
 and 
 ot… 
 ba… 
 Ti… 
 de… 
 pl… 
 and 2 115 117 -4 -10 -14 
 ot… 
 sh… 
 in… 
 Fe… 
 fu… 
 so… 
 and 
 se… 
 bo… 2 4,648 4,6… -128 -865 -993 
 or 
 pu… 
 un… 
 ag… 
 to 
 re… 
 Tr… 
 ac… 256 1,507 1,7… — -362 -362 
 as… 
 De… 301 4,473 4,7… 7,0… -4,4… 2,5… 
 se… 
 Lo… 
 and 
 le… 
 Re… 287 93 380 -612 -731 -1,… 
 mo… 
 Ho… -125 18 -107 -245 21 -224 
 eq… 
 Cr… 841 -205 636 -994 7 -987 
 ca… 
 Di… 
 and 250 791 1,0… 185 -454 -269 
 ot… 
 co… 
 To… 1,9… -2,… 
 co… 
 U.… 1,1… 2,532 3,6… -553 -553 -1,… 
 co… 
 No… 452 1,498 1,9… -147 -309 -456 
 co… 
 Co… 
 re… 126 973 1,0… -89 -205 -294 
 es… 
 Co… 
 le… -59 70 11 -80 -17 -97 
 fi… 
 To… 6,7… -1,… 
 co… 
 To… 
 lo… 8,6… -4,… 
 and 
 le… 
 Ot… 
 ea… -144 2,670 2,5… 904 -1,1… -218 
 as… 
 Net 
 in… 
 (d… $ 24,… $ -3,… 
 in 
 in… 
 in… 
 In… 
 (d… 
 in 
 in… 
 ex… 
 U.… 
 in… 
 de… 
 De… 
 and 
 mo… $ -18 $ 2,849 $ 2,8… $ 134 $ -797 $ -663 
 ma… 
 de… 
 Ti… 
 and 13 635 648 -39 -525 -564 
 sa… 
 de… 
 To… 
 U.… 3,4… -1,… 
 in… 
 de… 
 No… 
 in… -4 706 702 16 -195 -179 
 de… 
 To… 
 in… 4,1… -1,… 
 de… 
 Fe… 
 fu… 
 pu… 
 and 
 se… 
 lo… 11 3,645 3,6… 142 -910 -768 
 or 
 so… 
 un… 
 ag… 
 to 
 re… 
 Sh… 
 bo… 
 and -238 3,918 3,6… -4 -573 -577 
 ot… 
 in… 
 li… 
 Tr… 
 ac… -63 473 410 298 -144 154 
 li… 
 Lo… 118 3,320 3,4… 338 -1,2… -890 
 de… 
 Net 
 in… 
 (d… 15,… -3,… 
 in 
 in… 
 ex… 
 Net 
 in… 
 (d… 
 in $ 9,5… $ -498 
 net 
 in… 
 in… 
(1) The changes for each category of interest income and expense are divided between the portion of
change attributable to the variance in volume and the portion of change attributable to the variance
in rate for that category. The unallocated change in rate or volume variance is allocated between the
rate and volume variances.
(2) Includes an increase (decrease) in FTE basis adjustments of $11 million from 2021 to 2022 and
$(72) million from 2020 to 2021.
 Bank of America36 
 Business Segment Operations 
 Segment Description and Basis of Presentation 
We report our results of operations through the
following four business segments: Consumer
Banking, GWIM, Global Banking and Global Markets
, with the remaining operations recorded in All
Other . We manage our segments and report their
results on an FTE basis. The primary activities,
products and businesses of the business segments
and All Other are shown below.
We periodically review capital allocated to our
businesses and allocate capital annually during
the strategic and capital planning processes. We
utilize a methodology that considers the effect
of regulatory capital requirements in addition to
internal risk-based capital models. Our internal
risk-based capital models use a risk-adjusted
methodology incorporating each segment’s credit,
market, interest rate, business and operational
risk components. For more information on the
nature of these risks, see Managing Risk on page
46. The capital allocated to the business
segments is referred to as allocated capital.
Allocated equity in the reporting units is
comprised of allocated capital plus capital for
the portion of goodwill and intangibles
specifically assigned to the reporting unit. For
more information, including the definition of a
reporting unit, see Note 7 – Goodwill and
Intangible Assets to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
For more information on our presentation of
financial information on an FTE basis, see
Supplemental Financial Data on page 32, and for
reconciliations to consolidated total revenue,
net income and year-end total assets, see Note 23
– Business Segment Information to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Key Performance Indicators 
We present certain key financial and nonfinancial
performance indicators that management uses when
evaluating segment results. We believe they are
useful to investors because they provide
additional information about our segments’
operational performance, customer trends and
business growth.
 37Bank of America 
 Consumer Banking 
 Tot… 
 (D… Con… Con… 
 in Dep… Len… Ban… % 
 mi… 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 Cha… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net 
 in… $ 19,… $ 14,3… $ 10,… $ 10,5… $ 30,… $ 24,9… 21 % 
 in… 
 No… 
 in… 
 Ca… -36 -28 5,2… 5,200 5,1… 5,172 — 
 in… 
 Se… 2,7… 3,535 3 3 2,7… 3,538 -24 
 ch… 
 All 
 ot… 478 223 237 143 715 366 95 
 in… 
 To… 
 no… 3,1… 3,730 5,4… 5,346 8,5… 9,076 -5 
 in… 
 To… 
 re… 
 net 22,… 18,0… 16,… 15,9… 38,… 34,0… 14 
 of 
 in… 
 ex… 
 Pr… 
 for 564 240 1,4… -1,2… 1,9… -1,0… n/m 
 cr… 
 lo… 
 No… 12,… 11,6… 7,6… 7,640 20,… 19,2… 4 
 ex… 
 In… 
 be… 9,4… 6,198 7,1… 9,552 16,… 15,7… 5 
 in… 
 ta… 
 In… 
 tax 2,3… 1,519 1,7… 2,340 4,0… 3,859 5 
 ex… 
 Net $ 7,1… $ 4,679 $ 5,3… $ 7,212 $ 12,… $ 11,8… 5 
 in… 
 Ef… 
 tax 24.5 % 24.5 % 
 ra… 
 Net 
 in… 1.82 % 1.48 % 3.72 % 3.77 % 2.73 % 2.45 % 
 yi… 
 Re… 
 on 
 av… 55 39 20 27 31 31 
 al… 
 ca… 
 Ef… 55.… 64.41 47.… 48.00 51.… 56.73 
 ra… 
 Ba… 
 Sh… 
 Av… 
 To… 
 lo… $ 4,1… $ 4,431 $ 288… $ 279,… $ 292… $ 284,… 3 % 
 and 
 le… 
 To… 
 ea… 1,0… 973,… 289… 280,… 1,0… 1,01… 8 
 as… 
 To… 1,0… 1,00… 296… 285,… 1,1… 1,05… 8 
 as… 
 To… 1,0… 976,… 5,7… 6,934 1,0… 983,… 8 
 de… 
 Al… 13,… 12,0… 27,… 26,5… 40,… 38,5… 4 
 ca… 
 Ye… 
 End 
 To… 
 lo… $ 4,1… $ 4,206 $ 300… $ 282,… $ 304… $ 286,… 6 % 
 and 
 le… 
 To… 
 ea… 1,0… 1,04… 300… 282,… 1,0… 1,09… — 
 as… 
 To… 1,0… 1,08… 308… 289,… 1,1… 1,13… — 
 as… 
 To… 1,0… 1,04… 5,6… 5,910 1,0… 1,05… -1 
 de… 
(1) Estimated at the segment level only.
(2) In segments and businesses where the total of
liabilities and equity exceeds assets, we
allocate assets from All Other to match the
segments’ and businesses’ liabilities and
allocated shareholders’ equity. As a result,
total earning assets and total assets of the
businesses may not equal total Consumer Banking .
n/m = not meaningful
Consumer Banking, comprised of Deposits and
Consumer Lending, offers a diversified range of
credit, banking and investment products and
services to consumers and small businesses.
Deposits and Consumer Lending include the net
impact of migrating customers and their related
deposit, brokerage asset and loan balances
between Deposits, Consumer Lending and GWIM , as
well as other client-managed businesses. Our
customers and clients have access to a coast-to-
coast network including financial centers in 38
states and the District of Columbia. As of
December 31, 2022, our network includes
approximately 3,900 financial centers,
approximately 16,000 ATMs, nationwide call
centers and leading digital banking platforms
with more than 44 million active users, including
approximately 35 million active mobile users.
 Consumer Banking Results 
Net income for Consumer Banking increased $625
million to $12.5 billion due to higher revenue,
partially offset by an increase in provision for
credit losses and higher noninterest expense. Net
interest income increased $5.1 billion to $30.0
billion primarily driven by higher interest rates
and the benefits of higher deposit and loan
balances, partially offset by a lower amount of
accelerated net capitalized loan fees due to PPP
loan forgiveness, which primarily occurred in
2021. Noninterest income decreased $486 million
to $8.6 billion primarily driven by the impact of
non-sufficient funds and overdraft policy
changes, partially offset by a gain on the sale
of an affinity card loan portfolio in the fourth
quarter of 2022.
The provision for credit losses increased $3.0
billion to $2.0 billion primarily driven by loan
growth and a dampened
macroeconomic outlook in 2022, compared to a
benefit in 2021 due to an improved macroeconomic
outlook. Noninterest expense increased $787
million to $20.1 billion primarily driven by
continued investments for business growth,
including marketing, technology and people, as
well as increased client activity, partially
offset by an impairment charge for real estate
rationalization and the contribution to the Bank
of America Foundation in the prior year.
The return on average allocated capital was 31
percent, unchanged from 2021. For more
information on capital allocated to the business
segments, see Business Segment Operations on page
37.
 Deposits 
Deposits includes the results of consumer deposit
activities that consist of a comprehensive range
of products provided to consumers and small
businesses. Our deposit products include
noninterest- and interest-bearing checking
accounts, money market savings accounts,
traditional savings accounts, CDs and IRAs, as
well as investment accounts and products. Net
interest income is allocated to deposit products
using our funds transfer pricing process that
matches assets and liabilities with similar
interest rate sensitivity and maturity
characteristics. Deposits generates fees such as
account service fees and ATM fees, as well as
investment and brokerage fees from Consumer
Investment accounts. Consumer Investments serves
investment client relationships through the
Merrill Edge integrated investing and banking
service platform, providing investment advice and
guidance, client brokerage asset services, self-
directed online investing and key banking
capabilities including access to the
 Bank of America38 
Corporation’s network of financial centers and
ATMs. Net income for Deposits increased $2.4
billion to $7.1 billion due to higher revenue,
partially offset by higher noninterest expense
and an increase in provision for credit losses.
Net interest income increased $4.9 billion to
$19.3 billion primarily due to higher interest
rates and the benefit of higher deposit balances.
Noninterest income decreased $585 million to $3.1
billion primarily driven by the impact of non-
sufficient funds and overdraft policy changes,
partially offset by higher other service charges
due to increased client activity. The provision
for credit losses increased $324 million to $564
million primarily driven by increased overdraft
losses due to higher payment activity related to
checking accounts. The benefit in the prior year
was due to an improved macroeconomic outlook.
Noninterest expense increased $743 million to
$12.4 billion primarily driven by continued
investments for business growth and increased
client activity, partially offset by an
impairment charge for real estate rationalization
in the prior year. Average deposits increased
$80.7 billion to $1.1 trillion primarily due to
net inflows of $46.8 billion in checking and
$34.9 billion in money market savings largely
driven by strong organic growth. The table below
provides key performance indicators for Deposits.
Management uses these metrics, and we believe
they are useful to investors because they provide
additional information to evaluate our deposit
profitability and digital/mobile trends.
 Key Statistics – Deposits 
 Total deposit spreads (excludes noninterest costs)(1) 
 Year End 2022 1.86% 2021 1.69% 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer investment assets (in $ 319,648 $ 368,831 
 millions)(2) 
 Active digital banking users (in 44,054 41,365 
 thousands)(3) 
 Active mobile banking users (in 35,452 32,980 
 thousands)(4) 
 Financial centers 3,913 4,173 
 ATMs 15,528 16,209 
(1) Includes deposits held in Consumer Lending.
(2) Includes client brokerage assets, deposit
sweep balances and AUM in Consumer Banking . (3)
Represents mobile and/or online active users over
the past 90 days. (4) Represents mobile active
users over the past 90 days. Consumer investment
assets decreased $49.2 billion to $319.6 billion
driven by market performance, partially offset by
client flows. Active mobile banking users
increased approximately two million, reflecting
continuing changes in our clients’ banking
preferences. We had a net decrease of 260
financial centers and 681 ATMs as we continue to
optimize our consumer banking network. Consumer
Lending Consumer Lending offers products to
consumers and small businesses across the U.S.
The products offered include debit and credit
cards, residential mortgages and home equity
loans, and direct and indirect loans such as
automotive, recreational vehicle and consumer
personal loans. In addition to earning net
interest spread revenue on its lending
activities, Consumer Lending generates
interchange revenue from debit and credit card
transactions, late fees, cash advance fees,
annual credit card fees, mortgage banking fee
income and other miscellaneous fees. Consumer
Lending products are available to our customers
through our retail network, direct telephone, and
online and mobile channels. Consumer Lending
results also include the impact of servicing
residential mortgages and home
equity loans, including loans held on the balance
sheet of Consumer Lending and loans serviced for
others. Net income for Consumer Lending decreased
$1.8 billion to $5.4 billion primarily due to an
increase in provision for credit losses. Net
interest income increased $220 million to $10.8
billion primarily due to higher interest rates
and loan balances, largely offset by a lower
amount of accelerated net capitalized loan fees
due to PPP loan forgiveness, which primarily
occurred in 2021. Noninterest income increased
$99 million to $5.4 billion primarily driven by a
gain on the sale of an affinity card loan
portfolio in the fourth quarter of 2022. The
provision for credit losses increased $2.7
billion to $1.4 billion primarily driven by loan
growth and a dampened macroeconomic environment
in 2022 compared to a benefit in 2021 due to an
improved macroeconomic outlook. Noninterest
expense increased $44 million to $7.7 billion
largely driven by continued investments for
business growth and increased client activity,
partially offset by the contribution to the Bank
of America Foundation in the prior year. Average
loans increased $8.6 billion to $288.2 billion
primarily driven by an increase in credit card
loans and first mortgage loans, partially offset
by a decline in PPP loans. The table below
provides key performance indicators for Consumer
Lending. Management uses these metrics, and we
believe they are useful to investors because they
provide additional information about loan growth
and profitability.
 Key Statistics – Consumer Lending 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 
 Total credit card(1) 
 Gross interest yield(2) 10.42 % 10.17 % 
 Risk-adjusted margin(3) 10.06 10.17 
 New accounts (in thousands) 4,397 3,594 
 Purchase volumes $ 356,588 $ 311,571 
 Debit card purchase volumes $ 503,583 $ 473,770 
(1) Includes GWIM's credit card portfolio. (2)
Calculated as the effective annual percentage
rate divided by average loans. (3) Calculated as
the difference between total revenue, net of
interest expense, and net credit losses divided
by average loans. During 2022, the total risk-
adjusted margin decreased 11 bps primarily driven
by lower net interest margin and lower fee
income, partially offset by lower net credit
losses. Total credit card purchase volumes
increased $45.0 billion to $356.6 billion and
debit card purchase volumes increased $29.8
billion to $503.6 billion, reflecting higher
levels of consumer spending.
 Key Statistics – Loan Production(1) 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Consumer Banking: 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 First mortgage $ 20,981 $ 45,976 
 Home equity 7,988 3,996 
 Total(2): 
 First mortgage $ 44,765 $ 79,692 
 Home equity 9,591 4,895 
(1) The loan production amounts represent the
unpaid principal balance of loans and, in the
case of home equity, the principal amount of the
total line of credit. (2) In addition to loan
production in Consumer Banking , there is also
first mortgage and home equity loan production in
GWIM. First mortgage loan originations for
Consumer Banking and the total Corporation
decreased $25.0 billion and $34.9 billion during
2022 primarily driven by changes in demand. Home
equity production in Consumer Banking and the
total Corporation increased $4.0 billion and $4.7
billion during 2022 primarily driven by higher
demand.
 39Bank of America 
 Global Wealth & Investment Management 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 % Change 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net interest income $ 7,466 $ 5,664 32 % 
 Noninterest income: 
 Investment and brokerage services 13,561 14,312 -5 
 All other income 721 772 -7 
 Total noninterest income 14,282 15,084 -5 
 Total revenue, net of interest expense 21,748 20,748 5 
 Provision for credit losses 66 -241 -127 
 Noninterest expense 15,490 15,258 2 
 Income before income taxes 6,192 5,731 8 
 Income tax expense 1,517 1,404 8 
 Net income $ 4,675 $ 4,327 8 
 Effective tax rate 24.5 % 24.5 % 
 Net interest yield 1.95 1.51 
 Return on average allocated capital 27 26 
 Efficiency ratio 71.23 73.54 
 Balance Sheet 
 Average 
 Total loans and leases $ 219,810 $ 196,899 12 % 
 Total earning assets 383,352 374,273 2 
 Total assets 396,167 386,918 2 
 Total deposits 351,329 340,124 3 
 Allocated capital 17,500 16,500 6 
 Year end 
 Total loans and leases $ 223,910 $ 208,971 7 
 Total earning assets 355,461 425,112 -16 
 Total assets 368,893 438,275 -16 
 Total deposits 323,899 390,143 -17 
GWIM consists of two primary businesses: Merrill
Wealth Management and Bank of America Private
Bank.
Merrill Wealth Management’s advisory business
provides a high-touch client experience through a
network of financial advisors focused on clients
with over $250,000 in total investable assets.
Merrill Wealth Management provides tailored
solutions to meet clients’ needs through a full
set of investment management, brokerage, banking
and retirement products.
Bank of America Private Bank, together with
Merrill Wealth Management’s Private Wealth
Management business, provides comprehensive
wealth management solutions targeted to high net
worth and ultra high net worth clients, as well
as customized solutions to meet clients’ wealth
structuring, investment management, trust and
banking needs, including specialty asset
management services.
Net income for GWIM increased $348 million to
$4.7 billion driven by higher revenue, partially
offset by higher provision for credit losses and
noninterest expense. The operating margin
remained unchanged at 28 percent compared to a
year ago.
Net interest income increased $1.8 billion to
$7.5 billion due to the impacts of higher
interest rates, as well as the benefits of higher
loan and deposit balances.
Noninterest income, which primarily includes
investment and brokerage services income,
decreased $802 million to $14.3 billion primarily
due to the impacts of lower market valuations and
declines in AUM pricing, partially offset by the
impact of positive AUM flows.
The provision for credit losses increased $307
million primarily due to a dampened macroeconomic
outlook and loan growth in the current-year
period, compared to a benefit in the prior-year
period due to an improved macroeconomic outlook.
Noninterest expense increased $232 million to
$15.5 billion primarily due to continued
investments in the business, partially offset by
lower revenue-related incentives.
The return on average allocated capital was 27
percent, up from 26 percent, due to higher net
income, partially offset by an increase in
allocated capital. For more information on
capital allocated to the business segments, see
Business Segment Operations on page 37.
Average loans increased $22.9 billion to $219.8
billion primarily due to residential mortgage,
securities-based lending and custom lending.
Average deposits increased $11.2 billion to
$351.3 billion primarily driven by inflows from
new and existing accounts.
Merrill Wealth Management revenue of $18.1
billion increased four percent primarily driven
by the benefits of higher interest rates, as well
as higher deposit and loan balances, partially
offset by the impact of lower market valuations
and declines in AUM pricing.
Bank of America Private Bank revenue of $3.6
billion increased nine percent primarily driven
by the benefits of higher interest rates, as well
as higher deposit and loan balances, partially
offset by the impact of lower market valuations.
 Bank of America40 
 Key Indicators and Metrics 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Revenue by Business 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Merrill Wealth Management $ 18,135 $ 17,448 
 Bank of America Private Bank 3,613 3,300 
 Total revenue, net of interest expense $ 21,748 $ 20,748 
 Client Balances by Business, at year end 
 Merrill Wealth Management $ 2,822,910 $ 3,214,881 
 Bank of America Private Bank 563,931 625,453 
 Total client balances $ 3,386,841 $ 3,840,334 
 Client Balances by Type, at year end 
 Assets under management $ 1,401,474 $ 1,638,782 
 Brokerage and other assets 1,482,025 1,655,021 
 Deposits 323,899 390,143 
 Loans and leases(1) 226,973 212,251 
 Less: Managed deposits in assets under -47,530 -55,863 
 management 
 Total client balances $ 3,386,841 $ 3,840,334 
 Assets Under Management Rollforward 
 Assets under management, beginning of $ 1,638,782 $ 1,408,465 
 year 
 Net client flows 20,785 66,250 
 Market valuation/other -258,093 164,067 
 Total assets under management, end of $ 1,401,474 $ 1,638,782 
 year 
 Total wealth advisors, at year end(2) 19,273 18,846 
(1) Includes margin receivables which are
classified in customer and other receivables on
the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(2) Includes advisors across all wealth
management businesses in GWIM and Consumer
Banking.
Client Balances
Client balances managed under advisory and/or
discretion of GWIM are AUM and are typically held
in diversified portfolios. Fees earned on AUM are
calculated as a percentage of clients’ AUM
balances. The asset management fees charged to
clients per year depend on various factors but
are commonly driven by the breadth of the
client’s relationship. The net client AUM flows
represent the net change in clients’ AUM balances
over a
specified period of time, excluding market
appreciation/depreciation and other adjustments.
Client balances decreased $453.5 billion, or 12
percent, to $3.4 trillion at December 31, 2022
compared to December 31, 2021. The decrease in
client balances was primarily due to the impact
of lower market valuations, partially offset by
positive client flows.
 41Bank of America 
Global Banking
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 % Change 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net interest income $ 12,184 $ 8,511 43 % 
 Noninterest income: 
 Service charges 3,293 3,523 -7 
 Investment banking fees 3,004 5,107 -41 
 All other income 3,748 3,734 — 
 Total noninterest income 10,045 12,364 -19 
 Total revenue, net of interest expense 22,229 20,875 6 
 Provision for credit losses 641 -3,201 -120 
 Noninterest expense 10,966 10,632 3 
 Income before income taxes 10,622 13,444 -21 
 Income tax expense 2,815 3,630 -22 
 Net income $ 7,807 $ 9,814 -20 
 Effective tax rate 26.5 % 27.0 % 
 Net interest yield 2.26 1.55 
 Return on average allocated capital 18 23 
 Efficiency ratio 49.34 50.93 
 Balance Sheet 
 Average 
 Total loans and leases $ 375,271 $ 329,655 14 % 
 Total earning assets 539,032 549,749 -2 
 Total assets 603,273 611,304 -1 
 Total deposits 511,804 522,790 -2 
 Allocated capital 44,500 42,500 5 
 Year end 
 Total loans and leases $ 379,107 $ 352,933 7 % 
 Total earning assets 522,539 574,583 -9 
 Total assets 588,466 638,131 -8 
 Total deposits 498,661 551,752 -10 
Global Banking , which includes Global Corporate
Banking, Global Commercial Banking, Business
Banking and Global Investment Banking, provides a
wide range of lending-related products and
services, integrated working capital management
and treasury solutions, and underwriting and
advisory services through our network of offices
and client relationship teams. Our lending
products and services include commercial loans,
leases, commitment facilities, trade finance,
commercial real estate lending and asset-based
lending. Our treasury solutions business includes
treasury management, foreign exchange, short-term
investing options and merchant services. We also
provide investment banking services to our
clients such as debt and equity underwriting and
distribution, and merger-related and other
advisory services. Underwriting debt and equity
issuances, fixed-income and equity research, and
certain market-based activities are executed
through our global broker-dealer affiliates,
which are our primary dealers in several
countries. Within Global Banking , Global
Corporate Banking clients generally include large
global corporations, financial institutions and
leasing clients. Global Commercial Banking
clients generally include middle-market
companies, commercial real estate firms and not-
for-profit companies. Business Banking clients
include mid-sized U.S.-based businesses requiring
customized and integrated financial advice and
solutions.
Net income for Global Banking decreased $2.0
billion to $7.8 billion driven by higher
provision for credit losses and noninterest
expense, partially offset by higher revenue.
Net interest income increased $3.7 billion to
$12.2 billion primarily due to the benefits of
higher interest rates and loan balances.
Noninterest income decreased $2.3 billion to
$10.0 billion driven by lower investment banking
fees and valuation adjustments on leveraged
loans, as well as lower treasury service charges.
The provision for credit losses increased $3.8
billion to $641 million primarily driven by a
dampened macroeconomic outlook and loan growth,
compared to a benefit in the prior year due to an
improved macroeconomic outlook.
Noninterest expense increased $334 million to
$11.0 billion, primarily due to continued
investments in the business, including strategic
hiring and technology.
The return on average allocated capital was 18
percent, down from 23 percent, due to lower net
income and higher allocated capital. For more
information on capital allocated to the business
segments, see Business Segment Operations on page
37.
Global Corporate, Global Commercial and Business
Banking
Global Corporate, Global Commercial and Business
Banking each include Business Lending and Global
Transaction Services activities. Business Lending
includes various lending-related products and
services, and related hedging activities,
including commercial loans, leases, commitment
facilities, trade finance, real estate lending
and asset-based lending. Global Transaction
Services includes deposits, treasury management,
credit card, foreign exchange and short-term
investment products.
The following table and discussion present a
summary of the results, which exclude certain
investment banking and PPP activities in Global
Banking .
 Bank of America42 
 Glo… 
 Cor… 
 Glo… 
 Com… 
 and 
 Bus… 
 Ban… 
 (Do… Glob… Glo… 
 in Corp… Com… Bus… 
 mil… Bank… Ban… Ban… Tot… 
 Rev… 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Bus… $ 4,325 $ 3,723 $ 4,3… $ 3,675 $ 251 $ 224 $ 8,8… $ 7,622 
 Len… 
 Glo… 
 Tra… 5,002 3,235 4,1… 3,341 1,2… 941 10,… 7,517 
 Ser… 
 Tot… 
 rev… 
 net $ 9,327 $ 6,958 $ 8,4… $ 7,016 $ 1,4… $ 1,165 $ 19,… $ 15,1… 
 of 
 int… 
 exp… 
 Bal… 
 She… 
 Ave… 
 Tot… 
 loa… $ 174,… $ 150,… $ 187… $ 161,… $ 12,… $ 12,7… $ 374… $ 323,… 
 and 
 lea… 
 Tot… 250,… 252,… 204… 213,… 56,… 56,3… 511… 522,… 
 dep… 
 Year 
 end 
 Tot… 
 loa… $ 174,… $ 163,… $ 191… $ 175,… $ 12,… $ 12,8… $ 378… $ 351,… 
 and 
 lea… 
 Tot… 262,… 260,… 186… 233,… 50,… 57,8… 498… 551,… 
 dep… 
(1) Prior periods have been revised to conform to current-period presentation.
Business Lending revenue increased $1.3 billion
in 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to the
benefits of higher interest rates and loan
balances. Global Transaction Services revenue
increased $2.9 billion in 2022 compared to 2021
driven by higher interest rates, partially offset
by lower treasury service charges. Average loans
and leases increased 16 percent in 2022 compared
to 2021 due to higher client demand. Average
deposits decreased two percent due to declines in
domestic balances. Global Investment Banking
Client teams and product specialists underwrite
and distribute debt, equity and loan products,
and provide advisory services and tailored risk
management solutions. The economics of certain
investment banking and underwriting activities
are shared primarily between Global Banking and
Global Markets under an internal revenue-sharing
arrangement. Global Banking originates certain
deal-related transactions with our corporate and
commercial clients that are executed and
distributed by Global Markets . To provide a
complete discussion of our
consolidated investment banking fees, the table
below presents total Corporation investment
banking fees and the portion attributable to
Global Banking.
 Investment Banking 
 Fees 
 (Dollars in 
 millions) Total Corporation 
 Products Global Banking 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Advisory $ 1,643 $ 2,139 $ 1,783 $ 2,311 
 Debt issuance 1,099 1,736 2,523 4,015 
 Equity issuance 262 1,232 709 2,784 
 Gross investment 3,004 5,107 5,015 9,110 
 banking fees 
 Self-led deals -78 -93 -192 -223 
 Total investment $ 2,926 $ 5,014 $ 4,823 $ 8,887 
 banking fees 
Total Corporation investment banking fees, which
exclude self-led deals and are primarily included
within Global Banking and Global Markets,
decreased 46 percent to $4.8 billion primarily
due to lower equity issuance, debt issuance and
advisory fees.
 43Bank of America 
 Global Markets 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 % Change 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net interest income $ 3,088 $ 4,011 -23 % 
 Noninterest income: 
 Investment and brokerage services 2,002 1,979 1 
 Investment banking fees 1,820 3,616 -50 
 Market making and similar activities 11,406 8,760 30 
 All other income -178 889 -120 
 Total noninterest income 15,050 15,244 -1 
 Total revenue, net of interest expense 18,138 19,255 -6 
 Provision for credit losses 28 65 -57 
 Noninterest expense 12,420 13,032 -5 
 Income before income taxes 5,690 6,158 -8 
 Income tax expense 1,508 1,601 -6 
 Net income $ 4,182 $ 4,557 -8 
 Effective tax rate 26.5 % 26.0 % 
 Return on average allocated capital 10 12 
 Efficiency ratio 68.48 67.68 
 Balance Sheet 
 Average 
 Trading-related assets: 
 Trading account securities $ 303,587 $ 291,505 4 % 
 Reverse repurchases 126,324 113,989 11 
 Securities borrowed 116,764 100,292 16 
 Derivative assets 54,128 43,582 24 
 Total trading-related assets 600,803 549,368 9 
 Total loans and leases 116,652 91,339 28 
 Total earning assets 602,889 541,391 11 
 Total assets 857,637 785,998 9 
 Total deposits 40,382 51,833 -22 
 Allocated capital 42,500 38,000 12 
 Year end 
 Total trading-related assets $ 564,769 $ 491,160 15 % 
 Total loans and leases 127,735 114,846 11 
 Total earning assets 587,772 561,135 5 
 Total assets 812,489 747,794 9 
 Total deposits 39,077 46,374 -16 
Global Markets offers sales and trading services
and research services to institutional clients
across fixed-income, credit, currency, commodity
and equity businesses. Global Markets product
coverage includes securities and derivative
products in both the primary and secondary
markets. Global Markets provides market-making,
financing, securities clearing, settlement and
custody services globally to our institutional
investor clients in support of their investing
and trading activities. We also work with our
commercial and corporate clients to provide risk
management products using interest rate, equity,
credit, currency and commodity derivatives,
foreign exchange, fixed-income and mortgage-
related products. As a result of our market-
making activities in these products, we may be
required to manage risk in a broad range of
financial products including government
securities, equity and equity-linked securities,
high-grade and high-yield corporate debt
securities, syndicated loans, MBS, commodities
and asset-backed securities. The economics of
certain investment banking and underwriting
activities are shared primarily between Global
Markets and Global Banking under an internal
revenue-sharing arrangement. Global Banking
originates certain deal-related transactions with
our corporate and commercial clients that are
executed and distributed by Global Markets . For
information on investment banking fees on a
consolidated basis, see page 43.
The following explanations for year-over-year
changes for
Global Markets , including those disclosed under
Sales and Trading Revenue, are the same for
amounts including and excluding net DVA. Amounts
excluding net DVA are a non-GAAP financial
measure. For more information on net DVA, see
Supplemental Financial Data on page 32.
Net income for Global Markets decreased $375
million to $4.2 billion. Net DVA gains were $20
million compared to losses of $54 million in
2021. Excluding net DVA, net income decreased
$431 million to $4.2 billion. These decreases
were primarily driven by lower revenue, partially
offset by lower noninterest expense.
Revenue decreased $1.1 billion to $18.1 billion
primarily due to lower investment banking fees,
partially offset by higher sales and trading
revenue. Sales and trading revenue increased $1.3
billion, and excluding net DVA, sales and trading
revenue increased $1.2 billion. These increases
were driven by higher revenue in both FICC and
Equities.
Noninterest expense decreased $612 million to
$12.4 billion primarily driven by the realignment
of a liquidating business activity from Global
Markets to All Other in the fourth quarter of
2021 and an acceleration of expenses from
incentive compensation award changes in the prior
year .
Average total assets increased $71.6 billion to
$857.6 billion driven by loan growth and
commodities activity in FICC. Period-end total
assets increased $64.7 billion to $812.5 billion
 Bank of America44 
driven by loan growth, an increase in commodities activity, and higher derivative balances due to
higher interest rates. The return on average allocated capital was 10 percent, down from 12 percent,
reflecting lower net income and an increase in allocated capital. For more information on capital
allocated to the business segments, see Business Segment Operations on page 37. Sales and Trading
Revenue Sales and trading revenue includes unrealized and realized gains and losses on trading and
other assets which are included in market making and similar activities, net interest income, and
fees primarily from commissions on equity securities. Sales and trading revenue is segregated into
fixed-income (government debt obligations, investment and non-investment grade corporate debt
obligations, commercial MBS, residential mortgage-backed securities, collateralized loan obligations,
interest rate and credit derivative contracts), currencies (interest rate and foreign exchange
contracts), commodities (primarily futures, forwards, swaps and options) and equities (equity-linked
derivatives and cash equity activity). The following table and related discussion present sales and
trading revenue, substantially all of which is in Global Markets, with the remainder in Global
Banking . In addition, the following table and related discussion also present sales and trading
revenue, excluding net DVA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure. For more information on net DVA,
see Supplemental Financial Data on page 32.
 Sales and Trading Revenue(1, 2, 3) 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Sales and trading revenue 2022 2021 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fixed income, currencies and commodities $ 9,917 $ 8,761 
 Equities 6,572 6,428 
 Total sales and trading revenue $ 16,489 $ 15,189 
 Sales and trading revenue, excluding net 
 DVA(4) 
 Fixed income, currencies and commodities $ 9,898 $ 8,810 
 Equities 6,571 6,433 
 Total sales and trading revenue, $ 16,469 $ 15,243 
 excluding net DVA 
(1) For more information on sales and trading
revenue, see Note 3 – Derivatives to the
Consolidated Financial Statements. (2) Includes
FTE adjustments of $354 million and $421 million
for 2022 and 2021. (3) Includes Global Banking
sales and trading revenue of $1.0 billion and
$510 million for 2022 and 2021. (4) FICC and
Equities sales and trading revenue, excluding net
DVA, is a non-GAAP financial measure. FICC net
DVA gains (losses) were $19 million and $(49)
million for 2022 and 2021. Equities net DVA gains
(losses) were $1 million and $(5) million for
2022 and 2021. Including and excluding net DVA,
FICC revenue increased $1.2 billion and $1.1
billion driven by improved trading performance
across interest rate and currency products,
partially offset by a weaker trading environment
for credit products in the current-year period
and a gain in commodities from a weather-related
event in the prior year . Including and excluding
net DVA, Equities revenue increased $144 million
and $138 million driven by strong performances in
derivatives and client financing activities,
partially offset by a weaker performance in cash.
 All Other 
 (Dollars in 
 millions) 2022 2021 % Change 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net interest income $ 117 $ 246 -52 % 
 Noninterest income -5,479 -5,589 -2 
 (loss) 
 Total revenue, net -5,362 -5,343 — 
 of interest expense 
 Provision for -172 -182 -5 
 credit losses 
 Noninterest expense 2,485 1,519 64 
 Loss before income -7,675 -6,680 15 
 taxes 
 Income tax benefit -6,023 -8,069 -25 
 Net income (loss) $ -1,652 $ 1,389 n/m 
 Balance Sheet 
 Year Ended December 
 31 
 Average 2022 2021 % Change 
 Total loans and $ 12,683 $ 18,447 -31 % 
 leases 
 Total assets(1) 139,466 191,831 -27 
 Total deposits 20,082 16,512 22 
 Year end December 31 December 31 % Change 
 2022 2021 
 Total loans and $ 10,234 $ 15,863 -35 % 
 leases 
 Total assets(1) 155,074 214,153 -28 
 Total deposits 19,905 21,182 -6 
(1) In segments where the total of liabilities
and equity exceeds assets, which are generally
deposit-taking segments, we allocate assets from
All Other to those segments to match liabilities
(i.e., deposits) and allocated shareholders’
equity. Average allocated assets were $1.1
trillion for both 2022 and 2021, and year-end
allocated assets were $1.0 trillion and $1.2
trillion at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
n/m = not meaningful
All Other primarily consists of asset and
liability management (ALM) activities,
liquidating businesses and certain expenses not
otherwise allocated to a business segment. ALM
activities encompass interest rate and foreign
currency risk management activities for which
substantially all of the results are allocated to
our business segments. For more information on
our ALM activities, see Note 23 – Business
Segment Information to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
Net income decreased $3.0 billion to a loss of
$1.7 billion primarily due to a lower income tax
benefit and higher noninterest expense.
Noninterest expense increased $966 million
primarily driven by the realignment of a
liquidating business activity from Global Markets
to All Other in the fourth quarter of 2021,
expense associated with the settlement of the
legacy monoline insurance litigation and expense
related to certain regulatory matters, partially
offset by decreases in other expenses.
 45Bank of America 
The income tax benefit was $6.0 billion in 2022
compared to a benefit of $8.1 billion in 2021.
The decrease in the tax benefit was primarily
driven by the impact of the U.K. tax law change
in 2021. For more information, see Financial
Highlights - Income Tax Expense on page 29. Both
periods included income tax benefit adjustments
to eliminate the FTE treatment of certain tax
credits recorded in Global Banking and Global
Markets .
 Managing Risk 
Risk is inherent in all our business activities.
Sound risk management enables us to serve our
customers and deliver for our shareholders. If
not managed well, risk can result in financial
loss, regulatory sanctions and penalties, and
damage to our reputation, each of which may
adversely impact our ability to execute our
business strategies. We take a comprehensive
approach to risk management with a defined Risk
Framework and an articulated Risk Appetite
Statement, which are approved annually by the ERC
and the Board.
The seven key types of risk faced by the
Corporation are strategic, credit, market,
liquidity, compliance, operational and
reputational.
● Strategic risk is the risk to current or
projected financial condition arising from
incorrect assumptions about external or internal
factors, inappropriate business plans,
ineffective business strategy execution or
failure to respond in a timely manner to changes
in the regulatory, macroeconomic or competitive
environments in the geographic locations in which
we operate.
● Credit risk is the risk of loss arising from
the inability or failure of a borrower or
counterparty to meet its obligations.
● Market risk is the risk that changes in market
conditions adversely impact the value of assets
or liabilities or otherwise negatively impact
earnings. Market risk is composed of price risk
and interest rate risk.
● Liquidity risk is the inability to meet
expected or unexpected cash flow and collateral
needs while continuing to support our businesses
and customers under a range of economic
conditions.
● Compliance risk is the risk of legal or
regulatory sanctions, material financial loss or
damage to the reputation of the Corporation
arising from the failure of the Corporation to
comply with the requirements of applicable laws,
rules and regulations and our internal policies
and procedures.
● Operational risk is the risk of loss resulting
from inadequate or failed internal processes or
systems, people or external events.
● Reputational risk is the risk that negative
perception of the Corporation may adversely
impact profitability or operations.
The following sections address in more detail the
specific procedures, measures and analyses of the
major categories of risk. This discussion of
managing risk focuses on the current Risk
Framework that, as part of its annual review
process, was approved by the ERC and the Board.
As set forth in our Risk Framework, a culture of
managing risk well is fundamental to our values
and our purpose, and how we drive Responsible
Growth. It requires us to focus on risk in all
activities and encourages the necessary mindset
and behavior to enable effective risk management
and promote sound risk-taking within our risk
appetite. Sustaining a culture of managing risk
well throughout the organization is critical to
the success of the Corporation and is a clear
expectation of our executive management team and
the Board.
Our Risk Framework serves as the foundation for
the consistent and effective management of risks
facing the Corporation. The Risk Framework sets
forth roles and responsibilities for the
management of risk and provides a blueprint for
how the Board, through delegation of authority to
committees and executive officers, establishes
risk appetite and associated limits for our
activities.
Executive management assesses, with Board
oversight, the risk-adjusted returns of each
business. Management reviews and approves the
strategic and financial operating plans, as well
as the capital plan and Risk Appetite Statement,
and recommends them annually to the Board for
approval. Our strategic plan takes into
consideration return objectives and financial
resources, which must align with risk capacity
and risk appetite. Management sets financial
objectives for each business by allocating
capital and setting a target for return on
capital for each business. Capital allocations
and operating limits are regularly evaluated as
part of our overall governance processes as the
businesses and the economic environment in which
we operate continue to evolve. For more
information regarding capital allocations, see
Business Segment Operations on page 37.
The Corporation’s risk appetite indicates the
amount of capital, earnings or liquidity we are
willing to put at risk to achieve our strategic
objectives and business plans, consistent with
applicable regulatory requirements. Our risk
appetite provides a common framework that
includes a set of measures to assist senior
management and the Board in assessing the
Corporation’s risk profile against our risk
appetite and risk capacity. Our risk appetite is
formally articulated in the Risk Appetite
Statement, which includes both qualitative
statements and quantitative limits.
Our overall capacity to take risk is limited;
therefore, we prioritize the risks we take in
order to maintain a strong and flexible financial
position so we can withstand challenging economic
conditions and take advantage of organic growth
opportunities. Therefore, we set objectives and
targets for capital and liquidity that are
intended to permit us to continue to operate in a
safe and sound manner at all times, including
during periods of stress.
Our lines of business operate with risk limits
that align with the Corporation’s risk appetite.
Senior management is responsible for tracking and
reporting performance measurements as well as any
exceptions to risk appetite limits. The Board,
and its committees when appropriate, oversee
financial performance, execution of the strategic
and financial operating plans, adherence to risk
appetite limits and the adequacy of internal
controls.
For a more detailed discussion of our risk
management activities, see the discussion below
and pages 49 through 82.
 Risk Management Governance 
The Risk Framework describes delegations of
authority whereby the Board and its committees
may delegate authority to management-level
committees or executive officers. Such
delegations may authorize certain decision-making
and approval functions, which may be evidenced in
documents such as committee charters, job
descriptions, meeting minutes and resolutions.
The chart below illustrates the interrelationship
among the Board, Board committees and management
committees that have the majority of risk
oversight responsibilities for the Corporation.
 Bank of America46 
 Board of Directors and Board Committees 
The Board is composed of 15 directors, all but
one of whom are independent. The Board authorizes
management to maintain an effective Risk
Framework and oversees compliance with safe and
sound banking practices. In addition, the Board
or its committees conduct inquiries of, and
receive reports from senior management on, risk-
related matters to assess scope or resource
limitations that could impede the ability of
Global Risk Management (GRM) and/or Corporate
Audit to execute its responsibilities. The Board
committees discussed below have the principal
responsibility for enterprise-wide oversight of
our risk management activities. Through these
activities, the Board and applicable committees
are provided with information on our risk profile
and oversee senior management addressing key
risks we face. Other Board committees, as
described below, provide additional oversight of
specific risks.
Each of the committees shown on the above chart
regularly reports to the Board on risk-related
matters within the committee’s responsibilities,
which is intended to collectively provide the
Board with integrated insight about our
management of enterprise-wide risks.
 Audit Committee 
The Audit Committee oversees the qualifications,
performance and independence of the Independent
Registered Public Accounting Firm, the
performance of our corporate audit function, the
integrity of our consolidated financial
statements, our compliance with legal and
regulatory requirements, and makes inquiries of
senior management or the Chief Audit Executive
(CAE) to determine whether there are scope or
resource limitations that impede the ability of
Corporate Audit to execute its responsibilities.
The Audit Committee is also responsible for
overseeing compliance risks pursuant to the New
York Stock Exchange listing standards.
 Enterprise Risk Committee 
The ERC oversees the Corporation’s Risk
Framework, risk appetite and senior management’s
responsibilities for the identification,
measurement, monitoring and control of key risks
facing the Corporation. The ERC may consult with
other Board committees on risk-related matters.
 Other Board Committees 
Our Corporate Governance, ESG, and Sustainability
Committee oversees our Board’s governance
processes, identifies and reviews the
qualifications of potential Board members, leads
Board and committee succession planning and their
formal self-evaluation, and reviews our ESG
activities, shareholder input and shareholder
engagement process.
Our Compensation and Human Capital Committee
oversees establishing, maintaining and
administering our compensation programs and
employee benefit plans, including approving and
recommending our Chief Executive Officer’s (CEO)
compensation to our Board for further approval by
all independent directors; reviewing and
approving our executive officers’ compensation,
as well as compensation for non-management
directors; and reviewing certain other human
capital management topics, including pay equity
and diversity and inclusion.
 Management Committees 
Management committees receive their authority
from the Board, a Board committee, or another
management committee. Our primary management risk
committee is the MRC. Subject to Board oversight,
the MRC is responsible for management oversight
of key risks facing the Corporation, including an
integrated evaluation of risk, earnings, capital
and liquidity.
 Lines of Defense 
We have clear ownership and accountability for
managing risk across three lines of defense:
Front Line Units (FLUs), GRM and Corporate Audit.
We also have control functions outside of FLUs
and GRM (e.g., Legal and Global Human Resources).
The three lines of defense are integrated into
our management-level governance structure. Each
of these functional roles is further described in
this section.
 Executive Officers 
Executive officers lead various functions
representing the functional roles. Authority for
functional roles may be delegated to executive
officers from the Board, Board committees or
management-level committees. Executive officers,
in turn, may further delegate responsibilities,
as appropriate, to management-level committees,
management routines or individuals. Executive
officers review our activities for consistency
with our Risk Framework, risk appetite, and
applicable strategic, capital and financial
operating plans, as well as applicable policies
and standards. Executive officers and other
employees make decisions individually on a day-
to-day basis, consistent with the authority they
have been delegated. Executive officers and other
employees may also serve on committees and
participate in committee decisions.
 47Bank of America 
 Front Line Units 
FLUs, which include the lines of business as well
as Global Technology and Global Operations, are
responsible for appropriately assessing and
effectively managing all of the risks associated
with their activities.
Three organizational units that include FLU
activities and control function activities, but
are not part of GRM are first, the Chief
Financial Officer Group; second, the Chief
Administrative Officer Group; and third, Global
Strategy and Enterprise Platforms.
 Global Risk Management 
GRM is part of our control functions and operates
as our independent risk management function. GRM,
led by the Chief Risk Officer (CRO), is
responsible for independently assessing and
overseeing risks within FLUs and other control
functions. GRM establishes written enterprise
policies and procedures outlining how aggregate
risks are identified, measured, monitored and
controlled.
The CRO has the stature, authority and
independence needed to develop and implement a
meaningful risk management framework and
practices to guide the Corporation in managing
risk. The CRO has unrestricted access to the
Board and reports directly to both the ERC and
the CEO. GRM is organized into horizontal risk
teams that cover a specific risk area and
vertical CRO teams that cover a particular FLU or
control function. These teams work
collaboratively in executing their respective
duties.
 Corporate Audit 
Corporate Audit and the CAE maintain their
independence from the FLUs, GRM and other control
functions by reporting directly to the Audit
Committee. The CAE administratively reports to
the CEO. Corporate Audit provides independent
assessment and validation through testing of key
processes and controls across the Corporation.
Corporate Audit includes Credit Review, which
provides an independent assessment of credit
lending decisions and the effectiveness of credit
processes across the Corporation’s credit
platform through examinations and monitoring.
 Risk Management Processes 
The Risk Framework requires that strong risk
management practices are integrated in key
strategic, capital and financial planning
processes and in day-to-day business processes
across the Corporation, thereby ensuring risks
are appropriately considered, evaluated and
responded to in a timely manner. We employ an
effective risk management process, referred to as
Identify, Measure, Monitor and Control, as part
of our daily activities.
Identify – To be effectively managed, risks must
be proactively identified and well understood.
Proper risk identification focuses on recognizing
and understanding key risks inherent in our
business activities or key risks that may arise
from external factors. Each employee is expected
to identify and escalate risks promptly. Risk
identification is an ongoing process that
incorporates input from FLUs and control
functions. It is designed to be forward-looking
and to capture relevant risk factors across all
of our lines of business.
Measure – Once a risk is identified, it must be
prioritized and accurately measured through a
systematic process including qualitative
statements and quantitative limits. Risk is
measured at various levels, including, but not
limited to, risk type, FLU and legal entity, and
also on an aggregate basis. This risk measurement
process helps to capture changes in our risk
profile due to changes in strategic direction,
concentrations, portfolio quality and the overall
economic environment. Senior management considers
how risk exposures might evolve under a variety
of stress scenarios.
Monitor – We monitor risk levels regularly to
track adherence to risk appetite, policies and
standards. We also regularly update risk
assessments and review risk exposures. Through
our monitoring, we know our level of risk
relative to limits and can take action in a
timely manner. We also know when risk limits are
breached and have processes to appropriately
report and escalate exceptions. This includes
timely requests for approval to managers and
alerts to executive management, management-level
committees or the Board (directly or through an
appropriate committee).
Control – We establish and communicate risk
limits and controls through policies, standards,
procedures and processes. The limits and controls
can be adjusted by senior management or the Board
when conditions or risk tolerances warrant. These
limits may be absolute (e.g., loan amount,
trading volume, operational loss) or relative
(e.g., percentage of loan book in higher-risk
categories). Our FLUs are held accountable for
performing within the established limits.
The formal processes used to manage risk
represent a part of our overall risk management
process. We instill a strong and comprehensive
culture of managing risk well through
communications, training, policies, procedures
and organizational roles and responsibilities.
Establishing a culture reflective of our purpose
to help make our customers’ financial lives
better and delivering on Responsible Growth is
also critical to effective risk management. We
are committed to the highest principles of
ethical and professional conduct. Conduct risk is
the risk of improper actions, behaviors or
practices by the Corporation, its employees or
representatives that are illegal, unethical
and/or contrary to our core values that could
result in harm to the Corporation, our
shareholders or our customers, damage the
integrity of the financial markets, or negatively
impact our reputation. We have established
protocols and structures so that conduct risk is
governed and reported across the Corporation
appropriately. All employees are held accountable
for adhering to the Code of Conduct, operating
within our risk appetite and managing risk in
their daily business activities. In addition, our
performance management and compensation practices
encourage responsible risk-taking that is
consistent with our Risk Framework and risk
appetite.
 Corporation-wide Stress Testing 
Integral to our Capital Planning, Financial
Planning and Strategic Planning processes, we
conduct capital scenario management and stress
forecasting on a periodic basis to better
understand balance sheet, earnings and capital
sensitivities to certain economic and business
scenarios, including economic and market
conditions that are more severe than anticipated.
These stress forecasts provide an understanding
of the potential impacts from our risk profile on
the balance sheet, earnings and capital, and
serve as a key component of our capital and risk
management practices. The intent of stress
testing is to develop a comprehensive
understanding of potential impacts of on- and
off-balance sheet risks at the Corporation and
certain subsidiaries and how they impact
financial resiliency, which provides confidence
to management, regulators and our investors.
 Contingency Planning 
We have developed and maintain contingency plans
that are designed to prepare us in advance to
respond in the event of
 Bank of America48 
potential adverse economic, financial or market
stress. These contingency plans include our
Capital Contingency Plan and Financial
Contingency and Recovery Plan, which provide
monitoring, escalation, actions and routines
designed to enable us to increase capital, access
funding sources and reduce risk through
consideration of potential options that include
asset sales, business sales, capital or debt
issuances, and other de-risking strategies. We
also maintain a Resolution Plan to limit adverse
systemic impacts that could be associated with a
potential resolution of Bank of America.
 Strategic Risk Management 
Strategic risk is embedded in every business and
is one of the major risk categories along with
credit, market, liquidity, compliance,
operational and reputational risks. This risk
results from incorrect assumptions about external
or internal factors, inappropriate business
plans, ineffective business strategy execution,
or failure to respond in a timely manner to
changes in the regulatory, macroeconomic or
competitive environments in the geographic
locations in which we operate, such as competitor
actions, changing customer preferences, product
obsolescence and technology developments.
An aspect of strategic risk is the risk that the
Corporation’s capital levels are not adequate to
meet minimum regulatory requirements and support
execution of business activities or absorb losses
from risks during normal or adverse economic and
market conditions. As such, capital risk is
managed in parallel to strategic risk.
We manage strategic risk through the Strategic
Risk Enterprise Policy and integration into the
strategic planning process, among other
activities. Our strategic plan is consistent with
our risk appetite, capital plan and liquidity
requirements, and specifically addresses
strategic risks impacting each business.
On an annual basis, the Board reviews and
approves the strategic plan, capital plan,
financial operating plan and Risk Appetite
Statement. With oversight by the Board, senior
management directs the lines of business to
execute our strategic plan consistent with our
core operating principles and risk appetite. The
executive management team monitors business
performance throughout the year and provides the
Board with regular progress reports on whether
strategic objectives and timelines are being met,
including reports on strategic risks and if
additional or alternative actions need to be
considered or implemented. The regular executive
reviews focus on assessing forecasted earnings
and returns on capital, the current risk profile,
current capital and liquidity requirements,
staffing levels and changes required to support
the strategic plan, stress testing results, and
other qualitative factors such as market growth
rates and peer analysis.
Significant strategic actions, such as capital
actions, material acquisitions or divestitures,
and resolution plans are reviewed and approved by
the Board. At the business level, processes are
in place to discuss the strategic risk
implications of new, expanded or modified
businesses, products or services and other
strategic initiatives, and to provide formal
review and approval where required. With
oversight by the Board and the ERC, executive
management performs similar analyses throughout
the year, and evaluates changes to the financial
forecast or the risk, capital or liquidity
positions as deemed appropriate to balance and
optimize achieving the targeted risk appetite,
shareholder returns and maintaining the targeted
financial strength. Proprietary models are used
to measure the capital requirements for credit,
country, market, operational and strategic risks.
The allocated capital assigned to each business
is based on its unique risk profile. With
oversight by the Board, executive management
assesses the risk-adjusted returns of each
business in approving strategic and financial
operating plans. The businesses use allocated
capital to define business strategies, and price
products and transactions.
 Capital Management 
The Corporation manages its capital position so
that its capital is more than adequate to support
its business activities and aligns with risk,
risk appetite and strategic planning.
Additionally, we seek to maintain safety and
soundness at all times, even under adverse
scenarios, take advantage of organic growth
opportunities, meet obligations to creditors and
counterparties, maintain ready access to
financial markets, continue to serve as a credit
intermediary, remain a source of strength for our
subsidiaries, and satisfy current and future
regulatory capital requirements. Capital
management is integrated into our risk and
governance processes, as capital is a key
consideration in the development of our strategic
plan, risk appetite and risk limits.
We conduct an Internal Capital Adequacy
Assessment Process (ICAAP) on a periodic basis.
The ICAAP is a forward-looking assessment of our
projected capital needs and resources,
incorporating earnings, balance sheet and risk
forecasts under baseline and adverse economic and
market conditions. We utilize periodic stress
tests to assess the potential impacts to our
balance sheet, earnings, regulatory capital and
liquidity under a variety of stress scenarios. We
perform qualitative risk assessments to identify
and assess material risks not fully captured in
our forecasts or stress tests. We assess the
potential capital impacts of proposed changes to
regulatory capital requirements. Management
assesses ICAAP results and provides documented
quarterly assessments of the adequacy of our
capital guidelines and capital position to the
Board or its committees.
We periodically review capital allocated to our
businesses and allocate capital annually during
the strategic and capital planning processes. For
more information, see Business Segment Operations
on page 37.
 CCAR and Capital Planning 
The Federal Reserve requires BHCs to submit a
capital plan and planned capital actions on an
annual basis, consistent with the rules governing
the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review
(CCAR) capital plan. Based on the results of our
2022 CCAR stress test, our stress capital buffer
(SCB) increased to 3.4 percent from 2.5 percent,
effective October 1, 2022 through September 30,
2023.
In October 2021, the Board authorized the
Corporation’s $25 billion common stock repurchase
program. Additionally, the Board authorized
common stock repurchases to offset shares awarded
under the Corporation’s equity-based compensation
plans. Pursuant to the Board’s authorizations,
during 2022, we repurchased $5.1 billion of
common stock, including repurchases to offset
shares awarded under equity-based compensation
plans.
The timing and amount of common stock repurchases
are subject to various factors, including the
Corporation’s capital position, liquidity,
financial performance and alternative uses of
capital, stock trading price, regulatory
requirements and general market conditions, and
may be suspended at any time. Such repurchases
may be effected through open market purchases or
privately negotiated transactions, including
repurchase plans that satisfy the conditions of
Rule 10b5-1 of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended (Exchange Act).
 49Bank of America 
 Regulatory Capital 
As a financial services holding company, we are
subject to regulatory capital rules, including
Basel 3, issued by U.S. banking regulators. Basel
3 established minimum capital ratios and buffer
requirements and outlined two methods of
calculating risk-weighted assets (RWA), the
Standardized approach and the Advanced
approaches. The Standardized approach relies
primarily on supervisory risk weights based on
exposure type, and the Advanced approaches
determine risk weights based on internal models.
The Corporation's depository institution
subsidiaries are also subject to the Prompt
Corrective Action (PCA) framework. The
Corporation and its primary affiliated banking
entity, BANA, are Advanced approaches
institutions under Basel 3 and are required to
report regulatory risk-based capital ratios and
RWA under both the Standardized and Advanced
approaches. The lower of the capital ratios under
Standardized or Advanced approaches compared to
their respective regulatory capital ratio
requirements are used to assess capital adequacy,
including under the PCA framework. As of December
31, 2022, the common equity tier 1 (CET1), Tier 1
capital and Total capital ratios under the
Standardized approach were the binding ratios.
 Minimum Capital Requirements 
In order to avoid restrictions on capital
distributions and discretionary bonus payments,
the Corporation must meet risk-based capital
ratio requirements that include a capital
conservation buffer of 2.5 percent (under the
Advanced approaches only), an SCB (under the
Standardized approach only), plus any applicable
countercyclical capital buffer and a global
systemically important bank (G-SIB) surcharge.
The buffers and surcharge must be comprised
solely of CET1 capital. For the period from
October 1, 2021 through September 30, 2022, the
Corporation's minimum CET1 capital ratio
requirement was 9.5 percent under both the
Standardized and Advanced approaches. Based on
the results of our 2022 CCAR stress test, the
Corporation’s SCB increased to 3.4 percent,
resulting in a minimum CET1 capital ratio
requirement of 10.4 percent under the
Standardized approach for the period from October
1, 2022 through September 30, 2023. Our minimum
CET1 capital ratio requirement under the Advanced
approaches
remains unchanged at 9.5 percent.
The Corporation is required to calculate its
G-SIB surcharge on an annual basis under two
methods and is subject to the higher of the
resulting two surcharges. Method 1 is consistent
with the approach prescribed by the Basel
Committee’s assessment methodology and is
calculated using specified indicators of systemic
importance. Method 2 modifies the Method 1
approach by, among other factors, including a
measure of the Corporation’s reliance on short-
term wholesale funding. The Corporation’s G-SIB
surcharge, which is higher under Method 2, is
expected to increase to 3.0 percent from 2.5
percent on January 1, 2024, which will increase
our minimum CET1 capital ratio requirement. At
December 31, 2022, the Corporation’s CET1 capital
ratio of 11.2 percent under the Standardized
approach exceeded its current CET1 capital ratio
requirement as well as the minimum requirement
expected to be in place as of January 1, 2024 due
to an anticipated increase in our G-SIB
surcharge.
The Corporation is also required to maintain a
minimum supplementary leverage ratio (SLR) of 3.0
percent plus a leverage buffer of 2.0 percent in
order to avoid certain restrictions on capital
distributions and discretionary bonus payments.
Our insured depository institution subsidiaries
are required to maintain a minimum 6.0 percent
SLR to be considered well capitalized under the
PCA framework. The numerator of the SLR is
quarter-end Basel 3 Tier 1 capital. The
denominator is total leverage exposure based on
the daily average of the sum of on-balance sheet
exposures less permitted deductions, and
applicable temporary exclusions, as well as the
simple average of certain off-balance sheet
exposures, as of the end of each month in a
quarter.
 Capital Composition and Ratios 
Table 10 presents Bank of America Corporation’s
capital ratios and related information in
accordance with Basel 3 Standardized and Advanced
approaches as measured at December 31, 2022 and
2021. For the periods presented herein, the
Corporation met the definition of well
capitalized under current regulatory
requirements.
 Bank of America50 
 Bank of 
 Table 10 America 
 (Dollars in Corporation 
 millions, Regulatory Standardized… 
 except as Capital under December 31, 
 noted) Basel 3 2022 AdvancedAppro… RegulatoryMi… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Risk-based 
 capital 
 metrics: 
 Common 
 equity tier $ 180,060 $ 180,060 
 1 capital 
 Tier 1 208,446 208,446 
 capital 
 Total 238,773 230,916 
 capital(3) 
 Risk-weight… 
 assets (in 1,605 1,411 
 billions) 
 Common 
 equity tier 11.2 % 12.8 % 10.4 % 
 1 capital 
 ratio 
 Tier 1 
 capital 13.0 14.8 11.9 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capital 14.9 16.4 13.9 
 ratio 
 Leverage-ba… 
 metrics: 
 Adjusted 
 quarterly 
 average $ 2,997 $ 2,997 
 assets (in 
 billions)(4) 
 Tier 1 
 leverage 7.0 % 7.0 % 4.0 
 ratio 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage $ 3,523 
 exposure (in 
 billions) 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage 5.9 % 5.0 
 ratio 
 December 31, 
 2021 
 Risk-based 
 capital 
 metrics: 
 Common 
 equity tier $ 171,759 $ 171,759 
 1 capital 
 Tier 1 196,465 196,465 
 capital 
 Total 227,592 220,616 
 capital(3) 
 Risk-weight… 
 assets (in 1,618 1,399 
 billions) 
 Common 
 equity tier 10.6 % 12.3 % 9.5 % 
 1 capital 
 ratio 
 Tier 1 
 capital 12.1 14.0 11.0 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capital 14.1 15.8 13.0 
 ratio 
 Leverage-ba… 
 metrics: 
 Adjusted 
 quarterly 
 average $ 3,087 $ 3,087 
 assets (in 
 billions)(4) 
 Tier 1 
 leverage 6.4 % 6.4 % 4.0 
 ratio 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage $ 3,604 
 exposure (in 
 billions) 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage 5.5 % 5.0 
 ratio 
(1) Capital ratios as of December 31, 2022 and
2021 are calculated using the regulatory capital
rule that allows a five-year transition period
related to the adoption of the current expected
credit losses (CECL) accounting standard on
January 1, 2020.
(2) The capital conservation buffer and G-SIB
surcharge were 2.5 percent at both December 31,
2022 and 2021. The Corporation's SCB applied in
place of the capital conservation buffer under
the Standardized approach was 3.4 percent at
December 31, 2022 and 2.5 percent at December 31,
2021. The countercyclical capital buffer for both
periods was zero. The CET1 capital regulatory
minimum is the sum of the CET1 capital ratio
minimum of 4.5 percent, our G-SIB surcharge of
2.5 percent and our capital conservation buffer
of 2.5 percent or the SCB, as applicable, of 3.4
percent at December 31, 2022 and 2.5 percent at
December 31, 2021. The SLR regulatory minimum
includes a leverage buffer of 2.0 percent.
(3) Total capital under the Advanced approaches
differs from the Standardized approach due to
differences in the amount permitted in Tier 2
capital related to the qualifying allowance for
credit losses.
(4) Reflects total average assets adjusted for
certain Tier 1 capital deductions.
At December 31, 2022, CET1 capital was $180.1
billion, an increase of $8.3 billion from
December 31, 2021, due to earnings, partially
offset by dividends, common stock repurchases and
higher net unrealized losses on available-for-
sale debt securities included in accumulated
other comprehensive income (OCI). Tier 1 capital
increased $12.0 billion primarily driven by the
same factors as CET1 capital as well as non-
cumulative perpetual preferred stock issuances.
Total capital under the Standardized approach
increased $11.2 billion primarily due to the same
factors driving the increase in
Tier 1 capital and an increase in the adjusted
allowance for credit losses included in Tier 2
capital, partially offset by a decrease in
subordinated debt. RWA under the Standardized
approach, which yielded the lower CET1 capital
ratio at December 31, 2022, decreased $13.0
billion during 2022 to $1,605 billion primarily
due to lower counterparty exposures in Global
Markets and a decrease in debt securities in the
Treasury portfolio, partially offset by loan
growth. Supplementary leverage exposure at
December 31, 2022 decreased $80.3 billion
primarily due to lower debt securities, driven by
lower deposits, partially offset by loan growth.
 51Bank of America 
Table 11 shows the capital composition at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Table 11 Capital Composition December 31 
 (Dollars in millions) under Basel 3 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total common shareholders’ equity $ 244,800 $ 245,358 
 CECL transitional amount(1) 1,881 2,508 
 Goodwill, net of related deferred tax -68,644 -68,641 
 liabilities 
 Deferred tax assets arising from net 
 operating loss and tax credit -7,776 -7,743 
 carryforwards 
 Intangibles, other than mortgage 
 servicing rights, net of related -1,554 -1,605 
 deferred tax liabilities 
 Defined benefit pension plan net assets -867 -1,261 
 Cumulative unrealized net (gain) loss 
 related to changes in fair value of 
 financial liabilities attributable to own 496 1,400 
 creditworthiness, 
 net-of-tax 
 Accumulated net (gain) loss on certain 11,925 1,870 
 cash flow hedges(2) 
 Other -201 -127 
 Common equity tier 1 capital 180,060 171,759 
 Qualifying preferred stock, net of 28,396 24,707 
 issuance cost 
 Other -10 -1 
 Tier 1 capital 208,446 196,465 
 Tier 2 capital instruments 18,751 20,750 
 Qualifying allowance for credit 11,739 10,534 
 losses(3) 
 Other -163 -157 
 Total capital under the Standardized 238,773 227,592 
 approach 
 Adjustment in qualifying allowance for 
 credit losses under the Advanced -7,857 -6,976 
 approaches(3) 
 Total capital under the Advanced $ 230,916 $ 220,616 
 approaches 
(1) Includes the impact of the Corporation's adoption of the CECL accounting standard on January 1,
2020 and 25 percent of the increase in reserves since the initial adoption.
(2) Includes amounts in accumulated other comprehensive income related to the hedging of items that
are not recognized at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(3) Includes the impact of transition provisions
related to the CECL accounting standard.
Table 12 shows the components of RWA as measured under Basel 3 at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Risk-wei… 
 Table 12 Assets 
 under 
 Basel 3 
 Standard… Advanced Standard… Advanced 
 Approach Approaches Approach Approaches 
 December 
 31 
 (Dollars 
 in 2022 2021 
 billion… 
 Credit $ 1,538 $ 939 $ 1,549 $ 913 
 risk 
 Market 67 67 69 69 
 risk 
 Operati… n/a 364 n/a 378 
 risk(1) 
 Risks 
 related 
 to n/a 41 n/a 39 
 credit 
 valuati… 
 adjustm… 
 Total 
 risk-we… $ 1,605 $ 1,411 $ 1,618 $ 1,399 
 assets 
(1) December 31, 2022 includes the effects of an update made to our operational risk RWA model during
the fourth quarter of 2022.
n/a = not applicable
 Bank of America52 
 Bank of America, N.A. Regulatory Capital 
Table 13 presents regulatory capital information for BANA in accordance with Basel 3 Standardized and
Advanced approaches as measured at December 31, 2022 and 2021. BANA met the definition of well
capitalized under the PCA framework for both periods.
 Table 13 Bank of 
 (Dollars in America, N.A. 
 millions, Regulatory Standardized… 
 except as Capital December 31, 
 noted) under Basel 3 2022 AdvancedAppro… RegulatoryMi… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Risk-based 
 capital 
 metrics: 
 Common 
 equity tier $ 181,089 $ 181,089 
 1 capital 
 Tier 1 181,089 181,089 
 capital 
 Total 194,254 186,648 
 capital(3) 
 Risk-weight… 
 assets (in 1,386 1,087 
 billions) 
 Common 
 equity tier 13.1 % 16.7 % 7.0 % 
 1 capital 
 ratio 
 Tier 1 
 capital 13.1 16.7 8.5 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capital 14.0 17.2 10.5 
 ratio 
 Leverage-ba… 
 metrics: 
 Adjusted 
 quarterly 
 average $ 2,358 $ 2,358 
 assets (in 
 billions)(4) 
 Tier 1 
 leverage 7.7 % 7.7 % 5.0 
 ratio 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage $ 2,785 
 exposure (in 
 billions) 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage 6.5 % 6.0 
 ratio 
 December 31, 
 2021 
 Risk-based 
 capital 
 metrics: 
 Common 
 equity tier $ 182,526 $ 182,526 
 1 capital 
 Tier 1 182,526 182,526 
 capital 
 Total 194,773 188,091 
 capital(3) 
 Risk-weight… 
 assets (in 1,352 1,048 
 billions) 
 Common 
 equity tier 13.5 % 17.4 % 7.0 % 
 1 capital 
 ratio 
 Tier 1 
 capital 13.5 17.4 8.5 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capital 14.4 17.9 10.5 
 ratio 
 Leverage-ba… 
 metrics: 
 Adjusted 
 quarterly 
 average $ 2,414 $ 2,414 
 assets (in 
 billions)(4) 
 Tier 1 
 leverage 7.6 % 7.6 % 5.0 
 ratio 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage $ 2,824 
 exposure (in 
 billions) 
 Supplementa… 
 leverage 6.5 % 6.0 
 ratio 
(1) Capital ratios as of December 31, 2022 and 2021 are calculated using the regulatory capital rule
that allows a five-year transition period related to the adoption of the CECL accounting standard on
January 1,2020 .
(2) Risk-based capital regulatory minimums at both December 31, 2022 and 2021 are the minimum ratios
under Basel 3 including a capital conservation buffer of 2.5 percent. The regulatory minimums for the
leverage ratios as of both period ends are the percent required to be considered well capitalized
under the PCA framework.
(3) Total capital under the Advanced approaches differs from the Standardized approach due to
differences in the amount permitted in Tier 2 capital related to the qualifying allowance for credit
losses.
(4) Reflects total average assets adjusted for certain Tier 1 capital deductions.
 Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity Requirements 
Total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) consists of
the Corporation’s Tier 1 capital and eligible
long-term debt issued directly by the
Corporation. Eligible long-term debt for TLAC
ratios is comprised of unsecured debt that has a
remaining maturity of at least one year and
satisfies additional requirements as prescribed
in the TLAC final rule. As with the
risk-based capital ratios and SLR, the
Corporation is required to maintain TLAC ratios
in excess of minimum requirements plus applicable
buffers to avoid restrictions on capital
distributions and discretionary bonus payments.
Table 14 presents the Corporation's TLAC and
long-term debt ratios and related information as
of December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 53Bank of America 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Corporati… 
 Total 
 Loss-Abso… 
 Table 14 Capacity 
 (Dollars and TLAC(1) 
 in Long-Term December Regulatory Long-term Regulatory 
 millions) Debt 31, 2022 Minimum(2) Debt Minimum(3) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total 
 eligible $ 465,451 $ 243,833 
 balance 
 Percenta… 
 of 29.0 % 22.0 % 15.2 % 8.5 % 
 risk-wei… 
 assets(4) 
 Percenta… 
 of 
 suppleme… 13.2 9.5 6.9 4.5 
 leverage 
 exposure 
 December 
 31, 2021 
 Total 
 eligible $ 435,904 $ 227,714 
 balance 
 Percenta… 
 of 26.9 % 22.0 % 14.1 % 8.5 % 
 risk-wei… 
 assets(4) 
 Percenta… 
 of 
 suppleme… 12.1 9.5 6.3 4.5 
 leverage 
 exposure 
(1) As of December 31, 2022 and 2021, TLAC ratios are calculated using the regulatory capital rule
that allows a five-year transition period related to the adoption of CECL.
(2) The TLAC RWA regulatory minimum consists of 18.0 percent plus a TLAC RWA buffer comprised of 2.5
percent plus the Method 1 G-SIB surcharge of 1.5 percent. The countercyclical buffer is zero for both
periods. The TLAC supplementary leverage exposure regulatory minimum consists of 7.5 percent plus a
2.0 percent TLAC leverage buffer. The TLAC RWA and leverage buffers must be comprised solely of CET1
capital and Tier 1 capital, respectively.
(3) The long-term debt RWA regulatory minimum is comprised of 6.0 percent plus an additional 2.5
percent requirement based on the Corporation’s Method 2 G-SIB surcharge. The long-term debt leverage
exposure regulatory minimum is 4.5 percent.
(4) The approach that yields the higher RWA is used to calculate TLAC and long-term debt ratios,
which was the Standardized approach as of December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Regulatory Capital and Securities Regulation 
The Corporation’s principal U.S. broker-dealer
subsidiaries are BofA Securities, Inc. (BofAS),
Merrill Lynch Professional Clearing Corp. (MLPCC)
and Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith
Incorporated (MLPF&S). The Corporation's
principal European broker-dealer subsidiaries are
Merrill Lynch International (MLI) and BofA
Securities Europe SA (BofASE).
The U.S. broker-dealer subsidiaries are subject
to the net capital requirements of Rule 15c3-1
under the Exchange Act. BofAS computes its
minimum capital requirements as an alternative
net capital broker-dealer under Rule 15c3-1e, and
MLPCC and MLPF&S compute their minimum capital
requirements in accordance with the alternative
standard under Rule 15c3-1. BofAS and MLPCC are
also registered as futures commission merchants
and are subject to Commodity Futures Trading
Commission (CFTC) Regulation 1.17. The U.S.
broker-dealer subsidiaries are also registered
with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority,
Inc. (FINRA). Pursuant to FINRA Rule 4110, FINRA
may impose higher net capital requirements than
Rule 15c3-1 under the Exchange Act with respect
to each of the broker-dealers.
BofAS provides institutional services, and in
accordance with the alternative net capital
requirements, is required to maintain tentative
net capital in excess of $5.0 billion and net
capital in excess of the greater of $1.0 billion
or a certain percentage of its reserve
requirement in addition to a certain percentage
of securities-based swap risk margin. BofAS must
also notify the SEC in the event its tentative
net capital is less than $6.0 billion. BofAS is
also required to hold a certain percentage of its
customers' and affiliates' risk-based margin in
order to meet its CFTC minimum net capital
requirement. At December 31, 2022, BofAS had
tentative net capital of $20.9 billion. BofAS
also had regulatory net capital of $17.5 billion,
which exceeded the minimum requirement of $4.1
billion.
MLPCC is a fully-guaranteed subsidiary of BofAS
and provides clearing and settlement services as
well as prime brokerage and arranged financing
services for institutional clients. At December
31, 2022, MLPCC’s regulatory net capital of $7.5
billion exceeded the minimum requirement of $1.4
billion.
MLPF&S provides retail services. At December 31,
2022, MLPF&S' regulatory net capital was $6.0
billion, which exceeded the minimum requirement
of $137 million.
Our European broker-dealers are subject to
requirements from U.S. and non-U.S. regulators.
MLI, a U.K. investment firm, is regulated by the
Prudential Regulation Authority and the
Financial Conduct Authority and is subject to
certain regulatory capital requirements. At
December 31, 2022, MLI’s capital resources were
$33.4 billion, which exceeded the minimum Pillar
1 requirement of $11.6 billion.
BofASE is an authorized credit institution with
its head office located in France. Previously,
BofASE had been authorized as an investment firm,
but following the European Union’s adoption of
the harmonized Investment Firm Directive and
Investment Firm Regulation prudential regime, it
was required to apply for reauthorization as a
credit institution. The application was approved
in November 2022 and became effective on December
8, 2022. BofASE is authorized and regulated by
the Autorité de Contrôle Prudentiel et de
Résolution and the Autorité des Marchés
Financiers, and supervised under the Single
Supervisory Mechanism by the European Central
Bank. At December 31, 2022, BofASE's capital
resources were $9.0 billion, which exceeded the
minimum Pillar 1 requirement of $3.0 billion.
In addition, MLI and BofASE became conditionally
registered with the SEC as security-based swap
dealers in the fourth quarter of 2021, and
maintained net liquid assets at December 31, 2022
that exceeded the applicable minimum requirements
under the Exchange Act.
 Liquidity Risk 
 Funding and Liquidity Risk Management 
Our primary liquidity risk management objective
is to meet expected or unexpected cash flow and
collateral requirements, including payments under
long-term debt agreements, commitments to extend
credit and customer deposit withdrawals, while
continuing to support our businesses and
customers under a range of economic conditions.
To achieve that objective, we analyze and monitor
our liquidity risk under expected and stressed
conditions, maintain liquidity and access to
diverse funding sources, including our stable
deposit base, and seek to align liquidity-related
incentives and risks. These liquidity risk
management practices have allowed us to
effectively manage the market fluctuation from
the rising interest rate environment,
inflationary pressures and macroeconomic
environment.
We define liquidity as readily available assets,
limited to cash and high-quality, liquid,
unencumbered securities that we can use to meet
our contractual and contingent financial
obligations as they arise. We manage our
liquidity position through line-of-business and
ALM activities, as well as through our legal
entity funding strategy, on both a forward and
current
 Bank of America54 
(including intraday) basis under both expected
and stressed conditions. We believe that a
centralized approach to funding and liquidity
management enhances our ability to monitor
liquidity requirements, maximizes access to
funding sources, minimizes borrowing costs and
facilitates timely responses to liquidity events.
The Board approves our liquidity risk policy and
the Financial Contingency and Recovery Plan. The
ERC establishes our liquidity risk tolerance
levels. The MRC is responsible for overseeing
liquidity risks and directing management to
maintain exposures within the established
tolerance levels. The MRC reviews and monitors
our liquidity position and stress testing
results, approves certain liquidity risk limits
and reviews the impact of strategic decisions on
our liquidity. For more information, see Managing
Risk on page 46. Under this governance framework,
we developed certain funding and liquidity risk
management practices which include: maintaining
liquidity at Bank of America Corporation (Parent)
and selected subsidiaries, including our bank
subsidiaries and other regulated entities;
determining what amounts of liquidity are
appropriate for these entities based on analysis
of debt maturities and other potential cash
outflows, including those that we may experience
during stressed market conditions; diversifying
funding sources, considering our asset profile
and legal entity structure; and performing
contingency planning. NB Holdings Corporation The
Parent, which is a separate and distinct legal
entity from our bank and nonbank subsidiaries,
has an intercompany arrangement with our wholly-
owned holding company subsidiary, NB Holdings
Corporation (NB Holdings). We have transferred,
and agreed to transfer, additional Parent assets
not required to satisfy anticipated near-term
expenditures to NB Holdings. The Parent is
expected to continue to have access to the same
flow of dividends, interest and other amounts of
cash necessary to service its debt, pay dividends
and perform other obligations as it would have
had it not entered into these arrangements and
transferred any assets. These arrangements
support our preferred single point of entry
resolution strategy, under which only the Parent
would be resolved under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
In consideration for the transfer of assets, NB
Holdings issued a subordinated note to the Parent
in a principal amount equal to the value of the
transferred assets. The aggregate principal
amount of the note will increase by the amount of
any future asset transfers. NB Holdings also
provided the Parent with a committed line of
credit that allows the Parent to draw funds
necessary to service near-term cash needs. These
arrangements support our preferred single point
of entry resolution strategy, under which only
the Parent would be resolved under the U.S.
Bankruptcy Code. These arrangements include
provisions to terminate the line of credit,
forgive the subordinated note and require the
Parent to transfer its remaining financial assets
to NB Holdings if our projected liquidity
resources deteriorate so severely that resolution
of the Parent becomes imminent. Global Liquidity
Sources and Other Unencumbered Assets We maintain
liquidity available to the Corporation, including
the Parent and selected subsidiaries, in the form
of cash and high-quality, liquid, unencumbered
securities. Our liquidity buffer, referred to as
Global Liquidity Sources (GLS), is comprised of
assets that are readily available to the Parent
and selected subsidiaries, including holding
company, bank and broker-dealer subsidiaries,
even during stressed market conditions. Our cash
is primarily on deposit with the Federal Reserve
Bank and, to a lesser extent, central banks
outside of the U.S. We limit the composition of
high-quality, liquid, unencumbered securities to
U.S. government securities, U.S. agency
securities, U.S. agency MBS and other investment-
grade securities, and a select group of non-U.S.
government securities. We can obtain cash for
these securities, even in stressed conditions,
through repurchase agreements or outright sales.
We hold our GLS in legal entities that allow us
to meet the liquidity requirements of our global
businesses, and we consider the impact of
potential regulatory, tax, legal and other
restrictions that could limit the transferability
of funds among entities. Table 15 presents
average GLS for the three months ended December
31, 2022 and 2021.
 Three Months Ended December 
 Table 15 Average Global 31 
 (Dollars in billions) Liquidity Sources 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Bank entities $ 694 $ 1,006 
 Nonbank and other 174 152 
 entities(1) 
 Total Average Global $ 868 $ 1,158 
 Liquidity Sources 
(1) Nonbank includes Parent, NB Holdings and
other regulated entities. Our bank subsidiaries’
liquidity is primarily driven by deposit and
lending activity, as well as securities valuation
and net debt activity. Bank subsidiaries can also
generate incremental liquidity by pledging a
range of unencumbered loans and securities to
certain FHLBs and the Federal Reserve Discount
Window. The cash we could have obtained by
borrowing against this pool of specifically-
identified eligible assets was $348 billion and
$322 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021. We
have established operational procedures to enable
us to borrow against these assets, including
regularly monitoring our total pool of eligible
loans and securities collateral. Eligibility is
defined in guidelines from the FHLBs and the
Federal Reserve and is subject to change at their
discretion. Due to regulatory restrictions,
liquidity generated by the bank subsidiaries can
generally be used only to fund obligations within
the bank subsidiaries, and transfers to the
Parent or nonbank subsidiaries may be subject to
prior regulatory approval. Liquidity is also held
in nonbank entities, including the Parent, NB
Holdings and other regulated entities. The Parent
and NB Holdings liquidity is typically in the
form of cash deposited at BANA, which is excluded
from the liquidity at bank subsidiaries, and
high-quality, liquid, unencumbered securities.
Liquidity held in other regulated entities,
comprised primarily of broker-dealer
subsidiaries, is primarily available to meet the
obligations of that entity, and transfers to the
Parent or to any other subsidiary may be subject
to prior regulatory approval due to regulatory
restrictions and minimum requirements. Our other
regulated entities also hold unencumbered
investment-grade securities and equities that we
believe could be used to generate additional
liquidity. Table 16 presents the composition of
average GLS for the three months ended December
31, 2022 and December 31, 2021.
 55Bank of America 
 Three Months Ended 
 Table 16 Average Global Liquidity December 31 
 (Dollars in billions) Sources Composition 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash on deposit $ 174 $ 259 
 U.S. Treasury securities 252 278 
 U.S. agency securities, 
 mortgage-backed 
 securities, and other 427 606 
 investment-grade 
 securities 
 Non-U.S. government 15 15 
 securities 
 Total Average Global $ 868 $ 1,158 
 Liquidity Sources 
Our GLS are substantially the same in composition to what qualifies as High Quality Liquid Assets
(HQLA) under the final U.S. Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) rules. However, HQLA for purposes of
calculating LCR is not reported at market value, but at a lower value that incorporates regulatory
deductions and the exclusion of excess liquidity held at certain subsidiaries. The LCR is calculated
as the amount of a financial institution’s unencumbered HQLA relative to the estimated net cash
outflows the institution could encounter over a 30-day period of significant liquidity stress,
expressed as a percentage. Our average consolidated HQLA, on a net basis, was $605 billion and $617
billion for the three months ended December 31, 2022 and 2021. For the same periods, the average
consolidated LCR was 120 percent and 115 percent. Our LCR fluctuates due to normal business flows
from customer activity. Liquidity Stress Analysis We utilize liquidity stress analysis to assist us
in determining the appropriate amounts of liquidity to maintain at the Parent and our subsidiaries to
meet contractual and contingent cash outflows under a range of scenarios. The scenarios we consider
and utilize incorporate market-wide and Corporation-specific events, including potential credit
rating downgrades for the Parent and our subsidiaries, and more severe events including potential
resolution scenarios. The scenarios are based on our historical experience, experience of distressed
and failed financial institutions, regulatory guidance, and both expected and unexpected future
events. The types of potential contractual and contingent cash outflows we consider in our scenarios
may include, but are not limited to, upcoming contractual maturities of unsecured debt and reductions
in new debt issuances; diminished access to secured financing markets; potential deposit withdrawals;
increased draws on loan commitments, liquidity facilities and letters of credit; additional
collateral that counterparties could call if our credit ratings were downgraded; collateral and
margin requirements arising from market value changes; and potential liquidity required to maintain
businesses and finance customer activities. Changes in certain market factors, including, but not
limited to, credit rating downgrades, could negatively impact potential contractual and contingent
outflows and the related financial instruments, and in some cases these impacts could be material to
our financial results. We consider all sources of funds that we could access during each stress
scenario and focus particularly on matching available sources with corresponding liquidity
requirements by legal entity. We also use the stress modeling results to manage our asset and
liability profile and establish limits and guidelines on certain funding sources and businesses. Net
Stable Funding Ratio The Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) is a liquidity requirement for large banks
to maintain a minimum level of stable funding over a one-year period. The requirement is intended to
support
the ability of banks to lend to households and businesses in both normal and adverse economic
conditions and is complementary to the LCR, which focuses on short-term liquidity risks. The U.S.
NSFR applies to the Corporation on a consolidated basis and to our insured depository institutions.
At December 31, 2022, the Corporation and its insured depository institutions were in compliance with
this requirement. Diversified Funding Sources We fund our assets primarily with a mix of deposits,
and secured and unsecured liabilities through a centralized, globally coordinated funding approach
diversified across products, programs, markets, currencies and investor groups. The primary benefits
of our centralized funding approach include greater control, reduced funding costs, wider name
recognition by investors and greater flexibility to meet the variable funding requirements of
subsidiaries. Where regulations, time zone differences or other business considerations make Parent
funding impractical, certain other subsidiaries may issue their own debt. We fund a substantial
portion of our lending activities through our deposits, which were $1.93 trillion and $2.1 trillion
at December 31, 2022 and 2021. Deposits are primarily generated by our Consumer Banking, GWIM and
Global Banking segments. These deposits are diversified by clients, product type and geography, and
the majority of our U.S. deposits are insured by the FDIC. We consider a substantial portion of our
deposits to be a stable, low-cost and consistent source of funding. We believe this deposit funding
is generally less sensitive to interest rate changes, market volatility or changes in our credit
ratings than wholesale funding sources. Our lending activities may also be financed through secured
borrowings, including credit card securitizations and securitizations with government-sponsored
enterprises (GSE), the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and private-label investors, as well as
FHLB loans. Our trading activities in other regulated entities are primarily funded on a secured
basis through securities lending and repurchase agreements, and these amounts will vary based on
customer activity and market conditions. We believe funding these activities in the secured financing
markets is more cost-efficient and less sensitive to changes in our credit ratings than unsecured
financing. Repurchase agreements are generally short-term and often overnight. Disruptions in secured
financing markets for financial institutions have occurred in prior market cycles which resulted in
adverse changes in terms or significant reductions in the availability of such financing. We manage
the liquidity risks arising from secured funding by sourcing funding globally from a diverse group of
counterparties, providing a range of securities collateral and pursuing longer durations, when
appropriate. For more information on secured financing agreements, see Note 10 – Securities Financing
Agreements, Short-term Borrowings, Collateral and Restricted Cash to the Consolidated Financial
Statements. Total long-term debt decreased $4.1 billion to $276.0 billion during 2022 primarily due
to debt maturities, redemptions and valuation adjustments, partially offset by debt issuances. We
may, from time to time, purchase outstanding debt instruments in various transactions, depending on
market conditions, liquidity and other factors. Our other regulated entities may also make markets in
our debt instruments to provide liquidity for investors. During 2022, we issued $66.0 billion of
long-term debt consisting of $44.2 billion of notes issued by Bank of America Corporation,
substantially all of which were TLAC compliant,
 Bank of America56 
$10.0 billion of notes issued by Bank of America,
N.A. and $11.8 billion of other debt. During
2021, we issued $76.7 billion of long-term debt
consisting of $56.2 billion of notes issued by
Bank of America Corporation, substantially all of
which were TLAC compliant, $8 billion of notes
issued by Bank of America, N.A. and $12.5 billion
of other debt. During 2022, we had total long-
term debt maturities and redemptions in the
aggregate of $33.3 billion consisting of $19.8
billion for Bank of America Corporation, $9.9
billion for Bank of America, N.A. and $3.6
billion of other debt. During 2021, we had total
long-term debt maturities and redemptions in the
aggregate of $46.4 billion consisting of $24.4
billion for Bank of America Corporation, $10.4
billion for Bank of America, N.A. and $11.6
billion of other debt. At December 31, 2022, Bank
of America Corporation's senior notes of $205.9
billion included $179.1 billion of outstanding
notes that are both TLAC eligible and callable at
least one year before their stated maturities. Of
these senior notes, $16.6 billion will be
callable and become TLAC ineligible during 2023,
and $21.4 billion, $21.3 billion, $16.0 billion
and $24.4 billion will do so during each of 2024
through 2027, respectively, and $79.4 billion
thereafter. We issue long-term unsecured debt in
a variety of maturities and currencies to achieve
cost-efficient funding and to maintain an
appropriate maturity profile. While the cost and
availability of unsecured funding may be
negatively impacted by general market conditions
or by matters specific to the financial services
industry or the Corporation, we seek to mitigate
refinancing risk by actively managing the amount
of our borrowings that we anticipate will mature
within any month or quarter. We may issue
unsecured debt in the form of structured notes
for client purposes, certain of which qualify as
TLAC-eligible debt. During 2022, we issued $12.5
billion of structured notes, which are debt
obligations that pay investors returns linked to
other debt or equity securities, indices,
currencies or commodities. We typically hedge the
returns we are obligated to pay on these
liabilities with derivatives and/or investments
in the underlying instruments, so that from a
funding perspective, the cost is similar to our
other unsecured long-term debt. We could be
required to settle certain structured note
obligations for cash or other securities prior to
maturity under certain circumstances, which we
consider for liquidity planning purposes. We
believe, however, that a portion of such
borrowings will remain outstanding beyond the
earliest put or redemption date. Substantially
all of our senior and subordinated debt
obligations contain no provisions that could
trigger a requirement for an early repayment,
require additional collateral support, result in
changes to terms, accelerate maturity or create
additional financial obligations upon an adverse
change in our credit ratings, financial ratios,
earnings, cash flows or stock price. For more
information on long-term debt funding, including
issuances and maturities and redemptions, see
Note 11 – Long-term Debt to the Consolidated
Financial Statements. We use derivative
transactions to manage the duration, interest
rate and currency risks of our borrowings,
considering the characteristics of the assets
they are funding. For more information on our ALM
activities, see Interest Rate Risk Management for
the Banking Book on page 79. Uninsured Deposits
The FDIC insures the Corporation’s U.S. deposits
up to $250,000 per depositor, per insured bank
for each account ownership category, and various
country-specific funds insure non-U.S. deposits
up to specified limits. Deposits that exceed
insurance limits are uninsured. At December 31,
2022, the Corporation’s deposits totaled $1.9
trillion, of which total estimated uninsured U.S.
and non-U.S. deposits were $617.6 billion and
$102.8 billion. At December 31, 2021, the
Corporation’s deposits totaled $2.1 trillion, of
which total estimated uninsured U.S. and non-U.S.
deposits were $701.4 billion and $111.9 billion.
Table 17 presents information about the
Corporation’s total estimated uninsured time
deposits. For more information on our liquidity
sources, see Global Liquidity Sources and Other
Unencumbered Assets, and for more information on
deposits, see Diversified Funding Sources in this
section. For more information on contractual time
deposit maturities, see Note 9 – Deposits to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Uninsured Time 
 Table 17 Deposits(1) December 31, 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Dollars in millions) U.S. Non-U.S. Total 
 Uninsured time deposits 
 with a maturity 
 of: 
 3 months or less $ 3,721 $ 7,023 $ 10,744 
 Over 3 months through 6 2,230 275 2,505 
 months 
 Over 6 months through 12 2,712 86 2,798 
 months 
 Over 12 months 686 1,566 2,252 
 Total $ 9,349 $ 8,950 $ 18,299 
(1) Amounts are estimated based on the regulatory
methodologies defined by each local jurisdiction.
Contingency Planning We maintain contingency
funding plans that outline our potential
responses to liquidity stress events at various
levels of severity. These policies and plans are
based on stress scenarios and include potential
funding strategies and communication and
notification procedures that we would implement
in the event we experienced stressed liquidity
conditions. We periodically review and test the
contingency funding plans to validate efficacy
and assess readiness. Our U.S. bank subsidiaries
can access contingency funding through the
Federal Reserve Discount Window. Certain non-U.S.
subsidiaries have access to central bank
facilities in the jurisdictions in which they
operate. While we do not rely on these sources in
our liquidity modeling, we maintain the policies,
procedures and governance processes that would
enable us to access these sources if necessary.
Credit Ratings Our borrowing costs and ability to
raise funds are impacted by our credit ratings.
In addition, credit ratings may be important to
customers or counterparties when we compete in
certain markets and when we seek to engage in
certain transactions, including over-the-counter
(OTC) derivatives. Thus, it is our objective to
maintain high-quality credit ratings, and
management maintains an active dialogue with the
major rating agencies. Credit ratings and
outlooks are opinions expressed by rating
agencies on our creditworthiness and that of our
obligations or securities, including long-term
debt, short-term borrowings, preferred stock and
other securities, including asset
securitizations. Our credit ratings are subject
to ongoing review by the rating agencies, and
they consider a number of factors, including our
own financial strength, performance, prospects
and operations as well as factors not under our
control. The rating agencies could make
adjustments to our ratings at any
 57Bank of America 
time, and they provide no assurances that they
will maintain our ratings at current levels .
Other factors that influence our credit ratings
include changes to the rating agencies’
methodologies for our industry or certain
security types; the rating agencies’ assessment
of the general operating environment for
financial services companies; our relative
positions in the markets in which we compete; our
various risk exposures and risk management
policies and activities; pending litigation and
other contingencies or potential tail risks; our
reputation; our liquidity position, diversity of
funding sources and funding costs; the current
and expected level and volatility of our
earnings; our capital position and capital
management practices; our corporate governance;
the sovereign credit ratings of the U.S.
government; current or future regulatory and
legislative initiatives; and the agencies’ views
on whether the U.S. government would provide
meaningful support to the Corporation or its
subsidiaries in a crisis.
On September 19, 2022, Fitch Ratings (Fitch)
affirmed the long-term and short-term senior debt
ratings of the Corporation. Fitch also affirmed
and withdrew the long-term and short-term ratings
on certain subsidiaries, as they are no longer
considered relevant to the agency’s coverage.
On January 23, 2023, Moody’s Investors Service
(Moody’s) placed the long-term rating of the
Corporation as well as the long-term rating of
its rated subsidiaries, including BANA, on review
for upgrade. The agency cited the Corporation’s
strengthened capital ratios, improved earnings
profile and continued commitment to maintaining a
restrained risk appetite as drivers of the
review. A review for upgrade indicates that those
ratings are under consideration for a change in
the near term and typically concludes within 90
days. Moody’s concurrently affirmed all Prime-1
short-term ratings of the Corporation and rated
subsidiaries.
The current ratings and outlooks for the
Corporation and its subsidiaries from Standard &
Poor’s Global Ratings (S&P) were not the subject
of any rating actions during 2022 or through
February 22, 2023.
Table 18 presents the Corporation’s current long-
term/short-term senior debt ratings and outlooks
expressed by the rating agencies.
 Tab… Seni… 
 18 Debt 
 Rati… 
 Stan… 
 Mood… & Fitch 
 Inve… Poor… Ratin… 
 Serv… Glob… 
 Rati… 
 Long… Shor… Outl… Long… Short… Outl… Long-… Shor… Outlo… 
 Bank Revi… 
 of A2 P-1 for A- A-2 Posi… AA- F1+ Stable 
 Ame… Upgr… 
 Cor… 
 Bank Revi… 
 of Aa2 P-1 for A+ A-1 Posi… AA F1+ Stable 
 Ame… Upgr… 
 N.A. 
 Bank 
 of 
 Ame… 
 Eur… NR NR NR A+ A-1 Posi… AA F1+ Stable 
 Des… 
 Act… 
 Com… 
 Mer… 
 Lyn… 
 Pie… 
 Fen… NR NR NR A+ A-1 Posi… AA F1+ Stable 
 & 
 Smi… 
 Inc… 
 BofA 
 Sec… NR NR NR A+ A-1 Posi… AA F1+ Stable 
 Inc. 
 Mer… 
 Lyn… NR NR NR A+ A-1 Posi… AA F1+ Stable 
 Int… 
 BofA 
 Sec… NR NR NR A+ A-1 Posi… AA F1+ Stable 
 Eur… 
 SA 
NR = not rated
A reduction in certain of our credit ratings or
the ratings of certain asset-backed
securitizations may have a material adverse
effect on our liquidity, potential loss of access
to credit markets, the related cost of funds, our
businesses and on certain revenues, particularly
in those businesses where counterparty
creditworthiness is critical. In addition, under
the terms of certain OTC derivative contracts and
other trading agreements, in the event of
downgrades of our or our rated subsidiaries’
credit ratings, the counterparties to those
agreements may require us to provide additional
collateral, or to terminate these contracts or
agreements, which could cause us to sustain
losses and/or adversely impact our liquidity. If
the short-term credit ratings of our Parent, bank
or broker-dealer subsidiaries were downgraded by
one or more levels, the potential loss of access
to short-term funding sources such as repo
financing and the effect on our incremental cost
of funds could be material.
While certain potential impacts are contractual
and quantifiable, the full scope of the
consequences of a credit rating downgrade to a
financial institution is inherently uncertain, as
it depends upon numerous dynamic, complex and
inter-related factors and assumptions, including
whether any downgrade of a company’s long-term
credit ratings precipitates downgrades to its
short-term credit ratings, and assumptions about
the potential behaviors of various customers,
investors and counterparties. For more
information on potential impacts of credit rating
downgrades, see Liquidity Risk – Liquidity Stress
Analysis on page 56.
For more information on additional collateral and
termination payments that could be required in
connection with certain over-the-counter
derivative contracts and other trading agreements
in the event of a credit rating downgrade, see
Note 3 – Derivatives to the Consolidated
Financial Statements herein and Item 1A. Risk
Factors.
 Common Stock Dividends 
For a summary of our declared quarterly cash
dividends on common stock during 2022 and through
February 22, 2023, see Note 13 – Shareholders’
Equity to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Finance Subsidiary Issuers and Parent Guarantor 
BofA Finance LLC, a Delaware limited liability
company (BofA Finance), is a consolidated finance
subsidiary of the Corporation that has issued and
sold, and is expected to continue to issue and
sell, its senior unsecured debt securities
(Guaranteed Notes) that are fully and
unconditionally guaranteed by the Corporation.
The Corporation guarantees the due and punctual
payment, on demand, of amounts payable on the
Guaranteed Notes if not paid by BofA Finance. In
addition, each of BAC Capital Trust XIII, BAC
Capital Trust XIV and BAC Capital Trust XV,
Delaware statutory trusts (collectively, the
Trusts), is a 100 percent owned finance
subsidiary of the Corporation that has issued and
sold trust preferred securities (the Trust
Preferred
 Bank of America58 
Securities) or capital securities (the Capital
Securities and, together with the Guaranteed
Notes and the Trust Preferred Securities, the
Guaranteed Securities), as applicable, that
remained outstanding at December 31, 2022. The
Corporation guarantees the payment of amounts and
distributions with respect to the Trust Preferred
Securities and Capital Securities if not paid by
the Trusts, to the extent of funds held by the
Trusts, and this guarantee, together with the
Corporation’s other obligations with respect to
the Trust Preferred Securities and Capital
Securities, effectively constitutes a full and
unconditional guarantee of the Trusts’ payment
obligations on the Trust Preferred Securities or
Capital Securities, as applicable. No other
subsidiary of the Corporation guarantees the
Guaranteed Securities.
BofA Finance and each of the Trusts are finance
subsidiaries, have no independent assets,
revenues or operations and are dependent upon the
Corporation and/or the Corporation’s other
subsidiaries to meet their respective obligations
under the Guaranteed Securities in the ordinary
course. If holders of the Guaranteed Securities
make claims on their Guaranteed Securities in a
bankruptcy, resolution or similar proceeding, any
recoveries on those claims will be limited to
those available under the applicable guarantee by
the Corporation, as described above.
The Corporation is a holding company and depends
upon its subsidiaries for liquidity. Applicable
laws and regulations and intercompany
arrangements entered into in connection with the
Corporation’s resolution plan could restrict the
availability of funds from subsidiaries to the
Corporation, which could adversely affect the
Corporation’s ability to make payments under its
guarantees. In addition, the obligations of the
Corporation under the guarantees of the
Guaranteed Securities will be structurally
subordinated to all existing and future
liabilities of its subsidiaries, and claimants
should look only to assets of the Corporation for
payments. If the Corporation, as guarantor of the
Guaranteed Notes, transfers all or substantially
all of its assets to one or more direct or
indirect majority-owned subsidiaries, under the
indenture governing the Guaranteed Notes, the
subsidiary or subsidiaries will not be required
to assume the Corporation’s obligations under its
guarantee of the Guaranteed Notes.
For more information on factors that may affect
payments to holders of the Guaranteed Securities,
see Liquidity Risk – NB Holdings Corporation in
this section, Item 1. Business – Insolvency and
the Orderly Liquidation Authority on page 6 and
Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors – Liquidity on page
9.
 Representations and Warranties Obligations 
For information on representations and warranties
obligations in connection with the sale of
mortgage loans, see Note 12 – Commitments and
Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
 Credit Risk Management 
Credit risk is the risk of loss arising from the
inability or failure of a borrower or
counterparty to meet its obligations. Credit risk
can also arise from operational failures that
result in an erroneous advance, commitment or
investment of funds. We define the credit
exposure to a borrower or counterparty as the
loss potential arising from all product
classifications including loans and leases,
deposit overdrafts, derivatives, assets held-for-
sale and unfunded lending commitments, which
include loan commitments, letters of credit and
financial guarantees. Derivative positions are
recorded at fair value, and assets held-for-sale
are recorded at either fair value or the lower of
cost or
fair value. Certain loans and unfunded
commitments are accounted for under the fair
value option. Credit risk for categories of
assets carried at fair value is not accounted for
as part of the allowance for credit losses but as
part of the fair value adjustments recorded in
earnings. For derivative positions, our credit
risk is measured as the net cost in the event the
counterparties with contracts in which we are in
a gain position fail to perform under the terms
of those contracts. We use the current fair value
to represent credit exposure without giving
consideration to future mark-to-market changes.
The credit risk amounts take into consideration
the effects of legally enforceable master netting
agreements and cash collateral. Our consumer and
commercial credit extension and review procedures
encompass funded and unfunded credit exposures.
For more information on derivatives and credit
extension commitments, see Note 3 – Derivatives
and Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies to
the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We manage credit risk based on the risk profile
of the borrower or counterparty, repayment
sources, the nature of underlying collateral and
other support given current events, conditions
and expectations. We classify our portfolios as
either consumer or commercial and monitor credit
risk in each as discussed below.
We refine our underwriting and credit risk
management practices as well as credit standards
to meet the changing economic environment. To
mitigate losses and enhance customer support in
our consumer businesses, we have in place
collection programs and loan modification and
customer assistance infrastructures. We utilize a
number of actions to mitigate losses in the
commercial businesses including increasing the
frequency and intensity of portfolio monitoring,
hedging activity and our practice of transferring
management of deteriorating commercial exposures
to independent special asset officers as credits
enter criticized categories.
During 2022, asset quality generally improved
compared to 2021. Our 2022 net charge-off ratio
remained near historic lows, and nonperforming
loans and commercial reservable criticized
utilized exposure decreased compared to 2021,
which was partially offset by an increase in
reservable criticized exposure associated with
our direct exposure to Russia as a result of the
Russia/Ukraine conflict. While uncertainty around
the pandemic has diminished, uncertainty remains
regarding broader economic impacts as a result of
inflationary pressures, rising rates and the
current geopolitical situation and could lead to
adverse impacts to credit quality metrics in
future periods.
For information on our credit risk management
activities, see Consumer Portfolio Credit Risk
Management below, Commercial Portfolio Credit
Risk Management on page 64, Non-U.S. Portfolio on
page 70, Allowance for Credit Losses on page 73,
and Note 5 – Outstanding Loans and Leases and
Allowance for Credit Losses to the Consolidated
Financial Statements. For more information on the
factors that may expose us to credit risk, see
Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual
Report on Form 10-K.
 Consumer Portfolio Credit Risk Management 
Credit risk management for the consumer portfolio
begins with initial underwriting and continues
throughout a borrower’s credit cycle. Statistical
techniques in conjunction with experiential
judgment are used in all aspects of portfolio
management including underwriting, product
pricing, risk appetite, setting credit limits,
and establishing operating processes and metrics
to quantify and balance risks and returns.
Statistical models are built using detailed
behavioral information from external
 59Bank of America 
sources, such as credit bureaus, and/or internal
historical experience and are a component of our
consumer credit risk management process. These
models are used in part to assist in making both
new and ongoing credit decisions as well as
portfolio management strategies, including
authorizations and line management, collection
practices and strategies, and determination of
the allowance for loan and lease losses and
allocated capital for credit risk.
 Consumer Credit Portfolio 
During 2022, the U.S. unemployment rate continued
to decline and home prices increased compared to
2021, although they began to decline in the
second half of 2022 as inflationary pressures
continued to persist. During 2022, net charge-
offs were $1.9 billion, relatively unchanged
compared to 2021. During 2022, nonperforming
loans declined primarily due to
decreases from consumer real estate loan sales,
partially offset by increases from loans whose
prior-period deferrals expired and were modified
in troubled debt restructurings (TDRs) during the
first quarter of 2022.
The consumer allowance for loan and lease losses
increased $204 million during 2022 to $7.2
billion. For more information, see Allowance for
Credit Losses on page 73.
For more information on our accounting policies
regarding delinquencies, nonperforming status,
charge-offs and TDRs for the consumer portfolio,
see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles and Note 5 – Outstanding Loans and
Leases and Allowance for Credit Losses to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Table 19 presents our outstanding consumer loans
and leases, consumer nonperforming loans and
accruing consumer loans past due 90 days or more.
 T… Co… 
 19 Cr… 
 Qu… 
 Ac… 
 Pa… 
 Due 
 Ou… No… 90 
 Da… 
 or 
 Mo… 
 De… 
 31 
 (… 
 in 20… 20… 20… 2021 20… 2021 
 m… 
 R… $ 22… $ 22… $ 2,… $ 2,2… $ 368 $ 634 
 m… 
 H… 26… 27… 510 630 — — 
 e… 
 C… 93… 81… n/a n/a 717 487 
 c… 
 D… 10… 10… 77 75 2 11 
 c… 
 O… 156 190 — — — — 
 c… 
 C… 
 l… 
 e… 
 l… 
 a… 
 f… $ 45… $ 43… $ 2,… $ 2,9… $ 1,… $ 1,1… 
 u… 
 t… 
 f… 
 v… 
 o… 
 L… 
 a… 
 f… 
 u… 339 618 
 t… 
 f… 
 v… 
 o… 
 T… 
 c… 
 l… $ 45… $ 43… 
 a… 
 l… 
 P… 
 of 
 o… 
 c… n/a n/a 0.… % 0.69 % 0.… % 0.26 % 
 l… 
 a… 
 l… 
 P… 
 of 
 o… 
 c… 
 l… 
 a… n/a n/a 0.… 0.71 0.… 0.12 
 l… 
 e… 
 f… 
 l… 
 p… 
(1) Residential mortgage loans accruing past due 90 days or more are fully-insured loans. At December
31, 2022 and 2021, residential mortgage included $260 million and $444 million of loans on which
interest had been curtailed by the FHA, and therefore were no longer accruing interest, although
principal was still insured, and $108 million and $190 million of loans on which interest was still
accruing.
(2) Outstandings primarily includes auto and specialty lending loans and leases of $51.8 billion and
$48.5 billion, U.S. securities-based lending loans of $50.4 billion and $51.1 billion at December 31,
2022 and 2021, and non-U.S. consumer loans of $3.0 billion as of both period ends.
(3) For more information on the fair value option, see Note 21 – Fair Value Option to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
(4) Excludes consumer loans accounted for under the fair value option. At December 31, 2022 and 2021,
$7 million and $21 million of loans accounted for under the fair value option were past due 90 days
or more and not accruing interest.
n/a = not applicable
Table 20 presents net charge-offs and related ratios for consumer loans and leases.
 Consumer Net 
 Charge-offs Net 
 Table 20 and Net Charge-off 
 (Dollars in Related Charge-offs Ratios(1) 
 millions) Ratios 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Residential $ 72 $ -28 0.03 % -0.01 % 
 mortgage 
 Home equity -90 -119 -0.33 -0.39 
 Credit card 1,334 1,723 1.60 2.29 
 Direct/Indi… 18 1 0.02 — 
 consumer 
 Other 521 270 n/m n/m 
 consumer 
 Total $ 1,855 $ 1,847 0.42 0.44 
(1) Net charge-off ratios are calculated as net
charge-offs divided by average outstanding loans
and leases, excluding loans accounted for under
the fair value option.
n/m = not meaningful
We believe that the presentation of information
adjusted to exclude the impact of the fully-
insured loan portfolio and loans accounted for
under the fair value option is more
representative of the ongoing operations and
credit quality of the business. As a result, in
the following tables and discussions of the
residential mortgage and home equity portfolios,
we exclude loans accounted for under the fair
value option and provide information that
excludes the impact of the fully-insured loan
portfolio in certain credit quality statistics.
 Residential Mortgage 
The residential mortgage portfolio made up the
largest percentage of our consumer loan portfolio
at 50 percent of consumer loans and leases in
2022. Approximately 51 percent of the residential
mortgage portfolio was in Consumer Banking and 45
percent was in GWIM. The remaining portion was in
All Other .
Outstanding balances in the residential mortgage
portfolio increased $7.7 billion in 2022 as
originations were partially offset by paydowns
and loan sales.
 Bank of America60 
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the residential
mortgage portfolio included $11.7 billion and
$12.7 billion of outstanding fully-insured loans,
of which both had $2.2 billion of FHA insurance,
with the remainder protected by Fannie Mae long-
term standby agreements.
Table 21 presents certain residential mortgage
key credit
statistics on both a reported basis and excluding
the fully-insured loan portfolio. The following
discussion presents the residential mortgage
portfolio excluding the fully-insured loan
portfolio.
 Residenti… 
 Table 21 Mortgage – 
 Key Credit 
 Statistics 
 Reported Excluding 
 Basis(1) Fully-ins… 
 Loans(1) 
 December 
 31 
 (Dollars 
 in 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 millions) 
 Outstand… $ 229,670 $ 221,963 $ 217,976 $ 209,259 
 Accruing 
 past due 1,471 1,753 844 866 
 30 days 
 or more 
 Accruing 
 past due 368 634 — — 
 90 days 
 or more 
 Nonperfo… 2,167 2,284 2,167 2,284 
 loans(2) 
 Percent 
 of 
 portfolio 
 Refreshed 
 LTV 
 greater 
 than 90 1 % 1 % 1 % 1 % 
 but less 
 than or 
 equal to 
 100 
 Refreshed 
 LTV — — — — 
 greater 
 than 100 
 Refreshed 
 FICO 1 2 1 1 
 below 620 
(1) Outstandings, accruing past due,
nonperforming loans and percentages of portfolio
exclude loans accounted for under the fair value
option.
(2) Includes loans that are contractually current
which primarily consist of collateral-dependent
TDRs, including those that have been discharged
in Chapter 7 bankruptcy and loans that have not
yet demonstrated a sustained period of payment
performance following a TDR.
Nonperforming outstanding balances in the
residential mortgage portfolio decreased $117
million in 2022 primarily due to decreases from
consumer real estate loan sales in the second
quarter of 2022, partially offset by increases
from loans whose prior-period deferrals expired
and were modified in TDRs during the first
quarter of 2022. Of the nonperforming residential
mortgage loans at December 31, 2022, $1.4
billion, or 63 percent, were current on
contractual payments. Loans accruing past due 30
days or more decreased $22 million.
Net charge-offs of $72 million for 2022 increased
$100 million compared to 2021 primarily due to
loan sales that occurred in the second quarter of
2022.
Of the $218.0 billion in total residential
mortgage loans outstanding at December 31, 2022,
28 percent were originated as interest-only
loans. The outstanding balance of interest-only
residential mortgage loans that had entered the
amortization period was $3.4 billion, or six
percent, at December 31, 2022. Residential
mortgage loans that have entered the amortization
period generally experience a higher rate of
early stage delinquencies and nonperforming
status compared to the residential mortgage
portfolio as a whole. At December 31, 2022, $64
million, or two percent, of outstanding interest-
only
residential mortgages that had entered the
amortization period were accruing past due 30
days or more compared to $844 million, or less
than one percent, for the entire residential
mortgage portfolio. In addition, at December 31,
2022, $204 million, or six percent, of
outstanding interest-only residential mortgage
loans that had entered the amortization period
were nonperforming, of which $79 million were
contractually current. Loans that have yet to
enter the amortization period in our interest-
only residential mortgage portfolio are primarily
well-collateralized loans to our wealth
management clients and have an interest-only
period of three to ten years. Approximately 96
percent of these loans that have yet to enter the
amortization period will not be required to make
a fully-amortizing payment until 2025 or later.
Table 22 presents outstandings, nonperforming
loans and net charge-offs by certain state
concentrations for the residential mortgage
portfolio. The Los Angeles-Long Beach-Santa Ana
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) within
California represented 14 percent and 15 percent
of outstandings at December 31, 2022 and 2021. In
the New York area, the New York-Northern New
Jersey-Long Island MSA made up 15 percent of
outstandings at both December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Reside… 
 Table Mortga… 
 22 State 
 Concen… 
 Outsta… Nonper… 
 Decemb… Net 
 31 Charg… 
 (Doll… Decemb… Decemb… Decemb… Decemb… 
 in 31 31 31 31 2022 2021 
 milli… 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 Calif… $ 80,878 $ 77,819 $ 656 $ 693 $ 37 $ -14 
 New 26,228 24,975 328 358 7 3 
 York 
 Flori… 15,225 13,883 145 158 -2 -8 
 Texas 9,399 9,002 88 86 — — 
 New 8,810 8,723 96 117 3 — 
 Jersey 
 Other 77,436 74,857 854 872 27 -9 
 Resid… 
 mortg… $ 217,976 $ 209,259 $ 2,167 $ 2,284 $ 72 $ -28 
 loans 
 Fully… 
 loan 11,694 12,704 
 portf… 
 Total 
 resid… 
 mortg… $ 229,670 $ 221,963 
 loan 
 portf… 
(1) Outstandings and nonperforming loans exclude loans accounted for under the fair value option.
 Home Equity 
At December 31, 2022, the home equity portfolio
made up six percent of the consumer portfolio and
was comprised of home equity lines of credit
(HELOCs), home equity loans and reverse
mortgages. HELOCs generally have an initial draw
period of 10
years, and after the initial draw period ends,
the loans generally convert to 15- or 20-year
amortizing loans. We no longer originate home
equity loans or reverse mortgages.
At December 31, 2022, 82 percent of the home
equity portfolio was in Consumer Banking , nine
percent was in All Other and the remainder of the
portfolio was primarily in GWIM .
 61Bank of America 
Outstanding balances in the home equity portfolio
decreased $1.4 billion in 2022 primarily due to
paydowns outpacing draws on existing lines and
new originations. Of the total home equity
portfolio at December 31, 2022 and 2021, $11.1
billion and $12.2 billion, or 42 percent and 44
percent, were in first-lien positions. At
December 31, 2022, outstanding balances in the
home equity portfolio that were in a second-lien
or more junior-
lien position and where we also held the first-
lien loan totaled $4.5 billion, or 17 percent of
our total home equity portfolio.
Unused HELOCs totaled $42.4 billion and $40.5
billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021. The HELOC
utilization rate was 38 percent and 39 percent at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Table 23 presents certain home equity portfolio
key credit statistics.
 Table 23 Home Equity – Key 
 (Dollars in Credit December 31 
 millions) Statistics(1) 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstandings $ 26,563 $ 27,935 
 Accruing past due 96 157 
 30 days or more 
 Nonperforming 510 630 
 loans(2) 
 Percent of 
 portfolio 
 Refreshed CLTV 
 greater than 90 but 
 less — % — % 
 than or equal to 
 100 
 Refreshed CLTV — 1 
 greater than 100 
 Refreshed FICO 2 3 
 below 620 
(1) Outstandings, accruing past due,
nonperforming loans and percentages of the
portfolio exclude loans accounted for under the
fair value option.
(2) Includes loans that are contractually current
which primarily consist of collateral-dependent
TDRs, including those that have been discharged
in Chapter 7 bankruptcy, junior-lien loans where
the underlying first lien is 90 days or more past
due, as well as loans that have not yet
demonstrated a sustained period of payment
performance following a TDR.
Nonperforming outstanding balances in the home
equity portfolio decreased $120 million to $510
million at December 31, 2022, primarily driven by
loan sales. Of the nonperforming home equity
loans at December 31, 2022, $275 million, or 54
percent, were current on contractual payments. In
addition, $167 million, or 33 percent, of
nonperforming home equity loans were 180 days or
more past due and had been written down to the
estimated fair value of the collateral, less
costs to sell. Accruing loans that were 30 days
or more past due decreased $61 million in 2022.
Net recoveries decreased $29 million to $90
million in 2022 compared to 2021.
Of the $26.6 billion in total home equity
portfolio outstandings at December 31, 2022, as
shown in Table 23, 13 percent require interest-
only payments. The outstanding balance of HELOCs
that had reached the end of their draw period and
entered the amortization period was $5.2 billion
at December 31, 2022. The HELOCs that have
entered the amortization period have experienced
a higher percentage of early stage delinquencies
and nonperforming status when compared to the
HELOC portfolio as a whole. At December 31, 2022,
$53 million, or one percent, of outstanding
HELOCs that
had entered the amortization period were accruing
past due 30 days or more. In addition, at
December 31, 2022, $354 million, or seven
percent, were nonperforming.
For our interest-only HELOC portfolio, we do not
actively track how many of our home equity
customers pay only the minimum amount due on
their home equity loans and lines; however, we
can infer some of this information through a
review of our HELOC portfolio that we service and
is still in its revolving period. During 2022, 10
percent of these customers with an outstanding
balance did not pay any principal on their
HELOCs.
Table 24 presents outstandings, nonperforming
balances and net recoveries by certain state
concentrations for the home equity portfolio. In
the New York area, the New York-Northern New
Jersey-Long Island MSA made up 12 percent and 13
percent of the outstanding home equity portfolio
at December 31, 2022 and 2021. The Los Angeles-
Long Beach-Santa Ana MSA within California made
up 11 percent and 10 percent of the outstanding
home equity portfolio at December 31, 2022 and
2021.
 Home 
 Table Equity 
 24 State 
 Concen… 
 Outstan… Nonper… 
 December Net 
 31 Charge-… 
 (Dolla… 
 in 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 millio… 
 Califo… $ 7,406 $ 7,600 $ 119 $ 140 $ -20 $ -40 
 Florida 2,743 2,977 63 78 -21 -21 
 New 2,047 2,259 53 69 -3 -4 
 Jersey 
 New 1,806 2,072 80 96 -4 -1 
 York 
 Massac… 1,347 1,422 23 32 -2 -3 
 Other 11,214 11,605 172 215 -40 -50 
 Total 
 home 
 equity $ 26,563 $ 27,935 $ 510 $ 630 $ -90 $ -119 
 loan 
 portfo… 
(1) Outstandings and nonperforming loans exclude loans accounted for under the fair value option.
 Credit Card 
At December 31, 2022, 97 percent of the credit
card portfolio was managed in Consumer Banking
with the remainder in GWIM . Outstandings in the
credit card portfolio increased $12.0 billion
during 2022 to $93.4 billion primarily driven by
increased purchase volumes, partially offset by
the sale of a $1.6 billion affinity card loan
portfolio. Net charge-offs decreased $389
million to $1.3 billion in 2022 compared to 2021,
as loss rates remained near historic lows. In
addition, the prior year included charge-offs
associated with deferrals that expired in 2020.
Credit card loans 30 days or more past due and
still accruing interest increased $508 million,
and 90 days or more past due and still accruing
interest increased $230 million. Unused lines of
credit for credit card increased to $370.1
billion
 Bank of America62 
at December 31, 2022 from $361.2 billion at
December 31, 2021.
Table 25 presents certain state concentrations
for the credit card portfolio.
 Credit 
 Table Card 
 25 State 
 Concent… 
 Accruing 
 Outsta… Past Due 
 90 Days 
 or More 
 Decemb… Net 
 31 Charge… 
 (Doll… 
 in 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 milli… 
 Calif… $ 15,363 $ 13,076 $ 126 $ 82 $ 232 $ 322 
 Flori… 9,512 8,046 100 71 183 245 
 Texas 8,125 6,894 72 47 123 158 
 New 5,381 4,725 56 35 99 135 
 York 
 Washi… 4,844 4,080 21 13 36 39 
 Other 50,196 44,617 342 239 661 824 
 Total 
 credit $ 93,421 $ 81,438 $ 717 $ 487 $ 1,334 $ 1,723 
 card 
 portf… 
 Direct/Indirect Consumer 
At December 31, 2022, 49 percent of the
direct/indirect portfolio was included in
Consumer Banking (consumer auto and recreational
vehicle lending) and 51 percent was included in
GWIM (principally securities-based lending
loans). Outstandings
in the direct/indirect portfolio increased $2.7
billion in 2022 to $106.2 billion driven by
growth in our auto portfolio.
Table 26 presents certain state concentrations
for the direct/indirect consumer loan portfolio.
 Table Direc… 
 26 State 
 Conce… 
 Accru… 
 Past 
 Due 
 Outst… 90 
 Days 
 or 
 More 
 Decem… Net 
 31 Charg… 
 (Dol… 
 in 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 mill… 
 Cali… $ 15,516 $ 15,061 $ 1 $ 2 $ 6 $ 3 
 Flor… 13,783 13,352 — 1 4 1 
 Texas 9,837 9,505 — 2 3 2 
 New 7,891 7,802 — 1 2 3 
 York 
 New 4,456 4,228 — — 1 -3 
 Jers… 
 Other 54,753 53,612 1 5 2 -5 
 Total 
 dire… $ 106,2… $ 103,5… $ 2 $ 11 $ 18 $ 1 
 loan 
 port… 
 Other Consumer 
Other consumer primarily consists of deposit
overdraft balances. Net charge-offs increased
$251 million in 2022 to $521 million, primarily
driven by overdraft losses due to higher payment
activity related to checking accounts.
Nonperforming Consumer Loans, Leases and
Foreclosed Properties Activity
Table 27 presents nonperforming consumer loans,
leases and foreclosed properties activity during
2022 and 2021. During 2022, nonperforming
consumer loans decreased $235 million to $2.8
billion primarily due to decreases from loan
sales, partially offset by increases from loans
whose prior-period deferrals expired and were
modified in TDRs during the first quarter of
2022.
At December 31, 2022, $605 million, or 22
percent, of nonperforming loans were 180 days or
more past due and had been written down to their
estimated property value less costs to sell. In
addition, at December 31, 2022, $1.7 billion, or
61 percent, of nonperforming consumer loans were
modified and are now current after successful
trial periods, or are current loans classified as
nonperforming loans in accordance with applicable
policies.
Foreclosed properties increased $20 million in
2022 to $121 million. Nonperforming loans also
include certain loans that have been modified in
TDRs where economic concessions have been granted
to borrowers experiencing financial difficulties.
 63Bank of America 
 Nonperforming Consumer Loans, 
 Table 27 Leases and Foreclosed 
 (Dollars in millions) Properties Activity 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Nonperforming loans and 
 leases, January $ 2,989 $ 2,725 
 1 
 Additions 1,453 2,006 
 Reductions: 
 Paydowns and payoffs -535 -625 
 Sales -402 -4 
 Returns to performing -661 -1,037 
 status(1) 
 Charge-offs -56 -64 
 Transfers to foreclosed -34 -12 
 properties 
 Total net 
 additions/(reductions) to -235 264 
 nonperforming loans and leases 
 Total nonperforming loans and 
 leases, 2,754 2,989 
 December 31 
 Foreclosed properties, 121 101 
 December 31(2) 
 Nonperforming consumer loans, 
 leases and $ 2,875 $ 3,090 
 foreclosed properties, 
 December 31 
 Nonperforming consumer loans 
 and leases 
 as a percentage of outstanding 0.60 % 0.69 % 
 consumer 
 loans and leases(3) 
 Nonperforming consumer loans, 
 leases and 
 foreclosed properties as a 
 percentage of 0.63 0.71 
 outstanding consumer loans, 
 leases and 
 foreclosed properties(3) 
(1) Consumer loans may be returned to performing status when all principal and interest is current
and full repayment of the remaining contractual principal and interest is expected, or when the loan
otherwise becomes well-secured and is in the process of collection.
(2) Foreclosed property balances do not include properties insured by certain government-guaranteed
loans, principally FHA-insured, of $60 million and $52 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
(3) Outstanding consumer loans and leases exclude loans accounted for under the fair value option.
Table 28 presents TDRs for the consumer real estate portfolio. Performing TDR balances are excluded
from nonperforming loans and leases in Table 27.
 Consum… 
 Real 
 Estate 
 Troubl… Decemb… Decemb… 
 Table Debt 31, 31, 
 28 Restru… 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Doll… 
 in Nonper… Perfor… Total Nonper… Perfor… Total 
 milli… 
 Resid… 
 mortg… $ 1,726 $ 1,548 $ 3,274 $ 1,498 $ 2,278 $ 3,776 
 2) 
 Home 324 544 868 254 652 906 
 equit… 
 Total 
 consu… 
 real 
 estate $ 2,050 $ 2,092 $ 4,142 $ 1,752 $ 2,930 $ 4,682 
 troub… 
 debt 
 restr… 
(1) At December 31, 2022 and 2021, residential
mortgage TDRs deemed collateral dependent totaled
$1.8 billion and $1.6 billion, and included $1.6
billion and $1.4 billion of loans classified as
nonperforming and $183 million and $279 million
of loans classified as performing.
(2) At December 31, 2022 and 2021, residential
mortgage performing TDRs included $1.1 billion
and $1.2 billion of loans that were fully-
insured.
(3) At December 31, 2022 and 2021, home equity
TDRs deemed collateral dependent totaled $411
million and $370 million, and included $293
million and $222 million of loans classified as
nonperforming and $118 million and $148 million
of loans classified as performing.
In addition to modifying consumer real estate
loans, we work with customers who are
experiencing financial difficulty by modifying
credit card and other consumer loans. Credit card
and other consumer loan modifications generally
involve a reduction in the customer’s interest
rate on the account and placing the customer on a
fixed payment plan not exceeding 60 months.
Modifications of credit card and other consumer
loans are made through programs utilizing direct
customer contact, but may also utilize external
programs. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, our
credit card and other consumer TDR portfolio was
$624 million and $672 million, of which $540
million and $599 million were current or less
than 30 days past due under the modified terms.
 Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management 
Credit risk management for the commercial
portfolio begins with an assessment of the credit
risk profile of the borrower or counterparty
based on an analysis of its financial position.
As part of the overall credit risk assessment,
our commercial credit exposures are assigned a
risk rating and are subject to approval based on
defined credit approval standards. Subsequent to
loan origination, risk ratings are monitored on
an ongoing basis, and if necessary, adjusted to
reflect changes in the financial condition, cash
flow, risk profile or outlook of a borrower or
counterparty. In making credit decisions, we
consider risk rating, collateral, country,
industry and single-name concentration limits
while also balancing these considerations with
the total borrower or counterparty relationship.
We use a variety of tools to continuously monitor
the ability of a borrower or counterparty to
perform under its obligations. We use risk rating
aggregations
to measure and evaluate concentrations within
portfolios. In addition, risk ratings are a
factor in determining the level of allocated
capital and the allowance for credit losses.
As part of our ongoing risk mitigation
initiatives, we attempt to work with clients
experiencing financial difficulty to modify their
loans to terms that better align with their
current ability to pay. In situations where an
economic concession has been granted to a
borrower experiencing financial difficulty, we
identify these loans as TDRs. For more
information on our accounting policies regarding
delinquencies, nonperforming status and net
charge-offs for the commercial portfolio, see
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
Management of Commercial Credit Risk
Concentrations
Commercial credit risk is evaluated and managed
with the goal that concentrations of credit
exposure continue to be aligned with our risk
appetite. We review, measure and manage
concentrations of credit exposure by industry,
product, geography, customer relationship and
loan size. We also review, measure and manage
commercial real estate loans by geographic
location and property type. In addition, within
our non-U.S. portfolio, we evaluate exposures by
region and by country. Tables 33, 36 and 39
summarize our concentrations. We also utilize
syndications of exposure to third parties, loan
sales, hedging and other risk mitigation
techniques to manage the size and risk profile of
the commercial credit portfolio. For more
information on our industry concentrations, see
Table 36
 Bank of America64 
and Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management –
Industry Concentrations on page 68.
We account for certain large corporate loans and
loan commitments, including issued but unfunded
letters of credit which are considered utilized
for credit risk management purposes, that exceed
our single-name credit risk concentration
guidelines under the fair value option. Lending
commitments, both funded and unfunded, are
actively managed and monitored, and as
appropriate, credit risk for these lending
relationships may be mitigated through the use of
credit derivatives, with our credit view and
market perspectives determining the size and
timing of the hedging activity. In addition, we
purchase credit protection to cover the funded
portion as well as the unfunded portion of
certain other credit exposures. To lessen the
cost of obtaining our desired credit protection
levels, credit exposure may be added within an
industry, borrower or counterparty group by
selling protection. These credit derivatives do
not meet the requirements for treatment as
accounting hedges. They are carried at fair value
with changes in fair value recorded in other
income.
In addition, we are a member of various
securities and derivative exchanges and
clearinghouses, both in the U.S. and other
countries. As a member, we may be required to pay
a pro-rata share of the losses incurred by some
of these organizations as a result of another
member default and under other loss scenarios.
For more information, see Note 12 – Commitments
and Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
 Commercial Credit Portfolio 
During 2022, commercial credit quality improved
as charge-offs, nonperforming commercial loans
and reservable criticized utilized exposure
declined. Due to the ongoing Russia/Ukraine
conflict, all direct exposure to Russian
counterparties was downgraded and reported as
reservable criticized exposure, and expected
credit losses (ECL) have been incorporated into
our estimate of the allowance for credit losses.
Outstanding
commercial loans and leases increased $45.9
billion during 2022 due to growth in commercial
and industrial, primarily in Global Banking .
This increase was partially offset by lower U.S.
small business commercial loans due to repayments
of PPP loans by the Small Business Administration
(SBA) under the terms of the program.
Credit quality of commercial real estate
borrowers generally improved from 2021 as
pandemic-impacted sectors are recovering.
However, many commercial real estate markets,
while improving, are still experiencing
disruptions in demand, supply chain challenges,
tenant difficulties and challenging capital
markets. Demand for office space continues to be
uncertain as companies evaluate space needs with
employment models that utilize a mix of remote
and conventional office use.
The commercial allowance for loan and lease
losses remained relatively unchanged at $5.4
billion at December 31, 2022, as loan growth and
a dampened macroeconomic outlook were offset by
asset quality improvement and a reserve release
for reduced pandemic uncertainties. For more
information, see Allowance for Credit Losses on
page 73.
Total commercial utilized credit exposure
increased $51.3 billion during 2022 to $704.9
billion primarily driven by higher loans and
leases and derivative assets. The utilization
rate for loans and leases, standby letters of
credit (SBLCs) and financial guarantees, and
commercial letters of credit, in the aggregate,
was 56 percent at both December 31, 2022 and
2021.
Table 29 presents commercial credit exposure by
type for utilized, unfunded and total binding
committed credit exposure. Commercial utilized
credit exposure includes SBLCs and financial
guarantees and commercial letters of credit that
have been issued and for which we are legally
bound to advance funds under prescribed
conditions during a specified time period, and
excludes exposure related to trading account
assets. Although funds have not yet been
advanced, these exposure types are considered
utilized for credit risk management purposes.
 Comme… 
 Table Credit 
 29 Expos… 
 by 
 Type 
 Commer… Commer… Total 
 Utiliz… Unfund… Commer… 
 3, 4) Commit… 
 Decemb… 
 31 
 (Doll… 
 in 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 milli… 
 Loans 
 and $ 589,362 $ 543,4… $ 487,772 $ 454,2… $ 1,077,… $ 997,6… 
 leases 
 Deriv… 48,642 35,344 — — 48,642 35,344 
 asset… 
 Stand… 
 lette… 
 of 
 credit 33,376 34,389 1,266 639 34,642 35,028 
 and 
 finan… 
 guara… 
 Debt 
 secur… 
 and 20,195 19,427 2,551 4,638 22,746 24,065 
 other 
 inves… 
 Loans 6,112 13,185 3,729 16,581 9,841 29,766 
 held-… 
 Opera… 5,509 5,935 — — 5,509 5,935 
 leases 
 Comme… 
 lette… 973 1,176 28 247 1,001 1,423 
 of 
 credit 
 Other 698 652 — — 698 652 
 Total $ 704,867 $ 653,5… $ 495,346 $ 476,3… $ 1,200,… $ 1,129… 
(1) Commercial utilized exposure includes loans of $5.4 billion and $7.2 billion accounted for under
the fair value option at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
(2) Commercial unfunded exposure includes commitments accounted for under the fair value option with
a notional amount of $3.0 billion and $4.8 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
(3) Excludes unused business card lines, which are not legally binding.
(4) Includes the notional amount of unfunded legally binding lending commitments, net of amounts
distributed (i.e., syndicated or participated) to other financial institutions. The distributed
amounts were $10.4 billion and $10.7 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
(5) Derivative assets are carried at fair value, reflect the effects of legally enforceable master
netting agreements and have been reduced by cash collateral of $33.8 billion and $30.8 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. Not reflected in utilized and committed exposure is additional non-cash
derivative collateral held of $51.6 billion and $44.8 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021, which
consists primarily of other marketable securities.
 65Bank of America 
Nonperforming commercial loans decreased $524 million across all product types. Table 30 presents our
commercial loans and leases portfolio and related credit quality information at December 31, 2022 and
2021.
 Table 
 30 
 (Doll… Accrui… 
 in Past 
 milli… Outsta… Due 
 Comme… Commer… Decemb… 90 Days 
 and Credit 31 Nonperf… or More 
 indus… Quality 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. $ 358,481 $ 325,936 $ 553 $ 825 $ 190 $ 171 
 comme… 
 Non-U… 124,479 113,266 212 268 25 19 
 comme… 
 Total 
 comme… 482,960 439,202 765 1,093 215 190 
 and 
 indus… 
 Comme… 
 real 69,766 63,009 271 382 46 40 
 estate 
 Comme… 
 lease 13,644 14,825 4 80 8 8 
 finan… 
 566,370 517,036 1,040 1,555 269 238 
 U.S. 
 small 17,560 19,183 14 23 355 87 
 busin… 
 comme… 
 Comme… 
 loans 
 exclu… 
 loans 
 accou… 
 for $ 583,930 $ 536,219 $ 1,054 $ 1,578 $ 624 $ 325 
 under 
 the 
 fair 
 value 
 option 
 Loans 
 accou… 
 for 
 under 5,432 7,201 
 the 
 fair 
 value 
 optio… 
 Total 
 comme… 
 loans $ 589,362 $ 543,420 
 and 
 leases 
(1) Includes card-related products.
(2) Commercial loans accounted for under the fair value option includes U.S. commercial of $2.9
billion and $4.6 billion and non-U.S. commercial of $2.5 billion and $2.6 billion at December 31,
2022 and 2021. For more information on the fair value option, see Note 21 – Fair Value Option to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Table 31 presents net charge-offs and related ratios for our commercial loans and leases for 2022 and
2021.
 Table 31 
 (Dollars in 
 millions) Commercial Net 
 Commercial Charge-offs Net Net Charge-off 
 and and Charge-offs Ratios(1) 
 industrial: Related Ratios 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. $ 71 $ -23 0.02 % (0.01 %) 
 commercial 
 Non-U.S. 21 35 0.02 0.04 
 commercial 
 Total 
 commercial 92 12 0.02 — 
 and 
 industrial 
 Commercial 66 34 0.10 0.06 
 real estate 
 Commercial 
 lease 5 -1 0.03 — 
 financing 
 163 45 0.03 0.01 
 U.S. small 
 business 154 351 0.86 1.19 
 commercial 
 Total $ 317 $ 396 0.06 0.08 
 commercial 
(1) Net charge-off ratios are calculated as net charge-offs divided by average outstanding loans and
leases, excluding loans accounted for under the fair value option.
Table 32 presents commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure by loan type. Criticized
exposure corresponds to the Special Mention, Substandard and Doubtful asset categories as defined by
regulatory authorities. Total commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure decreased $3.1
billion during 2022, which was broad-based across industries. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, 88
percent and 87 percent of commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure was secured.
 Table 32 
 (Dollars in Commercial 
 millions) Reservable 
 Commercial and Criticized Utilized December 31 
 industrial: Exposure(1, 2) 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. commercial $ 10,724 2.78 % $ 11,327 3.20 % 
 Non-U.S. commercial 2,665 2.04 2,582 2.17 
 Total commercial 13,389 2.59 13,909 2.94 
 and industrial 
 Commercial real 5,201 7.30 7,572 11.72 
 estate 
 Commercial lease 240 1.76 387 2.61 
 financing 
 18,830 3.13 21,868 3.96 
 U.S. small business 444 2.53 513 2.67 
 commercial 
 Total commercial 
 reservable $ 19,274 3.12 $ 22,381 3.91 
 criticized 
 utilized exposure 
(1) Total commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure includes loans and leases of $18.5
billion and $21.2 billion and commercial letters of credit of $817 million and $1.2 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.
(2) Percentages are calculated as commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure divided by total
commercial reservable utilized exposure for each exposure category.
 Commercial and Industrial 
Commercial and industrial loans include U.S.
commercial and non-U.S. commercial portfolios.
 U.S. Commercial 
At December 31, 2022, 63 percent of the U.S.
commercial loan
portfolio, excluding small business, was managed
in Global Banking, 21 percent in Global Markets ,
15 percent in GWIM (loans that provide financing
for asset purchases, business investments and
other liquidity needs for high net worth clients)
and the remainder primarily in Consumer Banking .
U.S. commercial loans increased $32.5 billion, or
10 percent, during
 Bank of America66 
2022 primarily driven by Global Banking .
Reservable criticized utilized exposure decreased
$603 million, or five percent, driven by
decreases across a broad range of industries.
 Non-U.S. Commercial 
At December 31, 2022, 64 percent of the non-U.S.
commercial loan portfolio was managed in Global
Banking, 35 percent in Global Markets and the
remainder in GWIM . Non-U.S. commercial loans
increased $11.2 billion, or 10 percent, during
2022 due to loan growth in Global Markets .
Reservable criticized utilized exposure increased
$83 million, or three percent, due to downgrades
for direct exposure to Russian counterparties.
For information on the non-U.S. commercial
portfolio, see Non-U.S. Portfolio on page 70. For
more information on the Russia/Ukraine conflict,
see Recent Developments on page 27.
 Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate primarily includes
commercial loans secured by non-owner-occupied
real estate and is dependent on the sale or lease
of the real estate as the primary source of
repayment. Outstanding loans increased $6.8
billion, or 11 percent, during 2022 to $69.8
billion due to new originations outpacing
paydowns and increased utilizations under
existing
credit facilities. Reservable criticized utilized
exposure decreased $2.4 billion, or 31 percent,
primarily driven by Hotels due to improving
vacancy rates and reduced travel restrictions.
The portfolio remains diversified across property
types and geographic regions. California
represented the largest state concentration at 19
percent and 21 percent of the commercial real
estate portfolio at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
The commercial real estate portfolio is
predominantly managed in Global Banking and
consists of loans made primarily to public and
private developers, and commercial real estate
firms.
During 2022, we continued to see low default
rates and varying degrees of improvement in
certain geographic regions and property types of
the portfolio. We use a number of proactive risk
mitigation initiatives to reduce adversely rated
exposure in the commercial real estate portfolio,
including transfers of deteriorating exposures
for management by independent special asset
officers and the pursuit of loan restructurings
or asset sales to achieve the best results for
our customers and the Corporation.
Table 33 presents outstanding commercial real
estate loans by geographic region, based on the
geographic location of the collateral, and by
property type.
 Table 33 
 (Dollars in millions) Outstanding Commercial Real December 31 
 By Geographic Region Estate Loans 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Northeast $ 15,601 $ 14,318 
 California 13,360 13,145 
 Southwest 8,723 7,510 
 Southeast 7,713 6,758 
 Florida 5,374 4,367 
 Midwest 3,419 3,221 
 Illinois 3,327 2,878 
 Midsouth 2,716 2,289 
 Northwest 1,959 1,709 
 Non-U.S. 5,518 4,760 
 Other 2,056 2,054 
 Total outstanding commercial real 
 estate $ 69,766 $ 63,009 
 loans 
 By Property Type 
 Non-residential 
 Office $ 18,230 $ 18,309 
 Industrial / Warehouse 13,775 10,749 
 Multi-family rental 10,412 8,173 
 Shopping centers /Retail 5,830 6,502 
 Hotel / Motels 5,696 5,932 
 Unsecured 3,195 3,178 
 Multi-use 2,403 1,835 
 Other 9,046 7,238 
 Total non-residential 68,587 61,916 
 Residential 1,179 1,093 
 Total outstanding commercial real 
 estate $ 69,766 $ 63,009 
 loans 
 U.S. Small Business Commercial 
The U.S. small business commercial loan portfolio
is comprised of small business card loans and
small business loans primarily managed in
Consumer Banking, and included $1.0 billion and
$4.7 billion of PPP loans outstanding at December
31, 2022 and 2021. The decline of $3.7 billion in
PPP loans during 2022 was primarily due to
repayment of the loans by the SBA under
the terms of the program. Excluding PPP, credit
card-related products were 53 percent and 50
percent of the U.S. small business commercial
portfolio at December 31, 2022 and 2021 and
represented all of the net charge-offs in 2022
compared to 95 percent in 2021. The increase of
$268 million in accruing past due 90 days or more
in 2022 was driven by PPP loans, which are fully
guaranteed by the SBA.
 67Bank of America 
Nonperforming Commercial Loans, Leases and
Foreclosed Properties Activity
Table 34 presents the nonperforming commercial
loans, leases and foreclosed properties activity
during 2022 and 2021. Nonperforming loans do not
include loans accounted for under the fair value
option. During 2022, nonperforming commercial
loans and leases decreased $524 million to $1.1
billion. At
December 31, 2022, 97 percent of commercial
nonperforming loans, leases and foreclosed
properties were secured, and 65 percent were
contractually current. Commercial nonperforming
loans were carried at 85 percent of their unpaid
principal balance, as the carrying value of these
loans has been reduced to the estimated
collateral value less costs to sell.
 Nonperforming Commercial Loans, 
 Leases and Foreclosed 
 Table 34 Properties 
 (Dollars in millions) Activity(1, 2) 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Nonperforming loans and leases, 
 January $ 1,578 $ 2,227 
 1 
 Additions 952 1,622 
 Reductions: 
 Paydowns -825 -1,163 
 Sales -57 -199 
 Returns to performing status(3) -334 -264 
 Charge-offs -221 -254 
 Transfers to loans -39 -391 
 held-for-sale 
 Total net reductions to 
 nonperforming -524 -649 
 loans and leases 
 Total nonperforming loans and 
 leases, 1,054 1,578 
 December 31 
 Foreclosed properties, December 49 29 
 31 
 Nonperforming commercial loans, 
 leases $ 1,103 $ 1,607 
 and foreclosed properties, 
 December 31 
 Nonperforming commercial loans 
 and 
 leases as a percentage of 0.18 % 0.29 % 
 outstanding 
 commercial loans and leases(4) 
 Nonperforming commercial loans, 
 leases 
 and foreclosed properties as a 
 percentage of outstanding 0.19 0.30 
 commercial 
 loans, leases and foreclosed 
 properties(4) 
(1) Balances do not include nonperforming loans
held-for-sale of $219 million and $264 million at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.
(2) Includes U.S. small business commercial
activity. Small business card loans are excluded
as they are not classified as nonperforming.
(3) Commercial loans and leases may be returned
to performing status when all principal and
interest is current and full repayment of the
remaining contractual principal and interest is
expected, or when the loan otherwise becomes
well-secured and is in the process of collection.
TDRs are generally classified as performing after
a sustained period of demonstrated payment
performance.
(4) Outstanding commercial loans exclude loans
accounted for under the fair value option.
Table 35 presents our commercial TDRs by product
type and performing status. U.S. small business
commercial TDRs are comprised of renegotiated
small business card loans and small business
loans. The renegotiated small business card loans
are not classified as nonperforming as they are
charged off no later
than the end of the month in which the loan
becomes 180 days past due. Commercial TDRs
increased $957 million, or 50 percent, during
2022 primarily due to commercial real estate
loans that were modified as TDRs during the first
half of the year.
 Commer… 
 Troubl… Decemb… Decemb… 
 Table Debt 31, 31, 
 35 Restru… 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Doll… 
 in Nonper… Perfor… Total Nonper… Perfor… Total 
 milli… 
 Comme… 
 and 
 indus… 
 U.S. $ 305 $ 985 $ 1,290 $ 359 $ 685 $ 1,044 
 comme… 
 Non-U… 69 238 307 72 8 80 
 comme… 
 Total 
 comme… 374 1,223 1,597 431 693 1,124 
 and 
 indus… 
 Comme… 
 real 59 1,131 1,190 244 437 681 
 estate 
 Comme… 
 lease 3 16 19 50 7 57 
 finan… 
 436 2,370 2,806 725 1,137 1,862 
 U.S. 
 small — 51 51 — 38 38 
 busin… 
 comme… 
 Total 
 comme… 
 troub… $ 436 $ 2,421 $ 2,857 $ 725 $ 1,175 $ 1,900 
 debt 
 restr… 
 Industry Concentrations 
Table 36 presents commercial committed and
utilized credit exposure by industry. Our
commercial credit exposure is diversified across
a broad range of industries. Total commercial
committed exposure increased $70.3 billion, or
six percent, during 2022 to $1.2 trillion. The
increase in commercial committed exposure was
concentrated in Asset managers and funds, Global
commercial banks and Pharmaceuticals and
biotechnology.
Industry limits are used internally to manage
industry concentrations and are based on
committed exposure that is determined on an
industry-by-industry basis. A risk management
framework is in place to set and approve industry
limits as well as to provide ongoing monitoring.
Asset managers and funds, our largest industry
concentration with committed exposure of $165.1
billion,
increased $28.2 billion, or 21 percent, during
2022 primarily driven by investment-grade
exposures.
Real estate, our second largest industry
concentration with committed exposure of $99.7
billion, increased $3.5 billion, or four percent,
during 2022. For more information on the
commercial real estate and related portfolios,
see Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management –
Commercial Real Estate on page 67.
Capital goods, our third largest industry
concentration with committed exposure of $87.3
billion, increased $3.0 billion, or four percent,
during 2022. The increase in committed exposure
occurred primarily as a result of increases in
the Electrical equipment and Trading companies
and distributors, partially offset by a decrease
in Building products.
While the U.S. and global economies have shown
signs of relief from the pandemic, uncertainty
remains as a result of
 Bank of America68 
geopolitical and inflationary pressures, and a
number of industries will likely continue to be
adversely impacted due to these conditions. We
continue to monitor all industries,
particularly higher risk industries that are
experiencing or could experience a more
significant impact to their financial condition.
 Commercial 
 Table 36 Credit 
 Exposure by 
 Industry(1) 
 Commercial Total 
 Utilized Commercial 
 Committed(2) 
 December 31 
 (Dollars in 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 millions) 
 Asset 
 managers & $ 106,842 $ 89,786 $ 165,087 $ 136,914 
 funds 
 Real 72,180 69,384 99,722 96,202 
 estate(3) 
 Capital 45,580 42,784 87,314 84,293 
 goods 
 Finance 55,248 59,327 79,546 86,009 
 companies 
 Healthcare 
 equipment 33,554 32,003 58,761 58,195 
 and services 
 Materials 26,304 25,133 55,589 53,652 
 Retailing 24,785 24,514 53,714 50,816 
 Government & 
 public 34,861 37,597 48,134 50,066 
 education 
 Food, 
 beverage and 23,232 21,584 47,486 45,419 
 tobacco 
 Consumer 26,980 28,172 47,372 48,052 
 services 
 Individuals 34,897 29,752 45,572 39,869 
 and trusts 
 Commercial 
 services and 23,628 22,390 41,596 42,451 
 supplies 
 Utilities 20,292 17,082 40,164 36,855 
 Energy 15,132 14,217 36,043 34,136 
 Transportat… 22,273 21,079 33,858 32,015 
 Technology 
 hardware and 11,441 10,159 29,825 26,910 
 equipment 
 Global 
 commercial 27,217 20,062 29,293 21,390 
 banks 
 Media 14,781 12,495 28,216 26,318 
 Pharmaceuti… 
 and 7,547 5,608 26,208 19,439 
 biotechnolo… 
 Software and 12,961 10,663 25,633 27,643 
 services 
 Consumer 
 durables and 10,009 9,740 21,389 21,226 
 apparel 
 Vehicle 12,909 11,030 20,638 15,678 
 dealers 
 Insurance 10,224 5,743 19,444 14,323 
 Telecommuni… 9,679 10,056 17,349 21,270 
 services 
 Automobiles 
 and 8,774 9,236 16,911 17,052 
 components 
 Food and 
 staples 7,157 6,902 11,908 12,226 
 retailing 
 Financial 
 markets 3,913 3,876 8,752 6,076 
 infrastruct… 
 (clearingho… 
 Religious 
 and social 2,467 3,154 4,689 5,394 
 organizatio… 
 Total 
 commercial 
 credit $ 704,867 $ 653,528 $ 1,200,213 $ 1,129,889 
 exposure by 
 industry 
(1) Includes U.S. small business commercial exposure.
(2) Includes the notional amount of unfunded legally binding lending commitments, net of amounts
distributed (i.e., syndicated or participated) to other financial institutions. The distributed
amounts were $10.4 billion and $10.7 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
(3) Industries are viewed from a variety of perspectives to best isolate the perceived risks. For
purposes of this table, the real estate industry is defined based on the primary business activity of
the borrowers or counterparties using operating cash flows and primary source of repayment as key
factors.
Risk Mitigation We purchase credit protection to
cover the funded portion as well as the unfunded
portion of certain credit exposures. To lower the
cost of obtaining our desired credit protection
levels, we may add credit exposure within an
industry, borrower or counterparty group by
selling protection. At December 31, 2022 and
2021, net notional credit default protection
purchased in our credit derivatives portfolio to
hedge our funded and unfunded exposures for which
we elected the fair value option, as well as
certain other credit exposures, was $9.0 billion
and $2.6 billion. We recorded net losses of $37
million in 2022 compared to net losses $91
million in 2021. The gains and losses on these
instruments were largely offset by gains and
losses on the related exposures. The Value-at-
Risk (VaR) results for these exposures are
included in the fair value option portfolio
information in Table 43. For more information,
see Trading Risk Management on page 76.
Tables 37 and 38 present the maturity profiles
and the credit exposure debt ratings of the net
credit default protection portfolio at December
31, 2022 and 2021.
 Table 37 Net Credit Default Protection by 
 Maturity 
 December 31 
 2022 2021 
 Less than or equal to one year 14 % 34 % 
 Greater than one year and less 
 than or 85 62 
 equal to five years 
 Greater than five years 1 4 
 Total net credit default 100 % 100 % 
 protection 
 69Bank of America 
 Net Credit 
 Table 38 Default 
 (Dollars in Protection 
 millions) by Credit NetNotional… 
 Ratings(2, Exposure December 31 Percent of NetNotiona… Percent of 
 3) Debt Rating 2022 Total 2021 Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 AAA $ -379 4.0 % $ — — % 
 AA -867 10.0 — — 
 A -3,257 36.0 -350 13.4 
 BBB -2,476 28.0 -710 27.1 
 BB -1,049 12.0 -809 30.9 
 B -676 7.0 -659 25.2 
 CCC and -93 1.0 -35 1.3 
 below 
 NR(4) -182 2.0 -55 2.1 
 Total net 
 credit $ -8,979 100.0 % $ -2,618 100.0 % 
 default 
 protection 
(1) Represents net credit default protection purchased. (2) Ratings are refreshed on a quarterly
basis. (3) Ratings of BBB- or higher are considered to meet the definition of investment grade. (4)
NR is comprised of index positions held and any names that have not been rated. In addition to our
net notional credit default protection purchased to cover the funded and unfunded portion of certain
credit exposures, credit derivatives are used for market-making activities for clients and
establishing positions intended to profit from directional or relative value changes. We execute the
majority of our credit derivative trades in the OTC market with large, multinational financial
institutions, including broker-dealers and, to a lesser degree, with a variety of other investors.
Because these transactions are executed in the OTC market, we are subject to settlement risk. We are
also subject to credit risk in the event that these counterparties fail to perform under the terms of
these contracts. In order to properly reflect counterparty credit risk, we record counterparty credit
risk valuation adjustments on certain derivative assets, including our purchased credit default
protection. In most cases, credit derivative transactions are executed on a daily margin basis.
Therefore, events such as a credit downgrade, depending on the ultimate rating level, or a breach of
credit covenants would typically require an increase in the amount of collateral required by the
counterparty, where applicable, and/or allow us to take additional protective measures such as early
termination of all
trades. For more information on credit derivatives and counterparty credit risk valuation
adjustments, see Note 3 – Derivatives to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Non-U.S. Portfolio
Our non-U.S. credit and trading portfolios are subject to country risk. We define country risk as the
risk of loss from unfavorable economic and political conditions, currency fluctuations, social
instability and changes in government policies. A risk management framework is in place to measure,
monitor and manage non-U.S. risk and exposures. In addition to the direct risk of doing business in a
country, we also are exposed to indirect country risks (e.g., related to the collateral received on
secured financing transactions or related to client clearing activities). These indirect exposures
are managed in the normal course of business through credit, market and operational risk governance
rather than through country risk governance. Table 39 presents our 20 largest non-U.S. country
exposures at December 31, 2022. These exposures accounted for 89 percent of our total non-U.S.
exposure at both December 31, 2022 and 2021. Net country exposure for these 20 countries increased
$24.0 billion in 2022 primarily driven by increases in Germany, Japan, Ireland, India and
Switzerland, partially offset by decreases in China, Belgium, Australia and Singapore. Non-U.S.
exposure is presented on an internal risk management basis and includes sovereign and non-sovereign
credit exposure, securities and other investments issued by or domiciled in countries other than the
U.S. Funded loans and loan equivalents include loans, leases, and other extensions of credit and
funds, including letters of credit and due from placements. Unfunded commitments are the undrawn
portion of legally binding commitments related to loans and loan equivalents. Net counterparty
exposure includes the fair value of derivatives, including the counterparty risk associated with
credit default swaps (CDS), and secured financing transactions. Securities and other investments are
carried at fair value and long securities exposures are netted against short exposures with the same
underlying issuer to, but not below, zero. Net country exposure represents country exposure less
hedges and credit default protection purchased, net of credit default protection sold.
 Bank of America70 
 Net 
 Co… Co… Inc… 
 Ta… Top Fun… Ex… Hed… Ex… (De… 
 39 20 Loa… at and at from 
 (D… Non… and Unf… Net Sec… De… Cre… De… Dec… 
 in Cou… Loan Loan Cou… Oth… 31 Def… 31 31 
 mi… Exp… Equ… Com… Exp… Inv… 20… Pro… 20… 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Un… $ 29,… $ 16,… $ 7,2… $ 2,5… $ 56… $ -1,… $ 55… $ 376 
 Ki… 
 Ge… 32,… 9,4… 2,1… 2,7… 46… -885 45… 11,… 
 Fr… 13,… 8,0… 2,0… 3,6… 27… -986 26… 1,6… 
 Ca… 10,… 10,… 1,4… 3,3… 25… -368 25… -738 
 Ja… 19,… 1,8… 1,3… 1,5… 23… -826 23… 5,8… 
 Au… 14,… 4,0… 568 1,5… 20… -286 20… -1,… 
 Br… 6,1… 1,4… 741 4,1… 12… -28 12… -250 
 Ch… 6,4… 294 1,3… 2,9… 11… -285 10… -1,… 
 In… 6,8… 589 614 2,8… 10… -80 10… 2,1… 
 Sw… 7,0… 3,0… 469 438 11… -321 10… 2,1… 
 Si… 4,0… 627 126 4,8… 9,… -37 9,… -1,… 
 Ne… 3,1… 4,8… 617 1,4… 10… -797 9,… -313 
 So… 6,1… 927 504 1,6… 9,… -72 9,… 974 
 Ko… 
 Ir… 7,6… 1,1… 151 230 9,… -126 9,… 3,5… 
 Me… 4,4… 1,7… 514 743 7,… -62 7,… 930 
 Ho… 5,1… 523 466 1,1… 7,… -22 7,… -56 
 Ko… 
 Sp… 2,4… 2,1… 398 1,0… 6,… -227 5,… -79 
 It… 3,8… 1,7… 184 426 6,… -602 5,… 464 
 Sa… 2,4… 1,4… 219 15 4,… -109 4,… 545 
 Ar… 
 Be… 1,4… 1,4… 184 910 4,… -153 3,… -1,… 
 To… 
 top 
 20 $ 187… $ 72,… $ 21,… $ 38,… $ 31… $ -7,… $ 31… $ 23,… 
 no… 
 co… 
 ex… 
Our largest non-U.S. country exposure at December
31, 2022 was the United Kingdom with net exposure
of $55.3 billion, which represents an increase of
$376 million from December 31, 2021. The increase
was primarily driven by net counterparty exposure
with financial institutions, partially offset by
a reduction in deposits with the central bank.
Our second largest non-U.S. country exposure was
Germany with net exposure of $45.7 billion at
December 31, 2022, an increase of $11.9 billion
from December 31, 2021. The increase was driven
by higher deposits with the central bank and
increased exposure with financial institutions
and corporates.
 Loan and Lease Contractual Maturities 
Table 40 disaggregates total outstanding loans
and leases by remaining scheduled principal due
dates and interest rates. The amounts provided do
not reflect prepayment assumptions or hedging
activities related to the loan portfolio. For
information on the asset sensitivity of our total
banking book balance sheet, see Interest Rate
Risk Management for the Banking Book on page 79.
 71Bank of America 
 Loan and 
 Lease 
 Table Contract… December 
 40 Maturiti… 31, 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Due After Due 
 (Dolla… Due in One Year After 
 in One Through Five Due After Total 
 millio… Year or Five Years 15 Years 
 Less Years Through 
 15 Years 
 Reside… $ 5,660 $ 32,546 $ 94,544 $ 96,991 $ 229,741 
 mortga… 
 Home 251 1,195 5,076 20,309 26,831 
 equity 
 Credit 93,421 — — — 93,421 
 card 
 Direct… 65,877 35,066 4,464 829 106,236 
 consum… 
 Other 156 — — — 156 
 consum… 
 Total 
 consum… 165,365 68,807 104,084 118,129 456,385 
 loans 
 U.S. 97,153 242,313 20,343 1,584 361,393 
 commer… 
 Non-U.… 49,662 52,826 22,436 2,075 126,999 
 commer… 
 Commer… 
 real 19,199 48,051 1,650 866 69,766 
 estate 
 Commer… 
 lease 2,737 8,214 1,026 1,667 13,644 
 financ… 
 U.S. 
 small 10,615 4,474 2,407 64 17,560 
 busine… 
 commer… 
 Total 
 commer… 179,366 355,878 47,862 6,256 589,362 
 loans 
 Total 
 loans $ 344,731 $ 424,685 $ 151,946 $ 124,385 $ 1,045,7… 
 and 
 leases 
 Amount Amount 
 due in due 
 one year after 
 or less one year 
 at: at: 
 (Dolla… Variable Fixed Variable Fixed 
 in Interest Interest Interest Interest Total 
 millio… Rates Rates Rates Rates 
 Reside… $ 1,007 $ 4,653 $ 83,441 $ 140,640 $ 229,741 
 mortga… 
 Home 203 48 22,438 4,142 26,831 
 equity 
 Credit 88,113 5,308 — — 93,421 
 card 
 Direct… 47,240 18,637 2,857 37,502 106,236 
 consum… 
 Other — 156 — — 156 
 consum… 
 Total 
 consum… 136,563 28,802 108,736 182,284 456,385 
 loans 
 U.S. 73,593 23,560 223,099 41,141 361,393 
 commer… 
 Non-U.… 42,692 6,970 75,355 1,982 126,999 
 commer… 
 Commer… 
 real 18,361 838 49,247 1,320 69,766 
 estate 
 Commer… 
 lease 229 2,508 3,696 7,211 13,644 
 financ… 
 U.S. 
 small 6,363 4,252 109 6,836 17,560 
 busine… 
 commer… 
 Total 
 commer… 141,238 38,128 351,506 58,490 589,362 
 loans 
 Total 
 loans $ 277,801 $ 66,930 $ 460,242 $ 240,774 $ 1,045,7… 
 and 
 leases 
(1) Includes loans accounted for under the fair value option.
 Bank of America72 
 Allowance for Credit Losses 
The allowance for credit losses increased $379
million from December 31, 2021 to $14.2 billion
at December 31, 2022, which included a $202
million reserve increase related to the consumer
portfolio and a $177 million reserve increase
related to the commercial portfolio. The increase
in the allowance was
primarily driven by loan growth and a dampened
macroeconomic outlook, partially offset by a
reserve release for reduced pandemic
uncertainties.
Table 41 presents an allocation of the allowance
for credit losses by product type at December 31,
2022 and 2021.
 Allo… 
 of 
 the 
 Allo… 
 for 
 Tab… Cred… 
 41 Loss… Amou… Perc… Perc… 
 (Do… by Dece… Perc… ofLo… Dece… Per… ofLo… 
 in Prod… 31, of andL… 31, of andL… 
 mil… Type 2022 Total Outs… 2021 Amou… Tot… Outs… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 All… 
 for 
 loan 
 and 
 lea… 
 los… 
 Res… $ 328 2.59 % 0.14 % $ 351 2.83 % 0.16 % 
 mor… 
 Home 92 0.73 0.35 206 1.66 0.74 
 equ… 
 Cre… 6,136 48.38 6.57 5,907 47.… 7.25 
 card 
 Dir… 585 4.61 0.55 523 4.22 0.51 
 con… 
 Oth… 96 0.76 n/m 46 0.37 n/m 
 con… 
 Tot… 7,237 57.07 1.59 7,033 56.… 1.62 
 con… 
 U.S. 3,007 23.71 0.80 3,019 24.… 0.87 
 com… 
 Non… 1,194 9.41 0.96 975 7.87 0.86 
 com… 
 Com… 
 real 1,192 9.40 1.71 1,292 10.… 2.05 
 est… 
 Com… 
 lea… 52 0.41 0.38 68 0.55 0.46 
 fin… 
 Tot… 5,445 42.93 0.93 5,354 43.… 1.00 
 com… 
 All… 
 for 
 loan 12,6… 100.… % 1.22 12,3… 100… % 1.28 
 and 
 lea… 
 los… 
 Res… 
 for 
 unf… 1,540 1,456 
 len… 
 com… 
 All… 
 for $ 14,2… $ 13,8… 
 cre… 
 los… 
(1) Ratios are calculated as allowance for loan
and lease losses as a percentage of loans and
leases outstanding excluding loans accounted for
under the fair value option.
(2) Includes allowance for loan and lease losses
for U.S. small business commercial loans of $844
million and $1.2 billion at December 31, 2022 and
2021.
n/m = not meaningful
Net charge-offs for both 2022 and 2021 were $2.2
billion as credit card losses, which remained
near historic lows, were partially offset by
higher overdrafts charged off in other consumer
due to payment activity related to checking
accounts. The provision for credit losses
increased $7.1 billion to an expense of $2.5
billion during 2022 compared to 2021. The
provision for credit losses in 2022 was primarily
driven by loan growth and a dampened
macroeconomic outlook, partially offset by a
reserve release for reduced pandemic
uncertainties. The provision for credit losses
for the consumer portfolio, including unfunded
lending commitments, increased $3.2 billion to an
expense of $2.0 billion during 2022 compared to
2021. The
provision for credit losses for the commercial
portfolio, including unfunded lending
commitments, increased $3.9 billion to an expense
of $495 million for 2022 compared to 2021.
Table 42 presents a rollforward of the allowance
for credit losses, including certain loan and
allowance ratios for 2022 and 2021. For more
information on the Corporation’s credit loss
accounting policies and activity related to the
allowance for credit losses, see Note 1 – Summary
of Significant Accounting Principles and Note 5 –
Outstanding Loans and Leases and Allowance for
Credit Losses to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
 73Bank of America 
 Table 42 Allowance for 
 (Dollars in millions) Credit Losses 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Allowance for loan and lease losses, $ 12,387 $ 18,802 
 January 1 
 Loans and leases charged off 
 Residential mortgage -161 -34 
 Home equity -45 -44 
 Credit card -1,985 -2,411 
 Direct/Indirect consumer -232 -297 
 Other consumer -538 -292 
 Total consumer charge-offs -2,961 -3,078 
 U.S. commercial(1) -354 -626 
 Non-U.S. commercial -41 -47 
 Commercial real estate -75 -46 
 Commercial lease financing -8 — 
 Total commercial charge-offs -478 -719 
 Total loans and leases charged off -3,439 -3,797 
 Recoveries of loans and leases 
 previously charged off 
 Residential mortgage 89 62 
 Home equity 135 163 
 Credit card 651 688 
 Direct/Indirect consumer 214 296 
 Other consumer 17 22 
 Total consumer recoveries 1,106 1,231 
 U.S. commercial(2) 129 298 
 Non-U.S. commercial 20 12 
 Commercial real estate 9 12 
 Commercial lease financing 3 1 
 Total commercial recoveries 161 323 
 Total recoveries of loans and leases 1,267 1,554 
 previously charged off 
 Net charge-offs -2,172 -2,243 
 Provision for loan and lease losses 2,460 -4,173 
 Other 7 1 
 Allowance for loan and lease losses, 12,682 12,387 
 December 31 
 Reserve for unfunded lending 1,456 1,878 
 commitments, January 1 
 Provision for unfunded lending 83 -421 
 commitments 
 Other 1 -1 
 Reserve for unfunded lending 1,540 1,456 
 commitments, December 31 
 Allowance for credit losses, December 31 $ 14,222 $ 13,843 
 Loan and allowance ratios(3): 
 Loans and leases outstanding at December $ 1,039,976 $ 971,305 
 31 
 Allowance for loan and lease losses as a 
 percentage of total loans and leases 1.22 % 1.28 % 
 outstanding at December 31 
 Consumer allowance for loan and lease 
 losses as a percentage of total consumer 1.59 1.62 
 loans and leases outstanding at December 
 31 
 Commercial allowance for loan and lease 
 losses as a percentage of total 0.93 1.00 
 commercial loans and leases outstanding 
 at December 31 
 Average loans and leases outstanding $ 1,010,799 $ 913,354 
 Net charge-offs as a percentage of 0.21 % 0.25 % 
 average loans and leases outstanding 
 Allowance for loan and lease losses as a 
 percentage of total nonperforming loans 333 271 
 and leases at December 31 
 Ratio of the allowance for loan and 
 lease losses at December 31 to net 5.84 5.52 
 charge-offs 
 Amounts included in allowance for loan 
 and lease losses for loans and leases $ 6,998 $ 7,027 
 that are excluded from nonperforming 
 loans and leases at December 31(4) 
 Allowance for loan and lease losses as a 
 percentage of total nonperforming loans 
 and leases, excluding the allowance for 
 loan and lease losses for loans and 149 % 117 % 
 leases that are excluded from 
 nonperforming loans and leases at 
 December 31(4) 
(1) Includes U.S. small business commercial charge-offs of $203 million in 2022 compared to $425
million in 2021.
(2) Includes U.S. small business commercial recoveries of $49 million in 2022 compared to $74 million
in 2021.
(3) Ratios are calculated as allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of loans and leases
outstanding excluding loans accounted for under the fair value option.
(4) Primarily includes amounts related to credit card and unsecured consumer lending portfolios in
Consumer Banking .
 Bank of America74 
 Market Risk Management 
Market risk is the risk that changes in market
conditions may adversely impact the value of
assets or liabilities, or otherwise negatively
impact earnings. This risk is inherent in the
financial instruments associated with our
operations, primarily within our Global Markets
segment. We are also exposed to these risks in
other areas of the Corporation (e.g., our ALM
activities). In the event of market stress, these
risks could have a material impact on our
results. For more information, see Interest Rate
Risk Management for the Banking Book on page 79.
Our traditional banking loan and deposit products
are non-trading positions and are generally
reported at amortized cost for assets or the
amount owed for liabilities (historical cost).
However, these positions are still subject to
changes in economic value based on varying market
conditions, with one of the primary risks being
changes in the levels of interest rates. The risk
of adverse changes in the economic value of our
non-trading positions arising from changes in
interest rates is managed through our ALM
activities. We have elected to account for
certain assets and liabilities under the fair
value option.
Our trading positions are reported at fair value
with changes reflected in income. Trading
positions are subject to various changes in
market-based risk factors. The majority of this
risk is generated by our activities in the
interest rate, foreign exchange, credit, equity
and commodities markets. In addition, the values
of assets and liabilities could change due to
market liquidity, correlations across markets and
expectations of market volatility. We seek to
manage these risk exposures by using a variety of
techniques that encompass a broad range of
financial instruments. The key risk management
techniques are discussed in more detail in the
Trading Risk Management section.
GRM is responsible for providing senior
management with a clear and comprehensive
understanding of the trading risks to which we
are exposed. These responsibilities include
ownership of market risk policy, developing and
maintaining quantitative risk models, calculating
aggregated risk measures, establishing and
monitoring position limits consistent with risk
appetite, conducting daily reviews and analysis
of trading inventory, approving material risk
exposures and fulfilling regulatory requirements.
Market risks that impact businesses outside of
Global Markets are monitored and governed by
their respective governance functions.
Model risk is the potential for adverse
consequences from decisions based on incorrect or
misused model outputs and reports. Given that
models are used across the Corporation, model
risk impacts all risk types including credit,
market and operational risks. The Enterprise
Model Risk Policy defines model risk standards,
consistent with our Risk Framework and risk
appetite, prevailing regulatory guidance and
industry best practice. All models, including
risk management, valuation and regulatory capital
models, must meet certain validation criteria,
including effective challenge of the conceptual
soundness of the model, independent model testing
and ongoing monitoring through outcomes analysis
and benchmarking. The Enterprise Model Risk
Committee, a subcommittee of the MRC, oversees
that model standards are consistent with model
risk requirements and monitors the effective
challenge in the model validation process across
the Corporation.
 Interest Rate Risk 
Interest rate risk represents exposures to
instruments whose values vary with the level or
volatility of interest rates. These instruments
include, but are not limited to, loans, debt
securities, certain trading-related assets and
liabilities, deposits, borrowings and
derivatives. Hedging instruments used to mitigate
these risks include derivatives such as options,
futures, forwards and swaps.
 Foreign Exchange Risk 
Foreign exchange risk represents exposures to
changes in the values of current holdings and
future cash flows denominated in currencies other
than the U.S. dollar. The types of instruments
exposed to this risk include investments in
non-U.S. subsidiaries, foreign currency-
denominated loans and securities, future cash
flows in foreign currencies arising from foreign
exchange transactions, foreign currency-
denominated debt and various foreign exchange
derivatives whose values fluctuate with changes
in the level or volatility of currency exchange
rates or non-U.S. interest rates. Hedging
instruments used to mitigate this risk include
foreign exchange options, currency swaps,
futures, forwards, and foreign currency-
denominated debt and deposits.
 Mortgage Risk 
Mortgage risk represents exposures to changes in
the values of mortgage-related instruments. The
values of these instruments are sensitive to
prepayment rates, mortgage rates, agency debt
ratings, default, market liquidity, government
participation and interest rate volatility. Our
exposure to these instruments takes several
forms. For example, we trade and engage in
market-making activities in a variety of mortgage
securities including whole loans, pass-through
certificates, commercial mortgages and
collateralized mortgage obligations including
collateralized debt obligations using mortgages
as underlying collateral. In addition, we
originate a variety of MBS, which involves the
accumulation of mortgage-related loans in
anticipation of eventual securitization, and we
may hold positions in mortgage securities and
residential mortgage loans as part of the ALM
portfolio. We also record MSRs as part of our
mortgage origination activities. Hedging
instruments used to mitigate this risk include
derivatives such as options, swaps, futures and
forwards as well as securities including MBS and
U.S. Treasury securities. For more information,
see Mortgage Banking Risk Management on page 80.
 Equity Market Risk 
Equity market risk represents exposures to
securities that represent an ownership interest
in a corporation in the form of domestic and
foreign common stock or other equity-linked
instruments. Instruments that would lead to this
exposure include, but are not limited to, the
following: common stock, exchange-traded funds,
American Depositary Receipts, convertible bonds,
listed equity options (puts and calls), OTC
equity options, equity total return swaps, equity
index futures and other equity derivative
products. Hedging instruments used to mitigate
this risk include options, futures, swaps,
convertible bonds and cash positions.
 Commodity Risk 
Commodity risk represents exposures to
instruments traded in the petroleum, natural gas,
power and metals markets. These instruments
consist primarily of futures, forwards, swaps and
options. Hedging instruments used to mitigate
this risk include options, futures and swaps in
the same or similar commodity product, as well as
cash positions.
 75Bank of America 
 Issuer Credit Risk 
Issuer credit risk represents exposures to
changes in the creditworthiness of individual
issuers or groups of issuers. Our portfolio is
exposed to issuer credit risk where the value of
an asset may be adversely impacted by changes in
the levels of credit spreads, by credit migration
or by defaults. Hedging instruments used to
mitigate this risk include bonds, CDS and other
credit fixed-income instruments.
 Market Liquidity Risk 
Market liquidity risk represents the risk that
the level of expected market activity changes
dramatically and, in certain cases, may even
cease. This exposes us to the risk that we will
not be able to transact business and execute
trades in an orderly manner which may impact our
results. This impact could be further exacerbated
if expected hedging or pricing correlations are
compromised by disproportionate demand or lack of
demand for certain instruments. We utilize
various risk mitigating techniques as discussed
in more detail in Trading Risk Management.
 Trading Risk Management 
To evaluate risks in our trading activities, we
focus on the actual and potential volatility of
revenues generated by individual positions as
well as portfolios of positions. Various
techniques and procedures are utilized to enable
the most complete understanding of these risks.
Quantitative measures of market risk are
evaluated on a daily basis from a single position
to the portfolio of the Corporation. These
measures include sensitivities of positions to
various market risk factors, such as the
potential impact on revenue from a one basis
point change in interest rates, and statistical
measures utilizing both actual and hypothetical
market moves, such as VaR and stress testing.
Periods of extreme market stress influence the
reliability of these techniques to varying
degrees. Qualitative evaluations of market risk
utilize the suite of quantitative risk measures
while understanding each of their respective
limitations. Additionally, risk managers
independently evaluate the risk of the portfolios
under the current market environment and
potential future environments.
VaR is a common statistic used to measure market
risk as it allows the aggregation of market risk
factors, including the effects of portfolio
diversification. A VaR model simulates the value
of a portfolio under a range of scenarios in
order to generate a distribution of potential
gains and losses. VaR represents the loss a
portfolio is not expected to exceed more than a
certain number of times per period, based on a
specified holding period, confidence level and
window of historical data. We use one VaR model
consistently across the trading portfolios and it
uses a historical simulation approach based on a
three-year window of historical data. Our primary
VaR statistic is equivalent to a 99 percent
confidence level, which means that for a VaR with
a one-day holding period, there should not be
losses in excess of VaR, on average, 99 out of
100 trading days.
Within any VaR model, there are significant and
numerous assumptions that will differ from
company to company. The accuracy of a VaR model
depends on the availability and quality of
historical data for each of the risk factors in
the portfolio. A VaR model may require additional
modeling assumptions for new products that do not
have the necessary historical market data or for
less liquid positions for which accurate daily
prices are not consistently available. For
positions with insufficient historical data for
the VaR calculation, the process for establishing
an appropriate proxy is based on fundamental and
statistical analysis of the new product or less
liquid position. This analysis identifies
reasonable alternatives that replicate both the
expected volatility and correlation to other
market risk factors that the missing data would
be expected to experience.
VaR may not be indicative of realized revenue
volatility as changes in market conditions or in
the composition of the portfolio can have a
material impact on the results. In particular,
the historical data used for the VaR calculation
might indicate higher or lower levels of
portfolio diversification than will be
experienced. In order for the VaR model to
reflect current market conditions, we update the
historical data underlying our VaR model on a
weekly basis, or more frequently during periods
of market stress, and regularly review the
assumptions underlying the model. A minor portion
of risks related to our trading positions is not
included in VaR. These risks are reviewed as part
of our ICAAP. For more information regarding
ICAAP, see Capital Management on page 49.
GRM continually reviews, evaluates and enhances
our VaR model so that it reflects the material
risks in our trading portfolio. Changes to the
VaR model are reviewed and approved prior to
implementation and any material changes are
reported to management through the appropriate
management committees.
Trading limits on quantitative risk measures,
including VaR, are independently set by Global
Markets Risk Management and reviewed on a regular
basis so that trading limits remain relevant and
within our overall risk appetite for market
risks. Trading limits are reviewed in the context
of market liquidity, volatility and strategic
business priorities. Trading limits are set at
both a granular level to allow for extensive
coverage of risks as well as at aggregated
portfolios to account for correlations among risk
factors. All trading limits are approved at least
annually. Approved trading limits are stored and
tracked in a centralized limits management
system. Trading limit excesses are communicated
to management for review. Certain quantitative
market risk measures and corresponding limits
have been identified as critical in the
Corporation’s Risk Appetite Statement. These risk
appetite limits are reported on a daily basis and
are approved at least annually by the ERC and the
Board.
In periods of market stress, Global Markets
senior leadership communicates daily to discuss
losses, key risk positions and any limit
excesses. As a result of this process, the
businesses may selectively reduce risk.
Table 43 presents the total market-based
portfolio VaR, which is the combination of the
total covered positions (and less liquid trading
positions) portfolio and the fair value option
portfolio. Covered positions are defined by
regulatory standards as trading assets and
liabilities, both on- and off-balance sheet, that
meet a defined set of specifications. These
specifications identify the most liquid trading
positions which are intended to be held for a
short-term horizon and where we are able to hedge
the material risk elements in a two-way market.
Positions in less liquid markets, or where there
are restrictions on the ability to trade the
positions, typically do not qualify as covered
positions. Foreign exchange and commodity
positions are always considered covered
positions, except for structural foreign currency
positions that are excluded with prior regulatory
approval.
In addition, Table 43 presents our fair value
option portfolio, which includes substantially
all of the funded and unfunded exposures for
which we elect the fair value option, and their
corresponding hedges. Additionally, market risk
VaR for trading activities as presented in Table
43 differs from VaR used for regulatory capital
calculations due to the holding period being
 Bank of America76 
used. The holding period for VaR used for
regulatory capital calculations is 10 days, while
for the market risk VaR presented below, it is
one day. Both measures utilize the same process
and methodology.
The total market-based portfolio VaR results in
Table 43 include market risk to which we are
exposed from all business segments, excluding
credit valuation adjustment (CVA), DVA and
related hedges. The majority of this portfolio is
within the Global Markets segment.
Table 43 presents year-end, average, high and low
daily trading VaR for 2022 and 2021 using a 99
percent confidence
level. The amounts disclosed in Table 43 and
Table 44 align to the view of covered positions
used in the Basel 3 capital calculations. Foreign
exchange and commodity positions are always
considered covered positions, regardless of
trading or banking treatment for the trade,
except for structural foreign currency positions
that are excluded with prior regulatory approval.
The annual average of total covered positions and
less liquid trading positions portfolio VaR
increased for 2022 compared to 2021 driven by
heightened market volatility and reduced
diversification across asset classes.
 M… 
 … R… 
 … V… 
 … f… 2… 
 … T… Y… … 
 … A… E… A… H… L… 2… … A… … … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … $ 38 $ 21 $ 39 $ 12 $ … $ 12 $ … $ 5 
 … 
 … 36 36 56 24 … 40 … … 
 … 
 … 76 71 1… 52 … 69 … … 
 … 18 20 33 12 … 24 … … 
 … 8 13 27 7 6 8 … 4 
 … -… -… n… … … -… n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … 95 70 1… 42 … 53 … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 35 38 n… … 8 20 n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… 1… 2… 61 … 73 … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 48 51 65 37 … 50 … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 16 17 24 13 … 16 … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … -… -… n… … … -… n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 26 32 44 23 … 34 … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 9 -… n… … … -… n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 1… $ 1… 2… 70 $ … $ 97 … … 
 … 
(1) The high and low for each portfolio may have occurred on different trading days than the high and
low for the components. Therefore the impact from less liquid exposures and the amount of portfolio
diversification, which is the difference between the total portfolio and the sum of the individual
components, is not relevant.
(2) Impact is net of diversification effects between the covered positions and less liquid trading
positions portfolios.
n/a = not applicable
The following graph presents the daily covered positions and less liquid trading positions portfolio
VaR for 2022, corresponding to the data in Table 43.
Additional VaR statistics produced within our single VaR model are provided in Table 44 at the same
level of detail as in Table 43. Evaluating VaR with additional statistics allows for an increased
understanding of the risks in the portfolio, as the historical market data used in the VaR
calculation does not necessarily follow a predefined statistical distribution. Table 44 presents
average trading VaR statistics at 99 percent and 95 percent confidence levels for 2022 and 2021.
 77Bank of America 
 Average 
 Market 
 Risk VaR 
 for 
 Trading 
 Activities 
 – 99 
 percent 
 Table 44 and 95 
 (Dollars percent 
 in VaR 2022 95 95 
 millions) Statistics 99 percent percent 2021 99 percent percent 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Foreign $ 21 $ 12 $ 12 $ 8 
 exchange 
 Interest 36 17 40 20 
 rate 
 Credit 71 28 69 21 
 Equity 20 11 24 12 
 Commodit… 13 7 8 4 
 Portfolio -91 -46 -100 -39 
 diversif… 
 Total 
 covered 70 29 53 26 
 positions 
 portfolio 
 Impact 
 from less 38 7 20 2 
 liquid 
 exposures 
 Total 
 covered 
 positions 
 and less 108 36 73 28 
 liquid 
 trading 
 positions 
 portfolio 
 Fair 
 value 51 14 50 12 
 option 
 loans 
 Fair 
 value 17 10 16 9 
 option 
 hedges 
 Fair 
 value 
 option -36 -13 -32 -9 
 portfolio 
 diversif… 
 Total 
 fair 
 value 32 11 34 12 
 option 
 portfolio 
 Portfolio -11 -7 -10 -7 
 diversif… 
 Total 
 market-b… $ 129 $ 40 $ 97 $ 33 
 portfolio 
 Backtesting 
The accuracy of the VaR methodology is evaluated
by backtesting, which compares the daily VaR
results, utilizing a one-day holding period,
against a comparable subset of trading revenue. A
backtesting excess occurs when a trading loss
exceeds the VaR for the corresponding day. These
excesses are evaluated to understand the
positions and market moves that produced the
trading loss with a goal to help confirm that the
VaR methodology accurately represents those
losses. We expect the frequency of trading losses
in excess of VaR to be in line with the
confidence level of the VaR statistic being
tested. For example, with a 99 percent confidence
level, we expect one trading loss in excess of
VaR every 100 days or between two to three
trading losses in excess of VaR over the course
of a year. The number of backtesting excesses
observed can differ from the statistically
expected number of excesses if the current level
of market volatility is materially different than
the level of market volatility that existed
during the three years of historical data used in
the VaR calculation.
The trading revenue used for backtesting is
defined by regulatory agencies in order to most
closely align with the VaR component of the
regulatory capital calculation. This revenue
differs from total trading-related revenue in
that it excludes revenue from trading activities
that either do not generate market risk or the
market risk cannot be included in VaR. Some
examples of the types of revenue excluded for
backtesting are fees, commissions, reserves, net
interest income and intra-day trading revenues.
We conduct daily backtesting on the VaR results
used for regulatory capital calculations as well
as the VaR results for key legal entities,
regions and risk factors. These results are
reported to senior market risk management. Senior
management regularly reviews and evaluates the
results of these tests.
During 2022, there was one day where this subset
of trading revenue had losses that exceeded our
total covered portfolio VaR, utilizing a one-day
holding period.
 Total Trading-related Revenue 
Total trading-related revenue, excluding
brokerage fees, and CVA, DVA and funding
valuation adjustment gains (losses), represents
the total amount earned from trading positions,
including market-based net interest income, which
are taken in a diverse range of financial
instruments and markets. For more information on
fair value, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements
to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Trading-related revenue can be volatile and is
largely driven by general market conditions and
customer demand. Also, trading-related revenue is
dependent on the volume and type of transactions,
the level of risk assumed, and the volatility of
price and rate movements at any given time within
the ever-changing market environment. Significant
daily revenue by business is monitored and the
primary drivers of these are reviewed.
The following histogram is a graphic depiction of
trading volatility and illustrates the daily
level of trading-related revenue for 2022 and
2021. During 2022, positive trading-related
revenue was recorded for 99 percent of the
trading days, of which 90 percent were daily
trading gains of over $25 million, and the
largest loss was $9 million. This compares to
2021 where positive trading-related revenue was
recorded for 97 percent of the trading days, of
which 80 percent were daily trading gains of over
$25 million, and the largest loss was $45
million.
 Trading Portfolio Stress Testing 
Because the very nature of a VaR model suggests
results can exceed our estimates and it is
dependent on a limited historical window, we also
stress test our portfolio using scenario
analysis. This analysis estimates the change in
the value of our trading portfolio that may
result from abnormal market movements.
A set of scenarios, categorized as either
historical or hypothetical, are computed daily
for the overall trading portfolio and individual
businesses. These scenarios include shocks to
underlying market risk factors that may be well
beyond the shocks found in the historical data
used to calculate VaR.
 Bank of America78 
Historical scenarios simulate the impact of the market moves that occurred during a period of
extended historical market stress. Generally, a multi-week period representing the most severe point
during a crisis is selected for each historical scenario. Hypothetical scenarios provide estimated
portfolio impacts from potential future market stress events. Scenarios are reviewed and updated in
response to changing positions and new economic or political information. In addition, new or ad hoc
scenarios are developed to address specific potential market events or particular vulnerabilities in
the portfolio. The stress tests are reviewed on a regular basis and the results are presented to
senior management. Stress testing for the trading portfolio is integrated with enterprise-wide stress
testing and incorporated into the limits framework. The macroeconomic scenarios used for enterprise-
wide stress testing purposes differ from the typical trading portfolio scenarios in that they have a
longer time horizon and the results are forecasted over multiple periods for use in consolidated
capital and liquidity planning. For more information, see Managing Risk on page 46. Interest Rate
Risk Management for the Banking Book The following discussion presents net interest income for
banking book activities. Interest rate risk represents the most significant market risk exposure to
our banking book balance sheet. Interest rate risk is measured as the potential change in net
interest income caused by movements in market interest rates. Client-facing activities, primarily
lending and deposit-taking, create interest rate sensitive positions on our balance sheet. We prepare
forward-looking forecasts of net interest income. The baseline forecast takes into consideration
expected future business growth, ALM positioning and the future direction of interest rate movements
as implied by market-based forward curves. We then measure and evaluate the impact that alternative
interest rate scenarios have on the baseline forecast in order to assess interest rate sensitivity
under varied conditions. The net interest income forecast is frequently updated for changing
assumptions and differing outlooks based on economic trends, market conditions and business
strategies. Thus, we continually monitor our banking book balance sheet position in order to maintain
an acceptable level of exposure to interest rate changes. The interest rate scenarios that we analyze
incorporate balance sheet assumptions such as loan and deposit growth and pricing, changes in funding
mix, product repricing, maturity characteristics and investment securities premium amortization. Our
overall goal is to manage interest rate risk so that movements in interest rates do not significantly
adversely affect earnings and capital. Table 45 presents the spot and 12-month forward rates used in
developing the forward curve used in our baseline forecasts at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Table 45 Forward Rates December 31, 2022 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Federal Three-month 10-Year 
 Funds LIBOR Swap 
 Spot rates 4.50 % 4.77 % 3.84 % 
 12-month forward rates 4.75 4.78 3.62 
 December 31, 2021 
 Spot rates 0.25 % 0.21 % 1.58 % 
 12-month forward rates 1.00 1.07 1.84 
Table 46 shows the pretax impact to forecasted
net interest income over the next 12 months from
December 31, 2022 and 2021 resulting from
instantaneous parallel and non-parallel shocks to
the market-based forward curve. Periodically, we
evaluate the scenarios presented so that they are
meaningful in the context of the current rate
environment. The interest rate scenarios also
assume U.S. dollar interest rates are floored at
zero. Depending on the level of interest rates,
Down-rate scenarios may not receive the full
impact of the rate shock, particularly in low
rate environments. The overall decrease in asset
sensitivity, as shown in the following table, to
Up-rate scenarios was primarily due to an
increase in long-end and short-end rates. We
continue to be asset sensitive to a parallel
upward move in interest rates with the majority
of that impact coming from the short end of the
yield curve. Additionally, higher interest rates
negatively impact the fair value of our debt
securities classified as available for sale and
adversely affect accumulated OCI and thus capital
levels under the Basel 3 capital rules. Under
instantaneous upward parallel shifts, the near-
term adverse impact to Basel 3 capital would be
reduced over time by offsetting positive impacts
to net interest income generated from the banking
book activities. For more information on Basel 3,
see Capital Management – Regulatory Capital on
page 50.
 Estimated 
 Banking 
 Book Net 
 Interest 
 Table 46 Income 
 (Dollars in Sensitivity Long 
 millions) to Rate (bps) 
 Parallel Curve Short December 31 
 Shifts Changes Rate (bps) 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 +100 bps 
 instantane… +100 +100 $ 3,829 $ 6,542 
 shift 
 -100 bps 
 instantane… -100 -100 -4,591 n/m 
 shift 
 Flatteners 
 Short-end 
 instantane… +100 — 3,698 4,982 
 change 
 Long-end 
 instantane… — -100 -157 n/m 
 change 
 Steepeners 
 Short-end 
 instantane… -100 — -4,420 n/m 
 change 
 Long-end 
 instantane… — +100 131 1,646 
 change 
n/m = not meaningful
 79Bank of America 
The sensitivity analysis in Table 46 assumes that
we take no action in response to these rate
shocks and does not assume any change in other
macroeconomic variables normally correlated with
changes in interest rates. As part of our ALM
activities, we use securities, certain
residential mortgages, and interest rate and
foreign exchange derivatives in managing interest
rate sensitivity.
The behavior of our deposit portfolio in the
baseline forecast and in alternate interest rate
scenarios is a key assumption in our projected
estimates of net interest income. The sensitivity
analysis in Table 46 assumes no change in deposit
portfolio size or mix from the baseline forecast
in alternate rate environments. In higher rate
scenarios, any customer activity resulting in the
replacement of low-cost or noninterest-bearing
deposits with higher yielding deposits or market-
based funding would reduce our benefit in those
scenarios.
Interest Rate and Foreign Exchange Derivative
Contracts
We use interest rate and foreign exchange
derivative contracts in our ALM activities to
manage our interest rate and foreign exchange
risks. Specifically, we use those derivatives to
manage both the variability in cash flows and
changes in fair value of various assets and
liabilities arising from those risks. Our
interest rate derivative contracts are generally
non-leveraged swaps tied to various benchmark
interest rates and foreign exchange basis swaps,
options, futures and forwards, and our foreign
exchange contracts include cross-currency
interest rate swaps, foreign currency futures
contracts, foreign currency forward contracts and
options.
The derivatives used in our ALM activities can be
split into two broad categories: designated
accounting hedges and other risk management
derivatives. Designated accounting hedges are
primarily used to manage our exposure to interest
rates as described in the Interest Rate Risk
Management for the Banking Book section and are
included in the sensitivities presented in Table
46. The Corporation also uses foreign currency
derivatives in accounting hedges to manage
substantially all of the foreign exchange risk of
our foreign operations. By hedging the foreign
exchange risk of our foreign operations, the
Corporation's market risk exposure in this area
is not significant.
Risk management derivatives are predominantly
used to hedge foreign exchange risks related to
various foreign currency-denominated assets and
liabilities and eliminate substantially all
foreign currency exposures in the cash flows of
the Corporation’s non-trading foreign currency-
denominated financial instruments. These foreign
exchange derivatives are sensitive to other
market risk exposures such as cross-currency
basis spreads and interest rate risk. However, as
these features are not a significant component of
these foreign exchange derivatives, the market
risk related to this exposure is not significant.
For more information on the accounting for
derivatives, see Note 3 – Derivatives to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Mortgage Banking Risk Management 
We originate, fund and service mortgage loans,
which subject us to credit, liquidity and
interest rate risks, among others. We determine
whether loans will be held for investment or held
for sale at the time of commitment and manage
credit and liquidity risks by selling or
securitizing a portion of the loans we originate.
Interest rate risk and market risk can be
substantial in the mortgage business. Changes in
interest rates and other market factors impact
the volume of mortgage originations. Changes in
interest rates also impact the value of interest
rate lock commitments (IRLCs) and the related
residential first mortgage LHFS between the date
of the IRLC and the date the loans are sold to
the secondary market. An increase in mortgage
interest rates typically leads to a decrease in
the value of these instruments. Conversely, when
there is an increase in interest rates, the value
of the MSRs will increase driven by lower
prepayment expectations. Because the interest
rate risks of these hedged items offset, we
combine them into one overall hedged item with
one combined economic hedge portfolio consisting
of derivative contracts and securities.
During 2022, 2021 and 2020, we recorded gains of
$78 million, $39 million and $321 million. For
more information on MSRs, see Note 20 – Fair
Value Measurements to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
 Compliance and Operational Risk Management 
Compliance risk is the risk of legal or
regulatory sanctions, material financial loss or
damage to the reputation of the Corporation
arising from the failure of the Corporation to
comply with the requirements of applicable laws,
rules, regulations and our internal policies and
procedures (collectively, applicable laws, rules
and regulations). We are subject to comprehensive
regulation under federal and state laws, rules
and regulations in the U.S. and the laws of the
various jurisdictions in which we operate,
including those related to financial crimes and
anti-money laundering, market conduct, trading
activities, fair lending, privacy, data
protection and unfair, deceptive or abusive acts
or practices.
Operational risk is the risk of loss resulting
from inadequate or failed processes or systems,
people or external events, and includes legal
risk. Operational risk may occur anywhere in the
Corporation, including third-party business
processes, and is not limited to operations
functions. The Corporation faces a number of key
operational risks including third-party risk,
model risk, conduct risk, technology risk,
information security risk and data risk.
Operational risk can result in financial losses
and reputational impacts and is a component in
the calculation of total RWA used in the Basel 3
capital calculation. For more information on
Basel 3 calculations, see Capital Management on
page 49.
FLUs and control functions are first and foremost
responsible for managing all aspects of their
businesses, including their compliance and
operational risk. FLUs and control functions are
required to understand their business processes
and related risks and controls, including third-
party dependencies and the related regulatory
requirements, and monitor and report on the
effectiveness of the control environment. In
order to actively monitor and assess the
performance of their processes and controls, they
must conduct comprehensive quality assurance
activities and identify issues and risks to
remediate control gaps and weaknesses. FLUs and
control functions must also adhere to compliance
and operational risk appetite limits to meet
strategic, capital and financial planning
objectives. Finally, FLUs and control functions
are responsible for the proactive identification,
management and escalation of compliance and
operational risks across the Corporation.
Collectively, these efforts are important to
strengthen their compliance and operational
resiliency, which is the ability to deliver
critical operations through disruption.
Global Compliance and Operational Risk teams
independently assess compliance and operational
risk, monitor business activities and processes
and evaluate FLUs and control functions for
adherence to applicable laws, rules and
regulations, including identifying issues and
risks, and reporting
 Bank of America80 
on the state of the control environment.
Corporate Audit provides an independent
assessment and validation through testing of key
compliance and operational risk processes and
controls across the Corporation.
The Corporation's Global Compliance – Enterprise
Policy and Operational Risk Management –
Enterprise Policy set the requirements for
reporting compliance and operational risk
information to executive management as well as
the Board or appropriate Board-level committees
and reflect Global Compliance and Operational
Risk’s responsibilities for conducting
independent oversight of the Corporation’s
compliance and operational risk management
activities. The Board provides oversight of
compliance risk through its Audit Committee and
the ERC, and operational risk through its ERC.
A key operational risk facing the Corporation is
information security, which includes
cybersecurity. Cybersecurity risk includes
exposure to failures or interruptions of service
or security breaches resulting from malicious
technological attacks that impact the
confidentiality, integrity or availability of our
or third parties' operations, systems or data.
The Corporation seeks to mitigate information
security risk and associated reputational and
compliance risk by employing a multi-layered and
intelligence-led Global Information Security
Program focused on preparing for, preventing,
detecting, mitigating, responding to and
recovering from cyber threats and incidents and
effectively operating the Corporation’s
processes. Additionally, our business continuity
policy, standards and procedures are designed to
maintain the availability of business functions
and enable impacted units within the Corporation
and third parties to achieve strategic objectives
in the event of a cybersecurity incident.
The Global Information Security Program is
supported by three lines of defense. The Global
Information Security Team within the first line
of defense is responsible for the day-to-day
management of the Global Information Security
Program, which includes defining policies and
procedures to safeguard the Corporation’s
information systems and data, conducting
vulnerability and third-party information
security assessments, information security event
management (e.g., responding to ransomware and
distributed denial of service attacks),
evaluation of external cyber intelligence,
supporting industry cybersecurity efforts and
working with governmental agencies, and
developing employee training to support adherence
to the Corporation’s policies and procedures. As
the second line of defense, Global Compliance and
Operational Risk independently assesses, monitors
and tests information security risk across the
Corporation, as well as the effectiveness of the
Global Information Security Program. Corporate
Audit serves as the third line of defense,
conducting additional independent review and
validation of the first-line processes and
functions. As part of our Global Information
Security Program, we leverage both internal and
external assessments and partnerships with
industry leaders to help approach information
security holistically. Additionally the
Corporation maintains a comprehensive enterprise-
wide program that defines standards for the
planning, sourcing, management, and oversight of
third-party relationships and third-party access
to its system, facilities, and/or confidential or
proprietary data for a business purpose or
supervisory function.
Through established governance structures, we
have processes to help facilitate appropriate and
effective oversight of information security risk.
These routines enable our three lines of defense
and management to debate information security
risks and monitor control performance to allow
for further escalation to executive management,
management and
Board-level committees or to the Board, as
appropriate. The Board is actively engaged in the
oversight of Bank of America’s Global Information
Security Program and devotes significant time and
attention to the oversight of cybersecurity and
information security risk. The Board regularly
discusses cybersecurity and information security
risks with the Chief Technology and Information
Officer and the Chief Information Security
Officer. Additionally, the ERC receives regular
reporting, and reviews and approves the
Information Security Program and Policy on an
annual basis.
 Reputational Risk Management 
Reputational risk is the risk that negative
perception of the Corporation may adversely
impact profitability or operations. Reputational
risk may result from many of the Corporation’s
activities, including those related to the
management of our strategic, operational,
compliance and credit risks.
The Corporation manages reputational risk through
established policies and controls embedded
throughout its business and risk management
processes. We proactively monitor and identify
potential reputational risk events and have
processes established to mitigate reputational
risks in a timely manner. If reputational risk
events occur, we focus on remediating the
underlying issue and taking action to minimize
damage to the Corporation’s reputation. The
Corporation has processes and procedures in place
to respond to events that give rise to
reputational risk, including educating
individuals and organizations that influence
public opinion, implementing external
communication strategies to mitigate the risk,
and informing key stakeholders of potential
reputational risks. The Corporation’s
organization and governance structure provides
oversight of reputational risks. Reputational
risk reporting is provided regularly and directly
to senior management and the ERC, which provides
primary oversight of reputational risk. In
addition, each FLU has a committee, which
includes representatives from Legal and Risk,
that is responsible for the oversight of
reputational risk, including approval for
business activities that present elevated levels
of reputational risks.
 Climate Risk Management 
Climate-related risks are divided into two major
categories: (1) risks related to the physical
impacts of climate change, driven by extreme
weather events such as hurricanes and floods, as
well as chronic longer-term shifts such as rising
average global temperatures and sea levels, and
(2) risks related to the transition to a low-
carbon economy, which may entail extensive
policy, legal, technology and market changes.
These changes and events may have broad impacts
on operations, supply chains, distribution
networks, customers and markets and are otherwise
referred to, respectively, as physical risk and
transition risk. These risks may impact both
financial and nonfinancial risk types. Physical
risk may lead to increased credit risk by
diminishing borrowers’ repayment capacity or
impacting the value of collateral. Physical risk
may also increase operational risk by impacting
the Corporation’s facilities, employees,
customers or vendors. Transition risks may
amplify credit risk through the financial impacts
of changes in policy, technology or the market on
the Corporation or its counterparties.
Unanticipated market changes can lead to sudden
price adjustments and give rise to heightened
market risk. In addition, reputational risk may
arise, including from our climate-related
practices and disclosures and if we do not meet
our climate-related commitments.
Effective management of climate risk requires
coordinated governance, clearly defined roles and
responsibilities and well-
 81Bank of America 
developed processes to identify, measure, monitor
and control risks. As climate risk spans all key
risk types, we have developed and continue to
enhance processes to embed climate risk
considerations into our Risk Framework and risk
management programs established for strategic,
credit, market, liquidity, compliance,
operational and reputational risks. Our
Environmental and Social Risk Policy Framework
aligns with our Risk Framework and provides
additional clarity and transparency regarding our
approach to environmental and social risks,
inclusive of climate risk.
Our governance framework establishes oversight of
climate risk practices and strategies by the
Board, supported by its ERC, as well as the MRC
and the Responsible Growth Committee, both of
which are management-level committees comprised
of senior leaders across every major FLU and
control function. The Responsible Growth
Committee is supported by the ESG Disclosure sub-
committee, which is responsible for reviewing and
providing oversight of the Corporation’s climate
and ESG-related public disclosures.
Our climate risk management efforts are overseen
by an executive officer who reports to the CRO.
The Climate Risk Council, which consists of
leaders across risk, FLU and control functions,
meets routinely to discuss our approach to
managing climate-related risks in line with our
Risk Framework.
In 2021, we publicly announced our commitment to
achieve net zero emissions in our financing
activities, operations, and supply chain before
2050 (Net Zero Goal) and set 2030 emissions
targets for our operations and supply chain. In
connection with our Net Zero Goal, in 2022, we
announced a target to reduce emissions by 2030
associated with our financing activities related
to auto manufacturing, energy and power
generation (2030 Targets). In our September 2022
Task Force on Climate-related Financial
Disclosures Report, we disclosed our 2019 and
2020 financed emissions and emissions intensity
metrics for these sectors, with 2019 serving as
the baseline for our 2030 Targets.
We plan to disclose the financed emissions for
additional portions of our business loan
portfolio in 2023, and we plan to set financing
activity emission reduction targets for other key
sectors by April 2024.
Achieving our climate--related goals and targets,
including our Net Zero Goal and 2030 Targets, may
require technological advances, clearly defined
roadmaps for industry sectors, new standards and
public policies, including those that improve the
cost of capital for the transition to a low-
carbon economy and better emissions data
reporting, as well as ongoing, strong and active
engagement with customers, suppliers, investors,
government officials and other stakeholders.
Given the extended period of these and other
climate-related goals we have established, our
initiatives have not resulted in a significant
effect on our results of operations or financial
position in the relevant periods presented
herein.
For more information about climate-related
matters, including how the Corporation manages
climate risk, and the Corporation’s climate-
related goals and commitments, including our
plans to achieve our Net Zero Goal and 2030
Targets and progress on our sustainable finance
goals, see the Corporation’s website, including
our 2022 Task Force on Climate-related Financial
Disclosures Report and the 2022
Annual Report to shareholders available on the
Investor Relations portion of our website in
March 2023. The contents of the Corporation’s
website and 2022 Annual Report to shareholders
are not incorporated by reference into this
Annual Report on Form 10-K. For more information
on climate-related risks, see Item 1A. Risk
Factors on page 8.
The foregoing discussion and our discussion in
the 2022 Annual Report to shareholders regarding
our goals and commitments with respect to climate
risk management, including environmental
transition considerations, include “forward-
looking statements” within the meaning of the
Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
These statements are not guarantees of future
results or performance and involve certain known
and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions
that are difficult to predict and are often
beyond the Corporation’s control. Actual outcomes
and results may differ materially from those
expressed in, or implied by, any of these
forward-looking statements.
 Complex Accounting Estimates 
Our significant accounting principles, as
described in Note 1 – Summary of Significant
Accounting Principles to the Consolidated
Financial Statements, are essential in
understanding the MD&A. Many of our significant
accounting principles require complex judgments
to estimate the values of assets and liabilities.
We have procedures and processes in place to
facilitate making these judgments.
The more judgmental estimates are summarized in
the following discussion. We have identified and
described the development of the variables most
important in the estimation processes that
involve mathematical models to derive the
estimates. In many cases, there are numerous
alternative judgments that could be used in the
process of determining the inputs to the models.
Where alternatives exist, we have used the
factors that we believe represent the most
reasonable value in developing the inputs. Actual
performance that differs from our estimates of
the key variables could materially impact our
results of operations. Separate from the possible
future impact to our results of operations from
input and model variables, the value of our
lending portfolio and market-sensitive assets and
liabilities may change subsequent to the balance
sheet date, often significantly, due to the
nature and magnitude of future credit and market
conditions. Such credit and market conditions may
change quickly and in unforeseen ways and the
resulting volatility could have a significant,
negative effect on future operating results.
These fluctuations would not be indicative of
deficiencies in our models or inputs.
 Allowance for Credit Losses 
The allowance for credit losses includes the
allowance for loan and lease losses and the
reserve for unfunded lending commitments. Our
process for determining the allowance for credit
losses is discussed in Note 1 – Summary of
Significant Accounting Principles and Note 5 –
Outstanding Loans and Leases and Allowance for
Credit Losses to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
The determination of the allowance for credit
losses is based on numerous estimates and
assumptions, which require
 Bank of America82 
a high degree of judgment and are often
interrelated. A critical judgment in the process
is the weighting of our forward-looking
macroeconomic scenarios that are incorporated
into our quantitative models. As any one economic
outlook is inherently uncertain, the Corporation
uses multiple macroeconomic scenarios in its ECL
calculation, which have included a baseline
scenario derived from consensus estimates, an
adverse scenario reflecting an extended moderate
recession, a downside scenario reflecting
persistent inflation and interest rates above the
baseline scenario, a tail risk scenario similar
to the severely adverse scenario used in stress
testing and an upside scenario that considers the
potential for improvement above the baseline
scenario. The overall economic outlook is
weighted 95 percent towards a recessionary
environment in 2023, with continued inflationary
pressures leading to lower gross domestic product
(GDP) and higher unemployment rate expectations
as compared to the prior year. Generally, as the
consensus estimates improve or deteriorate, the
allowance for credit losses will change in a
similar direction. There are multiple variables
that drive the macroeconomic scenarios with the
key variables including, but not limited to, U.S.
GDP and unemployment rates. As of December 31,
2021, the weighted macroeconomic outlook for the
U.S. average unemployment rate was forecasted at
5.2 percent, 4.7 percent and 4.3 percent in the
fourth quarters of 2022, 2023 and 2024,
respectively, and the weighted macroeconomic
outlook for U.S. GDP was forecasted to grow at
2.1 percent, 1.9 percent and 1.9 percent year-
over-year in the fourth quarters of 2022, 2023
and 2024, respectively. As of December 31, 2022,
the latest consensus estimates for the U.S.
average unemployment rate for the fourth quarter
of 2022 was 3.7 percent and U.S. GDP was
forecasted to grow 0.4 percent year-over-year in
the fourth quarter of 2022, reflecting a tighter
labor market and depressed growth expectations
compared to our macroeconomic outlook as of
December 31, 2021, and were factored into our
allowance for credit losses estimate as of
December 31, 2022. In addition, as of December
31, 2022, the weighted macroeconomic outlook for
the U.S. average unemployment rate was forecasted
at 5.6 percent and 5.0 percent in the fourth
quarters of 2023 and 2024, and the weighted
macroeconomic outlook for U.S. GDP was forecasted
to contract 0.4 percent and grow 1.2 percent
year-over-year in the fourth quarters of 2023 and
2024.
In addition to the above judgments and estimates,
the allowance for credit losses can also be
impacted by unanticipated changes in asset
quality of the portfolio, such as increases or
decreases in credit and/or internal risk ratings
in our commercial portfolio, improvement or
deterioration in borrower delinquencies or credit
scores in our credit card portfolio and increases
or decreases in home prices, which is a primary
driver of LTVs, in our consumer real estate
portfolio, all of which have some degree of
uncertainty. The allowance for credit losses
increased to $14.2 billion from $13.8 billion at
December 31, 2021, primarily due to loan growth
and a dampened macroeconomic outlook in 2022.
To provide an illustration of the sensitivity of
the macroeconomic scenarios and other assumptions
on the estimate of our allowance for credit
losses, the Corporation compared the December 31,
2022 modeled ECL from the baseline scenario and
our adverse scenario. Relative to the baseline
scenario, the adverse scenario assumed a peak
U.S. unemployment rate of nearly three percentage
points higher than the baseline scenario, a
decline in U.S. GDP followed by a prolonged
recovery and a lower home price outlook with a
difference of approximately eight percent at the
trough. This
sensitivity analysis resulted in a hypothetical
increase in the allowance for credit losses of
approximately $4 billion.
While the sensitivity analysis may be useful to
understand how changes in macroeconomic
assumptions could impact our modeled ECLs, it is
not meant to forecast how our allowance for
credit losses is expected to change in a
different macroeconomic outlook. Importantly, the
analysis does not incorporate a variety of
factors, including qualitative reserves and the
weighting of alternate scenarios, which could
have offsetting effects on the estimate.
Considering the variety of factors contemplated
when developing and weighting macroeconomic
outlooks such as recent economic events, leading
economic indicators, views of internal and third-
party economists and industry trends, in addition
to other qualitative factors, the Corporation
believes the allowance for credit losses at
December 31, 2022 is appropriate.
 Fair Value of Financial Instruments 
Under applicable accounting standards, we are
required to maximize the use of observable inputs
and minimize the use of unobservable inputs in
measuring fair value. We classify fair value
measurements of financial instruments and MSRs
based on the three-level fair value hierarchy in
the accounting standards.
The fair values of assets and liabilities may
include adjustments, such as market liquidity and
credit quality, where appropriate. Valuations of
products using models or other techniques are
sensitive to assumptions used for the significant
inputs. Where market data is available, the
inputs used for valuation reflect that
information as of our valuation date. Inputs to
valuation models are considered unobservable if
they are supported by little or no market
activity. In periods of extreme volatility,
lessened liquidity or in illiquid markets, there
may be more variability in market pricing or a
lack of market data to use in the valuation
process. In keeping with the prudent application
of estimates and management judgment in
determining the fair value of assets and
liabilities, we have in place various processes
and controls that include: a model validation
policy that requires review and approval of
quantitative models used for deal pricing,
financial statement fair value determination and
risk quantification; a trading product valuation
policy that requires verification of all traded
product valuations; and a periodic review and
substantiation of daily profit and loss reporting
for all traded products. Primarily through
validation controls, we utilize both broker and
pricing service inputs which can and do include
both market-observable and internally-modeled
values and/or valuation inputs. Our reliance on
this information is affected by our understanding
of how the broker and/or pricing service develops
its data with a higher degree of reliance applied
to those that are more directly observable and
lesser reliance applied to those developed
through their own internal modeling. For example,
broker quotes in less active markets may only be
indicative and therefore less reliable. These
processes and controls are performed
independently of the business. For more
information, see Note 20 – Fair Value
Measurements and Note 21 – Fair Value Option to
the Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Level 3 Assets and Liabilities 
Financial assets and liabilities, and MSRs, where
values are based on valuation techniques that
require inputs that are both unobservable and are
significant to the overall fair value measurement
are classified as Level 3 under the fair value
hierarchy established in applicable accounting
standards. The fair value of these Level 3
financial assets and liabilities and
 83Bank of America 
MSRs is determined using pricing models,
discounted cash flow methodologies or similar
techniques for which the determination of fair
value requires significant management judgment or
estimation.
Level 3 financial instruments may be hedged with
derivatives classified as Level 1 or 2;
therefore, gains or losses associated with Level
3 financial instruments may be offset by gains or
losses associated with financial instruments
classified in other levels of the fair value
hierarchy. The Level 3 gains and losses recorded
in earnings did not have a significant impact on
our liquidity or capital. We conduct a review of
our fair value hierarchy classifications on a
quarterly basis. Transfers into or out of Level 3
are made if the significant inputs used in the
financial models measuring the fair values of the
assets and liabilities became unobservable or
observable, respectively, in the current
marketplace. For more information on transfers
into and out of Level 3 during 2022, 2021 and
2020, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements to
the Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Accrued Income Taxes and Deferred Tax Assets 
Accrued income taxes, reported as a component of
either other assets or accrued expenses and other
liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet,
represent the net amount of current income taxes
we expect to pay to or receive from various
taxing jurisdictions attributable to our
operations to date. We currently file income tax
returns in more than 100 jurisdictions and
consider many factors, including statutory,
judicial and regulatory guidance, in estimating
the appropriate accrued income taxes for each
jurisdiction.
Net deferred tax assets, reported as a component
of other assets on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet, represent the net decrease in taxes
expected to be paid in the future because of net
operating loss (NOL) and tax credit carryforwards
and
because of future reversals of temporary
differences in the bases of assets and
liabilities as measured by tax laws and their
bases as reported in the financial statements.
NOL and tax credit carryforwards result in
reductions to future tax liabilities, and many of
these attributes can expire if not utilized
within certain periods. We consider the need for
valuation allowances to reduce net deferred tax
assets to the amounts that we estimate are more
likely than not to be realized.
Consistent with the applicable accounting
guidance, we monitor relevant tax authorities and
change our estimates of accrued income taxes
and/or net deferred tax assets due to changes in
income tax laws and their interpretation by the
courts and regulatory authorities. These
revisions of our estimates, which also may result
from our income tax planning and from the
resolution of income tax audit matters, may be
material to our operating results for any given
period.
See Note 19 – Income Taxes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements for a table of significant
tax attributes and additional information. For
more information, see page 17 under Item 1A. Risk
Factors – Regulatory, Compliance and Legal.
 Goodwill and Intangible Assets 
The nature of and accounting for goodwill and
intangible assets are discussed in Note 1 –
Summary of Significant Accounting Principles ,
and Note 7 – Goodwill and Intangible Assets to
the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We completed our annual goodwill impairment test
as of June 30, 2022. Based on our assessment, we
have concluded that goodwill was not impaired.
 Certain Contingent Liabilities 
For more information on the complex judgments
associated with certain contingent liabilities,
see Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies to
the Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Bank of America84 
 Non-GAAP Reconciliations 
Tables 47 and 48 provide reconciliations of certain non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial
measures.
 Table 47 
 (Dollars in millions, 
 shares in thousands) 
 Reconciliation of 
 average shareholders’ 
 equity to average 
 tangible shareholders’ 
 equity and average Annual Reconciliations 
 tangible common to GAAP Financial 
 shareholders’ equity Measures(1) 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Shareholders’ equity $ 270,299 $ 273,757 $ 267,309 
 Goodwill -69,022 -69,005 -68,951 
 Intangible assets -2,117 -2,177 -1,862 
 (excluding MSRs) 
 Related deferred tax 922 916 821 
 liabilities 
 Tangible shareholders’ $ 200,082 $ 203,491 $ 197,317 
 equity 
 Preferred stock -28,318 -23,970 -23,624 
 Tangible common $ 171,764 $ 179,521 $ 173,693 
 shareholders’ equity 
 Reconciliation of 
 year-end shareholders’ 
 equity to year-end 
 tangible 
 shareholders’ equity 
 and year-end 
 tangible common 
 shareholders’ equity 
 Shareholders’ equity $ 273,197 $ 270,066 $ 272,924 
 Goodwill -69,022 -69,022 -68,951 
 Intangible assets -2,075 -2,153 -2,151 
 (excluding MSRs) 
 Related deferred tax 899 929 920 
 liabilities 
 Tangible shareholders’ $ 202,999 $ 199,820 $ 202,742 
 equity 
 Preferred stock -28,397 -24,708 -24,510 
 Tangible common $ 174,602 $ 175,112 $ 178,232 
 shareholders’ equity 
 Reconciliation of 
 year-end assets to 
 year-end tangible 
 assets 
 Assets $ 3,051,375 $ 3,169,495 $ 2,819,627 
 Goodwill -69,022 -69,022 -68,951 
 Intangible assets -2,075 -2,153 -2,151 
 (excluding MSRs) 
 Related deferred tax 899 929 920 
 liabilities 
 Tangible assets $ 2,981,177 $ 3,099,249 $ 2,749,445 
(1) Presents reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial measures. For more
information on non-GAAP financial measures and ratios we use in assessing the results of the
Corporation, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 32.
 Ta… 
 48 
 (D… 
 in 
 mi… 
 Re… 
 of 
 av… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 to 
 av… 
 ta… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 and Qua… 
 av… Rec… 
 ta… to 
 co… GAAP 2022 20… 
 sh… Fin… Qua… Qu… 
 eq… Mea… Fou… Thi… Sec… Fir… Fo… Thi… Se… Fir… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Sh… $ 272… $ 271… $ 268… $ 269… $ 27… $ 275… $ 27… $ 274… 
 eq… 
 Go… -69… -69… -69… -69… -6… -69… -6… -68… 
 In… 
 as… -2,… -2,… -2,… -2,… -2… -2,… -2… -2,… 
 (e… 
 MS… 
 Re… 
 de… 914 920 926 929 913 915 915 920 
 tax 
 li… 
 Ta… 
 sh… $ 202… $ 200… $ 197… $ 199… $ 20… $ 205… $ 20… $ 203… 
 eq… 
 Pr… -28… -29… -28… -26… -2… -23… -2… -24… 
 st… 
 Ta… 
 co… $ 173… $ 171… $ 169… $ 172… $ 17… $ 181… $ 18… $ 179… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 Re… 
 of 
 pe… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 to 
 pe… 
 ta… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 and 
 pe… 
 ta… 
 co… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 Sh… $ 273… $ 269… $ 269… $ 266… $ 27… $ 272… $ 27… $ 274… 
 eq… 
 Go… -69… -69… -69… -69… -6… -69… -6… -68… 
 In… 
 as… -2,… -2,… -2,… -2,… -2… -2,… -2… -2,… 
 (e… 
 MS… 
 Re… 
 de… 899 915 920 926 929 913 915 915 
 tax 
 li… 
 Ta… 
 sh… $ 202… $ 199… $ 198… $ 196… $ 19… $ 202… $ 20… $ 203… 
 eq… 
 Pr… -28… -29… -29… -27… -2… -23… -2… -24… 
 st… 
 Ta… 
 co… $ 174… $ 170… $ 169… $ 169… $ 17… $ 178… $ 18… $ 179… 
 sh… 
 eq… 
 Re… 
 of 
 pe… 
 as… 
 to 
 pe… 
 ta… 
 as… 
 As… $ 3,0… $ 3,0… $ 3,1… $ 3,2… $ 3,… $ 3,0… $ 3,… $ 2,9… 
 Go… -69… -69… -69… -69… -6… -69… -6… -68… 
 In… 
 as… -2,… -2,… -2,… -2,… -2… -2,… -2… -2,… 
 (e… 
 MS… 
 Re… 
 de… 899 915 920 926 929 913 915 915 
 tax 
 li… 
 Ta… $ 2,9… $ 3,0… $ 3,0… $ 3,1… $ 3,… $ 3,0… $ 2,… $ 2,8… 
 as… 
(1) Presents reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial measures. For more
information on non-GAAP financial measures and ratios we use in assessing the results of the
Corporation, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 32.
 85Bank of America 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk │
See Market Risk Management on page 75 in the MD&A and the sections referenced therein for
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk.
 Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary 
 Data 
 Table of Contents 
 Page 
 Consolidated Statement of Income 90 
 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 90 
 Consolidated Balance Sheet 91 
 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ 92 
 Equity 
 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 93 
 Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting 94 
 Principles 
 Note 2 – Net Interest Income and Noninterest 103 
 Income 
 Note 3 – Derivatives 104 
 Note 4 – Securities 111 
 Note 5 – Outstanding Loans and Leasesand Allowance 114 
 for Credit Losses 
 Note 6 – Securitizations and Other Variable 124 
 Interest Entities 
 Note 7 – Goodwill and Intangible Assets 128 
 Note 8 – Leases 129 
 Note 9 – Deposits 130 
 Note 10 – Securities Financing Agreements, 
 Short-term Borrowings, Collateral and Restricted 130 
 Cash 
 Note 11 – Long-term Debt 132 
 Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies 133 
 Note 13 – Shareholders’ Equity 137 
 Note 14 – Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income 139 
 Note 15 – Earnings Per Common Share 139 
 Note 16 – Regulatory Requirements and Restrictions 140 
 Note 17 – Employee Benefit Plans 141 
 Note 18 – Stock-based Compensation Plans 146 
 Note 19 – Income Taxes 146 
 Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements 148 
 Note 21 – Fair Value Option 157 
 Note 22 – Fair Value of Financial Instruments 159 
 Note 23 – Business Segment Information 160 
 Note 24 – Parent Company Information 163 
 Note 25 – Performance by Geographical Area 165 
 Glossary 166 
 Acronyms 168 
 Bank of America86 
Report of Management on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
The management of Bank of America Corporation is
responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial
reporting.
The Corporation’s internal control over financial
reporting is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of
financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America. The
Corporation’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures
that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records
that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the
assets of the Corporation; (ii) provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are
recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America, and that receipts and
expenditures of the Corporation are being made
only in accordance with authorizations of
management and directors of the Corporation; and
(iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the
Corporation’s assets that could have a material
effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal
control over financial reporting may not prevent
or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or
that the degree of compliance with the policies
or procedures may deteriorate.
Management assessed the effectiveness of the
Corporation’s internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2022 based on the
framework set forth by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission in Internal Control – Integrated
Framework (2013) . Based on that assessment,
management concluded that, as of December 31,
2022, the Corporation’s internal control over
financial reporting is effective.
The Corporation’s internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2022 has been
audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers , LLP , an
independent registered public accounting firm, as
stated in their accompanying report which
expresses an unqualified opinion on the
effectiveness of the Corporation’s internal
control over financial reporting as of December
31, 2022.
 Brian T. Moynihan 
Chair, Chief Executive Officer and President
 Alastair M. Borthwick 
Chief Financial Officer
 87Bank of America 
Report of Independent Registered Public
Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of
Bank of America Corporation
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal
Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the accompanying consolidated
balance sheets of Bank of America Corporation and
its subsidiaries (the “Corporation”) as of
December 31, 2022 and 2021, and the related
consolidated statements of income, comprehensive
income, changes in shareholders’ equity and cash
flows for each of the three years in the period
ended December 31, 2022, including the related
notes (collectively referred to as the
“consolidated financial statements”). We also
have audited the Corporation's internal control
over financial reporting as of December 31, 2022,
based on criteria established in Internal Control
- Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
Treadway Commission (COSO).
In our opinion, the consolidated financial
statements referred to above present fairly, in
all material respects, the financial position of
the Corporation as of December 31, 2022 and 2021,
and the results of its operations and its cash
flows for each of the three years in the period
ended December 31, 2022 in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America. Also in our opinion,
the Corporation maintained, in all material
respects, effective internal control over
financial reporting as of December 31, 2022,
based on criteria established in Internal Control
- Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the COSO.
Change in Accounting Principle
As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated
financial statements, the Corporation changed the
manner in which it accounts for credit losses on
certain financial instruments in 2020.
 Basis for Opinions 
The Corporation’s management is responsible for
these consolidated financial statements, for
maintaining effective internal control over
financial reporting, and for its assessment of
the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting, included in the accompanying
Report of Management on Internal Control Over
Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to
express opinions on the Corporation’s
consolidated financial statements and on the
Corporation's internal control over financial
reporting based on our audits. We are a public
accounting firm registered with the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United
States) (PCAOB) and are required to be
independent with respect to the Corporation in
accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws
and the applicable rules and regulations of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the
standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audits to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the
consolidated financial statements are free of
material misstatement, whether due to error or
fraud, and whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all
material respects. Our audits of the consolidated
financial statements included performing
procedures to assess the risks of material
misstatement of the consolidated financial
statements, whether due to error or fraud, and
performing procedures that respond to those
risks. Such procedures included examining, on a
test basis, evidence
regarding the amounts and disclosures in the
consolidated financial statements. Our audits
also included evaluating the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by
management, as well as evaluating the overall
presentation of the consolidated financial
statements. Our audit of internal control over
financial reporting included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial
reporting, assessing the risk that a material
weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the
design and operating effectiveness of internal
control based on the assessed risk. Our audits
also included performing such other procedures as
we considered necessary in the circumstances. We
believe that our audits provide a reasonable
basis for our opinions.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control
over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial
reporting is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of
financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles. A company’s internal control over
financial reporting includes those policies and
procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of
records that, in reasonable detail, accurately
and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii)
provide reasonable assurance that transactions
are recorded as necessary to permit preparation
of financial statements in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles, and
that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations
of management and directors of the company; and
(iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s
assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal
control over financial reporting may not prevent
or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or
that the degree of compliance with the policies
or procedures may deteriorate.
 Critical Audit Matters 
The critical audit matters communicated below are
matters arising from the current period audit of
the consolidated financial statements that were
communicated or required to be communicated to
the audit committee and that (i) relate to
accounts or disclosures that are material to the
consolidated financial statements and (ii)
involved our especially challenging, subjective,
or complex judgments. The communication of
critical audit matters does not alter in any way
our opinion on the consolidated financial
statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by
communicating the critical audit matters below,
providing separate opinions on the critical audit
matters or on the accounts or disclosures to
which they relate.
Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses - Commercial
and Consumer Card Loans
As described in Notes 1 and 5 to the consolidated
financial statements, the allowance for loan and
lease losses represents management’s estimate of
the expected credit losses in the Corporation’s
loan and lease portfolio, excluding loans and
unfunded lending commitments accounted for under
the fair
 Bank of America88 
value option. As of December 31, 2022, the
allowance for loan and lease losses was $12.7
billion on total loans and leases of $1,040.0
billion, which excludes loans accounted for under
the fair value option. For commercial and
consumer card loans, the expected credit loss is
typically estimated using quantitative methods
that consider a variety of factors such as
historical loss experience, the current credit
quality of the portfolio as well as an economic
outlook over the life of the loan. In its loss
forecasting framework, the Corporation
incorporates forward looking information through
the use of macroeconomic scenarios applied over
the forecasted life of the assets. These
macroeconomic scenarios include variables that
have historically been key drivers of increases
and decreases in credit losses. These variables
include, but are not limited to, unemployment
rates, real estate prices, gross domestic product
levels and corporate bond spreads. The scenarios
that are chosen and the weighting given to each
scenario depend on a variety of factors including
recent economic events, leading economic
indicators, views of internal as well as third-
party economists and industry trends. Also
included in the allowance for loan and lease
losses are qualitative reserves to cover losses
that are expected but, in the Corporation's
assessment, may not be adequately reflected in
the quantitative methods or the economic
assumptions. Factors that the Corporation
considers include changes in lending policies and
procedures, business conditions, the nature and
size of the portfolio, portfolio concentrations,
the volume and severity of past due loans and
nonaccrual loans, the effect of external factors
such as competition, and legal and regulatory
requirements, among others. Further, the
Corporation considers the inherent uncertainty in
quantitative models that are built on historical
data.
The principal considerations for our
determination that performing procedures relating
to the allowance for loan and lease losses for
the commercial and consumer card portfolios is a
critical audit matter are (i) the significant
judgment and estimation by management in
developing lifetime economic forecast scenarios,
related weightings to each scenario and certain
qualitative reserves, which in turn led to a high
degree of auditor judgment, subjectivity and
effort in performing procedures and in evaluating
audit evidence obtained, and (ii) the audit
effort involved professionals with specialized
skill and knowledge.
Addressing the matter involved performing
procedures and evaluating audit evidence in
connection with forming our overall opinion on
the consolidated financial statements. These
procedures included testing the effectiveness of
controls relating to the allowance for loan and
lease losses, including controls over the
evaluation and approval of models, forecast
scenarios and related weightings, and qualitative
reserves. These procedures also included, among
others, testing management’s process for
estimating the allowance for loan and lease
losses, including (i) evaluating the
appropriateness of the loss forecast models and
methodology, (ii) evaluating the reasonableness
of certain macroeconomic variables, (iii)
evaluating the reasonableness of management’s
development, selection and weighting of lifetime
economic forecast scenarios used in the loss
forecast models, (iv) testing the completeness
and accuracy of data used in the estimate, and
(v) evaluating the reasonableness of certain
qualitative reserves made to the model output
results to determine the overall allowance for
loan
and lease losses. The procedures also included
the involvement of professionals with specialized
skill and knowledge to assist in evaluating the
appropriateness of certain loss forecast models,
the reasonableness of economic forecast scenarios
and related weightings and the reasonableness of
certain qualitative reserves.
Valuation of Certain Level 3 Financial
Instruments
As described in Notes 1 and 20 to the
consolidated financial statements, the
Corporation carries certain financial instruments
at fair value, which includes $10.7 billion of
assets and $7.1 billion of liabilities classified
as Level 3 fair value measurements that are
valued on a recurring basis and $3.4 billion of
assets classified as Level 3 fair value
measurements that are valued on a nonrecurring
basis, for which the determination of fair value
requires significant management judgment or
estimation. The Corporation determines the fair
value of Level 3 financial instruments using
pricing models, discounted cash flow
methodologies, or similar techniques that require
inputs that are both unobservable and are
significant to the overall fair value
measurement. Unobservable inputs, such as
volatility or implied yield, may be determined
using quantitative-based extrapolations, pricing
models or other internal methodologies which
incorporate management estimates and available
market information.
The principal considerations for our
determination that performing procedures relating
to the valuation of certain Level 3 financial
instruments is a critical audit matter are the
significant judgment and estimation used by
management to determine the fair value of these
financial instruments, which in turn led to a
high degree of auditor judgment, subjectivity and
effort in performing procedures and in evaluating
audit evidence obtained, including the
involvement of professionals with specialized
skill and knowledge.
Addressing the matter involved performing
procedures and evaluating audit evidence in
connection with forming our overall opinion on
the consolidated financial statements. These
procedures included testing the effectiveness of
controls relating to the valuation of financial
instruments, including controls related to
valuation models, significant unobservable
inputs, and data. These procedures also included,
among others, the involvement of professionals
with specialized skill and knowledge to assist in
developing an independent estimate of fair value
for a sample of these certain financial
instruments and comparison of management’s
estimate to the independently developed estimate
of fair value. Developing the independent
estimate involved testing the completeness and
accuracy of data provided by management and
evaluating the reasonableness of management’s
significant unobservable inputs.
Charlotte, North Carolina
February 22, 2023
We have served as the Corporation’s auditor since
1958.
 89Bank of America 
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
 Consolidated Statement of Income 
 (In millions, except per share information) 
 Net interest income 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest income $ 72,565 $ 47,672 $ 51,585 
 Interest expense 20,103 4,738 8,225 
 Net interest income 52,462 42,934 43,360 
 Noninterest income 
 Fees and commissions 33,212 39,299 34,551 
 Market making and similar activities 12,075 8,691 8,355 
 Other income -2,799 -1,811 -738 
 Total noninterest income 42,488 46,179 42,168 
 Total revenue, net of interest expense 94,950 89,113 85,528 
 Provision for credit losses 2,543 -4,594 11,320 
 Noninterest expense 
 Compensation and benefits 36,447 36,140 32,725 
 Occupancy and equipment 7,071 7,138 7,141 
 Information processing and 6,279 5,769 5,222 
 communications 
 Product delivery and transaction related 3,653 3,881 3,433 
 Professional fees 2,142 1,775 1,694 
 Marketing 1,825 1,939 1,701 
 Other general operating 4,021 3,089 3,297 
 Total noninterest expense 61,438 59,731 55,213 
 Income before income taxes 30,969 33,976 18,995 
 Income tax expense 3,441 1,998 1,101 
 Net income $ 27,528 $ 31,978 $ 17,894 
 Preferred stock dividends and other 1,513 1,421 1,421 
 Net income applicable to common $ 26,015 $ 30,557 $ 16,473 
 shareholders 
 Per common share information 
 Earnings $ 3.21 $ 3.60 $ 1.88 
 Diluted earnings 3.19 3.57 1.87 
 Average common shares issued and 8,113.7 8,493.3 8,753.2 
 outstanding 
 Average diluted common shares issued and 8,167.5 8,558.4 8,796.9 
 outstanding 
 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 2020 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 27,528 $ 31,978 $ 17,894 
 Other comprehensive income (loss), 
 net-of-tax: 
 Net change in debt securities -6,028 -2,077 4,799 
 Net change in debit valuation 755 356 -498 
 adjustments 
 Net change in derivatives -10,055 -2,306 826 
 Employee benefit plan adjustments -667 624 -98 
 Net change in foreign currency -57 -45 -52 
 translation adjustments 
 Other comprehensive income (loss) -16,052 -3,448 4,977 
 Comprehensive income (loss) $ 11,476 $ 28,530 $ 22,871 
 See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
 Bank of America90 
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
 Consolidated Balance Sheet 
 (Dollars in millions) December 31 
 Assets 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and due from banks $ 30,334 $ 29,222 
 Interest-bearing deposits 
 with the 
 Federal Reserve, non-U.S. 199,869 318,999 
 central banks 
 and other banks 
 Cash and cash equivalents 230,203 348,221 
 Time deposits placed and 
 other 7,259 7,144 
 short-term investments 
 Federal funds sold and 
 securities borrowed or 
 purchased under agreements to 
 resell 267,574 250,720 
 (includes$146,999and 
 $150,665measured at fair 
 value) 
 Trading account assets 
 (includes$115,505and 296,108 247,080 
 $103,434pledged as 
 collateral) 
 Derivative assets 48,642 35,344 
 Debt securities: 
 Carried at fair value 229,994 308,073 
 Held-to-maturity, at cost 
 (fair value 632,825 674,554 
 –$524,267and $665,890) 
 Total debt securities 862,819 982,627 
 Loans and leases 
 (includes$5,771and 1,045,747 979,124 
 $7,819measured at fair value) 
 Allowance for loan and lease -12,682 -12,387 
 losses 
 Loans and leases, net of 1,033,065 966,737 
 allowance 
 Premises and equipment, net 11,510 10,833 
 Goodwill 69,022 69,022 
 Loans held-for-sale 
 (includes$1,115and 6,871 15,635 
 $4,455measured at fair value) 
 Customer and other 67,543 72,263 
 receivables 
 Other assets 
 (includes$9,594and 150,759 163,869 
 $12,144measured at fair 
 value) 
 Total assets $ 3,051,375 $ 3,169,495 
 Liabilities 
 Deposits in U.S. offices: 
 Noninterest-bearing $ 640,745 $ 784,189 
 Interest-bearing 
 (includes$311and 1,182,590 1,165,914 
 $408measured at fair value) 
 Deposits in non-U.S. offices: 
 Noninterest-bearing 20,480 27,457 
 Interest-bearing 86,526 86,886 
 Total deposits 1,930,341 2,064,446 
 Federal funds purchased and 
 securities loaned or sold 
 under agreements to 
 repurchase 195,635 192,329 
 (includes$151,708and 
 $139,641measured at fair 
 value) 
 Trading account liabilities 80,399 100,690 
 Derivative liabilities 44,816 37,675 
 Short-term borrowings 
 (includes$832and 26,932 23,753 
 $4,279measured at fair value) 
 Accrued expenses and other 
 liabilities 
 (includes$9,752and 
 $11,489measured at fair value 224,073 200,419 
 and$1,540and $1,456of reserve 
 for unfunded lending 
 commitments) 
 Long-term debt 
 (includes$33,070and 275,982 280,117 
 $29,708measured at fair 
 value) 
 Total liabilities 2,778,178 2,899,429 
 Commitments and 
 contingencies(Note 6 – 
 Securitizations and Other 
 Variable Interest Entities 
 andNote 12 – Commitments and 
 Contingencies) 
 Shareholders’ equity 
 Preferred stock, $0.01par 
 value; 
 authorized 28,397 24,708 
 –100,000,000shares; issued 
 and outstanding 
 –4,088,101and3,939,686shares 
 Common stock and additional 
 paid-in capital,$0.01par 
 value; authorized 58,953 62,398 
 –12,800,000,000shares; 
 issued and outstanding 
 –7,996,777,943and8,077,831,4… 
 Retained earnings 207,003 188,064 
 Accumulated other 
 comprehensive income -21,156 -5,104 
 (loss) 
 Total shareholders’ equity 273,197 270,066 
 Total liabilities and 
 shareholders’ $ 3,051,375 $ 3,169,495 
 equity 
 Assets of consolidated 
 variable interest entities 
 included in total assets above 
 (isolated to settle the 
 liabilities of the variable 
 interest entities) 
 Trading account assets $ 2,816 $ 5,004 
 Loans and leases 16,738 17,135 
 Allowance for loan and lease -797 -958 
 losses 
 Loans and leases, net of 15,941 16,177 
 allowance 
 All other assets 116 189 
 Total assets of consolidated $ 18,873 $ 21,370 
 variable interest entities 
 Liabilities of consolidated 
 variable interest entities 
 included in total liabilities 
 above 
 Short-term borrowings 
 (includes$42and $51of $ 42 $ 247 
 non-recourse short-term 
 borrowings) 
 Long-term debt 
 (includes$4,581and $3,587of 4,581 3,587 
 non-recourse debt) 
 All other liabilities 
 (includes$13and $7of 13 7 
 non-recourse liabilities) 
 Total liabilities of 
 consolidated variable interest $ 4,636 $ 3,841 
 entities 
 See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
 91Bank of America 
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
 Cons… 
 Stat… 
 of 
 Chan… Common 
 in Stock Accum… 
 Shar… and Other 
 Equi… Addit… Compr… Total 
 (In Prefe… Paid-… Reta… Income Shar… 
 mill… Stock Shares Capit… Amou… Earn… (Loss) Equi… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Bala… 
 Dece… $ 23,401 8,836… $ 91,723 $ 156,… $ -6,633 $ 264,… 
 31, 
 2019 
 Cumu… 
 adju… 
 for 
 adop… 
 of -2,4… -2,4… 
 cred… 
 loss 
 acco… 
 stan… 
 Net 17,8… 17,8… 
 inco… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in 4,799 4,799 
 debt 
 secu… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in -498 -498 
 debit 
 valu… 
 adju… 
 Net 
 chan… 826 826 
 in 
 deri… 
 Empl… 
 bene… -98 -98 
 plan 
 adju… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in 
 fore… -52 -52 
 curr… 
 tran… 
 adju… 
 Divi… 
 decl… 
 Comm… -6,2… -6,2… 
 Pref… -1,4… -1,4… 
 Issu… 
 of 2,181 2,181 
 pref… 
 stock 
 Rede… 
 of -1,072 -1,0… 
 pref… 
 stock 
 Comm… 
 stock 
 issu… 
 under 
 empl… 41.7 1,284 -9 1,275 
 plan… 
 net, 
 and 
 other 
 Comm… 
 stock -227.0 -7,025 -7,0… 
 repu… 
 Bala… 
 Dece… $ 24,510 8,650… $ 85,982 $ 164,… $ -1,656 $ 272,… 
 31, 
 2020 
 Net 31,9… 31,9… 
 inco… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in -2,077 -2,0… 
 debt 
 secu… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in 356 356 
 debit 
 valu… 
 adju… 
 Net 
 chan… -2,306 -2,3… 
 in 
 deri… 
 Empl… 
 bene… 624 624 
 plan 
 adju… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in 
 fore… -45 -45 
 curr… 
 tran… 
 adju… 
 Divi… 
 decl… 
 Comm… -6,5… -6,5… 
 Pref… -1,4… -1,4… 
 Issu… 
 of 2,169 2,169 
 pref… 
 stock 
 Rede… 
 of -1,971 -1,9… 
 pref… 
 stock 
 Comm… 
 stock 
 issu… 
 under 
 empl… 42.3 1,542 -6 1,536 
 plan… 
 net, 
 and 
 other 
 Comm… 
 stock -615.3 -25,1… -25,… 
 repu… 
 Bala… 
 Dece… $ 24,708 8,077… $ 62,398 $ 188,… $ -5,104 $ 270,… 
 31, 
 2021 
 Net 27,5… 27,5… 
 inco… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in -6,028 -6,0… 
 debt 
 secu… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in 755 755 
 debit 
 valu… 
 adju… 
 Net 
 chan… -10,0… -10,… 
 in 
 deri… 
 Empl… 
 bene… -667 -667 
 plan 
 adju… 
 Net 
 chan… 
 in 
 fore… -57 -57 
 curr… 
 tran… 
 adju… 
 Divi… 
 decl… 
 Comm… -6,9… -6,9… 
 Pref… -1,5… -1,5… 
 Issu… 
 of 4,426 4,426 
 pref… 
 stock 
 Rede… 
 of -737 83 -654 
 pref… 
 stock 
 Comm… 
 stock 
 issu… 
 under 
 empl… 44.9 1,545 -30 1,515 
 plan… 
 net, 
 and 
 other 
 Comm… 
 stock -125.9 -5,073 -5,0… 
 repu… 
 Bala… 
 Dece… $ 28,397 7,996… $ 58,953 $ 207,… $ -21,1… $ 273,… 
 31, 
 2022 
 See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
 Bank of America92 
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Operating activities 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 27,528 $ 31,978 $ 17,894 
 Adjustments to reconcile net income to 
 net cash provided by operating 
 activities: 
 Provision for credit losses 2,543 -4,594 11,320 
 Gains on sales of debt securities -32 -22 -411 
 Depreciation and amortization 1,978 1,898 1,843 
 Net amortization of premium/discount on 2,072 5,837 4,101 
 debt securities 
 Deferred income taxes 739 -838 -1,737 
 Stock-based compensation 2,862 2,768 2,031 
 Loans held-for-sale: 
 Originations and purchases -24,862 -43,635 -19,657 
 Proceeds from sales and paydowns of loans originally 
 classified as held for sale and instruments 31,567 34,684 19,049 
 from related securitization activities 
 Net change in: 
 Trading and derivative -95,772 -22,104 16,942 
 assets/liabilities 
 Other assets 20,799 -34,455 -12,883 
 Accrued expenses and other liabilities 23,029 16,639 -4,385 
 Other operating activities, net 1,222 4,651 3,886 
 Net cash provided by (used in) operating -6,327 -7,193 37,993 
 activities 
 Investing activities 
 Net change in: 
 Time deposits placed and other -115 -598 561 
 short-term investments 
 Federal funds sold and securities 
 borrowed or purchased under agreements -16,854 53,338 -29,461 
 to resell 
 Debt securities carried at fair value: 
 Proceeds from sales 69,114 6,893 77,524 
 Proceeds from paydowns and maturities 110,195 159,616 91,084 
 Purchases -134,962 -238,398 -194,877 
 Held-to-maturity debt securities: 
 Proceeds from paydowns and maturities 63,852 124,880 93,835 
 Purchases -24,096 -362,736 -257,535 
 Loans and leases: 
 Proceeds from sales of loans originally classified 
 as held for investment and instruments 26,757 10,396 13,351 
 from related securitization activities 
 Purchases -5,798 -5,164 -5,229 
 Other changes in loans and leases, net -86,010 -58,039 36,571 
 Other investing activities, net -4,612 -3,479 -3,489 
 Net cash used in investing activities -2,529 -313,291 -177,665 
 Financing activities 
 Net change in: 
 Deposits -134,190 268,966 360,677 
 Federal funds purchased and securities 
 loaned or sold under agreements to 3,306 22,006 5,214 
 repurchase 
 Short-term borrowings 3,179 4,432 -4,893 
 Long-term debt: 
 Proceeds from issuance 65,910 76,675 57,013 
 Retirement -34,055 -46,826 -47,948 
 Preferred stock: 
 Proceeds from issuance 4,426 2,169 2,181 
 Redemption -654 -1,971 -1,072 
 Common stock repurchased -5,073 -25,126 -7,025 
 Cash dividends paid -8,576 -8,055 -7,727 
 Other financing activities, net -312 -620 -601 
 Net cash provided by (used in) financing -106,039 291,650 355,819 
 activities 
 Effect of exchange rate changes on cash -3,123 -3,408 2,756 
 and cash equivalents 
 Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash -118,018 -32,242 218,903 
 equivalents 
 Cash and cash equivalents at January 1 348,221 380,463 161,560 
 Cash and cash equivalents at December 31 $ 230,203 $ 348,221 $ 380,463 
 Supplemental cash flow disclosures 
 Interest paid $ 18,526 $ 4,506 $ 8,662 
 Income taxes paid, net 2,288 2,760 2,894 
 See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
 93Bank of America 
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
NOTE 1 Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles
Bank of America Corporation, a bank holding
company and a financial holding company, provides
a diverse range of financial services and
products throughout the U.S. and in certain
international markets. The term “the Corporation”
as used herein may refer to Bank of America
Corporation, individually, Bank of America
Corporation and its subsidiaries, or certain of
Bank of America Corporation’s subsidiaries or
affiliates. Principles of Consolidation and Basis
of Presentation The Consolidated Financial
Statements include the accounts of the
Corporation and its majority-owned subsidiaries
and those variable interest entities (VIEs) where
the Corporation is the primary beneficiary.
Intercompany accounts and transactions have been
eliminated. Results of operations of acquired
companies are included from the dates of
acquisition, and for VIEs, from the dates that
the Corporation became the primary beneficiary.
Assets held in an agency or fiduciary capacity
are not included in the Consolidated Financial
Statements. The Corporation accounts for
investments in companies for which it owns a
voting interest and for which it has the ability
to exercise significant influence over operating
and financing decisions using the equity method
of accounting. These investments, which include
the Corporation’s interests in affordable housing
and renewable energy partnerships, are recorded
in other assets. Equity method investments are
subject to impairment testing, and the
Corporation’s proportionate share of income or
loss is included in other income. The preparation
of the Consolidated Financial Statements in
conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect reported amounts and disclosures. Actual
results could materially differ from those
estimates and assumptions. Certain prior-period
amounts have been reclassified to conform to
current period presentation. New Accounting
Standards Hedge Accounting The FASB issued a new
accounting standard that makes targeted
improvements to the application of the fair value
hedge accounting guidance for closed portfolios
of financial assets. The targeted improvements
were effective January 1, 2023 on a prospective
basis. Financial Instruments – Credit Losses The
FASB amended the accounting and disclosure
requirements for expected credit losses (ECL) by
removing the recognition and measurement guidance
on troubled debt restructurings (TDRs) and adding
disclosures on the financial effect and
subsequent performance of certain types of
modifications made to borrowers experiencing
financial difficulties. The effects of these
changes on the Corporation’s consolidated
financial position, results of operations or
disclosures in the Notes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements are not significant. The
amendments were effective on January 1, 2023,
which the Corporation adopted using a modified
retrospective approach.
Significant Accounting Principles Cash and Cash
Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include
cash on hand, cash items in the process of
collection, cash segregated under federal and
other brokerage regulations, and amounts due from
correspondent banks, the Federal Reserve Bank and
certain non-U.S. central banks. Certain cash
balances are restricted as to withdrawal or usage
by legally binding contractual agreements or
regulatory requirements. Securities Financing
Agreements Securities borrowed or purchased under
agreements to resell and securities loaned or
sold under agreements to repurchase (securities
financing agreements) are treated as
collateralized financing transactions except in
instances where the transaction is required to be
accounted for as individual sale and purchase
transactions. Generally, these agreements are
recorded at acquisition or sale price plus
accrued interest. In instances where the interest
is negative, the Corporation’s policy is to
present negative interest on financial assets as
interest income and negative interest on
financial liabilities as interest expense. For
securities financing agreements that are
accounted for under the fair value option, the
changes in the fair value of these securities
financing agreements are recorded in market
making and similar activities in the Consolidated
Statement of Income. The Corporation’s policy is
to monitor the market value of the principal
amount loaned under resale agreements and obtain
collateral from or return collateral pledged to
counterparties when appropriate. Securities
financing agreements do not create material
credit risk due to these collateral provisions;
therefore, an allowance for loan losses is not
necessary. In transactions where the Corporation
acts as the lender in a securities lending
agreement and receives securities that can be
pledged or sold as collateral, it recognizes an
asset on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at fair
value, representing the securities received, and
a liability, representing the obligation to
return those securities. Trading Instruments
Financial instruments utilized in trading
activities are carried at fair value. Fair value
is generally based on quoted market prices for
the same or similar assets and liabilities. If
these market prices are not available, fair
values are estimated based on dealer quotes,
pricing models, discounted cash flow
methodologies, or similar techniques where the
determination of fair value may require
significant management judgment or estimation.
Realized gains and losses are recorded on a
trade-date basis. Realized and unrealized gains
and losses are recognized in market making and
similar activities. Derivatives and Hedging
Activities Derivatives are entered into on behalf
of customers, for trading or to support risk
management activities. Derivatives used in risk
management activities include derivatives that
are both designated in qualifying accounting
hedge relationships and derivatives used to hedge
market risks in relationships that are not
designated in qualifying accounting hedge
relationships (referred to as other risk
management activities). The Corporation manages
interest rate and foreign currency exchange rate
sensitivity predominantly through the use of
derivatives. Derivatives utilized by the
Corporation include swaps, futures and forward
settlement contracts, and option contracts.
 Bank of America94 
All derivatives are recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at fair value, taking into
consideration the effects of legally enforceable master netting agreements that allow the Corporation
to settle positive and negative positions and offset cash collateral held with the same counterparty
on a net basis. For exchange-traded contracts, fair value is based on quoted market prices in active
or inactive markets or is derived from observable market-based pricing parameters, similar to those
applied to over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. For non-exchange traded contracts, fair value is based
on dealer quotes, pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies or similar techniques for which
the determination of fair value may require significant management judgment or estimation. Valuations
of derivative assets and liabilities reflect the value of the instrument including counterparty
credit risk. These values also take into account the Corporation’s own credit standing. Trading
Derivatives and Other Risk Management Activities Derivatives held for trading purposes are included
in derivative assets or derivative liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet with changes in fair
value included in market making and similar activities. Derivatives used for other risk management
activities are included in derivative assets or derivative liabilities. Derivatives used in other
risk management activities have not been designated in qualifying accounting hedge relationships
because they did not qualify or the risk that is being mitigated pertains to an item that is reported
at fair value through earnings so that the effect of measuring the derivative instrument and the
asset or liability to which the risk exposure pertains will offset in the Consolidated Statement of
Income to the extent effective. The changes in the fair value of derivatives that serve to mitigate
certain risks associated with mortgage servicing rights (MSRs), interest rate lock commitments
(IRLCs) and first-lien mortgage loans held-for-sale (LHFS) that are originated by the Corporation are
recorded in other income. Changes in the fair value of derivatives that serve to mitigate interest
rate risk and foreign currency risk are included in market making and similar activities. Credit
derivatives are also used by the Corporation to mitigate the risk associated with various credit
exposures. The changes in the fair value of these derivatives are included in market making and
similar activities and other income. Derivatives Used For Hedge Accounting Purposes (Accounting
Hedges) For accounting hedges, the Corporation formally documents at inception all relationships
between hedging instruments and hedged items, as well as the risk management objectives and
strategies for undertaking various accounting hedges. Additionally, the Corporation primarily uses
regression analysis at the inception of a hedge and for each reporting period thereafter to assess
whether the derivative used in an accounting hedge transaction is expected to be and has been highly
effective in offsetting changes in the fair value or cash flows of a hedged item or forecasted
transaction. The Corporation discontinues hedge accounting when it is determined that a derivative is
not expected to be or has ceased to be highly effective as a hedge, and then reflects changes in fair
value of the derivative in earnings after termination of the hedge relationship. Fair value hedges
are used to protect against changes in the fair value of the Corporation’s assets and liabilities
that are attributable to interest rate or foreign exchange volatility. Changes in the fair value of
derivatives designated as fair value hedges are recorded in earnings, together and in the same income
statement line item with changes in the fair value of the related hedged item. If a derivative
instrument in a fair value hedge is terminated or the hedge designation removed, the previous
adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged asset or liability are subsequently accounted for in
the same manner as other components of the carrying value of that asset or liability. For interest-
earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, such adjustments are amortized to earnings over the
remaining life of the respective asset or liability. Cash flow hedges are used primarily to minimize
the variability in cash flows of assets and liabilities or forecasted transactions caused by interest
rate or foreign exchange rate fluctuations. The Corporation also uses cash flow hedges to hedge the
price risk associated with deferred compensation. Changes in the fair value of derivatives used in
cash flow hedges are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income (OCI) and are reclassified
into the line item in the income statement in which the hedged item is recorded in the same period
the hedged item affects earnings. Components of a derivative that are excluded in assessing hedge
effectiveness are recorded in the same income statement line item as the hedged item. Net investment
hedges are used to manage the foreign exchange rate sensitivity arising from a net investment in a
foreign operation. Changes in the spot prices of derivatives that are designated as net investment
hedges of foreign operations are recorded as a component of accumulated OCI. The remaining components
of these derivatives are excluded in assessing hedge effectiveness and are recorded in market making
and similar activities. Securities Debt securities are reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at
their trade date. Their classification is dependent on the purpose for which the securities were
acquired. Debt securities purchased for use in the Corporation’s trading activities are reported in
trading account assets at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included in market making and
similar activities. Substantially all other debt securities purchased are used in the Corporation’s
asset and liability management (ALM) activities and are reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheet as
either debt securities carried at fair value or as held-to-maturity (HTM) debt securities. Debt
securities carried at fair value are either available-for-sale (AFS) securities with unrealized gains
and losses net-of-tax included in accumulated OCI or carried at fair value with unrealized gains and
losses reported in market making and similar activities. HTM debt securities are debt securities that
management has the intent and ability to hold to maturity and are reported at amortized cost. The
Corporation evaluates each AFS security where the value has declined below amortized cost. If the
Corporation intends to sell or believes it is more likely than not that it will be required to sell
the debt security, it is written down to fair value through earnings. For AFS debt securities the
Corporation intends to hold, the Corporation evaluates the debt securities for ECL, except for debt
securities that are guaranteed by the U.S. Treasury, U.S. government agencies or sovereign entities
of high credit quality where the Corporation applies a zero credit loss assumption. For the remaining
AFS debt securities, the Corporation considers qualitative parameters such as internal and external
credit ratings and the value of underlying collateral. If an AFS debt security fails any of the
qualitative parameters, a discounted cash flow analysis is used by the Corporation to
 95Bank of America 
determine if a portion of the unrealized loss is a result of an ECL. The Corporation will then
recognize either credit loss expense or a reversal of credit loss expense in other income for the
amount necessary to adjust the debt securities valuation allowance to its current estimate of
expected credit losses. Cash flows expected to be collected are estimated using all relevant
information available such as remaining payment terms, prepayment speeds, the financial condition of
the issuer, expected defaults and the value of the underlying collateral. If any of the decline in
fair value is related to market factors, that amount is recognized in accumulated OCI. In certain
instances, the credit loss may exceed the total decline in fair value, in which case, the allowance
recorded is limited to the difference between the amortized cost and the fair value of the asset. The
Corporation separately evaluates its HTM debt securities for any credit losses, of which
substantially all qualify for the zero loss assumption. For the remaining securities, the Corporation
performs a discounted cash flow analysis to estimate any credit losses which are then recognized as
part of the allowance for credit losses. Interest on debt securities, including amortization of
premiums and accretion of discounts, is included in interest income. Premiums and discounts are
amortized or accreted to interest income at a constant effective yield over the contractual lives of
the securities. Realized gains and losses from the sales of debt securities are determined using the
specific identification method. Equity securities with readily determinable fair values that are not
held for trading purposes are carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included in
other income. Equity securities that do not have readily determinable fair values are recorded at
cost less impairment, if any, plus or minus qualifying observable price changes. These securities are
reported in other assets. Loans and Leases Loans, with the exception of loans accounted for under the
fair value option, are measured at historical cost and reported at their outstanding principal
balances net of any unearned income, charge-offs, unamortized deferred fees and costs on originated
loans, and for purchased loans, net of any unamortized premiums or discounts. Loan origination fees
and certain direct origination costs are deferred and recognized as adjustments to interest income
over the lives of the related loans. Unearned income, discounts and premiums are amortized to
interest income using a level yield methodology. The Corporation elects to account for certain
consumer and commercial loans under the fair value option with interest reported in interest income
and changes in fair value reported in market making and similar activities or other income. Under
applicable accounting guidance, for reporting purposes, the loan and lease portfolio is categorized
by portfolio segment and, within each portfolio segment, by class of financing receivable. A
portfolio segment is defined as the level at which an entity develops and documents a systematic
methodology to determine the allowance for credit losses, and a class of financing receivable is
defined as the level of disaggregation of portfolio segments based on the initial measurement
attribute, risk characteristics and methods for assessing risk. The Corporation’s threeportfolio
segments are Consumer Real Estate, Credit Card and Other Consumer, and Commercial. The classes within
the Consumer Real Estate portfolio segment are residential mortgage and home equity. The classes
within the Credit Card and Other Consumer portfolio segment are credit card, direct/indirect consumer
and other consumer. The classes within the Commercial portfolio segment are U.S. commercial, non-U.S.
commercial, commercial real estate, commercial lease financing and U.S. small business commercial.
Leases The Corporation provides equipment financing to its customers through a variety of lessor
arrangements. Direct financing leases and sales-type leases are carried at the aggregate of lease
payments receivable plus the estimated residual value of the leased property less unearned income,
which is accreted to interest income over the lease terms using methods that approximate the interest
method. Operating lease income is recognized on a straight-line basis. The Corporation's lease
arrangements generally do not contain non-lease components. Allowance for Credit Losses On January 1,
2020, the Corporation adopted the new accounting standard that requires the measurement of the
allowance for credit losses, which includes both the allowance for loan and lease losses and the
reserve for unfunded lending commitments, to be based on management’s best estimate of the ECL in the
Corporation’s loan and lease portfolio, excluding loans and unfunded lending commitments accounted
for under the fair value option. Upon adoption, a $ 3.3billion, or 32percent, increase in the
allowance for credit losses was recorded on January 1, 2020, which was comprised of a net increase of
$ 2.9billion in the allowance for loan and lease losses and a $ 310million increase in the reserve
for unfunded lending commitments. The ECL on funded consumer and commercial loans and leases is
referred to as the allowance for loan and lease losses and is reported separately as a contra-asset
to loans and leases on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The ECL for unfunded lending commitments,
including home equity lines of credit (HELOCs), standby letters of credit (SBLCs) and binding
unfunded loan commitments is reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheet in accrued expenses and other
liabilities. The provision for credit losses related to the loan and lease portfolio and unfunded
lending commitments is reported in the Consolidated Statement of Income at the amount necessary to
adjust the allowance for credit losses to the current estimate of ECL. For loans and leases, the ECL
is typically estimated using quantitative methods that consider a variety of factors such as
historical loss experience, the current credit quality of the portfolio as well as an economic
outlook over the life of the loan. The life of the loan for closed-ended products is based on the
contractual maturity of the loan adjusted for any expected prepayments. The contractual maturity
includes any extension options that are at the sole discretion of the borrower. For open-ended
products (e.g., lines of credit), the ECL is determined based on the maximum repayment term
associated with future draws from credit lines unless those lines of credit are unconditionally
cancellable (e.g., credit cards) in which case the Corporation does not record any allowance. In its
loss forecasting framework, the Corporation incorporates forward-looking information through the use
of macroeconomic scenarios applied over the forecasted life of the assets. These macroeconomic
scenarios include variables that have historically been key drivers of increases and decreases in
credit losses. These variables include, but are not limited to, unemployment rates, real estate
prices, gross domestic product levels and corporate bond spreads. As any one economic outlook is
inherently uncertain, the Corporation leverages multiple scenarios. The scenarios that are chosen
each quarter
 Bank of America96 
and the weighting given to each scenario depend on a variety of factors including recent economic
events, leading economic indicators, views of internal and third-party economists and industry
trends. The estimate of credit losses includes expected recoveries of amounts previously charged off
(i.e., negative allowance). If a loan has been charged off, the expected cash flows on the loan are
not limited by the current amortized cost balance. Instead, expected cash flows can be assumed up to
the unpaid principal balance immediately prior to the charge-off. The allowance for loan and lease
losses for TDRs is measured based on the present value of projected future lifetime principal and
interest cash flows discounted at the loan’s original effective interest rate, or in cases where
foreclosure is probable or the loan is collateral dependent, at the loan’s collateral value or its
observable market price, if available. The measurement of ECL for the renegotiated consumer credit
card TDR portfolio is based on the present value of projected cash flows discounted using the average
TDR portfolio contractual interest rate, excluding promotionally priced loans, in effect prior to
restructuring. Projected cash flows for TDRs use the same economic outlook as discussed above. For
purposes of computing this specific loss component of the allowance, larger impaired loans are
evaluated individually and smaller impaired loans are evaluated as a pool. Also included in the
allowance for loan and lease losses are qualitative reserves to cover losses that are expected but,
in the Corporation's assessment, may not be adequately reflected in the quantitative methods or the
economic assumptions described above. For example, factors that the Corporation considers include
changes in lending policies and procedures, business conditions, the nature and size of the
portfolio, portfolio concentrations, the volume and severity of past due loans and nonaccrual loans,
the effect of external factors such as competition, and legal and regulatory requirements, among
others. Further, the Corporation considers the inherent uncertainty in quantitative models that are
built on historical data. With the exception of the Corporation's credit card portfolio, the
Corporation does not include reserves for interest receivable in the measurement of the allowance for
credit losses as the Corporation generally classifies consumer loans as nonperforming at 90days past
due and reverses interest income for these loans at that time. For credit card loans, the Corporation
reserves for interest and fees as part of the allowance for loan and lease losses. Upon charge-off of
a credit card loan, the Corporation reverses the interest and fee income against the income statement
line item where it was originally recorded. The Corporation has identified the following
threeportfolio segments and measures the allowance for credit losses using the following methods.
Consumer Real Estate To estimate ECL for consumer loans secured by residential real estate, the
Corporation estimates the number of loans that will default over the life of the existing portfolio,
after factoring in estimated prepayments, using quantitative modeling methodologies. The attributes
that are most significant in estimating the Corporation’s ECL include refreshed loan-to-value (LTV)
or, in the case of a subordinated lien, refreshed combined LTV (CLTV), borrower credit score, months
since origination and geography, all of which are further broken down by present collection status
(whether the loan is current, delinquent, in default, or in bankruptcy). The estimates are based on
the Corporation’s historical experience with the loan portfolio, adjusted to reflect the economic
outlook. The outlook on the unemployment rate and consumer real estate prices are key factors that
impact the frequency and severity of loss estimates. The Corporation does not reserve for credit
losses on the unpaid principal balance of loans insured by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA)
and long-term standby loans, as these loans are fully insured. The Corporation records a reserve for
unfunded lending commitments for the ECL associated with the undrawn portion of the Corporation’s
HELOCs, which can only be canceled by the Corporation if certain criteria are met. The ECL associated
with these unfunded lending commitments is calculated using the same models and methodologies noted
above and incorporate utilization assumptions at time of default. For loans that are more than
180days past due and collateral-dependent TDRs, the Corporation bases the allowance on the estimated
fair value of the underlying collateral as of the reporting date less costs to sell. The fair value
of the collateral securing these loans is generally determined using an automated valuation model
(AVM) that estimates the value of a property by reference to market data including sales of
comparable properties and price trends specific to the Metropolitan Statistical Area in which the
property being valued is located. In the event that an AVM value is not available, the Corporation
utilizes publicized indices or if these methods provide less reliable valuations, the Corporation
uses appraisals or broker price opinions to estimate the fair value of the collateral. While there is
inherent imprecision in these valuations, the Corporation believes that they are representative of
this portfolio in the aggregate. For loans that are more than 180days past due and collateral-
dependent TDRs, with the exception of the Corporation’s fully insured portfolio, the outstanding
balance of loans that is in excess of the estimated property value after adjusting for costs to sell
is charged off. If the estimated property value decreases in periods subsequent to the initial
charge-off, the Corporation will record an additional charge-off; however, if the value increases in
periods subsequent to the charge-off, the Corporation will adjust the allowance to account for the
increase but not to a level above the cumulative charge-off amount. Credit Cards and Other Consumer
Credit cards are revolving lines of credit without a defined maturity date. The estimated life of a
credit card receivable is determined by estimating the amount and timing of expected future payments
(e.g., borrowers making full payments, minimum payments or somewhere in between) that it will take
for a receivable balance to pay off. The ECL on the future payments incorporates the spending
behavior of a borrower through time using key borrower-specific factors and the economic outlook
described above. The Corporation applies all expected payments in accordance with the Credit Card
Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009 (i.e., paying down the highest interest rate
bucket first). Then forecasted future payments are prioritized to pay off the oldest balance until it
is brought to zero or an expected charge-off amount. Unemployment rate outlook, borrower credit
score, delinquency status and historical payment behavior are all key inputs into the credit card
receivable loss forecasting model. Future draws on the credit card lines are excluded from the ECL as
they are unconditionally cancellable. The ECL for the consumer vehicle lending portfolio is also
determined using quantitative methods supplemented with
 97Bank of America 
qualitative analysis. The quantitative model estimates ECL giving consideration to key borrower and
loan characteristics such as delinquency status, borrower credit score, LTV ratio, underlying
collateral type and collateral value. Commercial The ECL on commercial loans is forecasted using
models that estimate credit losses over the loan’s contractual life at an individual loan level. The
models use the contractual terms to forecast future principal cash flows while also considering
expected prepayments. For open-ended commitments such as revolving lines of credit, changes in funded
balance are captured by forecasting a borrower’s draw and payment behavior over the remaining life of
the commitment. For loans collateralized with commercial real estate and for which the underlying
asset is the primary source of repayment, the loss forecasting models consider key loan and customer
attributes such as LTV ratio, net operating income and debt service coverage, and captures variations
in behavior according to property type and region. The outlook on the unemployment rate, gross
domestic product, and forecasted real estate prices are utilized to determine indicators such as rent
levels and vacancy rates, which impact the ECL estimate. For all other commercial loans and leases,
the loss forecasting model determines the probabilities of transition to different credit risk
ratings or default at each point over the life of the asset based on the borrower’s current credit
risk rating, industry sector, size of the exposure and the geographic market. The severity of loss is
determined based on the type of collateral securing the exposure, the size of the exposure, the
borrower’s industry sector, any guarantors and the geographic market. Assumptions of expected loss
are conditioned to the economic outlook, and the model considers key economic variables such as
unemployment rate, gross domestic product, corporate bond spreads, real estate and other asset prices
and equity market returns. In addition to the allowance for loan and lease losses, the Corporation
also estimates ECL related to unfunded lending commitments such as letters of credit, financial
guarantees, unfunded bankers acceptances and binding loan commitments, excluding commitments
accounted for under the fair value option. Reserves are estimated for the unfunded exposure using the
same models and methodologies as the funded exposure and are reported as reserves for unfunded
lending commitments. Nonperforming Loans and Leases, Charge-offs and Delinquencies Nonperforming
loans and leases generally include loans and leases that have been placed on nonaccrual status. Loans
accounted for under the fair value option and LHFS are not reported as nonperforming. When a
nonaccrual loan is deemed uncollectible, it is charged off against the allowance for credit losses.
If the charged-off amount is later recovered, the amount is reversed through the allowance for credit
losses at the recovery date. Charge-offs are reported net of recoveries (net charge-offs). If
recoveries for the period are greater than charge-offs, net charge-offs are reported as a negative
amount. In accordance with the Corporation’s policies, consumer real estate-secured loans, including
residential mortgages and home equity loans, are generally placed on nonaccrual status and classified
as nonperforming at 90days past due unless repayment of the loan is insured by the FHA or through
individually insured long-term standby agreements with Fannie Mae (FNMA) or Freddie Mac (FHLMC) (the
fully-insured portfolio). Residential mortgage loans in the fully-insured portfolio are not placed on
nonaccrual status and, therefore, are not reported as nonperforming. Junior-lien home equity loans
are placed on nonaccrual status and classified as nonperforming when the underlying first-lien
mortgage loan becomes 90days past due even if the junior-lien loan is current. The outstanding
balance of real estate-secured loans that is in excess of the estimated property value less costs to
sell is charged off no later than the end of the month in which the loan becomes 180days past due
unless the loan is fully insured, or for loans in bankruptcy, within 60days of receipt of
notification of filing, with the remaining balance classified as nonperforming. Credit card and other
unsecured consumer loans are cha rged off when the loan becomes 180days past due, within 60days after
receipt of notification of death or bankruptcy or upon confir mation of fraud. These loans continue
to accrue interest until they are charged off and, therefore, are not reported as nonperforming
loans. Consumer vehicle loans are placed on nonaccrual status when they become 90days past due,
within 60days after receipt of notification of bankruptcy or death or upon confirmation of fraud.
These loans are charged off to their collateral values when the loans become 120days past due, upon
repossession of the collateral, within 60days after receipt of notification of bankruptcy or death or
upon confirmation of fraud. If repossession of the collateral is not expected, the loans are fully
charged off. Commercial loans and leases, excluding business card loans, that are past due 90days or
more as to principal or interest, or where reasonable doubt exists as to timely collection, including
loans that are individually identified as being impaired, are generally placed on nonaccrual status
and classified as nonperforming unless well-secured and in the process of collection. Business card
loans are charged off in the same manner as consumer credit card loans. Other commercial loans and
leases are generally charged off when all or a portion of the principal amount is determined to be
uncollectible. The entire balance of a consumer loan or commercial loan or lease is contractually
delinquent if the minimum payment is not received by the specified due date on the customer’s billing
statement. Interest and fees continue to accrue on past due loans and leases until the date the loan
is placed on nonaccrual status, if applicable. Accrued interest receivable is reversed when loans and
leases are placed on nonaccrual status. Interest collections on nonaccruing loans and leases for
which the ultimate collectability of principal is uncertain are applied as principal reductions;
otherwise, such collections are credited to income when received. Loans and leases may be restored to
accrual status when all principal and interest is current and full repayment of the remaining
contractual principal and interest is expected. Troubled Debt Restructurings Consumer and commercial
loans and leases whose contractual terms have been restructured in a manner that grants a concession
to a borrower experiencing financial difficulties are classified as TDRs. Concessions could include a
reduction in the interest rate to a rate that is below market on the loan, payment extensions,
forgiveness of principal, forbearance or other actions designed to maximize collections. Loans that
are carried at fair value and LHFS are not classified as TDRs. Loans and leases whose contractual
terms have been modified in a TDR and are current at the time of restructuring may remain on accrual
status if there is demonstrated performance prior to the restructuring and payment in full under the
restructured terms is expected. Otherwise, the loans are
 Bank of America98 
placed on nonaccrual status and reported as nonperforming, except for fully-insured consumer real
estate loans, until there is sustained repayment performance for a reasonable period, generally six
months. If accruing TDRs cease to perform in accordance with their modified contractual terms, they
are placed on nonaccrual status and reported as nonperforming TDRs. Secured consumer loans that have
been discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy and have not been reaffirmed by the borrower are classified
as TDRs at the time of discharge. Such loans are placed on nonaccrual status and written down to the
estimated collateral value less costs to sell no later than at the time of discharge. If these loans
are contractually current, interest collections are generally recorded in interest income on a cash
basis. Consumer real estate-secured loans for which a binding offer to restructure has been extended
are also classified as TDRs. Credit card and other unsecured consumer loans that have been
renegotiated in a TDR generally remain on accrual status until the loan is either paid in full or
charged off, which occurs no later than the end of the month in which the loan becomes 180days past
due or, for loans that have been placed on a fixed payment plan, 120days past due. A loan that had
previously been modified in a TDR and is subsequently refinanced under current underwriting standards
at a market rate with no concessionary terms is accounted for as a new loan and is no longer reported
as a TDR. Loans Held-for-sale Loans that the Corporation intends to sell in the foreseeable future,
including residential mortgages, loan syndications, and to a lesser degree, commercial real estate,
consumer finance and other loans, are reported as LHFS and are carried at the lower of aggregate cost
or fair value. The Corporation accounts for certain LHFS, including residential mortgage LHFS, under
the fair value option. Loan origination costs for LHFS carried at the lower of cost or fair value are
capitalized as part of the carrying value of the loans and, upon the sale of a loan, are recognized
as part of the gain or loss in noninterest income. LHFS that are on nonaccrual status and are
reported as nonperforming, as defined in the policy herein, are reported separately from
nonperforming loans and leases. Premises and Equipment Premises and equipment are carried at cost
less accumulated depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization are recognized using
the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Estimated lives range up to
40years for buildings, up to 12years for furniture and equipment, and the shorter of lease term or
estimated useful life for leasehold improvements . Other Assets For the Corporation’s financial
assets that are measured at amortized cost and are not included in debt securities or loans and
leases on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, the Corporation evaluates these assets for ECL using
various techniques. For assets that are subject to collateral maintenance provisions, including
federal funds sold and securities borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell, where the
collateral consists of daily margining of liquid and marketable assets where the margining is
expected to be maintained into the foreseeable future, the expected losses are assumed to be zero.
For all other assets, the Corporation performs qualitative analyses, including consideration of
historical losses and current economic conditions, to estimate any ECL which are then included in a
valuation account that is recorded as a contra-asset against the amortized cost basis of the
financial asset. Lessee Arrangements Substantially all of the Corporation’s lessee arrangements are
operating leases. Under these arrangements, the Corporation records right-of-use assets and lease
liabilities at lease commencement. Right-of-use assets are reported in other assetson the
Consolidated Balance Sheet, and the related lease liabilities are reported in accrued expenses and
other liabilities. All leases are recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet except leases with an
initial term less than 12 months for which the Corporation made the short-term lease election. Lease
expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term and is recorded in occupancy and
equipment expense in the Consolidated Statement of Income. The Corporation made an accounting policy
election not to separate lease and non-lease components of a contract that is or contains a lease for
its real estate and equipment leases. As such, lease payments represent payments on both lease and
non-lease components. At lease commencement, lease liabilities are recognized based on the present
value of the remaining lease payments and discounted using the Corporation’s incremental borrowing
rate. Right-of-use assets initially equal the lease liability, adjusted for any lease payments made
prior to lease commencement and for any lease incentives. Goodwill and Intangible Assets Goodwill is
the purchase premium after adjusting for the fair value of net assets acquired. Goodwill is not
amortized but is reviewed for potential impairment on an annual basis, or when events or
circumstances indicate a potential impairment, at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is a
business segment or one level below a business segment. The Corporation assesses the fair value of
each reporting unit against its carrying value, including goodwill, as measured by allocated equity.
For purposes of goodwill impairment testing, the Corporation utilizes allocated equity as a proxy for
the carrying value of its reporting units. Allocated equity in the reporting units is comprised of
allocated capital plus capital for the portion of goodwill and intangibles specifically assigned to
the reporting unit. In performing its goodwill impairment testing, the Corporation first assesses
qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a
reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Qualitative factors include, among other things,
macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, financial performance of the respective
reporting unit and other relevant entity- and reporting-unit specific considerations. If the
Corporation concludes it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than
its carrying value, a quantitative assessment is performed. The Corporation has an unconditional
option to bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly
to performing the quantitative goodwill impairment test. The Corporation may resume performing the
qualitative assessment in any subsequent period. When performing the quantitative assessment, if the
fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill of the reporting unit would not
be considered impaired. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, a
goodwill impairment loss would be recognized for the amount by
 99Bank of America 
which the reporting unit’s allocated equity exceeds its fair value. An impairment loss recognized
cannot exceed the amount of goodwill assigned to a reporting unit. An impairment loss establishes a
new basis in the goodwill, and subsequent reversals of goodwill impairment losses are not permitted
under applicable accounting guidance. For intangible assets subject to amortization, an impairment
loss is recognized if the carrying value of the intangible asset is not recoverable and exceeds fair
value. The carrying value of the intangible asset is considered not recoverable if it exceeds the sum
of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset. Intangible assets deemed
to have indefinite useful lives are not subject to amortization. An impairment loss is recognized if
the carrying value of the intangible asset with an indefinite life exceeds its fair value. Variable
Interest Entities A VIE is an entity that lacks equity investors or whose equity investors do not
have a controlling financial interest in the entity through their equity investments. The Corporation
consolidates a VIE if it has both the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most
significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and an obligation to absorb losses or the right
to receive benefits that could potentially be significant to the VIE. On a quarterly basis, the
Corporation reassesses its involvement with the VIE and evaluates the impact of changes in governing
documents and its financial interests in the VIE. The consolidation status of the VIEs with which the
Corporation is involved may change as a result of such reassessments. The Corporation primarily uses
VIEs for its securitization activities, in which the Corporation transfers whole loans or debt
securities into a trust or other vehicle. When the Corporation is the servicer of whole loans held in
a securitization trust, including non-agency residential mortgages, home equity loans, credit cards,
and other loans, the Corporation has the power to direct the most significant activities of the
trust. The Corporation generally does not have the power to direct the most significant activities of
a residential mortgage agency trust except in certain circumstances in which the Corporation holds
substantially all of the issued securities and has the unilateral right to liquidate the trust. The
power to direct the most significant activities of a commercial mortgage securitization trust is
typically held by the special servicer or by the party holding specific subordinate securities which
embody certain controlling rights. The Corporation consolidates a whole-loan securitization trust if
it has the power to direct the most significant activities and also holds securities issued by the
trust or has other contractual arrangements, other than standard representations and warranties, that
could potentially be significant to the trust. The Corporation may also transfer trading account
securities and AFS securities into municipal bond or resecuritization trusts. The Corporation
consolidates a municipal bond or resecuritization trust if it has control over the ongoing activities
of the trust such as the remarketing of the trust’s liabilities or, if there are no ongoing
activities, sole discretion over the design of the trust, including the identification of securities
to be transferred in and the structure of securities to be issued, and also retains securities or has
liquidity or other commitments that could potentially be significant to the trust. The Corporation
does not consolidate a municipal bond or resecuritization trust if one or a limited number of third-
party investors share responsibility for the design of the trust or have control over the significant
activities of the trust through liquidation or other substantive rights. Other VIEs used by the
Corporation include collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), investment vehicles created on behalf of
customers and other investment vehicles. The Corporation does not routinely serve as collateral
manager for CDOs and, therefore, does not typically have the power to direct the activities that most
significantly impact the economic performance of a CDO. However, following an event of default, if
the Corporation is a majority holder of senior securities issued by a CDO and acquires the power to
manage its assets, the Corporation consolidates the CDO. The Corporation consolidates a customer or
other investment vehicle if it has control over the initial design of the vehicle or manages the
assets in the vehicle and also absorbs potentially significant gains or losses through an investment
in the vehicle, derivative contracts or other arrangements. The Corporation does not consolidate an
investment vehicle if a single investor controlled the initial design of the vehicle or manages the
assets in the vehicles or if the Corporation does not have a variable interest that could potentially
be significant to the vehicle. Retained interests in securitized assets are initially recorded at
fair value. In addition, the Corporation may invest in debt securities issued by unconsolidated VIEs.
Fair values of these debt securities, which are classified as trading account assets, debt securities
carried at fair value or HTM securities, are based primarily on quoted market prices in active or
inactive markets. Generally, quoted market prices for retained residual interests are not available;
therefore, the Corporation estimates fair values based on the present value of the associated
expected future cash flows. Fair Value The Corporation measures the fair values of its assets and
liabilities, where applicable, in accordance with accounting guidance that requires an entity to base
fair value on exit price. Under this guidance, an entity is required to maximize the use of
observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs in measuring fair value. Under
applicable accounting standards, fair value measurements are categorized into one of three levels
based on the inputs to the valuation technique with the highest priority given to unadjusted quoted
prices in active markets and the lowest priority given to unobservable inputs. The Corporation
categorizes its fair value measurements of financial instruments based on this three-level hierarchy.
Level 1 Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. Level 1
assets and liabilities include debt and equity securities and derivative contracts that are traded in
an active exchange market, as well as certain U.S. Treasury securities that are highly liquid and are
actively traded in OTC markets. Level 2 Observable inputs other than Level 1 prices, such as quoted
prices for similar assets or liabilities, quoted prices in markets that are not active, or other
inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the
full term of the assets or liabilities. Level 2 assets and liabilities include debt securities with
quoted prices that are traded less frequently than exchange-traded instruments and derivative
contracts where fair value is determined using a pricing model with inputs that are observable in the
market or can be derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data. This category
generally includes U.S. government and
 Bank of America100 
agency mortgage-backed (MBS) and asset-backed securities (ABS), corporate debt securities, derivative
contracts, certain loans and LHFS. Level 3 Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no
market activity and that are significant to the overall fair value of the assets or liabilities.
Level 3 assets and liabilities include financial instruments for which the determination of fair
value requires significant management judgment or estimation. The fair value for such assets and
liabilities is generally determined using pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies or
similar techniques that incorporate the assumptions a market participant would use in pricing the
asset or liability. This category generally includes retained residual interests in securitizations,
consumer MSRs, certain ABS, highly structured, complex or long-dated derivative contracts, certain
loans and LHFS, IRLCs and certain CDOs where independent pricing information cannot be obtained for a
significant portion of the underlying assets. Income Taxes There are two components of income tax
expense: current and deferred. Current income tax expense reflects taxes to be paid or refunded for
the current period. Deferred income tax expense results from changes in deferred tax assets and
liabilities between periods. These gross deferred tax assets and liabilities represent decreases or
increases in taxes expected to be paid in the future because of future reversals of temporary
differences in the bases of assets and liabilities as measured by tax laws and their bases as
reported in the financial statements. Deferred tax assets are also recognized for tax attributes such
as net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards. Valuation allowances are recorded
to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts management concludes are more likely than not to be
realized. Income tax benefits are recognized and measured based upon a two-step model: first, a tax
position must be more likely than not to be sustained based solely on its technical merits in order
to be recognized, and second, the benefit is measured as the largest dollar amount of that position
that is more likely than not to be sustained upon settlement. The difference between the benefit
recognized and the tax benefit claimed on a tax return is referred to as an unrecognized tax benefit.
The Corporation records income tax-related interest and penalties, if applicable, within income tax
expense. Revenue Recognition The following summarizes the Corporation’s revenue recognition
accounting policies for certain noninterest income activities. Card Income Card income includes
annual, late and over-limit fees as well as interchange, cash advances and other miscellaneous items
from credit and debit card transactions and from processing card transactions for merchants. Card
income is presented net of direct costs. Interchange fees are recognized upon settlement of the
credit and debit card payment transactions and are generally determined on a percentage basis for
credit cards and fixed rates for debit cards based on the corresponding payment network’s rates.
Substantially all card fees are recognized at the transaction date, except for certain time-based
fees such as annual fees, which are recognized over 12 months. Fees charged to cardholders and
merchants that are estimated to be uncollectible are reserved in the allowance for loan and lease
losses. Included in direct cost are rewards and credit card partner payments. Rewards paid to
cardholders are related to points earned by the cardholder that can be redeemed for a broad range of
rewards including cash, travel and gift cards. The points to be redeemed are estimated based on past
redemption behavior, card product type, account transaction activity and other historical card
performance. The liability is reduced as the points are redeemed. The Corporation also makes payments
to credit card partners. The payments are based on revenue-sharing agreements that are generally
driven by cardholder transactions and partner sales volumes. As part of the revenue-sharing
agreements, the credit card partner provides the Corporation exclusive rights to market to the credit
card partner’s members or customers on behalf of the Corporation. Service Charges Service charges
include deposit and lending-related fees. Deposit-related fees consist of fees earned on consumer and
commercial deposit activities and are generally recognized when the transactions occur or as the
service is performed. Consumer fees are earned on consumer deposit accounts for account maintenance
and various transaction-based services, such as ATM transactions, wire transfer activities, check and
money order processing and insufficient funds/overdraft transactions. Commercial deposit-related fees
are from the Corporation’s Global Transaction Services business and consist of commercial deposit and
treasury management services, including account maintenance and other services, such as payroll,
sweep account and other cash management services. Lending-related fees generally represent
transactional fees earned from certain loan commitments, financial guarantees and SBLCs. Investment
and Brokerage Services Investment and brokerage services consist of asset management and brokerage
fees. Asset management fees are earned from the management of client assets under advisory agreements
or the full discretion of the Corporation’s financial advisors (collectively referred to as assets
under management (AUM)). Asset management fees are earned as a percentage of the client’s AUM and
generally range from 50basis points (bps) to 150bps of the AUM. In cases where a third party is used
to obtain a client’s investment allocation, the fee remitted to the third party is recorded net and
is not reflected in the transaction price, as the Corporation is an agent for those services.
Brokerage fees include income earned from transaction-based services that are performed as part of
investment management services and are based on a fixed price per unit or as a percentage of the
total transaction amount. Brokerage fees also include distribution fees and sales commissions that
are primarily in the Global Wealth & Investment Management (GWIM) segment and are earned over time.
In addition, primarily in the Global Markets segment, brokerage fees are earned when the Corporation
fills customer orders to buy or sell various financial products or when it acknowledges, affirms,
settles and clears transactions and/or submits trade information to the appropriate clearing broker.
Certain customers pay brokerage, clearing and/or exchange fees imposed by relevant regulatory bodies
or exchanges in order to execute or clear trades. These fees are recorded net and are not reflected
in the transaction price, as the Corporation is an agent for those services. Investment Banking
Income Investment banking income includes underwriting income and financial advisory services income.
Underwriting consists of fees
 101Bank of America 
earned for the placement of a customer’s debt or
equity securities. The revenue is generally
earned based on a percentage of the fixed number
of shares or principal placed. Once the number of
shares or notes is determined and the service is
completed, the underwriting fees are recognized.
The Corporation incurs certain out-of-pocket
expenses, such as legal costs, in performing
these services. These expenses are recovered
through the revenue the Corporation earns from
the customer and are included in operating
expenses. Syndication fees represent fees earned
as the agent or lead lender responsible for
structuring, arranging and administering a loan
syndication. Financial advisory services consist
of fees earned for assisting clients with
transactions related to mergers and acquisitions
and financial restructurings. Revenue varies
depending on the size of the transaction and
scope of services performed and is generally
contingent on successful completion of the
transaction. Revenue is typically recognized once
the transaction is completed and all services
have been rendered. Additionally, the Corporation
may earn a fixed fee in merger and acquisition
transactions to provide a fairness opinion, with
the fees recognized when the opinion is delivered
to the client. Other Revenue Measurement and
Recognition Policies The Corporation did not
disclose the value of any open performance
obligations at December 31, 2022, as its
contracts with customers generally have a fixed
term that is less than one year, an open term
with a cancellation period that is less than one
year, or provisions that allow the Corporation to
recognize revenue at the amount it has the right
to invoice. Earnings Per Common Share Earnings
per common share (EPS) is computed by dividing
net income allocated to common shareholders by
the weighted-average common shares outstanding,
excluding unvested
common shares subject to repurchase or
cancellation. Net income allocated to common
shareholders is net income adjusted for preferred
stock dividends including dividends declared,
accretion of discounts on preferred stock
including accelerated accretion when preferred
stock is repaid early, and cumulative dividends
related to the current dividend period that have
not been declared as of period end, less income
allocated to participating securities. Diluted
EPS is computed by dividing income allocated to
common shareholders plus dividends on dilutive
convertible preferred stock and preferred stock
that can be tendered to exercise warrants, by the
weighted-average common shares outstanding plus
amounts representing the dilutive effect of stock
options outstanding, restricted stock, restricted
stock units (RSUs), outstanding warrants and the
dilution resulting from the conversion of
convertible preferred stock, if applicable.
Foreign Currency Translation Assets, liabilities
and operations of foreign branches and
subsidiaries are recorded based on the functional
currency of each entity. When the functional
currency of a foreign operation is the local
currency, the assets, liabilities and operations
are translated, for consolidation purposes, from
the local currency to the U.S. dollar reporting
currency at period-end rates for assets and
liabilities and generally at average rates for
results of operations. The resulting unrealized
gains and losses are reported as a component of
accumulated OCI, net-of-tax. When the foreign
entity’s functional currency is the U.S. dollar,
the resulting remeasurement gains or losses on
foreign currency-denominated assets or
liabilities are included in earnings.
 Bank of America102 
 NOTE 2 Net Interest Income and Noninterest Income 
The table below presents the Corporation’s net interest income and noninterest income disaggregated
by revenue source for 2022, 2021 and 2020. For more information, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant
Accounting Principles. For a disaggregation of noninterest income by business segment and All Other ,
see Note 23 – Business Segment Information .
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Net interest income 
 Interest income 2022 2021 2020 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans and leases $ 37,919 $ 29,282 $ 34,029 
 Debt securities 17,127 12,376 9,790 
 Federal funds sold and securities 
 borrowed or purchased under agreements 4,560 -90 903 
 to resell(1) 
 Trading account assets 5,521 3,770 4,128 
 Other interest income 7,438 2,334 2,735 
 Total interest income 72,565 47,672 51,585 
 Interest expense 
 Deposits 4,718 537 1,943 
 Short-term borrowings(1) 6,978 -358 987 
 Trading account liabilities 1,538 1,128 974 
 Long-term debt 6,869 3,431 4,321 
 Total interest expense 20,103 4,738 8,225 
 Net interest income $ 52,462 $ 42,934 $ 43,360 
 Noninterest income 
 Fees and commissions 
 Card income 
 Interchange fees(2) $ 4,096 $ 4,560 $ 3,954 
 Other card income 1,987 1,658 1,702 
 Total card income 6,083 6,218 5,656 
 Service charges 
 Deposit-related fees 5,190 6,271 5,991 
 Lending-related fees 1,215 1,233 1,150 
 Total service charges 6,405 7,504 7,141 
 Investment and brokerage services 
 Asset management fees 12,152 12,729 10,708 
 Brokerage fees 3,749 3,961 3,866 
 Total investment and brokerage services 15,901 16,690 14,574 
 Investment banking fees 
 Underwriting income 1,970 5,077 4,698 
 Syndication fees 1,070 1,499 861 
 Financial advisory services 1,783 2,311 1,621 
 Total investment banking fees 4,823 8,887 7,180 
 Total fees and commissions 33,212 39,299 34,551 
 Market making and similar activities 12,075 8,691 8,355 
 Other income (loss) -2,799 -1,811 -738 
 Total noninterest income $ 42,488 $ 46,179 $ 42,168 
(1) For more information on negative interest, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles.
(2) Gross interchange fees and merchant income were $ 12.9billion, $ 11.5billion and $ 9.2billion for
2022, 2021, and 2020, respectively, and are presented net of $ 8.8billion, $ 6.9billion and $
5.5billion of expenses for rewards and partner payments as well as certain other card costs for the
same periods.
 103Bank of America 
NOTE 3 Derivatives
Derivative Balances Derivatives are entered into
on behalf of customers, for trading or to support
risk management activities. Derivatives used in
risk management activities include derivatives
that may or may not be designated in qualifying
hedge accounting relationships. Derivatives that
are not designated in qualifying hedge accounting
relationships are referred to as other risk
management derivatives. For more information on
the
Corporation’s derivatives and hedging activities,
see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles . The following tables present
derivative instruments included on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet in derivative assets
and liabilities at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Balances are presented on a gross basis, prior to
the application of counterparty and cash
collateral netting. Total derivative assets and
liabilities are adjusted on an aggregate basis to
take into consideration the effects of legally
enforceable master netting agreements and have
been reduced by cash collateral received or paid.
 Decem… 
 31, 
 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gross Gross 
 Deriv… Deriv… 
 Assets Liabi… 
 Tradi… Tradi… 
 (Dol… and Quali… and Qualif… 
 in Contr… Other Accou… Total Other Accoun… Total 
 bill… Notio… Risk Hedges Risk Hedges 
 Manag… Manag… 
 Deriv… Deriv… 
 Inte… 
 rate 
 cont… 
 Swaps $ 18,28… $ 138.2 $ 20.7 $ 158.9 $ 120.3 $ 36.7 $ 157.0 
 Futu… 
 and 2,796… 8.6 — 8.6 7.8 — 7.8 
 forw… 
 Writ… 1,657… — — — 41.4 — 41.4 
 opti… 
 Purc… 1,594… 42.4 — 42.4 — — — 
 opti… 
 Fore… 
 exch… 
 cont… 
 Swaps 1,509… 44.0 0.3 44.3 43.3 0.4 43.7 
 Spot, 
 futu… 4,159… 59.9 0.1 60.0 62.1 0.6 62.7 
 and 
 forw… 
 Writ… 392.2 — — — 8.1 — 8.1 
 opti… 
 Purc… 362.6 8.3 — 8.3 — — — 
 opti… 
 Equi… 
 cont… 
 Swaps 394.0 10.8 — 10.8 12.2 — 12.2 
 Futu… 
 and 114.6 3.3 — 3.3 1.0 — 1.0 
 forw… 
 Writ… 746.8 — — — 45.0 — 45.0 
 opti… 
 Purc… 671.6 40.9 — 40.9 — — — 
 opti… 
 Comm… 
 cont… 
 Swaps 56.0 5.1 — 5.1 5.3 — 5.3 
 Futu… 
 and 157.3 3.0 — 3.0 2.3 0.8 3.1 
 forw… 
 Writ… 59.5 — — — 3.3 — 3.3 
 opti… 
 Purc… 61.8 3.6 — 3.6 — — — 
 opti… 
 Cred… 
 deri… 
 Purc… 
 cred… 
 deri… 
 Cred… 
 defa… 319.9 2.8 — 2.8 1.6 — 1.6 
 swaps 
 Total 
 retu… 71.5 0.7 — 0.7 3.0 — 3.0 
 swap… 
 Writ… 
 cred… 
 deri… 
 Cred… 
 defa… 295.2 1.2 — 1.2 2.4 — 2.4 
 swaps 
 Total 
 retu… 85.3 4.4 — 4.4 0.9 — 0.9 
 swap… 
 Gross 
 deri… $ 377.2 $ 21.1 $ 398.3 $ 360.0 $ 38.5 $ 398.5 
 asse… 
 Less: 
 Lega… 
 enfo… -315.9 -315.9 
 mast… 
 nett… 
 agre… 
 Less: 
 Cash -33.8 -37.8 
 coll… 
 rece… 
 Total 
 deri… $ 48.6 $ 44.8 
 asse… 
(1) Represents the total contract/notional amount of derivative assets and liabilities outstanding.
(2) Includes certain out-of-the-money purchased options that have a liability amount primarily due to
the deferral of the option premiums to the end of the contract.
(3) Includes certain out-of-the-money written options that have an asset amount primarily due to the
deferral of the option premiums to the end of the contract.
(4) The net derivative asset (liability) and notional amount of written credit derivatives for which
the Corporation held purchased credit derivatives with identical underlying referenced names were $(
1.2) billion and $ 276.9billion at December 31, 2022.
 Bank of America104 
 Decem… 
 31, 
 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gross Gross 
 Deriv… Deriv… 
 Assets Liabi… 
 Tradi… Tradi… 
 (Dol… and Quali… and Qualif… 
 in Contr… Other Accou… Total Other Accoun… Total 
 bill… Notio… Risk Hedges Risk Hedges 
 Manag… Manag… 
 Deriv… Deriv… 
 Inte… 
 rate 
 cont… 
 Swaps $ 18,06… $ 150.5 $ 8.9 $ 159.4 $ 156.4 $ 4.4 $ 160.8 
 Futu… 
 and 2,243… 1.1 — 1.1 1.0 — 1.0 
 forw… 
 Writ… 1,616… — — — 28.8 — 28.8 
 opti… 
 Purc… 1,673… 33.1 — 33.1 — — — 
 opti… 
 Fore… 
 exch… 
 cont… 
 Swaps 1,420… 28.6 0.2 28.8 30.5 0.2 30.7 
 Spot, 
 futu… 4,087… 37.1 0.3 37.4 37.7 0.2 37.9 
 and 
 forw… 
 Writ… 287.2 — — — 4.1 — 4.1 
 opti… 
 Purc… 267.6 4.1 — 4.1 — — — 
 opti… 
 Equi… 
 cont… 
 Swaps 443.8 12.3 — 12.3 14.5 — 14.5 
 Futu… 
 and 113.3 0.5 — 0.5 1.7 — 1.7 
 forw… 
 Writ… 737.7 — — — 58.5 — 58.5 
 opti… 
 Purc… 657.0 55.9 — 55.9 — — — 
 opti… 
 Comm… 
 cont… 
 Swaps 47.7 3.1 — 3.1 6.0 — 6.0 
 Futu… 
 and 101.5 2.3 — 2.3 0.3 1.1 1.4 
 forw… 
 Writ… 44.4 — — — 2.6 — 2.6 
 opti… 
 Purc… 38.3 3.2 — 3.2 — — — 
 opti… 
 Cred… 
 deri… 
 Purc… 
 cred… 
 deri… 
 Cred… 
 defa… 297.0 1.9 — 1.9 4.3 — 4.3 
 swaps 
 Total 
 retu… 85.3 0.2 — 0.2 1.1 — 1.1 
 swap… 
 Writ… 
 cred… 
 deri… 
 Cred… 
 defa… 279.8 4.2 — 4.2 1.6 — 1.6 
 swaps 
 Total 
 retu… 85.3 0.9 — 0.9 0.5 — 0.5 
 swap… 
 Gross 
 deri… $ 339.0 $ 9.4 $ 348.4 $ 349.6 $ 5.9 $ 355.5 
 asse… 
 Less: 
 Lega… 
 enfo… -282.3 -282.3 
 mast… 
 nett… 
 agre… 
 Less: 
 Cash -30.8 -35.5 
 coll… 
 rece… 
 Total 
 deri… $ 35.3 $ 37.7 
 asse… 
(1) Represents the total contract/notional amount of derivative assets and liabilities outstanding.
(2) Includes certain out-of-the-money purchased options that have a liability amount primarily due to
the deferral of the option premiums to the end of the contract.
(3) Includes certain out-of-the-money written options that have an asset amount primarily due to the
deferral of the option premiums to the end of the contract.
(4) The net derivative asset (liability) and notional amount of written credit derivatives for which
the Corporation held purchased credit derivatives with identical underlying referenced names were $
2.3billion and $ 258.4billion at December 31, 2021.
Offsetting of Derivatives The Corporation enters into International Swaps and Derivatives
Association, Inc. (ISDA) master netting agreements or similar agreements with substantially all of
the Corporation’s derivative counterparties. Where legally enforceable, these master netting
agreements give the Corporation, in the event of default by the counterparty, the right to liquidate
securities held as collateral and to offset receivables and payables with the same counterparty. For
purposes of the Consolidated Balance Sheet, the Corporation offsets derivative assets and liabilities
and cash collateral held with the same counterparty where it has such a legally enforceable master
netting agreement. The following table presents derivative instruments included in derivative assets
and liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2022 and 2021 by primary risk
(e.g., interest rate risk) and the platform, where applicable, on which these derivatives are
transacted. Balances are presented on a gross basis, prior to the application of counterparty and
cash collateral netting. Total gross derivative assets and liabilities are adjusted on an aggregate
basis to take into consideration the effects of legally enforceable master netting agreements, which
include reducing the balance for counterparty netting and cash collateral received or paid. For more
information on offsetting of securities financing agreements, see Note 10 – Securities Financing
Agreements, Short-term Borrowings, Collateral and Restricted Cash .
 105Bank of America 
 Offsetting of Derivative Derivative 
 Derivatives(1) Assets Assets 
 (Dollars in December 31, Derivative December 31, Derivative 
 billions) 2022 Liabilities 2021 Liabilities 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest rate 
 contracts 
 Over-the-count… $ 138.4 $ 132.3 $ 171.3 $ 166.3 
 Exchange-traded 0.4 0.1 0.2 — 
 Over-the-count… 71.4 71.1 22.6 22.5 
 cleared 
 Foreign 
 exchange 
 contracts 
 Over-the-count… 109.7 110.6 67.9 70.5 
 Over-the-count… 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.1 
 cleared 
 Equity 
 contracts 
 Over-the-count… 21.5 22.6 29.2 32.9 
 Exchange-traded 33.0 33.8 38.3 38.4 
 Commodity 
 contracts 
 Over-the-count… 8.3 9.3 6.1 7.6 
 Exchange-traded 2.4 1.9 1.4 1.3 
 Over-the-count… 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.1 
 cleared 
 Credit 
 derivatives 
 Over-the-count… 8.9 7.5 5.2 5.3 
 Over-the-count… — — 1.8 1.8 
 cleared 
 Total gross 
 derivative 
 assets/liabili… 
 before netting 
 Over-the-count… 286.8 282.3 279.7 282.6 
 Exchange-traded 35.8 35.8 39.9 39.7 
 Over-the-count… 73.0 72.6 25.6 25.5 
 cleared 
 Less: Legally 
 enforceable 
 master netting 
 agreements and 
 cash collateral 
 received/paid 
 Over-the-count… -243.8 -248.2 -250.3 -254.6 
 Exchange-traded -33.5 -33.5 -37.8 -37.8 
 Over-the-count… -72.4 -72.0 -25.0 -25.4 
 cleared 
 Derivative 
 assets/liabili… 45.9 37.0 32.1 30.0 
 after 
 netting 
 Other gross 
 derivative 2.7 7.8 3.2 7.7 
 assets/liabili… 
 Total 
 derivative 48.6 44.8 35.3 37.7 
 assets/liabili… 
 Less: Financial 
 instruments -18.5 -7.4 -11.8 -10.6 
 collateral(3) 
 Total net 
 derivative $ 30.1 $ 37.4 $ 23.5 $ 27.1 
 assets/liabili… 
(1) Over-the-counter derivatives include bilateral transactions between the Corporation and a
particular counterparty. Over-the-counter cleared derivatives include bilateral transactions between
the Corporation and a counterparty where the transaction is cleared through a clearinghouse.
Exchange-traded derivatives include listed options transacted on an exchange.
(2) Consists of derivatives entered into under master netting agreements where the enforceability of
these agreements is uncertain under bankruptcy laws in some countries or industries.
(3) Amounts are limited to the derivative asset/liability balance and, accordingly, do not include
excess collateral received/pledged. Financial instruments collateral includes securities collateral
received or pledged and cash securities held and posted at third-party custodians that are not offset
on the Consolidated Balance Sheet but shown as a reduction to derive net derivative assets and
liabilities.
ALM and Risk Management Derivatives The Corporation’s ALM and risk management activities include the
use of derivatives to mitigate risk to the Corporation including derivatives designated in qualifying
hedge accounting relationships and derivatives used in other risk management activities. Interest
rate, foreign exchange, equity, commodity and credit contracts are utilized in the Corporation's ALM
and risk management activities. The Corporation maintains an overall interest rate risk management
strategy that incorporates the use of interest rate contracts, which are generally non-leveraged
generic interest rate and basis swaps, options, futures and forwards, to minimize significant
fluctuations in earnings caused by interest rate volatility. The Corporation’s goal is to manage
interest rate sensitivity and volatility so that movements in interest rates do not significantly
adversely affect earnings or capital. As a result of interest rate fluctuations, hedged fixed-rate
assets and liabilities appreciate or depreciate in fair value. Gains or losses on the derivative
instruments that are linked to the hedged fixed-rate assets and liabilities are expected to
substantially offset this unrealized appreciation or depreciation. Market risk, including interest
rate risk, can be substantial in the mortgage business. Market risk in the mortgage business is the
risk that values of mortgage assets or revenues will be adversely affected by changes in market
conditions such as interest rate movements. To mitigate the interest rate risk in mortgage banking
production income, the Corporation utilizes forward loan sale commitments and other derivative
instruments, including purchased options, and certain debt securities. The Corporation also utilizes
derivatives such as interest rate options, interest rate swaps, forward settlement contracts and
eurodollar futures to hedge certain market risks of MSRs. The Corporation uses foreign exchange
contracts to manage the foreign exchange risk associated with certain foreign currency-denominated
assets and liabilities, as well as the Corporation’s investments in non-U.S. subsidiaries. Exposure
to loss on these contracts will increase or decrease over their respective lives as currency exchange
and interest rates fluctuate. The Corporation purchases credit derivatives to manage credit risk
related to certain funded and unfunded credit exposures. Credit derivatives include credit default
swaps (CDS), total return swaps and swaptions. These derivatives are recorded on the Consolidated
Balance Sheet at fair value with changes in fair value recorded in other income. Derivatives
Designated as Accounting Hedges The Corporation uses various types of interest rate and foreign
exchange derivative contracts to protect against changes in the fair value of its assets and
liabilities due to fluctuations in interest rates and foreign exchange rates (fair value hedges). The
Corporation also uses these types of contracts to protect against changes in the cash flows of its
assets and liabilities,
 Bank of America106 
and other forecasted transactions (cash flow hedges). The Corporation hedges its net investment in
consolidated non-U.S. operations determined to have functional currencies other than the U.S. dollar
using forward exchange contracts and cross-currency basis swaps, and by issuing foreign currency-
denominated debt (net investment hedges). Fair Value Hedges The table below summarizes information
related to fair value hedges for 2022, 2021 and 2020.
 Gains 
 and 
 Losses 
 on 
 Deriv… 
 Desig… 
 as 
 Fair 
 Value 
 Hedges 
 (Doll… Hedged 
 in Item 
 milli… Deriva… 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Inter… 
 rate 
 risk $ -26,654 $ -7,018 $ 7,091 $ 26,825 $ 6,838 $ -7,220 
 on 
 long-… 
 debt(… 
 Inter… 
 rate 
 and 
 forei… 
 curre… -120 -90 783 119 79 -783 
 risk 
 on 
 long-… 
 debt(… 
 Inter… 
 rate 
 risk 21,991 5,203 -44 -22,280 -5,167 49 
 on 
 avail… 
 secur… 
 Price 
 risk 
 on 674 — — -674 — — 
 commo… 
 inven… 
 Total $ -4,109 $ -1,905 $ 7,830 $ 3,990 $ 1,750 $ -7,954 
(1) Amounts are recorded in interest expense in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
(2) For 2022, 2021 and 2020, the derivative amount includes gains (losses) of $( 37) million, $( 73)
million and $ 701million in interest expense, $( 81) million, $ 0and $ 73million in market making and
similar activities, and $( 2) million, $( 17) million and $ 9million in accumulated OCI,
respectively. Line item totals are in the Consolidated Statement of Income and on the Consolidated
Balance Sheet.
(3) Amounts are recorded in interest income in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
(4) Amounts are recorded in market making and similar activities in the Consolidated Statement of
Income.
The table below summarizes the carrying value of hedged assets and liabilities that are designated
and qualifying in fair value hedging relationships along with the cumulative amount of fair value
hedging adjustments included in the carrying value that have been recorded in the current hedging
relationships. These fair value hedging adjustments are open basis adjustments that are not subject
to amortization as long as the hedging relationship remains designated.
 Designated 
 Fair Value 
 Hedged Assets 
 and December 31, December 31, 
 Liabilities 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Dollars in Cumulative Cumulative 
 millions) Carrying Value Fair Value Carrying Value Fair Value 
 Adjustments(1) Adjustments(1) 
 Long-term $ 187,402 $ -21,372 $ 181,745 $ 3,987 
 debt(2) 
 Available-fo… 
 debt 
 securities(2, 167,518 -18,190 209,038 -2,294 
 3, 
 4) 
 Trading 
 account 16,119 146 2,067 32 
 assets(5) 
(1) Increase (decrease) to carrying value.
(2) At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the cumulative fair value adjustments remaining on long-term debt
and available-for-sale debt securities from discontinued hedging relationships resulted in an
increase of $ 137million and $ 1.5billion in the related liability and a decrease in the related
asset of $ 4.9billion and $ 1.0billion, which are being amortized over the remaining contractual life
of the de-designated hedged items.
(3) These amounts include the amortized cost of the prepayable financial assets used to designate
hedging relationships in which the hedged item is the last layer expected to be remaining at the end
of the hedging relationship (i.e. last-of-layer hedging relationship). At December 31, 2022 and 2021,
the amortized cost of the closed portfolios used in these hedging relationships was $ 21.4billion and
$ 21.1billion, of which $ 9.2billion and $ 6.9billion was designated in the last-of-layer hedging
relationship. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the cumulative adjustment associated with these hedging
relationships was a decrease of $ 451million and $ 172million.
(4) Carrying value represents amortized cost.
(5) Represents hedging activities related to certain commodities inventory.
Cash Flow and Net Investment Hedges The table below summarizes certain information related to cash
flow hedges and net investment hedges for 2022, 2021 and 2020. Of the $ 11.9billion after-tax net
loss ($ 15.9billion pretax) on derivatives in accumulated OCI at December 31, 2022, losses of $
4.4billion after-tax ($ 5.9billion pretax) related to both open and terminated cash flow hedges are
expected to be reclassified into earnings in the next 12 months. These net losses reclassified into
earnings are expected to primarily decrease net interest income related to the respective hedged
items. For open cash flow hedges, the maximum length of time over which forecasted transactions are
hedged is approximately seven years. For terminated cash flow hedges, the time period over which the
forecasted transactions will be recognized in interest income is approximately five years, with the
aggregated amount beyond this time period being insignificant.
 Gains and 
 Losses on 
 Derivatives 
 Designated 
 as Cash 
 Flow and 
 Net 
 Investment Gains Gains 
 Hedges (Losses) (Losses) in 
 (Dollars in Recognized Income 
 millions, in Reclassified 
 amounts Accumulated from 
 pretax) OCI on Accumulated 
 Cash flow Derivatives OCI 
 hedges 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest 
 rate risk 
 on $ -13,492 $ -2,686 $ 763 $ -338 $ 148 $ -7 
 variable-r… 
 portfolios… 
 Price risk 
 on 
 forecasted -129 -249 241 11 26 9 
 MBS 
 purchases(… 
 Price risk 
 on certain -88 93 85 29 55 12 
 compensati… 
 plans(2) 
 Total $ -13,709 $ -2,842 $ 1,089 $ -298 $ 229 $ 14 
 Net 
 investment 
 hedges 
 Foreign 
 exchange $ 1,710 $ 1,451 $ -834 $ 3 $ 23 $ 4 
 risk(3) 
(1) Amounts reclassified from accumulated OCI are recorded in interest income in the Consolidated
Statement of Income.
(2) Amounts reclassified from accumulated OCI are recorded in compensation and benefits expense in
the Consolidated Statement of Income.
(3) Amounts reclassified from accumulated OCI are recorded in other income in the Consolidated
Statement of Income. Amounts excluded from effectiveness testing and recognized in market making and
similar activities were losses of $ 38million, $ 123million and $ 11million in 2022, 2021 and 2020,
respectively.
 107Bank of America 
Other Risk Management Derivatives Other risk
management derivatives are used by the
Corporation to reduce certain risk exposures by
economically hedging various assets and
liabilities. The table below presents gains
(losses) on these derivatives for 2022, 2021 and
2020. These gains (losses) are largely offset by
the income or expense recorded on the hedged
item.
 Gains and Losses on Other Risk Management Derivatives 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 2020 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest rate risk on mortgage $ -326 $ -18 $ 611 
 activities(1, 2) 
 Credit risk on loans(2) -37 -25 -68 
 Interest rate and foreign currency risk 
 on asset and liability management 4,713 1,757 -2,971 
 activities(3) 
 Price risk on certain compensation -1,073 917 700 
 plans(4) 
(1) Includes hedges of interest rate risk on MSRs and IRLCs to originate mortgage loans that will be
held for sale.
(2) Gains (losses) on these derivatives are recorded in other income.
(3) Gains (losses) on these derivatives are recorded in market making and similar activities.
(4) Gains (losses) on these derivatives are recorded in compensation and benefits expense.
Transfers of Financial Assets with Risk Retained
through Derivatives The Corporation enters into
certain transactions involving the transfer of
financial assets that are accounted for as sales
where substantially all of the economic exposure
to the transferred financial assets is retained
through derivatives (e.g., interest rate and/or
credit), but the Corporation does not retain
control over the assets transferred. At both
December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had
transferred $ 4.8billion of non-U.S. government-
guaranteed mortgage-backed securities to a third-
party trust and retained economic exposure to the
transferred assets through derivative contracts.
In connection with these transfers, the
Corporation received gross cash proceeds of $
4.9billion and $ 4.8billion at the transfer
dates. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the fair
value of the transferred securities was $
4.7billion and $ 5.0billion. Sales and Trading
Revenue The Corporation enters into trading
derivatives to facilitate client transactions and
to manage risk exposures arising from trading
account assets and liabilities. It is the
Corporation’s policy to include these derivative
instruments in its trading activities, which
include derivatives and non-derivative cash
instruments. The resulting risk from these
derivatives is managed on a portfolio basis as
part of the Corporation’s Global Markets business
segment. The related sales and trading revenue
generated within Global Markets is recorded in
various income statement line items, including
market making and similar activities and net
interest income as well as other revenue
categories. Sales and trading revenue includes
changes in the fair value and realized gains and
losses on the sales of trading and other assets,
net interest income, and fees primarily from
commissions on equity securities. Revenue is
generated by the difference in the client price
for an instrument and the price at which the
trading desk can execute the trade in the dealer
market. For equity securities, commissions
related to purchases and sales are recorded in
the “Other” column in the Sales and Trading
Revenue table. Changes in the fair value of these
securities are included in market making and
similar activities. For debt securities, revenue,
with the exception of interest associated with
the debt securities, is typically included in
market making and similar activities. Unlike
commissions for equity securities, the initial
revenue related to broker-dealer
services for debt securities is typically
included in the pricing of the instrument rather
than being charged through separate fee
arrangements. Therefore, this revenue is recorded
in market making and similar activities as part
of the initial mark to fair value. For
derivatives, the majority of revenue is included
in market making and similar activities. In
transactions where the Corporation acts as agent,
which include exchange-traded futures and
options, fees are recorded in other income.
The table below, which includes both derivatives and non-derivative cash instruments, identifies the
amounts in the respective income statement line items attributable to the Corporation’s sales and
trading revenue in Global Markets , categorized by primary risk, for 2022, 2021 and 2020. This table
includes debit valuation adjustment (DVA) and funding valuation adjustment (FVA) gains (losses).
Global Markets results in Note 23 – Business Segment Information are presented on a fully taxable-
equivalent (FTE) basis. The table below is not presented on an FTE basis.
 Sales and Trading 
 Revenue Market making and 
 (Dollars in similar Net Interest 
 millions) 2022 activities Income Other(1) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest rate $ 1,919 $ 1,619 $ 392 $ 3,930 
 risk 
 Foreign exchange 1,981 46 -44 1,983 
 risk 
 Equity risk 6,077 -1,288 1,757 6,546 
 Credit risk 592 2,228 177 2,997 
 Other risk(2) 835 -171 15 679 
 Total sales and $ 11,404 $ 2,434 $ 2,297 $ 16,135 
 trading revenue 
 2021 
 Interest rate $ 523 $ 1,794 $ 217 $ 2,534 
 risk 
 Foreign exchange 1,505 -80 14 1,439 
 risk 
 Equity risk 4,581 -5 1,834 6,410 
 Credit risk 1,390 1,684 556 3,630 
 Other risk(2) 759 -128 124 755 
 Total sales and $ 8,758 $ 3,265 $ 2,745 $ 14,768 
 trading revenue 
 2020 
 Interest rate $ 2,236 $ 2,279 $ 229 $ 4,744 
 risk 
 Foreign exchange 1,486 -19 2 1,469 
 risk 
 Equity risk 3,656 -77 1,801 5,380 
 Credit risk 783 1,758 331 2,872 
 Other risk(2) 308 4 44 356 
 Total sales and $ 8,469 $ 3,945 $ 2,407 $ 14,821 
 trading revenue 
(1) Represents amounts in investment and brokerage services and other income that are recorded in
Global Markets and included in the definition of sales and trading revenue. Includes investment and
brokerage services revenue of $ 2.0billion, $ 1.9billion and $ 1.9billion in 2022, 2021 and 2020,
respectively.
(2) Includes commodity risk.
Credit Derivatives The Corporation enters into
credit derivatives primarily to facilitate client
transactions and to manage credit risk exposures.
Credit derivatives derive value based on an
underlying third-party referenced obligation or a
portfolio of referenced obligations and generally
require the Corporation, as the seller of credit
protection, to make payments to a buyer upon the
occurrence of a predefined credit event. Such
credit events generally include bankruptcy of the
referenced credit entity and failure to pay under
the obligation, as well as acceleration of
indebtedness and payment repudiation or
moratorium. For credit derivatives based on a
portfolio of referenced credits or credit
indices, the Corporation may not be required to
make payment until a specified amount of loss has
 Bank of America108 
occurred and/or may only be required to make payment up to a specified amount. Credit derivatives are
classified as investment and non-investment grade based on the credit quality of the underlying
referenced obligation. The Corporation considers ratings of BBB- or higher as investment grade. Non-
investment grade includes non-rated credit derivative instruments. The Corporation discloses internal
categorizations of investment grade and non-investment grade consistent with how risk is managed for
these instruments. Credit derivative instruments where the Corporation is the seller of credit
protection and their expiration at December 31, 2022 and 2021 are summarized in the table below.
 Less than 
 Credit One Year 
 Derivative December 31, One to Three to Over Five 
 Instruments 2022 Three Years Five Years Years Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Dollars in Carrying 
 millions) Value 
 Credit 
 default 
 swaps: 
 Investment $ 2 $ 25 $ 133 $ 34 $ 194 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 120 516 870 697 2,203 
 grade 
 Total 122 541 1,003 731 2,397 
 Total return 
 swaps/optio… 
 Investment 55 336 — — 391 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 332 9 132 10 483 
 grade 
 Total 387 345 132 10 874 
 Total credit $ 509 $ 886 $ 1,135 $ 741 $ 3,271 
 derivatives 
 Credit-rela… 
 notes: 
 Investment $ — $ — $ 19 $ 1,017 $ 1,036 
 grade 
 Non-investm… — 7 6 1,035 1,048 
 grade 
 Total 
 credit-rela… $ — $ 7 $ 25 $ 2,052 $ 2,084 
 notes 
 Maximum 
 Payout/Notio… 
 Credit 
 default 
 swaps: 
 Investment $ 34,670 $ 66,170 $ 93,237 $ 18,677 $ 212,754 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 15,229 29,629 30,891 6,662 82,411 
 grade 
 Total 49,899 95,799 124,128 25,339 295,165 
 Total return 
 swaps/optio… 
 Investment 38,722 10,407 — — 49,129 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 32,764 500 2,054 897 36,215 
 grade 
 Total 71,486 10,907 2,054 897 85,344 
 Total credit $ 121,385 $ 106,706 $ 126,182 $ 26,236 $ 380,509 
 derivatives 
 December 31, 
 2021 
 Carrying 
 Value 
 Credit 
 default 
 swaps: 
 Investment $ — $ 5 $ 79 $ 49 $ 133 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 34 250 453 769 1,506 
 grade 
 Total 34 255 532 818 1,639 
 Total return 
 swaps/optio… 
 Investment 35 388 — — 423 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 105 — 16 — 121 
 grade 
 Total 140 388 16 — 544 
 Total credit $ 174 $ 643 $ 548 $ 818 $ 2,183 
 derivatives 
 Credit-rela… 
 notes: 
 Investment $ — $ — $ 36 $ 412 $ 448 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 5 — 9 1,334 1,348 
 grade 
 Total 
 credit-rela… $ 5 $ — $ 45 $ 1,746 $ 1,796 
 notes 
 Maximum 
 Payout/Notio… 
 Credit 
 default 
 swaps: 
 Investment $ 34,503 $ 66,334 $ 73,444 $ 17,844 $ 192,125 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 16,119 29,233 34,356 7,961 87,669 
 grade 
 Total 50,622 95,567 107,800 25,805 279,794 
 Total return 
 swaps/optio… 
 Investment 49,626 11,494 78 — 61,198 
 grade 
 Non-investm… 22,621 717 642 73 24,053 
 grade 
 Total 72,247 12,211 720 73 85,251 
 Total credit $ 122,869 $ 107,778 $ 108,520 $ 25,878 $ 365,045 
 derivatives 
The notional amount represents the maximum amount payable by the Corporation for most credit
derivatives. However, the Corporation does not monitor its exposure to credit derivatives based
solely on the notional amount because this measure does not take into consideration the probability
of occurrence. As such, the notional amount is not a reliable indicator of the Corporation’s exposure
to these contracts. Instead, a risk framework is used to define risk tolerances and establish limits
so that certain credit risk-related losses occur within acceptable, predefined limits. Credit-related
notes in the preceding table include investments in securities issued by CDO, collateralized loan
 109Bank of America 
obligation (CLO) and credit-linked note vehicles.
These instruments are primarily classified as
trading securities. The carrying value of these
instruments equals the Corporation’s maximum
exposure to loss. The Corporation is not
obligated to make any payments to the entities
under the terms of the securities owned. Credit-
related Contingent Features and Collateral The
Corporation executes the majority of its
derivative contracts in the OTC market with
large, international financial institutions,
including broker-dealers and, to a lesser degree,
with a variety of non-financial companies. A
significant majority of the derivative
transactions are executed on a daily margin
basis. Therefore, events such as a credit rating
downgrade (depending on the ultimate rating
level) or a breach of credit covenants would
typically require an increase in the amount of
collateral required of the counterparty, where
applicable, and/or allow the Corporation to take
additional protective measures such as early
termination of all trades. Further, as previously
discussed on page 105, the Corporation enters
into legally enforceable master netting
agreements that reduce risk by permitting
closeout and netting of transactions with the
same counterparty upon the occurrence of certain
events. Certain of the Corporation’s derivative
contracts contain credit risk-related contingent
features, primarily in the form of ISDA master
netting agreements and credit support
documentation that enhance the creditworthiness
of these instruments compared to other
obligations of the respective counterparty with
whom the Corporation has transacted. These
contingent features may be for the benefit of the
Corporation as well as its counterparties with
respect to changes in the Corporation’s
creditworthiness and the mark-to-market exposure
under the derivative transactions. At December
31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation held cash and
securities collateral of $ 101.3billion and $
91.4billion and posted cash and securities
collateral of $ 81.2billion and $ 79.3billion in
the normal course of business under derivative
agreements, excluding cross-product margining
agreements where clients are permitted to margin
on a net basis for both derivative and secured
financing arrangements. In connection with
certain OTC derivative contracts and other
trading agreements, the Corporation can be
required to provide additional collateral or to
terminate transactions with certain
counterparties in the event of a downgrade of the
senior debt ratings of the Corporation or certain
subsidiaries. The amount of additional collateral
required depends on the contract and is usually a
fixed incremental amount and/or the market value
of the exposure. At December 31, 2022, the amount
of collateral, calculated based on the terms of
the contracts, that the Corporation and certain
subsidiaries could be required to post to
counterparties but had not yet posted to
counterparties was $ 3.2billion, including $
1.6billion for Bank of America, National
Association (BANA). Some counterparties are
currently able to unilaterally terminate certain
contracts, or the Corporation or certain
subsidiaries may be required to take other action
such as find a suitable replacement or obtain a
guarantee. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the
liability recorded for these derivative contracts
was not significant. The following table presents
the amount of additional collateral that would
have been contractually required by
derivative contracts and other trading agreements at December 31, 2022 if the rating agencies had
downgraded their long-term senior debt ratings for the Corporation or certain subsidiaries by one
incremental notch and by an additional second incremental notch. The table also presents derivative
liabilities that would be subject to unilateral termination by counterparties upon downgrade of the
Corporation's or certain subsidiaries' long-term senior debt ratings.
 Additional Collateral Required to be Posted and Derivative 
 Liabilities Subject to Unilateral Termination Upon Downgrade 
 at December 31, 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 One Second 
 (Dollars in millions) Incremental Incremental 
 Notch Notch 
 Additional collateral required to be 
 posted upon downgrade 
 Bank of America Corporation $ 230 $ 913 
 Bank of America, N.A. and 66 668 
 subsidiaries(1) 
 Derivative liabilities subject to 
 unilateral termination upon downgrade 
 Derivative liabilities $ 92 $ 1,073 
 Collateral posted 77 300 
(1) Included in Bank of America Corporation collateral requirements in this table.
Valuation Adjustments on Derivatives The
Corporation records credit risk valuation
adjustments on derivatives in order to properly
reflect the credit quality of the counterparties
and its own credit quality. The Corporation
calculates valuation adjustments on derivatives
based on a modeled expected exposure that
incorporates current market risk factors. The
exposure also takes into consideration credit
mitigants such as enforceable master netting
agreements and collateral. CDS spread data is
used to estimate the default probabilities and
severities that are applied to the exposures.
Where no observable credit default data is
available for counterparties, the Corporation
uses proxies and other market data to estimate
default probabilities and severity.
The table below presents credit valuation adjustment (CVA), DVA and FVA gains (losses) on derivatives
(excluding the effect of any related hedge activities), which are recorded in market making and
similar activities, for 2022, 2021 and 2020. CVA gains reduce the cumulative CVA thereby increasing
the derivative assets balance. DVA gains increase the cumulative DVA thereby decreasing the
derivative liabilities balance. CVA and DVA losses have the opposite impact. FVA gains related to
derivative assets reduce the cumulative FVA thereby increasing the derivative assets balance. FVA
gains related to derivative liabilities increase the cumulative FVA thereby decreasing the derivative
liabilities balance. FVA losses have the opposite impact.
 Valuation Adjustments Gains (Losses) on Derivatives(1) 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 2020 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Derivative assets (CVA) $ -80 $ 208 $ -118 
 Derivative assets/liabilities (FVA) 125 -2 -24 
 Derivative liabilities (DVA) 194 3 24 
(1) At December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, cumulative CVA reduced the derivative assets balance by $
518million, $ 438million and $ 646million, cumulative FVA reduced the net derivative balance by $
54million, $ 179million and $ 177million, and cumulative DVA reduced the derivative liabilities
balance by $ 506million, $ 312million and $ 309million, respectively.
 Bank of America110 
 NOTE 4 
 Securities 
The table below presents the amortized cost, gross unrealized gains and losses, and fair value of AFS
debt securities, other debt securities carried at fair value and HTM debt securities at December 31,
2022 and 2021.
 Debt Amor… Amor… 
 Sec… Cost Cost 
 (Do… Dece… Gross Gross Dece… Gro… Gross 
 in 31, Unre… Unre… Fair 31, Unr… Unre… Fair 
 mil… 2022 Gains Loss… Val… 2021 Gai… Loss… Val… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Ava… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 Mor… 
 sec… 
 Age… $ 25,2… $ 5 $ -1,7… $ 23,… $ 45,2… $ 1,2… $ -186 $ 46,… 
 Age… 
 mor… 2,452 — -231 2,2… 3,331 74 -25 3,3… 
 obl… 
 Com… 6,894 28 -515 6,4… 19,0… 647 -79 19,… 
 Non… 461 15 -90 386 591 25 -33 583 
 res… 
 Tot… 
 mor… 35,0… 48 -2,6… 32,… 68,2… 2,0… -323 69,… 
 sec… 
 U.S. 
 Tre… 
 and 160,… 18 -1,7… 159… 197,… 1,6… -318 199… 
 gov… 
 age… 
 Non… 13,4… 4 -52 13,… 11,9… — — 11,… 
 sec… 
 Oth… 
 tax… 4,728 1 -84 4,6… 2,725 39 -3 2,7… 
 sec… 
 Tax… 11,5… 19 -279 11,… 15,1… 317 -39 15,… 
 sec… 
 Tot… 
 ava… 225,… 90 -4,7… 220… 295,… 3,9… -683 299… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 Oth… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 car… 8,986 376 -156 9,2… 8,873 105 -83 8,8… 
 at 
 fair 
 val… 
 Tot… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 car… 234,… 466 -4,9… 229… 304,… 4,0… -766 308… 
 at 
 fair 
 val… 
 Hel… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 Age… 
 mor… 503,… — -87,… 415… 553,… 3,8… -10,… 547… 
 sec… 
 U.S. 
 Tre… 
 and 121,… — -20,… 101… 111,… 254 -2,3… 109… 
 gov… 
 age… 
 Oth… 
 tax… 8,033 — -1,0… 7,0… 9,011 147 -196 8,9… 
 sec… 
 Tot… 
 hel… 632,… — -108… 524… 674,… 4,2… -12,… 665… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 Tot… 
 debt $ 867,… $ 466 $ -113… $ 754… $ 979,… $ 8,3… $ -13,… $ 973… 
 sec… 
(1) At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the underlying collateral type included approximately 17percent
and 21percent prime and 83percent and 79percent subprime.
(2) Primarily includes non-U.S. securities used to satisfy certain international regulatory
requirements. Any changes in value are reported in market making and similar activities. For detail
on the components, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements .
(3) Includes securities pledged as collateral of $ 104.5billion and $ 111.9billion at December 31,
2022 and 2021.
(4) The Corporation held debt securities from FNMA and FHLMC that each exceeded 10 percent of
shareholders’ equity, with an amortized cost of $ 290.5billion and $ 176.7billion, and a fair value
of $ 239.6billion and $ 144.6billion at December 31, 2022, and an amortized cost of $ 345.3billion
and $ 205.3billion, and a fair value of $ 342.5billion and $ 202.4billion at December 31, 2021.
At December 31, 2022, the accumulated net
unrealized loss on AFS debt securities, excluding
the amount related to debt securities previously
transferred to held to maturity, included in
accumulated OCI was $ 3.5billion, net of the
related income tax benefit of $ 1.2billion. At
December 31, 2022 and 2021, nonperforming AFS
debt securities held by the Corporation were not
significant. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the
Corporation had $ 191.1billion and $ 268.5billion
in AFS debt securities, which were primarily U.S.
agency and U.S. Treasury securities that have a
zero credit loss assumption. For more information
on the zero credit loss assumption, see Note 1 –
Summary of Significant Accounting Principles .
For the remaining $ 29.7billion and $ 30.7billion
in AFS debt securities at December 31, 2022 and
2021, the amount of ECL was not significant. At
December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had $
524.3billion and $ 665.9billion in HTM debt
securities, which were substantially all U.S
agency and U.S. Treasury securities that have a
zero credit loss assumption. At December 31, 2022
and 2021, the Corporation held equity securities
at an aggregate fair value of $ 581million
and $ 513million and other equity securities, as
valued under the measurement alternative, at a
carrying value of $ 340million and $ 266million,
both of which are included in other assets. At
December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation also
held money market investments at a fair value of
$ 868million and $ 707million, which are included
in time deposits placed and other short-term
investments. The gross realized gains and losses
on sales of AFS debt securities for 2022, 2021
and 2020 are presented in the table below.
 Gains and Losses on Sales of AFS Debt Securities 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 2020 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Gross gains $ 1,251 $ 49 $ 423 
 Gross losses -1,219 -27 -12 
 Net gains on sales of AFS debt $ 32 $ 22 $ 411 
 securities 
 Income tax expense attributable to 
 realized net gains on sales of AFS debt $ 8 $ 5 $ 103 
 securities 
 111Bank of America 
The table below presents the fair value and the associated gross unrealized losses on AFS debt
securities and whether these securities have had gross unrealized losses for less than 12 months or
for 12 months or longer at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Total 
 AFS 
 Debt 
 Securi… 
 in a 
 Contin… 
 Unreal… 
 Loss 
 Positi… 
 (Dolla… 
 in 
 millio… 
 Contin… Less 
 unreal… than 
 loss-p… Twelve Twelve 
 AFS Months Months 
 debt Fair or 
 securi… Value Gross Longer Gross Total Gross 
 Mortga… December Unreali… Fair Unreali… Fair Unrealiz… 
 securi… 31, 2022 Losses Value Losses Value Losses 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Agency $ 18,759 $ -1,118 $ 4,437 $ -649 $ 23,196 $ -1,767 
 Agency… 
 mortga… 1,165 -96 1,022 -135 2,187 -231 
 obliga… 
 Commer… 3,273 -150 2,258 -365 5,531 -515 
 Non-ag… 264 -65 97 -25 361 -90 
 reside… 
 Total 
 mortga… 23,461 -1,429 7,814 -1,174 31,275 -2,603 
 securi… 
 U.S. 
 Treasu… 
 and 36,730 -308 118,636 -1,461 155,366 -1,769 
 govern… 
 agenci… 
 Non-U.… 9,399 -34 756 -18 10,155 -52 
 securi… 
 Other 
 taxable 2,036 -16 1,580 -68 3,616 -84 
 securi… 
 Tax-ex… 607 -28 2,849 -251 3,456 -279 
 securi… 
 Total 
 AFS 
 debt 
 securi… 
 in a $ 72,233 $ -1,815 $ 131,635 $ -2,972 $ 203,868 $ -4,787 
 contin… 
 unreal… 
 loss 
 positi… 
 December 
 31, 2021 
 Contin… 
 unreal… 
 loss-p… 
 AFS 
 debt 
 securi… 
 Mortga… 
 securi… 
 Agency $ 11,733 $ -166 $ 815 $ -20 $ 12,548 $ -186 
 Agency… 
 mortga… 1,427 -22 122 -3 1,549 -25 
 obliga… 
 Commer… 3,451 -41 776 -38 4,227 -79 
 Non-ag… 241 -13 174 -20 415 -33 
 reside… 
 Total 
 mortga… 16,852 -242 1,887 -81 18,739 -323 
 securi… 
 U.S. 
 Treasu… 
 and 103,307 -272 4,850 -46 108,157 -318 
 govern… 
 agenci… 
 Other 
 taxable — — 82 -3 82 -3 
 securi… 
 Tax-ex… 502 -16 109 -23 611 -39 
 securi… 
 Total 
 AFS 
 debt 
 securi… 
 in a $ 120,661 $ -530 $ 6,928 $ -153 $ 127,589 $ -683 
 contin… 
 unreal… 
 loss 
 positi… 
 Bank of America112 
The remaining contractual maturity distribution and yields of the Corporation’s debt securities
carried at fair value and HTM debt securities at December 31, 2022 are summarized in the table below.
Actual duration and yields may differ as prepayments on the loans underlying the MBS or other ABS are
passed through to the Corporation.
 M… 
 of 
 D… 
 S… 
 C… 
 at 
 F… 
 V… 
 a… 
 H… 
 D… 
 S… 
 (… 
 in 
 m… 
 A… 
 c… 
 of 
 d… Due Due 
 s… Due af… af… 
 c… in One Fi… 
 at One Ye… Ye… Due 
 f… Ye… th… th… af… 
 v… or Fi… Ten Ten 
 M… Le… Ye… Ye… Ye… To… 
 s… Am… Y… Am… Y… Am… Y… Am… Y… Am… Y… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 A… $ — — % $ 3 5… % $ 56 4… % $ 25… 3… % $ 25… 3… % 
 A… 
 m… — — 10 2… — — 2,… 2… 2,… 2… 
 o… 
 C… 22 2… 670 3… 4,… 2… 1,… 2… 6,… 2… 
 N… — — — — — — 825 9… 825 9… 
 r… 
 T… 
 m… 22 2… 683 3… 4,… 2… 30… 3… 35… 3… 
 s… 
 U… 
 T… 
 a… 3,… 1… 79… 1… 78… 1… 32 3… 16… 1… 
 g… 
 a… 
 N… 17… 2… 3,… 4… 723 3… 279 6… 21… 2… 
 s… 
 O… 
 t… 2,… 4… 2,… 4… 455 3… 137 3… 4,… 4… 
 s… 
 T… 890 3… 4,… 3… 2,… 3… 3,… 3… 11… 3… 
 s… 
 T… 
 a… 
 c… 
 of 
 d… $ 23… 2… $ 90… 1… $ 86… 1… $ 34… 3… $ 23… 2… 
 s… 
 c… 
 at 
 f… 
 v… 
 A… 
 c… 
 of 
 H… 
 d… 
 s… 
 A… 
 m… $ — — % $ — — % $ 14 2… % $ 50… 2… % $ 50… 2… % 
 s… 
 U… 
 T… 
 a… — — 4,… 1… 11… 1… — — 12… 1… 
 g… 
 a… 
 O… 
 t… 38 9… 1,… 2… 313 3… 6,… 2… 8,… 2… 
 s… 
 T… 
 a… 
 c… 
 of $ 38 9… $ 5,… 1… $ 11… 1… $ 50… 2… $ 63… 1… 
 H… 
 d… 
 s… 
 D… 
 s… 
 c… 
 at 
 f… 
 v… 
 M… 
 s… 
 A… $ — $ 3 $ 56 $ 23… $ 23… 
 A… 
 m… — 10 — 2,… 2,… 
 o… 
 C… 22 650 4,… 1,… 6,… 
 N… — 2 — 751 753 
 r… 
 T… 
 m… 22 665 4,… 27… 32… 
 s… 
 U… 
 T… 
 a… 3,… 79… 77… 30 15… 
 g… 
 a… 
 N… 17… 2,… 723 279 21… 
 s… 
 O… 
 t… 2,… 2,… 413 122 4,… 
 s… 
 T… 887 4,… 1,… 3,… 11… 
 s… 
 T… 
 d… 
 s… 
 c… $ 23… $ 89… $ 84… $ 31… $ 22… 
 at 
 f… 
 v… 
 F… 
 v… 
 of 
 H… 
 d… 
 s… 
 A… 
 m… $ — $ — $ 13 $ 41… $ 41… 
 s… 
 U… 
 T… 
 a… — 4,… 97… — 10… 
 g… 
 a… 
 O… 
 t… 38 1,… 295 5,… 7,… 
 s… 
 T… 
 f… 
 v… 
 of $ 38 $ 5,… $ 97… $ 42… $ 52… 
 H… 
 d… 
 s… 
(1) The weighted-average yield is computed based on a constant effective interest rate over the
contractual life of each security. The average yield considers the contractual coupon and the
amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts, excluding the effect of related hedging
derivatives.
 113Bank of America 
NOTE 5 Outstanding Loans and Leases and Allowance for Credit Losses
The following tables present total outstanding loans and leases and an aging analysis for the
Consumer Real Estate, Credit Card and Other Consumer, and Commercial portfolio segments, by class of
financing receivables, at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Tot… 
 Cur… Lo… 
 30-… To… or Ac… 
 Days Pa… Less for 
 Past 90 Due Than Un… 
 Due… 60… Days 30 30 the 
 (… Dec… Da… orM… Da… Days Fa… 
 in 31, Pa… Past or Past Va… Tot… 
 m… 2022 Du… Due… Mo… Due… Op… Out… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 C… 
 r… 
 e… 
 R… $ 1,0… $ 245 $ 945 $ 2,… $ 227… $ 229… 
 m… 
 H… 88 32 211 331 26,… 26,… 
 e… 
 C… 
 c… 
 a… 
 o… 
 c… 
 C… 466 322 717 1,… 91,… 93,… 
 c… 
 D… 204 59 45 308 105… 106… 
 c… 
 O… — — — — 156 156 
 c… 
 T… 1,8… 658 1,9… 4,… 451… 456… 
 c… 
 C… 
 l… 
 a… 
 f… 
 u… $ 339 339 
 t… 
 f… 
 v… 
 o… 
 T… 
 c… 
 l… 1,8… 658 1,9… 4,… 451… 339 456… 
 a… 
 l… 
 C… 
 U… 827 288 330 1,… 357… 358… 
 c… 
 N… 317 59 144 520 123… 124… 
 c… 
 C… 
 r… 409 81 77 567 69,… 69,… 
 e… 
 C… 
 l… 49 9 11 69 13,… 13,… 
 f… 
 U… 
 s… 107 63 356 526 17,… 17,… 
 b… 
 c… 
 T… 1,7… 500 918 3,… 580… 583… 
 c… 
 C… 
 l… 
 a… 
 f… 
 u… 5,… 5,4… 
 t… 
 f… 
 v… 
 o… 
 T… 
 c… 
 l… 1,7… 500 918 3,… 580… 5,… 589… 
 a… 
 l… 
 T… 
 l… $ 3,5… $ 1,… $ 2,8… $ 7,… $ 1,0… $ 5,… $ 1,0… 
 a… 
 l… 
 P… 
 of 0.34 % 0.… % 0.27 % 0.… % 98.… % 0.… % 100… % 
 o… 
(1) Consumer real estate loans 30-59 days past due includes fully-insured loans of $ 184million and
nonperforming loans of $ 155million. Consumer real estate loans 60-89 days past due includes fully-
insured loans of $ 75million and nonperforming loans of $ 88million. Consumer real estate loans 90
days or more past due includes fully-insured loans of $ 368million and nonperforming loans of $
788million. Consumer real estate loans current or less than 30 days past due includes $ 1.6billion,
and direct/indirect consumer includes $ 27million of nonperforming loans.
(2) Total outstandings primarily includes auto and specialty lending loans and leases of $
51.8billion, U.S. securities-based lending loans of $ 50.4billion and non-U.S. consumer loans of $
3.0billion.
(3) Consumer loans accounted for under the fair value option includes residential mortgage loans of $
71million and home equity loans of $ 268million. Commercial loans accounted for under the fair value
option includes U.S. commercial loans of $ 2.9billion and non-U.S. commercial loans of $ 2.5billion.
For more information, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements and Note 21 – Fair Value Option .
(4) Total outstandings includes U.S. commercial real estate loans of $ 64.9billion and non-U.S.
commercial real estate loans of $ 4.8billion.
(5) Includes Paycheck Protection Program loans.
(6) Total outstandings includes loans and leases pledged as collateral of $ 18.5billion. The
Corporation also pledged $ 163.6billion of loans with no related outstanding borrowings to secure
potential borrowing capacity with the Federal Reserve Bank and Federal Home Loan Bank.
 Bank of America114 
 Tot… 
 Cur… Lo… 
 To… or Ac… 
 30-… Pa… Less for 
 Day… Due Than Un… 
 Due… 60… 90 30 30 the 
 (… Dec… Da… Days Da… Days Fa… 
 in 31, Pa… orM… or Past Va… Tot… 
 m… 2021 Du… Due… Mo… Due… Op… Out… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 C… 
 r… 
 e… 
 R… $ 1,0… $ 297 $ 1,5… $ 2,… $ 219… $ 221… 
 m… 
 H… 123 69 369 561 27,… 27,… 
 e… 
 C… 
 c… 
 a… 
 o… 
 c… 
 C… 298 212 487 997 80,… 81,… 
 c… 
 D… 147 52 18 217 103… 103… 
 c… 
 O… — — — — 190 190 
 c… 
 T… 1,5… 630 2,4… 4,… 430… 435… 
 c… 
 C… 
 l… 
 a… 
 f… 
 u… $ 618 618 
 t… 
 f… 
 v… 
 o… 
 T… 
 c… 
 l… 1,5… 630 2,4… 4,… 430… 618 435… 
 a… 
 l… 
 C… 
 U… 815 308 396 1,… 324… 325… 
 c… 
 N… 148 20 83 251 113… 113… 
 c… 
 C… 
 r… 115 34 285 434 62,… 63,… 
 e… 
 C… 
 l… 104 28 13 145 14,… 14,… 
 f… 
 U… 
 s… 129 259 89 477 18,… 19,… 
 b… 
 c… 
 T… 1,3… 649 866 2,… 533… 536… 
 c… 
 C… 
 l… 
 a… 
 f… 
 u… 7,… 7,2… 
 t… 
 f… 
 v… 
 o… 
 T… 
 c… 
 l… 1,3… 649 866 2,… 533… 7,… 543… 
 a… 
 l… 
 T… 
 l… $ 2,8… $ 1,… $ 3,3… $ 7,… $ 963… $ 7,… $ 979… 
 a… 
 l… 
 P… 
 of 0.29 % 0.… % 0.34 % 0.… % 98.… % 0.… % 100… % 
 o… 
(1) Consumer real estate loans 30-59 days past due includes fully-insured loans of $ 164million and
nonperforming loans of $ 118million. Consumer real estate loans 60-89 days past due includes fully-
insured loans of $ 89million and nonperforming loans of $ 100million. Consumer real estate loans 90
days or more past due includes fully-insured loans of $ 633million and nonperforming loans of $
1.3billion. Consumer real estate loans current or less than 30 days past due includes $ 1.4billion,
and direct/indirect consumer includes $ 55million of nonperforming loans.
(2) Total outstandings primarily includes auto and specialty lending loans and leases of $
48.5billion, U.S. securities-based lending loans of $ 51.1billion and non-U.S. consumer loans of $
3.0billion.
(3) Consumer loans accounted for under the fair value option includes residential mortgage loans of $
279million and home equity loans of $ 339million. Commercial loans accounted for under the fair value
option includes U.S. commercial loans of $ 4.6billion and non-U.S. commercial loans of $ 2.6billion.
For more information, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements and Note 21 – Fair Value Option .
(4) Total outstandings includes U.S. commercial real estate loans of $ 58.2billion and non-U.S.
commercial real estate loans of $ 4.8billion.
(5) Includes Paycheck Protection Program loans.
(6) Total outstandings includes loans and leases pledged as collateral of $ 13.0billion. The
Corporation also pledged $ 146.6billion of loans with no related outstanding borrowings to secure
potential borrowing capacity with the Federal Reserve Bank and Federal Home Loan Bank.
The Corporation has entered into long-term credit protection agreements with FNMA and FHLMC on loans
totaling $ 9.5billion and $ 10.5billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021, providing full credit
protection on residential mortgage loans that become severely delinquent. All of these loans are
individually insured, and therefore the Corporation does not record an allowance for credit losses
related to these loans. Nonperforming Loans and Leases Commercial nonperforming loans decreased to $
1.1billion at December 31, 2022 from $ 1.6billion at December 31, 2021, as paydowns and returns to
performing status more than offset new downgrades to nonaccrual status. Consumer nonperforming loans
decreased to $ 2.8billion at December 31, 2022 from $ 3.0billion at December 31, 2021 primarily due
to decreases from consumer real estate loan sales, partially offset by increases from loans whose
prior-period deferrals expired and were modified in TDRs during the first quarter of 2022. The
following table presents the Corporation’s nonperforming loans and leases, including nonperforming
TDRs, and loans accruing past due 90days or more at December 31, 2022 and 2021. Nonperforming LHFS
are excluded from nonperforming loans and leases as they are recorded at either fair value or the
lower of cost or fair value. For more information on the criteria for classification as
nonperforming, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles.
 115Bank of America 
 Credit Quality 
 Nonperforming Accruing Past 
 Loans Due 
 and Leases 90 Days or More 
 December 31 
 (Dollars in 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 millions) 
 Residential $ 2,167 $ 2,284 $ 368 $ 634 
 mortgage(1) 
 With no related 1,973 1,950 — — 
 allowance(2) 
 Home equity(1) 510 630 — — 
 With no related 393 414 — — 
 allowance(2) 
 Credit Card n/a n/a 717 487 
 Direct/indirect 77 75 2 11 
 consumer 
 Total consumer 2,754 2,989 1,087 1,132 
 U.S. commercial 553 825 190 171 
 Non-U.S. 212 268 25 19 
 commercial 
 Commercial real 271 382 46 40 
 estate 
 Commercial 4 80 8 8 
 lease financing 
 U.S. small 
 business 14 23 355 87 
 commercial 
 Total 1,054 1,578 624 325 
 commercial 
 Total 
 nonperforming $ 3,808 $ 4,567 $ 1,711 $ 1,457 
 loans 
 Percentage of 
 outstanding 0.37 % 0.47 % 0.16 % 0.15 % 
 loans and 
 leases 
(1) Residential mortgage loans accruing past due 90 days or more are fully-insured loans. At December
31, 2022 and 2021 residential mortgage included $ 260million and $ 444million of loans on which
interest had been curtailed by the FHA, and therefore were no longer accruing interest, although
principal was still insured, and $ 108million and $ 190million of loans on which interest was still
accruing.
(2) Primarily relates to loans for which the estimated fair value of the underlying collateral less
any costs to sell is greater than the amortized cost of the loans as of the reporting date.
n/a = not applicable
Credit Quality Indicators The Corporation monitors credit quality within its Consumer Real Estate,
Credit Card and Other Consumer, and Commercial portfolio segments based on primary credit quality
indicators. For more information on the portfolio segments, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant
Accounting Principles. Within the Consumer Real Estate portfolio segment, the primary credit quality
indicators are refreshed LTV and refreshed Fair Isaac Corporation (FICO) score. Refreshed LTV
measures the carrying value of the loan as a percentage of the value of the property securing the
loan, refreshed quarterly. Home equity loans are evaluated using CLTV, which measures the carrying
value of the Corporation’s loan and available line of credit combined with any outstanding senior
liens against the property as a percentage of the value of the property securing the loan, refreshed
quarterly. FICO score measures the creditworthiness of the borrower based on the financial
obligations of the borrower and the borrower’s credit history. FICO scores are typically refreshed
quarterly or more frequently. Certain borrowers (e.g., borrowers that have had debts discharged in a
bankruptcy proceeding) may not have their FICO scores updated. FICO scores are also a primary credit
quality indicator for the Credit Card and Other Consumer portfolio segment and the business card
portfolio within U.S. small business commercial. Within the Commercial portfolio segment, loans are
evaluated using the internal classifications of pass rated or reservable criticized as the primary
credit quality indicators. The term reservable criticized refers to those commercial loans that are
internally classified or listed by the Corporation as Special Mention, Substandard or Doubtful, which
are asset quality categories defined by regulatory authorities. These assets have an elevated level
of risk and may have a high probability of default or total loss. Pass rated refers to all loans not
considered reservable criticized. In addition to these primary credit quality indicators, the
Corporation uses other credit quality indicators for certain types of loans. The following tables
present certain credit quality indicators and gross charge-offs for the Corporation's Consumer Real
Estate, Credit Card and Other Consumer, and Commercial portfolio segments by year of origination,
except for revolving loans and revolving loans that were modified into term loans, which are shown on
an aggregate basis at December 31, 2022.
 Bank of America116 
 Resid… 
 Mortg… 
 – 
 Credit 
 Quali… 
 Indic… Term 
 By Total Loans 
 Vinta… as of by 
 (Doll… Decem… Origin… 
 in 31, Year 
 milli… 2022 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 Prior 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Resid… 
 Mortg… 
 Refre… 
 LTV 
 Less 
 than 
 or $ 215,7… $ 39,625 $ 81,437 $ 37,228 $ 18,980 $ 5,734 $ 32,709 
 equal 
 to 90  
 perce… 
 Great… 
 than 
 90 
 perce… 
 but 
 less 1,615 950 530 93 15 8 19 
 than 
 or 
 equal 
 to 100 
 perce… 
 Great… 
 than 648 374 169 43 15 8 39 
 100  
 perce… 
 Fully… 11,694 580 3,667 3,102 949 156 3,240 
 loans 
 Total 
 Resid… $ 229,6… $ 41,529 $ 85,803 $ 40,466 $ 19,959 $ 5,906 $ 36,007 
 Mortg… 
 Resid… 
 Mortg… 
 Refre… 
 FICO 
 score 
 Less 
 than $ 2,156 $ 377 $ 518 $ 373 $ 124 $ 84 $ 680 
 620 
 Great… 
 than 
 or 
 equal 
 to 620 4,978 1,011 1,382 840 329 233 1,183 
 and 
 less 
 than 
 680 
 Great… 
 than 
 or 
 equal 
 to 680 25,444 5,411 8,290 4,369 2,187 830 4,357 
 and 
 less 
 than 
 740 
 Great… 
 than 
 or 185,3… 34,150 71,946 31,782 16,370 4,603 26,547 
 equal 
 to 740 
 Fully… 11,694 580 3,667 3,102 949 156 3,240 
 loans 
 Total 
 Resid… $ 229,6… $ 41,529 $ 85,803 $ 40,466 $ 19,959 $ 5,906 $ 36,007 
 Mortg… 
 Gross $ 161 $ — $ 6 $ 5 $ 6 $ 1 $ 143 
 charg… 
 Home Equity - 
 Credit 
 Quality Home Equity Revolving 
 Indicators Total Loans and Loans 
 (Dollars in December 31, Reverse Revolving Converted 
 millions) 2022 Mortgages(1) Loans to Term Loans 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Home Equity 
 Refreshed LTV 
 Less than or 
 equal to 90  $ 26,395 $ 1,304 $ 19,960 $ 5,131 
 percent 
 Greater than 
 90 percent 
 but less than 62 20 24 18 
 or 
 equal to 100 
 percent 
 Greater than 106 37 35 34 
 100 percent 
 Total Home $ 26,563 $ 1,361 $ 20,019 $ 5,183 
 Equity 
 Home Equity 
 Refreshed 
 FICO score 
 Less than 620 $ 683 $ 166 $ 189 $ 328 
 Greater than 
 or equal to 1,190 152 507 531 
 620 and less 
 than 680 
 Greater than 
 or equal to 4,321 312 2,747 1,262 
 680 and less 
 than 740 
 Greater than 
 or equal to 20,369 731 16,576 3,062 
 740 
 Total Home $ 26,563 $ 1,361 $ 20,019 $ 5,183 
 Equity 
 Gross $ 45 $ 5 $ 24 $ 16 
 charge-offs 
(1) Includes reverse mortgages of $ 937million and home equity loans of $ 424million, which are no
longer originated.
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 – 
 … 
 … C… 
 … D… C… 
 … T… T… 
 … D… C… 
 … I… T… C… R… 
 … as L… as L… 
 … of by of C… 
 … D… O… D… to 
 … 3… R… Y… 3… … T… 
 … 2… L… 2… 2… 2… … 2… … 2… … L… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … $ 8… $ 12 $ 2… $ 3… $ 1… $ … $ 43 $ … $ 4… $ … $ 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… 12 1… 8… 2… … 69 … 1… … 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 8… 52 4… 2… 9… … 2… … 3… … 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 3… 83 1… 1… 5… … 1… … 4… … 43 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 5… 5… 2… 3… 70 … 40 … — — — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 1… $ 5… $ 2… $ 1… $ 7… $ … $ 1… $ … $ 9… $ … $ 5… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 2… $ 7 $ 31 $ 79 $ 34 $ … $ 14 $ … $ 1… $ … $ 76 
 … 
(1) Represents TDRs that were modified into term loans.
(2) Other internal credit metrics may include delinquency status, geography or other factors.
(3) Direct/indirect consumer includes $ 53.4billion of securities-based lending, which is typically
supported by highly liquid collateral with market value greater than or equal to the outstanding loan
balance and therefore has minimal credit risk at December 31, 2022.
 117Bank of America 
 Com… 
 – 
 Cre… 
 Qua… 
 Ind… 
 By Term 
 Vin… Loans 
 (Do… Amor… 
 in Cost 
 mil… Total Basis 
 U.S. as of by 
 Com… Dece… Orig… 
 Risk 31, Year Revo… 
 rat… 2022 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 Pri… Loans 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Pass $ 348,… $ 61,2… $ 39,… $ 18,6… $ 16,… $ 8,749 $ 30,… $ 173,… 
 rat… 
 Res… 10,0… 278 794 697 884 1,202 856 5,323 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 U.S. $ 358,… $ 61,4… $ 40,… $ 19,3… $ 17,… $ 9,951 $ 31,… $ 178,… 
 Com… 
 Gro… $ 151 $ 2 $ 24 $ 24 $ 9 $ 6 $ 13 $ 73 
 cha… 
 Non… 
 Com… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 121,… $ 24,8… $ 19,… $ 5,183 $ 3,8… $ 2,423 $ 4,6… $ 61,7… 
 rat… 
 Res… 2,589 45 395 331 325 98 475 920 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 Non… $ 124,… $ 24,8… $ 19,… $ 5,514 $ 4,2… $ 2,521 $ 5,1… $ 62,6… 
 Com… 
 Gro… $ 41 $ — $ 3 $ 1 $ — $ 37 $ — $ — 
 cha… 
 Com… 
 Real 
 Est… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 64,6… $ 15,2… $ 13,… $ 5,756 $ 9,0… $ 4,384 $ 8,6… $ 8,481 
 rat… 
 Res… 5,147 11 837 545 1,5… 1,151 1,0… 85 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 Com… $ 69,7… $ 15,3… $ 13,… $ 6,301 $ 10,… $ 5,535 $ 9,6… $ 8,566 
 Real 
 Est… 
 Gro… $ 75 $ — $ — $ 6 $ — $ 26 $ 43 $ — 
 cha… 
 Com… 
 Lea… 
 Fin… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 13,4… $ 3,255 $ 2,7… $ 1,955 $ 1,5… $ 1,301 $ 2,5… $ — 
 rat… 
 Res… 240 9 35 12 71 50 63 — 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 Com… $ 13,6… $ 3,264 $ 2,7… $ 1,967 $ 1,6… $ 1,351 $ 2,6… $ — 
 Lea… 
 Fin… 
 Gro… $ 8 $ — $ 4 $ — $ 4 $ — $ — $ — 
 cha… 
 U.S. 
 Sma… 
 Bus… 
 Com… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 8,726 $ 1,825 $ 1,9… $ 1,408 $ 864 $ 624 $ 1,9… $ 127 
 rat… 
 Res… 329 11 35 48 76 51 105 3 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 U.S. 
 Sma… $ 9,055 $ 1,836 $ 1,9… $ 1,456 $ 940 $ 675 $ 2,0… $ 130 
 Bus… 
 Com… 
 Gro… $ 31 $ — $ 1 $ 11 $ 4 $ 1 $ 6 $ 8 
 cha… 
 Tot… $ 575,… $ 106,… $ 78,… $ 34,5… $ 34,… $ 20,0… $ 50,… $ 250,… 
 Tot… 
 gro… $ 306 $ 2 $ 32 $ 42 $ 17 $ 70 $ 62 $ 81 
 cha… 
(1) Excludes $ 5.4billion of loans accounted for under the fair value option at December 31, 2022.
(2) Excludes U.S. Small Business Card loans of $ 8.5billion. Refreshed FICO scores for this portfolio
are $ 297million for less than 620; $ 859million for greater than or equal to 620 and less than 680;
$ 2.4billion for greater than or equal to 680 and less than 740; and $ 5.0billion greater than or
equal to 740. Excludes U.S. Small Business Card loans gross charge-offs of $ 172million.
 Bank of America118 
The following tables present certain credit quality indicators for the Corporation's Consumer Real
Estate, Credit Card and Other Consumer, and Commercial portfolio segments by year of origination,
except for revolving loans and revolving loans that were modified into term loans, which are shown on
an aggregate basis at December 31, 2021.
 Resid… 
 Mortg… 
 – 
 Credit 
 Quali… 
 Indic… Term 
 By Total Loans 
 Vinta… as of by 
 (Doll… Decem… Origin… 
 in 31, Year 
 milli… 2021 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 Prior 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Resid… 
 Mortg… 
 Refre… 
 LTV 
 Less 
 than 
 or $ 206,5… $ 87,051 $ 43,597 $ 23,205 $ 7,392 $ 10,956 $ 34,361 
 equal 
 to 90  
 perce… 
 Great… 
 than 
 90 
 perce… 
 but 
 less 1,938 1,401 331 81 17 14 94 
 than 
 or 
 equal 
 to 100 
 perce… 
 Great… 
 than 759 520 112 29 11 12 75 
 100  
 perce… 
 Fully… 12,704 3,845 3,486 1,150 216 235 3,772 
 loans 
 Total 
 Resid… $ 221,9… $ 92,817 $ 47,526 $ 24,465 $ 7,636 $ 11,217 $ 38,302 
 Mortg… 
 Resid… 
 Mortg… 
 Refre… 
 FICO 
 score 
 Less 
 than $ 2,451 $ 636 $ 442 $ 140 $ 120 $ 104 $ 1,009 
 620 
 Great… 
 than 
 or 
 equal 
 to 620 5,199 1,511 1,123 477 294 307 1,487 
 and 
 less 
 than 
 680 
 Great… 
 than 
 or 
 equal 
 to 680 24,532 8,822 5,454 2,785 1,057 1,434 4,980 
 and 
 less 
 than 
 740 
 Great… 
 than 
 or 177,0… 78,003 37,021 19,913 5,949 9,137 27,054 
 equal 
 to 740 
 Fully… 12,704 3,845 3,486 1,150 216 235 3,772 
 loans 
 Total 
 Resid… $ 221,9… $ 92,817 $ 47,526 $ 24,465 $ 7,636 $ 11,217 $ 38,302 
 Mortg… 
 Home Equity 
 - Credit Revolving 
 Quality Home Equity Loans 
 Indicators Loans and Converted 
 (Dollars in December 31, Reverse Revolving to Term 
 millions) 2021 Total Mortgages(1) Loans Loans 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Home Equity 
 Refreshed 
 LTV 
 Less than 
 or equal to $ 27,594 $ 1,773 $ 19,095 $ 6,726 
 90 percent 
 Greater 
 than 90 
 percent but 
 less than 130 55 34 41 
 or 
 equal to 
 100 percent 
 Greater 
 than 100  211 85 54 72 
 percent 
 Total Home $ 27,935 $ 1,913 $ 19,183 $ 6,839 
 Equity 
 Home Equity 
 Refreshed 
 FICO score 
 Less than $ 893 $ 244 $ 209 $ 440 
 620 
 Greater 
 than or 
 equal to 1,434 222 495 717 
 620 and 
 less 
 than 680 
 Greater 
 than or 
 equal to 4,625 468 2,493 1,664 
 680 and 
 less 
 than 740 
 Greater 
 than or 20,983 979 15,986 4,018 
 equal to 
 740 
 Total Home $ 27,935 $ 1,913 $ 19,183 $ 6,839 
 Equity 
(1) Includes reverse mortgages of $ 1.3billion and home equity loans of $ 582million, which are no
longer originated.
 119Bank of America 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 – 
 … 
 … C… 
 … C… 
 … D… T… 
 … T… C… 
 … D… T… C… R… 
 … as L… as L… 
 … of by of C… 
 … D… O… D… to 
 … 3… R… Y… 3… … T… 
 … 2… L… 2… 2… 2… … 2… … 2… … L… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … $ 6… $ 13 $ 1… $ 1… $ 1… $ … $ 1… $ … $ 3… $ … $ 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… 14 1… 4… 3… … 1… … 9… … 2… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 8… 60 4… 1… 1… … 3… … 2… … 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 3… 94 1… 8… 6… … 1… … 4… … 48 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 5… 5… 2… 53 77 … 63 … — — — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 1… $ 5… $ 2… $ 1… $ 8… $ … $ 2… $ … $ 8… $ … $ 6… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
(1) Represents TDRs that were modified into term loans.
(2) Other internal credit metrics may include delinquency status, geography or other factors.
(3) Direct/indirect consumer includes $ 54.2billion of securities-based lending, which is typically
supported by highly liquid collateral with market value greater than or equal to the outstanding loan
balance and therefore has minimal credit risk at December 31, 2021.
 Com… 
 – 
 Cre… 
 Qua… 
 Ind… 
 By Term 
 Vin… Loans 
 (Do… Amor… 
 in Cost 
 mil… Total Basis 
 U.S. as of by 
 Com… Dece… Orig… 
 Risk 31, Year Revo… 
 rat… 2021 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 Pri… Loans 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Pass $ 315,… $ 55,8… $ 25,… $ 23,3… $ 11,… $ 10,4… $ 23,… $ 165,… 
 rat… 
 Res… 10,3… 598 687 1,308 1,6… 514 1,0… 4,524 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 U.S. $ 325,… $ 56,4… $ 25,… $ 24,6… $ 13,… $ 10,9… $ 24,… $ 170,… 
 Com… 
 Non… 
 Com… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 110,… $ 25,7… $ 8,7… $ 7,133 $ 4,5… $ 3,016 $ 3,0… $ 58,6… 
 rat… 
 Res… 2,479 223 324 487 275 257 216 697 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 Non… $ 113,… $ 25,9… $ 9,0… $ 7,620 $ 4,7… $ 3,273 $ 3,2… $ 59,3… 
 Com… 
 Com… 
 Real 
 Est… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 55,5… $ 14,4… $ 7,2… $ 11,2… $ 5,7… $ 3,326 $ 6,8… $ 6,761 
 rat… 
 Res… 7,498 277 990 2,237 1,7… 596 1,4… 224 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 Com… $ 63,0… $ 14,6… $ 8,2… $ 13,4… $ 7,4… $ 3,922 $ 8,2… $ 6,985 
 Real 
 Est… 
 Com… 
 Lea… 
 Fin… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 14,4… $ 3,280 $ 2,4… $ 2,427 $ 2,0… $ 1,741 $ 2,4… $ — 
 rat… 
 Res… 387 25 18 91 67 48 138 — 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 Com… $ 14,8… $ 3,305 $ 2,5… $ 2,518 $ 2,0… $ 1,789 $ 2,6… $ — 
 Lea… 
 Fin… 
 U.S. 
 Sma… 
 Bus… 
 Com… 
 Risk 
 rat… 
 Pass $ 11,6… $ 4,257 $ 2,9… $ 1,059 $ 763 $ 623 $ 1,8… $ 141 
 rat… 
 Res… 433 12 29 91 87 64 147 3 
 cri… 
 Tot… 
 U.S. 
 Sma… $ 12,0… $ 4,269 $ 2,9… $ 1,150 $ 850 $ 687 $ 2,0… $ 144 
 Bus… 
 Com… 
 Tot… $ 529,… $ 104,… $ 48,… $ 49,4… $ 28,… $ 20,6… $ 41,… $ 236,… 
(1) Excludes $ 7.2billion of loans accounted for under the fair value option at December 31, 2021.
(2) Excludes U.S. Small Business Card loans of $ 7.1billion. Refreshed FICO scores for this portfolio
are $ 192million for less than 620; $ 618million for greater than or equal to 620 and less than 680;
$ 1.9billion for greater than or equal to 680 and less than 740; and $ 4.4billion greater than or
equal to 740.
 Bank of America120 
During 2022, commercial credit quality showed
some signs of stabilization. Commercial
reservable criticized utilized exposure decreased
to $ 19.3billion at December 31, 2022 from $
22.4billion (to 3.12percent from 3.91percent of
total commercial reservable utilized exposure) at
December 31, 2021, which was broad-based across
industries.
Troubled Debt Restructurings Consumer Real Estate
Modifications of consumer real estate loans are
classified as TDRs when the borrower is
experiencing financial difficulties and a
concession has been granted. Concessions may
include reductions in interest rates,
capitalization of past due amounts, principal
and/or interest forbearance, payment extensions,
principal and/or interest forgiveness, or
combinations thereof. Prior to permanently
modifying a loan, the Corporation may enter into
trial modifications with certain borrowers under
both government and proprietary programs. Trial
modifications generally represent a three- to
four-month period during which the borrower makes
monthly payments under the anticipated modified
payment terms. Upon successful completion of the
trial period, the Corporation and the borrower
enter into a permanent modification. Binding
trial modifications are classified as TDRs when
the trial offer is made and continue to be
classified as TDRs regardless of whether the
borrower enters into a permanent modification.
Consumer real estate loans of $ 211million that
have been discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy with
no change in
repayment terms and not reaffirmed by the
borrower were included in TDRs at December 31,
2022, of which $ 53million were classified as
nonperforming and $ 33million were loans fully
insured. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, remaining
commitments to lend additional funds to debtors
whose terms have been modified in a consumer real
estate TDR were not significant. Consumer real
estate foreclosed properties totaled $ 121million
and $ 101million at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
The carrying value of consumer real estate loans,
including fully-insured loans, for which formal
foreclosure proceedings were in process at
December 31, 2022 and 2021 was $ 871million and $
1.1billion. During 2022 and 2021, the Corporation
reclassified $ 190million and $ 64million of
consumer real estate loans to foreclosed
properties or, for properties acquired upon
foreclosure of certain government-guaranteed
loans (principally FHA-insured loans), to other
assets. The reclassifications represent non-cash
investing activities and, accordingly, are not
reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash
Flows. The table below presents the December 31,
2022, 2021 and 2020 unpaid principal balance,
carrying value, and average pre- and post-
modification interest rates of consumer real
estate loans that were modified in TDRs during
2022, 2021 and 2020. The following Consumer Real
Estate portfolio segment tables include loans
that were initially classified as TDRs during the
period and also loans that had previously been
classified as TDRs and were modified again during
the period.
 Consumer 
 Real Estate 
 – TDRs 
 Entered 
 into During 
 2022, 2021 
 and 2020 Unpaid Pre-Modific… Post-Modif… 
 (Dollars in December 31, Principal Carrying Interest Interest 
 millions) 2022 Balance Value Rate Rate(1) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Residential $ 1,144 $ 1,015 3.52 % 3.40 % 
 mortgage 
 Home equity 238 191 4.61 4.65 
 Total $ 1,382 $ 1,206 3.71 3.62 
 December 31, 
 2021 
 Residential $ 891 $ 788 3.48 % 3.38 % 
 mortgage 
 Home equity 107 77 3.60 3.59 
 Total $ 998 $ 865 3.49 3.41 
 December 31, 
 2020 
 Residential $ 732 $ 646 3.66 % 3.59 % 
 mortgage 
 Home equity 87 69 3.67 3.61 
 Total $ 819 $ 715 3.66 3.59 
(1) The post-modification interest rate reflects the interest rate applicable only to permanently
completed modifications, which exclude loans that are in a trial modification period.
The table below presents the December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 carrying value for consumer real estate
loans that were modified in a TDR during 2022, 2021 and 2020, by type of modification.
 Consumer Real Estate – Modification Programs TDRs Entered into During 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Modifications under government programs $ 2 $ 4 $ 13 
 Modifications under proprietary programs 1,100 774 570 
 Loans discharged in Chapter 7 14 33 53 
 bankruptcy(1) 
 Trial modifications 90 54 79 
 Total modifications $ 1,206 $ 865 $ 715 
(1) Includes loans discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy with no change in repayment terms that are
classified as TDRs.
The following table presents the carrying value of consumer real estate loans that entered into
payment default during 2022, 2021 and 2020 that were modified in a TDR during the 12 months preceding
payment default. A payment default for consumer real estate TDRs is recognized when a borrower has
missed threemonthly payments (not necessarily consecutively) since modification.
 121Bank of America 
 Consumer Real Estate – TDRs Entering Payment Default that were 
 Modified During the Preceding 12 Months 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Modifications under government programs $ — $ 4 $ 16 
 Modifications under proprietary programs 189 128 51 
 Loans discharged in Chapter 7 2 9 19 
 bankruptcy(1) 
 Trial modifications(2) 25 19 54 
 Total modifications $ 216 $ 160 $ 140 
(1) Includes loans discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy with no change in repayment terms that are
classified as TDRs.
(2) Includes trial modification offers to which the customer did not respond.
Credit Card and Other Consumer The Corporation seeks to assist customers who are experiencing
financial difficulty by modifying loans while ensuring compliance with federal and local laws and
guidelines. Credit card and other consumer loan modifications generally involve reducing the interest
rate on the account, placing the customer on a fixed payment plan not exceeding 60 months and
canceling the customer’s available line of credit, all of which are considered TDRs. The Corporation
makes loan modifications directly with borrowers for debt held only by the Corporation (internal
programs). Additionally, the Corporation makes loan modifications for borrowers working with third-
party renegotiation agencies that provide solutions to customers’ entire unsecured debt structures
(external programs). The Corporation classifies other secured consumer loans that have been
discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy as TDRs, which are written down to collateral value and placed on
nonaccrual status no later than the time of discharge. The table below provides information on the
Corporation’s Credit Card and Other Consumer TDR portfolio including the December 31, 2022, 2021 and
2020 unpaid principal balance, carrying value, and average pre- and post-modification interest rates
of loans that were modified in TDRs during 2022, 2021 and 2020.
 Credit 
 Card and 
 Other 
 Consumer – 
 TDRs 
 Entered 
 into 
 During 
 2022, 2021 
 and 2020 
 (Dollars Unpaid Pre-Modifi… Post-Modif… 
 in December Principal Interest Interest 
 millions) 31, 2022 Balance CarryingVa… Rate Rate 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Credit $ 284 $ 293 22.34 % 3.89 % 
 card 
 Direct/In… 6 5 5.51 5.50 
 consumer 
 Total $ 290 $ 298 22.06 3.92 
 December 
 31, 2021 
 Credit $ 237 $ 248 18.45 % 4.09 % 
 card 
 Direct/In… 23 16 5.88 5.88 
 consumer 
 Total $ 260 $ 264 17.68 4.20 
 December 
 31, 2020 
 Credit $ 269 $ 277 18.16 % 5.63 % 
 card 
 Direct/In… 52 37 5.83 5.83 
 consumer 
 Total $ 321 $ 314 16.70 5.65 
(1) Includes accrued interest and fees.
The table below presents the December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 carrying value for Credit Card and
Other Consumer loans that were modified in a TDR during 2022, 2021 and 2020 by program type.
 Credit Card and Other Consumer – TDRs by Program Type at 
 December 31(1) 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Internal programs $ 251 $ 214 $ 225 
 External programs 44 44 73 
 Other 3 6 16 
 Total $ 298 $ 264 $ 314 
(1) Includes accrued interest and fees.
Credit card and other consumer loans are deemed
to be in payment default during the quarter in
which a borrower misses the second of
twoconsecutive payments. Payment defaults are one
of the factors considered when projecting future
cash flows in the calculation of the allowance
for loan and lease losses for credit card and
other consumer. Based on historical experience,
the Corporation estimates that 15percent of new
credit card TDRs and 15percent of new
direct/indirect consumer TDRs may be in payment
default within 12months after modification.
Commercial Loans Modifications of loans to
commercial borrowers that are experiencing
financial difficulty are designed to reduce the
Corporation’s loss exposure while providing the
borrower with an opportunity to work through
financial difficulties, often to avoid
foreclosure or bankruptcy. Each modification is
unique and reflects the individual circumstances
of the borrower. Modifications that result in a
TDR may include extensions of maturity at a
concessionary (below market) rate of interest,
payment forbearances or other actions designed to
benefit the borrower while mitigating the
Corporation’s risk exposure.
 Bank of America122 
Reductions in interest rates are rare. Instead,
the interest rates are typically increased,
although the increased rate may not represent a
market rate of interest. Infrequently,
concessions may also include principal
forgiveness in connection with foreclosure, short
sale or other settlement agreements leading to
termination or sale of the loan. At the time of
restructuring, the loans are remeasured to
reflect the impact, if any, on projected cash
flows resulting from the modified terms. If a
portion of the loan is deemed to be
uncollectible, a charge-off may be recorded at
the time of restructuring. Alternatively, a
charge-off may have already been recorded in a
previous period such that no charge-off is
required at the time of modification. During
2022, the carrying value of the Corporation’s
commercial loans that were modified as TDRs was $
1.9billion compared to $ 1.3billion and $
1.2billion for 2021 and 2020. At December 31,
2022, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation had
commitments to lend $ 358million, $ 283million
and $ 402million to commercial borrowers whose
loans were classified as TDRs. The balance of
commercial TDRs in payment default was $
105million, $ 262million and $ 218million at
December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020. Loans Held-for-
sale The Corporation had LHFS of $ 6.9billion and
$ 15.6billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021. Cash
and non-cash proceeds from sales and paydowns of
loans originally classified as LHFS were $
32.0billion, $ 43.6billion and $ 20.1billion for
2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively . Cash used for
originations and purchases of LHFS totaled $
24.9billion, $ 37.3billion and $ 19.7billion for
2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Also included
were non-cash net transfers into LHFS of $
1.9billion during 2022, primarily driven by the
transfer of a $ 1.6billion affinity card loan
portfolio to held for sale that was sold in
October 2022, and $ 808million during 2021.
Accrued Interest Receivable Accrued interest
receivable for loans and leases and loans held-
for-sale at December 31, 2022 and 2021 was $
3.8billion and $ 2.2billion and is reported in
customer and other receivableson the Consolidated
Balance Sheet. Outstanding credit card loan
balances include unpaid principal, interest and
fees. Credit card loans are not classified as
nonperforming but are charged off no later than
the end of the month in which the account becomes
180 days past due, within 60 days after receipt
of notification of death or bankruptcy, or upon
confirmation of fraud . During 2022 and 2021, the
Corporation reversed $ 332million and $
446million of interest and fee income against the
income statement line item in which it was
originally recorded upon charge-off of the
principal balance of the loan.
For the outstanding residential mortgage, home
equity, direct/indirect consumer and commercial
loan balances classified as nonperforming during
2022 and 2021, interest and fee income reversed
at the time the loans were classified as
nonperforming was not significant. For more
information on the Corporation's nonperforming
loan policies, see Note 1 – Summary of
Significant Accounting Principles.
Allowance for Credit Losses The allowance for
credit losses is estimated using quantitative and
qualitative methods that consider a variety of
factors, such as historical loss experience, the
current credit quality of the portfolio and an
economic outlook over the life of the loan.
Qualitative reserves cover losses that are
expected but, in the Corporation's assessment,
may not be adequately reflected in
the quantitative methods or the economic
assumptions. The Corporation incorporates
forward-looking information through the use of
several macroeconomic scenarios in determining
the weighted economic outlook over the forecasted
life of the assets. These scenarios include key
macroeconomic variables such as gross domestic
product, unemployment rate, real estate prices
and corporate bond spreads. The scenarios that
are chosen each quarter and the weighting given
to each scenario depend on a variety of factors
including recent economic events, leading
economic indicators, internal and third-party
economist views, and industry trends. For more
information on the Corporation's credit loss
accounting policies including the allowance for
credit losses, see Note 1 – Summary of
Significant Accounting Principles . The December
31, 2022 estimate for allowance for credit losses
was based on various economic scenarios,
including a baseline scenario derived from
consensus estimates, an adverse scenario
reflecting an extended moderate recession, a
downside scenario reflecting persistent inflation
and interest rates above the baseline scenario, a
tail risk scenario similar to the severely
adverse scenario used in stress testing and an
upside scenario that considers the potential for
improvement above the baseline scenario. The
overall economic outlook is weighted 95percent
towards a recessionary environment in 2023, with
continued inflationary pressures leading to lower
GDP and higher unemployment rate expectations as
compared to the prior year. The weighted economic
outlook assumes that the U.S. average
unemployment rate will be above five and a half
percent by the fourth quarter of 2023 and will
slowly decline to fivepercent by the fourth
quarter of 2024. Additionally, in this economic
outlook, U.S. gross domestic product is
forecasted to contract at 0.4percent and grow at
1.2percent year-over-year in the fourth quarters
of 2023 and 2024. For comparison, as of December
31, 2021, the weighted economic outlook for the
U.S. average unemployment rate was forecasted to
be just above fivepercent by the fourth quarter
of 2022 and slowly decline to just under
fivepercent by the fourth quarter of 2023 and
U.S. gross domestic product was forecasted at
2.1percent and 1.9percent year-over-year in the
fourth quarters of 2022 and 2023. The allowance
for credit losses at December 31, 2022 was $
14.2billion, an increase of $ 379million compared
to December 31, 2021. The increase in the
allowance for credit losses was primarily driven
by loan growth and a dampened macroeconomic
outlook, partially offset by a reserve release
for reduced pandemic uncertainties. The change in
the allowance for credit losses was comprised of
a net increase of $ 295million in the allowance
for loan and lease losses and an increase of $
84million in the reserve for unfunded lending
commitments. The increase in the allowance for
credit losses was attributed to increases in the
credit card and other consumer portfolios of $
341million, and commercial portfolio of $
177million, partially offset by a decrease in the
consumer real estate portfolio of $ 139million.
The provision for credit losses increased $
7.1billion to an expense of $ 2.5billion in 2022
compared to a benefit of $ 4.6billion in 2021 and
an expense of $ 11.3billion in 2020. The increase
in the provision for credit losses in 2022 was
primarily driven by loan growth and a dampened
macroeconomic outlook, partially offset by
reduced pandemic uncertainties. The benefit in
2021 was primarily due to an improved
macroeconomic outlook and credit quality.
Outstanding loans and leases excluding loans
accounted for under the fair value option
increased $ 68.7billion in 2022 primarily driven
by commercial loans, which increased $
47.7billion, driven by broad-based growth, and
consumer loans which
 123Bank of America 
increased $ 21.0billion, primarily driven by credit card and residential mortgage. The changes in the
allowance for credit losses, including net charge-offs and provision for loan and lease losses, are
detailed in the table below.
 Consumer 
 Real Estate Credit Card and 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 Other Consumer Commercial Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Allowance for loan and 
 lease losses, $ 557 $ 6,476 $ 5,354 $ 12,387 
 January 1 
 Loans and leases charged -206 -2,755 -478 -3,439 
 off 
 Recoveries of loans and 
 leases 224 882 161 1,267 
 previously charged off 
 Net charge-offs 18 -1,873 -317 -2,172 
 Provision for loan and -164 2,215 409 2,460 
 lease losses 
 Other 9 -1 -1 7 
 Allowance for loan and 
 lease losses, 420 6,817 5,445 12,682 
 December 31 
 Reserve for unfunded 
 lending 96 — 1,360 1,456 
 commitments, January 1 
 Provision for unfunded 
 lending -3 — 86 83 
 commitments 
 Other 1 — — 1 
 Reserve for unfunded 
 lending 94 — 1,446 1,540 
 commitments, December 31 
 Allowance for credit $ 514 $ 6,817 $ 6,891 $ 14,222 
 losses, December 31 
 2021 
 Allowance for loan and 
 lease losses, $ 858 $ 9,213 $ 8,731 $ 18,802 
 January 1 
 Loans and leases charged -78 -3,000 -719 -3,797 
 off 
 Recoveries of loans and 
 leases 225 1,006 323 1,554 
 previously charged off 
 Net charge-offs 147 -1,994 -396 -2,243 
 Provision for loan and -449 -744 -2,980 -4,173 
 lease losses 
 Other 1 1 -1 1 
 Allowance for loan and 
 lease losses, 557 6,476 5,354 12,387 
 December 31 
 Reserve for unfunded 
 lending 137 — 1,741 1,878 
 commitments, January 1 
 Provision for unfunded 
 lending -41 — -380 -421 
 commitments 
 Other — — -1 -1 
 Reserve for unfunded 
 lending 96 — 1,360 1,456 
 commitments, December 31 
 Allowance for credit $ 653 $ 6,476 $ 6,714 $ 13,843 
 losses, December 31 
 2020 
 Allowance for loan and 
 lease losses, $ 440 $ 7,430 $ 4,488 $ 12,358 
 January 1 
 Loans and leases charged -98 -3,646 -1,675 -5,419 
 off 
 Recoveries of loans and 
 leases 201 891 206 1,298 
 previously charged off 
 Net charge-offs 103 -2,755 -1,469 -4,121 
 Provision for loan and 307 4,538 5,720 10,565 
 lease losses 
 Other 8 — -8 — 
 Allowance for loan and 
 lease losses, 858 9,213 8,731 18,802 
 December 31 
 Reserve for unfunded 
 lending 119 — 1,004 1,123 
 commitments, January 1 
 Provision for unfunded 
 lending 18 — 737 755 
 commitments 
 Reserve for unfunded 
 lending 137 — 1,741 1,878 
 commitments, December 31 
 Allowance for credit $ 995 $ 9,213 $ 10,472 $ 20,680 
 losses, December 31 
NOTE 6 Securitizations and Other Variable
Interest Entities
The Corporation utilizes VIEs in the ordinary
course of business to support its own and its
customers’ financing and investing needs. The
Corporation routinely securitizes loans and debt
securities using VIEs as a source of funding for
the Corporation and as a means of transferring
the economic risk of the loans or debt securities
to third parties. The assets are transferred into
a trust or other securitization vehicle such that
the assets are legally isolated from the
creditors of the Corporation and are not
available to satisfy its obligations. These
assets can only be used to settle obligations of
the trust or other securitization vehicle. The
Corporation also administers, structures or
invests in other VIEs including CDOs, investment
vehicles and other entities. For more information
on the Corporation’s use of VIEs, see Note 1 –
Summary of Significant Accounting Principles. The
tables in this Note present the assets and
liabilities of consolidated and unconsolidated
VIEs at December 31, 2022 and 2021 in situations
where the Corporation has continuing involvement
with transferred assets or if the Corporation
otherwise has a variable interest in the VIE. The
tables also present the Corporation’s maximum
loss exposure at December 31, 2022 and 2021
resulting from its involvement with consolidated
VIEs and unconsolidated VIEs in which the
Corporation holds a variable interest. The
Corporation’s maximum loss exposure is based on
the unlikely event that all of the assets in the
VIEs become worthless and incorporates not only
potential losses associated with assets recorded
on the Consolidated Balance Sheet but also
potential losses associated with off-balance
sheet commitments, such as unfunded liquidity
commitments and other contractual arrangements.
The Corporation’s maximum loss exposure does not
include losses previously recognized through
write-downs of assets. The Corporation invests in
ABS issued by third-party VIEs with which it has
no other form of involvement and enters into
certain commercial lending arrangements that may
also incorporate the use of VIEs, for example to
hold collateral. These securities and loans are
included in Note 4 – Securities or Note 5 –
Outstanding Loans and Leases and Allowance for
Credit Losses. In addition, the Corporation has
used VIEs in connection with its funding
activities.
 Bank of America124 
The Corporation did not provide financial support to consolidated or unconsolidated VIEs during 2022,
2021 and 2020 that it was not previously contractually required to provide, nor does it intend to do
so. The Corporation had liquidity commitments, including written put options and collateral value
guarantees, with certain unconsolidated VIEs of $ 978million and $ 968million at December 31, 2022
and 2021. First-lien Mortgage Securitizations As part of its mortgage banking activities, the
Corporation securitizes a portion of the first-lien residential mortgage loans it originates or
purchases from third parties, generally in the form of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS)
guaranteed by government-sponsored enterprises, FNMA and FHLMC (collectively the GSEs), or the
Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA) primarily in the case of FHA- insured and U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)-guaranteed mortgage loans. Securitization usually occurs in
conjunction with or shortly after origination or purchase, and the Corporation may also securitize
loans held in its residential mortgage portfolio. In addition, the Corporation may, from time to
time, securitize commercial mortgages it originates or purchases from other entities. The Corporation
typically services the loans it securitizes. Further, the Corporation may retain beneficial interests
in the securitization trusts including senior and subordinate securities and equity tranches issued
by the trusts. Except as described in Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies , the Corporation does
not provide guarantees or recourse to the securitization trusts other than standard representations
and warranties. The table below summarizes select information related to first-lien mortgage
securitizations for 2022, 2021 and 2020.
 First-lien 
 Mortgage 
 Securitiz… Residential 
 (Dollars Mortgage - Commercial 
 in Agency Mortgage 
 millions) 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Proceeds 
 from loan $ 8,084 $ 6,664 $ 15,823 $ 5,853 $ 10,874 $ 5,084 
 sales(1) 
 Gains on 8 9 728 46 156 61 
 securitiz… 
 Repurchas… 
 from 53 756 436 — — — 
 securitiz… 
 trusts(3) 
(1) The Corporation transfers residential mortgage loans to securitizations sponsored primarily by
the GSEs or GNMA in the normal course of business and primarily receives residential mortgage-backed
securities in exchange. Substantially all of these securities are classified as Level 2 within the
fair value hierarchy and are typically sold shortly after receipt.
(2) A majority of the first-lien residential mortgage loans securitized are initially classified as
LHFS and accounted for under the fair value option. Gains recognized on these LHFS prior to
securitization, which totaled $ 41million, $ 121million and $ 160million net of hedges, during 2022,
2021 and 2020, respectively, are not included in the table above.
(3) The Corporation may have the option to repurchase delinquent loans out of securitization trusts,
which reduces the amount of servicing advances it is required to make. The Corporation may also
repurchase loans from securitization trusts to perform modifications. Repurchased loans include FHA-
insured mortgages collateralizing GNMA securities.
The Corporation recognizes consumer MSRs from the sale or securitization of consumer real estate
loans. The unpaid principal balance of loans serviced for investors, including residential mortgage
and home equity loans, totaled $ 100.1billion and $ 115.4billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Servicing fee and ancillary fee income on serviced loans was $ 274million, $ 392million and $
474million during 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Servicing advances on serviced loans, including
loans serviced for others and loans held for investment, were $ 1.6billion and $ 2.0billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. For more information on MSRs, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements .
During 2022, the Corporation deconsolidated agency residential mortgage securitization trusts with
total assets of $ 784million, with no significant deconsolidations in 2021. During 2020, the
Corporation completed the sale of $ 9.3billion of consumer real estate loans through GNMA loan
securitizations. As part of the securitizations, the Corporation retained $ 8.4billion of MBS, which
are classified as debt securities carried at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Total
gains on loan sales of $ 704million were recorded in other income in the Consolidated Statement of
Income. The following table summarizes select information related to first-lien mortgage
securitization trusts in which the Corporation held a variable interest at December 31, 2022 and
2021.
 125Bank of America 
 F… 
 M… 
 V… Re… 
 (… Mo… 
 in Ag… 
 m… De… No… Co… 
 U… 31 Pr… Su… Al… Mo… 
 V… 20… 2… 20… 2… 20… 2… 20… 2… 20… 2… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 M… 
 l… $ 9,… $ 1… $ 91 $ 1… $ 735 $ 9… $ 28 $ 14 $ 1,… $ 1… 
 e… 
 O… 
 s… 
 a… 
 S… 
 s… 
 T… 
 a… $ 232 $ 1… $ 3 $ 8 $ 25 $ 44 $ 26 $ 12 $ 91 $ 21 
 a… 
 D… 
 s… 
 c… 3,… 5… — — 410 5… — — — — 
 at 
 f… 
 v… 
 H… 5,… 6… — — — — — — 1,… 1… 
 s… 
 A… 
 o… — — 3 3 25 29 2 2 101 93 
 a… 
 T… 
 r… $ 9,… $ 1… $ 6 $ 11 $ 460 $ 6… $ 28 $ 14 $ 1,… $ 1… 
 p… 
 P… 
 b… $ 81… $ 9… $ 3,… $ 4… $ 5,… $ 6… $ 11… $ 1… $ 85… $ 8… 
 o… 
 C… 
 V… 
 M… 
 l… $ 1,… $ 1… $ — $ 49 $ 78 $ — $ — $ — $ — $ — 
 e… 
 O… 
 s… 
 a… 
 T… 
 a… $ 1,… $ 1… $ — $ — $ 78 $ — $ — $ — $ — $ — 
 a… 
 L… 
 a… — — — 58 — — — — — — 
 l… 
 n… 
 T… $ 1,… $ 1… $ — $ 58 $ 78 $ — $ — $ — $ — $ — 
 a… 
 T… $ — $ — $ — $ 9 $ — $ — $ — $ — $ — $ — 
 l… 
(1) Maximum loss exposure includes obligations under loss-sharing reinsurance and other arrangements
for non-agency residential mortgage and commercial mortgage securitizations, but excludes the reserve
for representations and warranties obligations and corporate guarantees and also excludes servicing
advances and other servicing rights and obligations. For more information, see Note 12 – Commitments
and Contingencies and Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements .
(2) Principal balance outstanding includes loans where the Corporation was the transferor to
securitization VIEs with which it has continuing involvement, which may include servicing the loans.
Other Asset-backed Securitizations
The table below summarizes select information related to home equity, credit card and other asset-
backed VIEs in which the Corporation held a variable interest at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Home 
 Equ… 
 Loa… 
 Cre… 
 Card 
 and 
 Oth… 
 Ass… 
 VIEs 
 (Do… Home 
 in Equi… Muni… 
 mil… Dece… Cred… Rese… Bond 
 Unc… 31 Card… Trus… Trus… 
 VIEs 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Max… 
 loss $ 119 $ 152 $ — $ — $ 4,243 $ 6,0… $ 2,537 $ 4,0… 
 exp… 
 On-… 
 she… 
 ass… 
 Sec… 
 Tra… 
 acc… $ — $ — $ — $ — $ 456 $ 1,0… $ — $ — 
 ass… 
 Debt 
 sec… 
 car… 1 1 — — 1,259 1,9… — — 
 at 
 fair 
 val… 
 Hel… — — — — 2,528 3,1… — — 
 sec… 
 Tot… 
 ret… $ 1 $ 1 $ — $ — $ 4,243 $ 6,0… $ — $ — 
 pos… 
 Tot… 
 ass… $ 326 $ 430 $ — $ — $ 12,2… $ 18,… $ 3,016 $ 4,6… 
 of 
 VIEs 
 Con… 
 VIEs 
 Max… 
 loss $ 32 $ 45 $ 9,555 $ 10,2… $ 551 $ 680 $ — $ 210 
 exp… 
 On-… 
 she… 
 ass… 
 Tra… 
 acc… $ — $ — $ — $ — $ 650 $ 686 $ — $ 122 
 ass… 
 Loa… 
 and 97 140 14,5… 14,4… — — — — 
 lea… 
 All… 
 for 
 loan 12 14 -808 -970 — — — — 
 and 
 lea… 
 los… 
 All 
 oth… 2 3 68 70 — — — 88 
 ass… 
 Tot… $ 111 $ 157 $ 13,8… $ 13,5… $ 650 $ 686 $ — $ 210 
 ass… 
 On-… 
 she… 
 lia… 
 Sho… $ — $ — $ — $ — $ — $ — $ — $ 196 
 bor… 
 Lon… 79 113 4,247 3,248 99 6 — — 
 debt 
 All 
 oth… — — 13 7 — — — — 
 lia… 
 Tot… $ 79 $ 113 $ 4,260 $ 3,255 $ 99 $ 6 $ — $ 196 
 lia… 
(1) For unconsolidated home equity loan VIEs, the maximum loss exposure includes outstanding trust
certificates issued by trusts in rapid amortization, net of recorded reserves. For both consolidated
and unconsolidated home equity loan VIEs, the maximum loss exposure excludes the reserve for
representations and warranties obligations and corporate guarantees. For more information, see Note
12 – Commitments and Contingencies .
(2) At December 31, 2022 and 2021, loans and leases in the consolidated credit card trust included $
3.3billion and $ 4.3billion of seller’s interest.
(3) The retained senior securities were valued using quoted market prices or observable market inputs
(Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy).
 Bank of America126 
Home Equity Loans The Corporation retains interests, primarily senior securities, in home equity
securitization trusts to which it transferred home equity loans. In addition, the Corporation may be
obligated to provide subordinate funding to the trusts during a rapid amortization event. This
obligation is included in the maximum loss exposure in the preceding table. The charges that will
ultimately be recorded as a result of the rapid amortization events depend on the undrawn portion of
the home equity lines of credit, performance of the loans, the amount of subsequent draws and the
timing of related cash flows. Credit Card Securitizations The Corporation securitizes originated and
purchased credit card loans. The Corporation’s continuing involvement with the securitization trust
includes servicing the receivables, retaining an undivided interest (seller’s interest) in the
receivables, and holding certain retained interests, including subordinate interests in accrued
interest and fees on the securitized receivables and cash reserve accounts. During 2022, 2021 and
2020, the Corporation issued new senior debt securities to third-party investors from the credit card
securitization trust totaling $ 2.3billion, $ 1.0billion, and $ 1.0billion, respectively. At December
31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation held subordinate securities issued by the credit card
securitization trust with a notional principal amount of $ 6.7billion and $ 6.5billion. These
securities serve as a form of credit enhancement to the senior debt securities and have a stated
interest rate of zeropercent. During 2022, 2021 and 2020, the credit card securitization trust issued
$ 363million, $ 161million and $ 161million, respectively, of these subordinate securities.
Resecuritization Trusts The Corporation transfers securities, typically MBS, into resecuritization
VIEs generally at the request of customers seeking securities with specific characteristics.
Generally, there are no significant ongoing activities performed in a resecuritization trust, and no
single investor has the unilateral ability to liquidate the trust. The Corporation resecuritized $
21.8billion, $ 28.9billion and $ 39.0billion of securities during 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Securities transferred into resecuritization VIEs were measured at fair value with changes in fair
value recorded in market making and similar activities prior to the resecuritization and,
accordingly, no gain or loss on sale was recorded. Securities received from the resecuritization VIEs
were recognized at their fair value of $ 2.4billion, $ 2.2billion and $ 6.1billion during 2022, 2021
and 2020, respectively. In 2022 and 2021, substantially all of the securities were classified as
trading account assets. All of the securities received as resecuritization proceeds during 2020 were
classified as trading account assets. Of the securities received as resecuritization proceeds during
2020, $ 2.4billion, $ 2.1billion and $ 1.7billion were classified as trading account assets, debt
securities carried at fair value and HTM securities, respectively. Substantially all of the trading
account securities carried at fair value were categorized as Level 2 within the fair value hierarchy.
Municipal Bond Trusts The Corporation administers municipal bond trusts that hold highly-rated, long-
term, fixed-rate municipal bonds. The trusts obtain financing by issuing floating-rate trust
certificates that reprice on a weekly or other short-term basis to third-party investors. The
Corporation’s liquidity commitments to unconsolidated municipal bond trusts, including those for
which the Corporation was transferor, totaled $ 2.5billion and $ 4.1billion at December 31, 2022 and
2021. The weighted-average remaining life of bonds held in the trusts at December 31, 2022 was
8.7years. There were no significant write-downs or downgrades of assets or issuers during 2022, 2021
and 2020. Other Variable Interest Entities The table below summarizes select information related to
other VIEs in which the Corporation held a variable interest at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Other 
 VIEs 
 (Dollars Consoli… Consoli… 
 in December December 
 million… 31, 2022 Unconsol… Total 31, 2021 Unconsol… Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Maximum 
 loss $ 2,286 $ 31,405 $ 33,691 $ 4,819 $ 27,790 $ 32,609 
 exposure 
 On-bala… 
 sheet 
 assets 
 Trading 
 account $ 353 $ 638 $ 991 $ 2,552 $ 626 $ 3,178 
 assets 
 Debt 
 securit… 
 carried — 5 5 — 7 7 
 at fair 
 value 
 Loans 
 and 2,086 90 2,176 2,503 47 2,550 
 leases 
 Allowan… 
 for loan 
 and -1 -12 -13 -2 -12 -14 
 lease 
 losses 
 All 
 other 46 30,221 30,267 28 26,628 26,656 
 assets 
 Total $ 2,484 $ 30,942 $ 33,426 $ 5,081 $ 27,296 $ 32,377 
 On-bala… 
 sheet 
 liabili… 
 Short-t… $ 42 $ — $ 42 $ 51 $ — $ 51 
 borrowi… 
 Long-te… 156 — 156 211 — 211 
 debt 
 All 
 other — 7,318 7,318 — 6,548 6,548 
 liabili… 
 Total $ 198 $ 7,318 $ 7,516 $ 262 $ 6,548 $ 6,810 
 Total 
 assets $ 2,484 $ 101,271 $ 103,755 $ 5,081 $ 92,249 $ 97,330 
 of VIEs 
 127Bank of America 
Customer VIEs Customer VIEs include credit-
linked, equity-linked and commodity-linked note
VIEs, repackaging VIEs and asset acquisition
VIEs, which are typically created on behalf of
customers who wish to obtain market or credit
exposure to a specific company, index, commodity
or financial instrument. The Corporation’s
maximum loss exposure to consolidated and
unconsolidated customer VIEs totaled $ 914million
and $ 2.9billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021,
including the notional amount of derivatives to
which the Corporation is a counterparty, net of
losses previously recorded, and the Corporation’s
investment, if any, in securities issued by the
VIEs. Collateralized Debt Obligation VIEs The
Corporation receives fees for structuring CDO
VIEs, which hold diversified pools of fixed-
income securities, typically corporate debt or
ABS, which the CDO VIEs fund by issuing multiple
tranches of debt and equity securities. CDOs are
generally managed by third-party portfolio
managers. The Corporation typically transfers
assets to these CDOs, holds securities issued by
the CDOs and may be a derivative counterparty to
the CDOs. The Corporation’s maximum loss exposure
to consolidated and unconsolidated CDOs totaled $
197million and $ 235million at December 31, 2022
and 2021. Investment VIEs The Corporation
sponsors, invests in or provides financing, which
may be in connection with the sale of assets, to
a variety of investment VIEs that hold loans,
real estate, debt securities or other financial
instruments and are designed to provide the
desired investment profile to investors or the
Corporation. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the
Corporation’s consolidated investment VIEs had
total assets of $ 854million and $ 1.0billion.
The Corporation also held investments in
unconsolidated VIEs with total assets of $
12.2billion and $ 7.1billion at December 31, 2022
and 2021. The Corporation’s maximum loss exposure
associated with both consolidated and
unconsolidated investment VIEs totaled $
2.4billion and $ 2.0billion at December 31, 2022
and 2021 comprised primarily of on-balance sheet
assets less non-recourse liabilities. Leveraged
Lease Trusts The Corporation’s net investment in
consolidated leveraged lease trusts totaled $
1.2billion and $ 1.5billion at December 31, 2022
and 2021. The trusts hold long-lived equipment
such as rail cars, power generation and
distribution equipment, and commercial aircraft.
The Corporation structures the trusts and holds a
significant residual interest. The net investment
represents the Corporation’s maximum loss
exposure to the trusts in the unlikely event that
the leveraged lease investments become worthless.
Debt issued by the leveraged lease trusts is non-
recourse to the Corporation. Tax Credit VIEs The
Corporation holds investments in unconsolidated
limited partnerships and similar entities that
construct, own and operate affordable housing,
wind and solar projects. An unrelated third party
is typically the general partner or managing
member and has control over the significant
activities of the VIE. As an investor, tax
credits associated with the investments in these
entities are allocated to the Corporation, as
provided by the U.S. Internal Revenue Code and
related regulations, and are recognized as income
tax benefits in the Corporation’s Consolidated
Statement of Income in the year they are earned,
which varies based on the type of investments.
Tax credits from environmental, social and
governance (ESG) investments in affordable
housing are recognized ratably over a term of up
to 10 years, and tax credits from wind and solar
energy investments are recognized either at
inception for transactions electing Investment
Tax Credits (ITCs) or as energy is produced for
transactions electing Production Tax Credits
(PTCs), which is generally up to a 10-year time
period. The volume and types of investments held
by the Corporation will influence the amount of
tax credits recognized each period. The maximum
loss exposure included in the Other VIEs table
was $ 28.8billion and $ 25.7billion at December
31, 2022 and 2021. In addition to that amount,
the Corporation had unfunded capital
contributions for renewable energy investments of
$ 1.9billion and $ 1.0billion at December 31,
2022 and 2021. The capital contributions are
contingent on various conditions precedent to
funding over the next two years. The
Corporation’s risk of loss is generally mitigated
by policies requiring that the project qualify
for the expected tax credits prior to making its
investment. The Corporation’s investments in
affordable housing partnerships, which are
reported in other assets on the Consolidated
Balance Sheet, totaled $ 14.1billion and $
12.6billion, including unfunded commitments to
provide capital contributions of $ 6.6billion and
$ 5.8billion, at December 31, 2022 and 2021. The
unfunded commitments are expected to be paid over
the next five years. During 2022, 2021 and 2020,
the Corporation recognized tax credits and other
tax benefits of $ 1.5billion, $ 1.3billion and $
1.2billion and reported pretax losses in other
income of $ 1.2billion, $ 1.1billion and $
1.0billion. These tax credits are recognized as
part of the Corporation’s annual effective tax
rate used to determine tax expense in a given
quarter. The Corporation may be asked to invest
additional amounts to support a troubled
affordable housing project. Such additional
investments have not been and are not expected to
be significant. NOTE 7 Goodwill and Intangible
Assets
Goodwill
The table below presents goodwill balances by
business segment at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
The reporting units utilized for goodwill
impairment testing are the operating segments or
one level below.
 Goodwill December 31 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer Banking $ 30,137 $ 30,137 
 Global Wealth & Investment Management 9,677 9,677 
 Global Banking 24,026 24,026 
 Global Markets 5,182 5,182 
 Total goodwill $ 69,022 $ 69,022 
During 2022, the Corporation completed its annual
goodwill impairment test as of June 30, 2022
using qualitative assessments for all applicable
reporting units. Based on the results of the
annual goodwill impairment test, the Corporation
determined there was no impairment. For more
information on the use of qualitative
assessments, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant
Accounting Principles .
Intangible Assets
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the net carrying
value of intangible assets was $ 2.1billion and $
2.2billion. At both December 31, 2022 and 2021,
intangible assets included $ 1.6
 Bank of America128 
billion of intangible assets associated with
trade names, substantially all of which had an
indefinite life and, accordingly, are not being
amortized. Amortization of intangibles expense
was $ 78million, $ 76million and $ 95million for
2022, 2021 and 2020. NOTE 8 Leases
The Corporation enters into both lessor and
lessee arrangements. For more information on
lease accounting, see Note 1 – Summary of
Significant Accounting Principles and on lease
financing receivables, see Note 5 – Outstanding
Loans and Leases and Allowance for Credit Losses
.
Lessor Arrangements
The Corporation’s lessor arrangements primarily
consist of operating, sales-type and direct
financing leases for equipment. Lease agreements
may include options to renew and for the lessee
to purchase the leased equipment at the end of
the lease term.
The table below presents the net investment in
sales-type and direct financing leases at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Net Investment(1) December 31 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Lease receivables $ 15,123 $ 16,806 
 Unguaranteed residuals 2,143 2,078 
 Total net investment in sales-type and direct $ 17,266 $ 18,884 
 financing leases 
(1) In certain cases, the Corporation obtains
third-party residual value insurance to reduce
its residual asset risk. The carrying value of
residual assets with third-party residual value
insurance for at least a portion of the asset
value was $ 6.5billion and $ 7.1billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.
The table below presents lease income for 2022,
2021 and 2020.
 Lease Income 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 2020 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Sales-type and direct financing leases $ 589 $ 613 $ 707 
 Operating leases 941 930 931 
 Total lease income $ 1,530 $ 1,543 $ 1,638 
Lessee Arrangements
The Corporation's lessee arrangements
predominantly consist of operating leases for
premises and equipment; the Corporation's
financing leases are not significant.
Lease terms may contain renewal and extension
options and early termination features.
Generally, these options do not impact the lease
term because the Corporation is not reasonably
certain that it will exercise the options.
The following table provides information on the
right-of-use assets, lease liabilities and
weighted-average discount rates and lease terms
at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Supplemental Information for Lessee 
 Arrangements December 31 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Right-of-use asset $ 9,755 $ 10,233 
 Lease liabilities 10,359 10,858 
 Weighted-average discount rate used to 
 calculate present value of future 3.25 % 2.91 % 
 minimum lease payments 
 Weighted-average lease term (in years) 8.6 9.0 
 Right-of-use assets obtained in 
 exchange for new operating $ 824 $ 1,713 
 lease liabilities(1) 
 2022 2021 2020 
 Operating cash flows from $ 1,986 $ 1,964 $ 2,039 
 operating leases(2) 
 Lease Cost and Supplemental 
 Information: 
 Operating lease cost $ 2,008 $ 2,025 $ 2,149 
 Variable lease cost(3) 464 462 474 
 Total lease cost(4) $ 2,472 $ 2,487 $ 2,623 
(1) Represents non-cash activity and,
accordingly, is not reflected in the Consolidated
Statement of Cash Flows.
(2) Represents cash paid for amounts included in
the measurements of lease liabilities.
(3) Primarily consists of payments for common
area maintenance and property taxes.
(4) Amounts are recorded in occupancy and
equipment expense in the Consolidated Statement
of Income.
Maturity Analysis
The maturities of lessor and lessee arrangements
outstanding at December 31, 2022 are presented in
the table below based on undiscounted cash flows.
 Lessor 
 Maturities of Lessor and Lessee Operating Sales-type and Lessee(1) 
 Arrangements Leases Direct Financing Operating 
 (Dollars in millions) December 31, 2022 Leases(2) Leases 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2023 $ 819 $ 4,932 $ 1,998 
 2024 682 4,399 1,850 
 2025 509 2,539 1,567 
 2026 368 1,993 1,354 
 2027 289 990 1,131 
 Thereafter 664 1,635 4,189 
 Total undiscounted $ 3,331 16,488 12,089 
 cash flows 
 Less: Net present 1,365 1,730 
 value adjustment 
 Total(3) $ 15,123 $ 10,359 
(1) Excludes $ 278million in commitments under
lessee arrangements that have not yet commenced
with lease terms that will begin in 2023.
(2) Includes $ 10.2billion in commercial lease
financing receivables and $ 4.9billion in
direct/indirect consumer lease financing
receivables.
(3) Represents lease receivables for lessor
arrangements and lease liabilities for lessee
arrangements.
 129Bank of America 
 NOTE 9 
 Deposits 
The scheduled contractual maturities for total time deposits at December 31, 2022 are presented in
the table below.
 Contractual Maturities of Total Time Deposits 
 (Dollars in millions) U.S. Non-U.S. Total 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Due in 2023 $ 36,114 $ 7,393 $ 43,507 
 Due in 2024 3,576 67 3,643 
 Due in 2025 643 6 649 
 Due in 2026 149 23 172 
 Due in 2027 116 1,472 1,588 
 Thereafter 238 8 246 
 Total time deposits $ 40,836 $ 8,969 $ 49,805 
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation
had aggregate U.S. time deposits of $ 12.8billion
and $ 9.4billion and non-U.S. time deposits of $
9.0billion and $ 10.6billion in denominations
that met or exceeded insurance limits.
NOTE 10 Securities Financing Agreements, Short-
term Borrowings, Collateral and Restricted Cash
The Corporation enters into securities financing
agreements which include securities borrowed or
purchased under agreements to resell and
securities loaned or sold under agreements to
repurchase. These financing agreements (also
referred to as “matched-book transactions”) are
to accommodate customers, obtain securities to
cover short positions and finance inventory
positions. The Corporation elects to account for
certain securities financing agreements under the
fair value option. For more information on the
fair value option, see Note 21 – Fair Value
Option . Offsetting of Securities Financing
Agreements Substantially all of the Corporation’s
securities financing activities are transacted
under legally enforceable master
repurchase agreements or legally enforceable
master securities lending agreements that give
the Corporation, in the event of default by the
counterparty, the right to liquidate securities
held and to offset receivables and payables with
the same counterparty. The Corporation offsets
securities financing transactions with the same
counterparty on the Consolidated Balance Sheet
where it has such a legally enforceable master
netting agreement and the transactions have the
same maturity date. The Securities Financing
Agreements table presents securities financing
agreements included on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet in federal funds sold and securities
borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell,
and in federal funds purchased and securities
loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. Balances are
presented on a gross basis, prior to the
application of counterparty netting. Gross assets
and liabilities are adjusted on an aggregate
basis to take into consideration the effects of
legally enforceable master netting agreements.
For more information on the offsetting of
derivatives, see Note 3 – Derivatives.
 Securiti… 
 Financing 
 Agreemen… Gross 
 (Dollars Assets/Lia… Net Balance 
 in December Amounts Sheet Financial Net 
 millions) 31, 2022 Offset Amount Instrumen… Assets/Lia… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Securiti… 
 borrowed 
 or 
 purchased $ 597,847 $ -330,273 $ 267,574 $ -240,120 $ 27,454 
 under 
 agreemen… 
 to 
 resell(3) 
 Securiti… 
 loaned or 
 sold 
 under $ 525,908 $ -330,273 $ 195,635 $ -183,265 $ 12,370 
 agreemen… 
 to 
 repurcha… 
 Other(4) 8,427 — 8,427 -8,427 — 
 Total $ 534,335 $ -330,273 $ 204,062 $ -191,692 $ 12,370 
 December 
 31, 2021 
 Securiti… 
 borrowed 
 or 
 purchased $ 527,054 $ -276,334 $ 250,720 $ -229,525 $ 21,195 
 under 
 agreemen… 
 to 
 resell(3) 
 Securiti… 
 loaned or 
 sold 
 under $ 468,663 $ -276,334 $ 192,329 $ -181,860 $ 10,469 
 agreemen… 
 to 
 repurcha… 
 Other(4) 11,391 — 11,391 -11,391 — 
 Total $ 480,054 $ -276,334 $ 203,720 $ -193,251 $ 10,469 
(1) Includes activity where uncertainty exists as to the enforceability of certain master netting
agreements under bankruptcy laws in some countries or industries.
(2) Includes securities collateral received or pledged under repurchase or securities lending
agreements where there is a legally enforceable master netting agreement. These amounts are not
offset on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, but are shown as a reduction to derive a net asset or
liability. Securities collateral received or pledged where the legal enforceability of the master
netting agreements is uncertain is excluded from the table.
(3) Excludes repurchase activity of $ 8.7billion and $ 20.1billion reported in loans and leases on
the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
(4) Balance is reported in accrued expenses and other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet
and relates to transactions where the Corporation acts as the lender in a securities lending
agreement and receives securities that can be pledged as collateral or sold. In these transactions,
the Corporation recognizes an asset at fair value, representing the securities received, and a
liability, representing the obligation to return those securities.
Repurchase Agreements and Securities Loaned Transactions Accounted for as Secured Borrowings The
following tables present securities sold under agreements to repurchase and securities loaned by
remaining contractual term to maturity and class of collateral pledged. Included in “Other” are
transactions where the Corporation acts as the lender in a securities lending agreement and receives
securities that can be pledged as collateral or sold. Certain agreements contain a right to
substitute collateral and/or terminate the agreement prior to maturity at the option of the
Corporation or the counterparty. Such agreements are included in the table below based on the
remaining contractual term to maturity.
 Bank of America130 
 Remaining 
 Contractu… Overnight 
 Maturity and After 30 
 (Dollars Continuous Days Greater 
 in December 30 Days or Through 90 than 
 millions) 31, 2022 Less Days 90 Days(1) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Securities 
 sold under 
 agreements $ 200,087 $ 181,632 $ 41,666 $ 30,107 $ 453,492 
 to 
 repurchase 
 Securities 66,909 288 1,139 4,080 72,416 
 loaned 
 Other 8,427 — — — 8,427 
 Total $ 275,423 $ 181,920 $ 42,805 $ 34,187 $ 534,335 
 December 
 31, 2021 
 Securities 
 sold under 
 agreements $ 148,023 $ 194,964 $ 36,939 $ 36,501 $ 416,427 
 to 
 repurchase 
 Securities 46,231 466 1,428 4,111 52,236 
 loaned 
 Other 11,391 — — — 11,391 
 Total $ 205,645 $ 195,430 $ 38,367 $ 40,612 $ 480,054 
(1) Noagreements have maturities greater than four years.
 Securities Sold Under 
 Class of Collateral Agreements to 
 Pledged Repurchase Securities 
 (Dollars in millions) December 31, 2022 Loaned Other Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. government and $ 193,005 $ 18 $ — $ 193,023 
 agency securities 
 Corporate securities, 
 trading loans and 14,345 2,896 317 17,558 
 other 
 Equity securities 10,249 69,432 8,110 87,791 
 Non-U.S. sovereign debt 232,171 70 — 232,241 
 Mortgage trading loans 3,722 — — 3,722 
 and ABS 
 Total $ 453,492 $ 72,416 $ 8,427 $ 534,335 
 December 31, 2021 
 U.S. government and $ 201,546 $ 27 $ — $ 201,573 
 agency securities 
 Corporate securities, 
 trading loans and 12,838 3,440 1,148 17,426 
 other 
 Equity securities 19,907 48,650 10,192 78,749 
 Non-U.S. sovereign debt 178,019 119 51 178,189 
 Mortgage trading loans 4,117 — — 4,117 
 and ABS 
 Total $ 416,427 $ 52,236 $ 11,391 $ 480,054 
Under repurchase agreements, the Corporation is required to post collateral with a market value equal
to or in excess of the principal amount borrowed. For securities loaned transactions, the Corporation
receives collateral in the form of cash, letters of credit or other securities. To determine whether
the market value of the underlying collateral remains sufficient, collateral is generally valued
daily, and the Corporation may be required to deposit additional collateral or may receive or return
collateral pledged when appropriate. Repurchase agreements and securities loaned transactions are
generally either overnight, continuous (i.e., no stated term) or short-term. The Corporation manages
liquidity risks related to these agreements by sourcing funding from a diverse group of
counterparties, providing a range of securities collateral and pursuing longer durations, when
appropriate. Short-term Bank Notes Bank of America, N.A. maintains a global program to offer up to a
maximum of $ 75.0billion outstanding at any one time, of bank notes with fixed or floating rates and
maturities of at least seven daysfrom the date of issue. Short-term bank notes outstanding under this
program totaled $ 6.2billion and $ 1.8billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021. These short-term bank
notes, along with Federal Home Loan Bank advances, U.S. Treasury tax and loan notes, and term federal
funds purchased, are included in short-term borrowings on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Collateral
The Corporation accepts securities and loans as collateral that it is permitted by contract or
practice to sell or repledge. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the fair value of this collateral was $
827.6billion and $ 854.8billion, of which $ 764.1billion and $ 782.7billion were sold or repledged.
The primary source of this collateral is securities borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell.
The Corporation also pledges company-owned securities and loans as collateral in transactions that
include repurchase agreements, securities loaned, public and trust deposits, U.S. Treasury tax and
loan notes, and short-term borrowings. This collateral, which in some cases can be sold or repledged
by the counterparties to the transactions, is parenthetically disclosed on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet. In certain cases, the Corporation has transferred assets to consolidated VIEs where those
restricted assets serve as collateral for the interests issued by the VIEs. These assets are included
on the Consolidated Balance Sheet in Assets of Consolidated VIEs.
 131Bank of America 
In addition, the Corporation obtains collateral
in connection with its derivative contracts.
Required collateral levels vary depending on the
credit risk rating and the type of counterparty.
Generally, the Corporation accepts collateral in
the form of cash, U.S. Treasury securities and
other marketable securities. Based on provisions
contained in master netting agreements, the
Corporation nets cash collateral received against
derivative assets. The Corporation also pledges
collateral on its own derivative positions which
can be applied against derivative
liabilities. For more information on the
collateral of derivatives, see Note 3 –
Derivatives. Restricted Cash At December 31, 2022
and 2021, the Corporation held restricted cash
included within cash and cash equivalents on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet of $ 7.6billion and $
5.9billion, predominantly related to cash
segregated in compliance with securities
regulations and cash held on deposit with central
banks to meet reserve requirements.
 NOTE 11 
 Long-term Debt 
Long-term debt consists of borrowings having an original maturity of one year or more. The table
below presents the balance of long-term debt at December 31, 2022 and 2021, and the related
contractual rates and maturity dates as of December 31, 2022.
 (Dol… 
 in 
 mill… 
 Notes 
 issu… 
 by 
 Bank 
 of 
 Amer… 
 Corp… Dece… 
 Seni… Weigh… Inter… Matu… 31 
 note… Rate Rates Dates 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fixed 3.03 % 0.25-… % 2023 - $ 188,… $ 194,1… 
 2052 
 Floa… 4.2 0.74-… 2023 - 17,4… 18,753 
 2044 
 Seni… 
 stru… 11,6… 15,086 
 notes 
 Subo… 
 note… 
 Fixed 4.88 2.94-… 2024 - 21,0… 22,311 
 2045 
 Floa… 3.45 2.48-… 2026 - 4,544 2,371 
 2037 
 Juni… 
 subo… 
 note… 
 Fixed 6.71 6.45-… 2027 - 743 741 
 2066 
 Floa… 5.56 5.56 2056 1 1 
 Total 
 notes 
 issu… 
 by 243,… 253,4… 
 Bank 
 of 
 Amer… 
 Corp… 
 Notes 
 issu… 
 by 
 Bank 
 of 
 Amer… 
 N.A. 
 Seni… 
 note… 
 Fixed — 501 
 Floa… 5.05 5.05 2024 2,600 3,173 
 Subo… 6.00 6.00 2036 1,485 1,780 
 notes 
 Adva… 
 from 
 Fede… 
 Home 
 Loan 
 Bank… 
 Fixed 4.49 0.01-… 2023 - 681 290 
 2034 
 Secu… 
 and 
 other 4,300 3,338 
 BANA 
 VIEs… 
 Other 908 680 
 Total 
 notes 
 issu… 
 by 9,974 9,762 
 Bank 
 of 
 Amer… 
 N.A. 
 Other 
 debt 
 Stru… 21,8… 16,599 
 liab… 
 Nonb… 281 249 
 VIEs… 
 Other — 53 
 Total 
 notes 
 issu… 
 by 22,1… 16,901 
 nonb… 
 and 
 other 
 enti… 
 Total 
 long… $ 275,… $ 280,1… 
 debt 
(1) Includes total loss-absorbing capacity compliant debt.
(2) Represents liabilities of consolidated VIEs included in total long-term debt on the Consolidated
Balance Sheet. Long-term debt of VIEs is collateralized by the assets of the VIEs. At December 31,
2022, amount includes debt predominantly from credit card securitization and other VIEs of $
4.2billion and $ 156million. For more information, see Note 6 – Securitizations and Other Variable
Interest Entities.
(3) Includes debt outstanding of $ 8.0billion and $ 5.4billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021 that was
issued by BofA Finance LLC, a consolidated finance subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation, the
parent company, and is fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the parent company.
During 2022, the Corporation issued $ 66.0billion of long-term debt consisting of $ 44.2billion of
notes issued by Bank of America Corporation, $ 10.0billion of notes issued by Bank of America, N.A.
and $ 11.8billion of other debt. During 2021, the Corporation issued $ 76.7billion of long-term debt
consisting of $ 56.2billion of notes issued by Bank of America Corporation, $ 8.0billion of notes
issued by Bank of America, N.A. and $ 12.5billion of other debt. During 2022, the Corporation had
total long-term debt maturities and redemptions in the aggregate of $ 33.3billion consisting of $
19.8billion for Bank of America Corporation, $ 9.9billion for Bank of America, N.A. and $ 3.6billion
of other debt. During 2021, the Corporation had total long-term debt maturities and redemptions in
the aggregate of $ 46.4billion consisting of $ 24.4billion for Bank of America Corporation, $
10.4billion for Bank of America, N.A. and $ 11.6billion of other debt. Bank of America Corporation
and Bank of America, N.A. maintain various U.S. and non-U.S. debt programs to offer both senior and
subordinated notes. The notes may be denominated in U.S. dollars or foreign currencies. At December
31, 2022 and 2021, the amount of foreign currency-denominated debt translated into U.S. dollars
included in total long-term debt was $ 46.7billion and $ 53.1billion. Foreign currency contracts may
be used to convert certain foreign currency-denominated debt into U.S. dollars. The weighted-average
effective interest rates for total long-term debt (excluding senior structured notes), total fixed-
rate debt and total floating-rate debt were 3.27percent, 3.23percent and 4.14percent, respectively,
at December 31, 2022, and 2.83percent, 3.08percent and 0.75percent, respectively, at December 31,
2021. The Corporation’s ALM activities maintain an overall interest rate risk management strategy
that incorporates the use of interest rate contracts to manage fluctuations in earnings caused by
interest rate volatility. The
 Bank of America132 
Corporation’s goal is to manage interest rate sensitivity so that movements in interest rates do not
have a significantly adverse effect on earnings and capital. The weighted-average rates are the
contractual interest rates on the debt and do not reflect the impacts of derivative transactions. The
table below shows the carrying value for aggregate annual contractual maturities of long-term debt as
of December 31, 2022. Included in the table are certain structured notes issued by the Corporation
that contain provisions whereby the borrowings are redeemable at the option of the holder (put
options) at specified dates prior to maturity. Other structured notes have coupon or repayment terms
linked to the performance of debt or equity securities, indices, currencies or commodities, and the
maturity may be accelerated based on the value of a referenced index or security. In both cases, the
Corporation or a subsidiary may be required to settle the obligation for cash or other securities
prior to the contractual maturity date. These borrowings are reflected in the table as maturing at
their contractual maturity date.
 Long… 
 Debt 
 by 
 Matu… 
 (Dol… 
 in 
 mill… 
 Bank 
 of 
 Amer… 
 Corp… 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 Therea… Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Seni… $ 8,029 $ 22,570 $ 24,730 $ 23,972 $ 16,055 $ 110,542 $ 205,8… 
 notes 
 Seni… 
 stru… 767 456 558 946 641 8,240 11,608 
 notes 
 Subo… — 3,205 5,132 4,908 2,155 10,242 25,642 
 notes 
 Juni… 
 subo… — — — — 188 556 744 
 notes 
 Total 
 Bank 
 of 8,796 26,231 30,420 29,826 19,039 129,580 243,8… 
 Amer… 
 Corp… 
 Bank 
 of 
 Amer… 
 N.A. 
 Seni… — 2,600 — — — — 2,600 
 notes 
 Subo… — — — — — 1,485 1,485 
 notes 
 Adva… 
 from 
 Fede… 600 — 15 9 4 53 681 
 Home 
 Loan 
 Banks 
 Secu… 
 and 
 other 1,000 1,000 2,248 — — 52 4,300 
 Bank 
 VIEs… 
 Other 642 89 71 45 63 -2 908 
 Total 
 Bank 
 of 2,242 3,689 2,334 54 67 1,588 9,974 
 Amer… 
 N.A. 
 Other 
 debt 
 Stru… 5,253 2,426 2,482 1,474 2,001 8,199 21,835 
 Liab… 
 Nonb… — — — — — 281 281 
 VIEs… 
 Other — — — — — — — 
 Total 
 other 5,253 2,426 2,482 1,474 2,001 8,480 22,116 
 debt 
 Total 
 long… $ 16,291 $ 32,346 $ 35,236 $ 31,354 $ 21,107 $ 139,648 $ 275,9… 
 debt 
(1) Represents liabilities of consolidated VIEs included in total long-term debt on the Consolidated
Balance Sheet.
NOTE 12 Commitments and Contingencies
In the normal course of business, the Corporation
enters into a number of off-balance sheet
commitments. These commitments expose the
Corporation to varying degrees of credit and
market risk and are subject to the same credit
and market risk limitation reviews as those
instruments recorded on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet. Credit Extension Commitments The
Corporation enters into commitments to extend
credit such as loan commitments, SBLCs and
commercial letters of credit to meet the
financing needs of its customers. The following
table includes the notional amount of unfunded
legally binding lending commitments net of
amounts distributed (i.e., syndicated or
participated) to other financial institutions.
The distributed amounts were $ 10.4billion and $
10.7billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021. The
carrying value of the Corporation’s credit
extension commitments at December 31, 2022 and
2021, excluding commitments accounted for under
the fair value option, was $ 1.6billion and $
1.5billion, which predominantly related to the
reserve for unfunded lending commitments. The
carrying value of these commitments is classified
in accrued expenses and other liabilities on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet. Legally binding
commitments to extend credit generally have
specified rates and maturities. Certain of these
commitments have adverse change clauses that help
to protect the Corporation against deterioration
in the borrower’s ability to pay. The following
table includes the notional amount of commitments
of $ 3.0billion and $ 4.8billion at December 31,
2022 and 2021 that are accounted for under the
fair value option. However, the table excludes
the cumulative net fair value for these
commitments of $ 110million and $ 97million at
December 31, 2022 and 2021, which is classified
in accrued expenses and other liabilities. For
more information regarding the Corporation’s loan
commitments accounted for under the fair value
option, see Note 21 – Fair Value Option.
 133Bank of America 
 Credit Expire in Expire 
 Extension One Expire After 
 Commitmen… Year or After One Three 
 (Dollars Less Year Years Expire 
 in December Through Through After 
 millions) 31, 2022 Three Years Five Years Five Years Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Notional 
 amount of 
 credit 
 extension 
 commitmen… 
 Loan $ 113,962 $ 162,890 $ 221,374 $ 13,667 $ 511,893 
 commitmen… 
 Home 
 equity 1,479 7,230 11,578 22,154 42,441 
 lines of 
 credit 
 Standby 
 letters of 
 credit and 22,565 9,237 2,787 628 35,217 
 financial 
 guarantee… 
 Letters of 853 46 52 49 1,000 
 credit 
 Other 5 93 71 1,103 1,272 
 commitmen… 
 Legally 
 binding 138,864 179,496 235,862 37,601 591,823 
 commitmen… 
 Credit 
 card 419,144 — — — 419,144 
 lines(4) 
 Total 
 credit $ 558,008 $ 179,496 $ 235,862 $ 37,601 $ 1,010,967 
 extension 
 commitmen… 
 December 
 31, 2021 
 Notional 
 amount of 
 credit 
 extension 
 commitmen… 
 Loan $ 102,464 $ 190,687 $ 174,978 $ 26,635 $ 494,764 
 commitmen… 
 Home 
 equity 890 5,097 10,268 24,276 40,531 
 lines of 
 credit 
 Standby 
 letters of 
 credit and 22,359 10,742 2,017 422 35,540 
 financial 
 guarantee… 
 Letters of 1,145 124 56 98 1,423 
 credit 
 Other 18 59 81 1,233 1,391 
 commitmen… 
 Legally 
 binding 126,876 206,709 187,400 52,664 573,649 
 commitmen… 
 Credit 
 card 406,169 — — — 406,169 
 lines(4) 
 Total 
 credit $ 533,045 $ 206,709 $ 187,400 $ 52,664 $ 979,818 
 extension 
 commitmen… 
(1) At December 31, 2022 and 2021, $ 2.6billion and $ 4.6billion of these loan commitments were held
in the form of a security.
(2) The notional amounts of SBLCs and financial guarantees classified as investment grade and non-
investment grade based on the credit quality of the underlying reference name within the instrument
were $ 25.1billion and $ 9.5billion at December 31, 2022, and $ 26.3billion and $ 8.7billion at
December 31, 2021. Amounts in the table include consumer SBLCs of $ 575million and $ 512million at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.
(3) Primarily includes second-loss positions on lease-end residual value guarantees.
(4) Includes business card unused lines of credit.
Other Commitments At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had commitments to purchase loans
(e.g., residential mortgage and commercial real estate) of $ 636million and $ 181million, which upon
settlement will be included in trading account assets, loans or LHFS, and commitments to purchase
commercial loans of $ 294million and $ 518million, which upon settlement will be included in trading
account assets. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had commitments to purchase
commodities, primarily liquefied natural gas, of $ 0and $ 949million, which upon settlement will be
included in trading account assets. At both December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had
commitments to enter into resale and forward-dated resale and securities borrowing agreements of $
92.0billion, and commitments to enter into forward-dated repurchase and securities lending agreements
of $ 57.8billion and $ 32.6billion as of both period ends. These commitments generally expire within
the next 12 months. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had a commitment to originate or
purchase up to $ 3.7billion and $ 4.0billion on a rolling 12-month basis, of auto loans and leases
from a strategic partner. This commitment extends through November 2026 and can be terminated with
12months prior notice. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had unfunded equity investment
commitments of $ 571million and $ 395million. Other Guarantees Bank-owned Life Insurance Book Value
Protection The Corporation sells products that offer book value protection to insurance carriers who
offer group life insurance policies to corporations, primarily banks. At December 31, 2022 and 2021,
the notional amount of these guarantees totaled $ 4.3 billion and $ 6.3billion. At December 31, 2022
and 2021, the Corporation’s maximum exposure related to these guarantees totaled $ 632million and $
928million, with estimated maturity dates between 2033 and 2039. Indemnifications In the ordinary
course of business, the Corporation enters into various agreements that contain indemnifications,
such as tax indemnifications, whereupon payment may become due if certain external events occur, such
as a change in tax law. The indemnification clauses are often standard contractual terms and were
entered into in the normal course of business based on an assessment that the risk of loss would be
remote. These agreements typically contain an early termination clause that permits the Corporation
to exit the agreement upon these events. The maximum potential future payment under indemnification
agreements is difficult to assess for several reasons, including the occurrence of an external event,
the inability to predict future changes in tax and other laws, the difficulty in determining how such
laws would apply to parties in contracts, the absence of exposure limits contained in standard
contract language and the timing of any early termination clauses. Historically, any payments made
under these guarantees have been de minimis. The Corporation has assessed the probability of making
such payments in the future as remote. Merchant Services The Corporation in its role as merchant
acquirer or as a sponsor of other merchant acquirers may be held liable for any reversed charges that
cannot be collected from the merchants, due to, among other things, merchant fraud or insolvency. If
charges are properly reversed after a purchase and cannot be collected from either the merchants or
merchant acquirers, the Corporation may be held liable for these reversed charges. The ability to
reverse a charge is primarily governed by the applicable
 Bank of America134 
payment network rules and regulations, which include, but are not limited to, the type of charge,
type of payment used and time limits. The total amount of transactions subject to reversal under
payment network rules and regulations processed for the preceding six-month period, which was
approximately $ 501billion, is an estimate of the Corporation’s maximum potential exposure as of
December 31, 2022. The Corporation’s risk in this area primarily relates to circumstances where a
cardholder has purchased goods or services for future delivery. The Corporation mitigates this risk
by requiring cash deposits, guarantees, letters of credit or other types of collateral from certain
merchants. The Corporation’s reserves for contingent losses and the losses incurred related to the
merchant processing activity were not significant. Exchange and Clearing House Member Guarantees The
Corporation is a member of various securities and derivative exchanges and clearinghouses, both in
the U.S. and other countries. As a member, the Corporation may be required to pay a pro-rata share of
the losses incurred by some of these organizations as a result of another member default and under
other loss scenarios. The Corporation’s potential obligations may be limited to its membership
interests in such exchanges and clearinghouses, to the amount (or multiple) of the Corporation’s
contribution to the guarantee fund or, in limited instances, to the full pro-rata share of the
residual losses after applying the guarantee fund. The Corporation’s maximum potential exposure under
these membership agreements is difficult to estimate; however, the Corporation has assessed the
probability of making any such payments as remote. Prime Brokerage and Securities Clearing Services
In connection with its prime brokerage and clearing businesses, the Corporation performs securities
clearance and settlement services with other brokerage firms and clearinghouses on behalf of its
clients. Under these arrangements, the Corporation stands ready to meet the obligations of its
clients with respect to securities transactions. The Corporation’s obligations in this respect are
secured by the assets in the clients’ accounts and the accounts of their customers as well as by any
proceeds received from the transactions cleared and settled by the Corporation on behalf of clients
or their customers. The Corporation’s maximum potential exposure under these arrangements is
difficult to estimate; however, the potential for the Corporation to incur material losses pursuant
to these arrangements is remote. Fixed Income Clearing Corporation Sponsored Member Repo Program The
Corporation acts as a sponsoring member in a repo program whereby the Corporation clears certain
eligible resale and repurchase agreements through the Government Securities Division of the Fixed
Income Clearing Corporation on behalf of clients that are sponsored members in accordance with the
Fixed Income Clearing Corporation’s rules. As part of this program, the Corporation guarantees the
payment and performance of its sponsored members to the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation. The
Corporation’s guarantee obligation is secured by a security interest in cash or high-quality
securities collateral placed by clients with the clearinghouse and therefore, the potential for the
Corporation to incur significant losses under this arrangement is remote. The Corporation’s maximum
potential exposure, without taking into consideration the related collateral, was $ 59.6billion and $
42.0billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021. Other Guarantees In the normal course of business, the
Corporation periodically guarantees the obligations of its affiliates in a variety of transactions
including ISDA-related transactions and non-ISDA related transactions such as commodities trading,
repurchase agreements, prime brokerage agreements and other transactions. Guarantees of Certain Long-
term Debt The Corporation, as the parent company, fully and unconditionally guarantees the securities
issued by BofA Finance LLC, a consolidated finance subsidiary of the Corporation, and effectively
provides for the full and unconditional guarantee of trust securities issued by certain statutory
trust companies that are 100percent owned finance subsidiaries of the Corporation. Representations
and Warranties Obligations and Corporate Guarantees The Corporation securitizes first-lien
residential mortgage loans generally in the form of RMBS guaranteed by the GSEs or by GNMA in the
case of FHA-insured, VA-guaranteed and Rural Housing Service-guaranteed mortgage loans, and sells
pools of first-lien residential mortgage loans in the form of whole loans. In addition, in prior
years, legacy companies and certain subsidiaries sold pools of first-lien residential mortgage loans
and home equity loans as private-label securitizations or in the form of whole loans. In connection
with these transactions, the Corporation or certain of its subsidiaries or legacy companies make and
have made various representations and warranties. Breaches of these representations and warranties
have resulted in and may continue to result in the requirement to repurchase mortgage loans or to
otherwise make whole or provide indemnification or other remedies to sponsors, investors,
securitization trusts, guarantors, insurers or other parties (collectively, repurchases). Unresolved
Repurchase Claims Unresolved representations and warranties repurchase claims represent the notional
amount of repurchase claims made by counterparties, typically the outstanding principal balance or
the unpaid principal balance at the time of default. In the case of first-lien mortgages, the claim
amount is often significantly greater than the expected loss amount due to the benefit of collateral
and, in some cases, mortgage insurance or mortgage guarantee payments. The notional amount of
unresolved repurchase claims at December 31, 2022 and 2021 was $ 5.5billion and $ 8.4billion. These
balances included $ 2.2billion and $ 2.8billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021 of claims related to
loans in specific private-label securitization groups or tranches where the Corporation owns
substantially all of the outstanding securities or will otherwise realize the benefit of any
repurchase claims paid. During 2022, the Corporation received $ 82million in new repurchase claims
that were not time-barred. During 2022, $ 3.0billion in claims were resolved. Reserve and Related
Provision The reserve for representations and warranties obligations and corporate guarantees was $
612million and $ 1.2billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021 and is included in accrued expenses and
other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, and the related provision is included in other
income in the Consolidated Statement of Income. The representations and warranties reserve represents
the Corporation’s best estimate
 135Bank of America 
of probable incurred losses, is based on its
experience in previous negotiations, and is
subject to judgment, a variety of assumptions,
and known or unknown uncertainties. Future
representations and warranties losses may occur
in excess of the amounts recorded for these
exposures; however, the Corporation does not
expect such amounts to be material to the
Corporation's financial condition and liquidity.
See Litigation and Regulatory Matters below for
the Corporation's combined range of possible loss
in excess of the reserve for representations and
warranties and the accrued liability for
litigation.
Litigation and Regulatory Matters In the ordinary
course of business, the Corporation and its
subsidiaries are routinely defendants in or
parties to many pending and threatened legal,
regulatory and governmental actions and
proceedings. In view of the inherent difficulty
of predicting the outcome of such matters,
particularly where the claimants seek very large
or indeterminate damages or where the matters
present novel legal theories or involve a large
number of parties, the Corporation generally
cannot predict the eventual outcome of the
pending matters, timing of the ultimate
resolution of these matters, or eventual loss,
fines or penalties related to each pending
matter. As a matter develops, the Corporation, in
conjunction with any outside counsel handling the
matter, evaluates whether such matter presents a
loss contingency that is probable and estimable,
and, for the matters below, whether a loss in
excess of any accrued liability is reasonably
possible in future periods. Once the loss
contingency is deemed to be both probable and
estimable, the Corporation will establish an
accrued liability and record a corresponding
amount of expense. The Corporation continues to
monitor the matter for further developments that
could affect the amount of the accrued liability
that has been previously established. Excluding
expenses of internal and external legal service
providers, litigation and regulatory
investigation-related expense of $ 1.2billion and
$ 164million was recognized in 2022 and 2021. For
any matter disclosed in this Note for which a
loss in future periods is reasonably possible and
estimable (whether in excess of an accrued
liability or where there is no accrued liability)
and for representations and warranties exposures,
the Corporation’s estimated range of possible
loss is $ 0to $ 0.8billion in excess of the
accrued liability, if any, as of December 31,
2022. The accrued liability and estimated range
of possible loss are based upon currently
available information and subject to significant
judgment, a variety of assumptions and known and
unknown uncertainties. The matters underlying the
accrued liability and estimated range of possible
loss are unpredictable and may change from time
to time, and actual losses may vary significantly
from the current estimate and accrual. The
estimated range of possible loss does not
represent the Corporation’s maximum loss
exposure. Information is provided below regarding
the nature of the litigation and, where
specified, associated claimed damages. Based on
current knowledge, and taking into account
accrued liabilities, management does not believe
that loss contingencies arising from pending
matters, including the matters described below,
will have a material adverse effect on the
consolidated financial condition or liquidity of
the Corporation. However, in light of the
significant judgment, variety of assumptions and
uncertainties involved in those matters, some of
which are beyond the Corporation’s control, and
the very large or indeterminate damages sought in
some of those matters, an adverse outcome in one
or more of those matters could be
material to the Corporation’s business or results
of operations for any particular reporting
period, or cause significant reputational harm.
Deposit Insurance Assessment On January 9, 2017,
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)
filed suit against BANA in the U.S. District
Court for the District of Columbia (“District
Court”) alleging failure to pay a December 15,
2016 invoice for additional deposit insurance
assessments and interest in the amount of $
542million for the quarters ending June 30, 2013
through December 31, 2014. On April 7, 2017, the
FDIC amended its complaint to add a claim for
additional deposit insurance and interest in the
amount of $ 583million for the quarters ending
March 31, 2012 through March 31, 2013. The FDIC
asserts these claims based on BANA’s alleged
underreporting of counterparty exposures that
resulted in underpayment of assessments for those
quarters, and its Enforcement Section is also
conducting a parallel investigation related to
the same alleged reporting error. BANA disagrees
with the FDIC’s interpretation of the regulations
as they existed during the relevant time period
and is defending itself against the FDIC’s
claims. Pending final resolution, BANA has
pledged security satisfactory to the FDIC related
to the disputed additional assessment amounts. On
March 27, 2018, the District Court denied BANA’s
partial motion to dismiss certain of the FDIC’s
claims. On January 24, 2023, the magistrate judge
assigned to the matter by the District Court
judge held oral argument on the parties’ motions
for summary judgment and took the motions under
advisement. LIBOR
The Corporation, BANA and certain Merrill Lynch
entities have been named as defendants along with
most of the other LIBOR panel banks in a number
of individual and putative class actions by
persons alleging they sustained losses on U.S.
dollar LIBOR-based financial instruments as a
result of collusion or manipulation by defendants
regarding the setting of U.S. dollar LIBOR.
Plaintiffs assert a variety of claims, including
antitrust, Commodity Exchange Act, Racketeer
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO),
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, common law fraud
and breach of contract claims, and seek
compensatory, treble and punitive damages, and
injunctive relief. All but one of the cases
naming the Corporation and its affiliates
relating to U.S. dollar LIBOR are pending in the
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of
New York (“District Court”). The District Court
has dismissed all RICO claims, and dismissed all
manipulation claims against Bank of America
entities based on alleged trader conduct. The
District Court has also substantially limited the
scope of antitrust, Commodity Exchange Act and
various other claims, including by dismissing in
their entirety certain individual and putative
class plaintiffs’ antitrust claims for lack of
standing. On December 30, 2021, the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the
dismissal of these antitrust claims for lack of
standing. Certain individual and putative class
actions remain pending against the Corporation,
BANA and certain Merrill Lynch entities. On
February 28, 2018, the District Court granted
certification of a class of persons that
purchased OTC swaps and notes that referenced
U.S. dollar LIBOR from one of the U.S. dollar
LIBOR panel banks, limited to claims under
Section 1 of the Sherman Act.
 Bank of America136 
NOTE 13 Shareholders’ Equity
Common Stock
 Declared Quarterly Cash 
 Dividends on Common Stock(1) 
 Declaration Date Record Date Payment Date Dividend Per Share 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 February 1, 2023 March 3, 2023 March 31, 2023 $ 0.22 
 October 19, 2022 December 2, 2022 December 30, 2022 0.22 
 July 20, 2022 September 2, 2022 September 30, 2022 0.22 
 April 27, 2022 June 3, 2022 June 24, 2022 0.21 
 February 2, 2022 March 4, 2022 March 25, 2022 0.21 
The cash dividends paid per share of common stock
were $ 0.86$ 0.78and $ 0.72for 2022, 2021 and
2020, respectively.
The table below summarizes common stock
repurchases during 2022, 2021 and 2020.
 Common Stock Repurchase Summary 
 (in millions) 
 Total share repurchases, including CCAR capital plan 2022 2021 2020 
 repurchases 126 615 227 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Purchase price of shares repurchased and $ 5,073 $ 25,126 $ 7,025 
 retired(1) 
(1) Consists of repurchases pursuant to the
Corporation’s CCAR capital plans.
During 2022, in connection with employee stock
plans, the Corporation issued 73million shares of
its common stock and, to satisfy tax withholding
obligations, repurchased 28million shares of its
common stock. At December 31, 2022, the
Corporation had reserved 491million unissued
shares of common stock for future issuances under
employee stock plans, convertible notes and
preferred stock.
Preferred Stock
The cash dividends declared on preferred stock
were $ 1.6billion in 2022 and $ 1.4billion in
both 2021 and 2020.
On January 25, 2022, the Corporation issued
70,000shares of 4.375% Fixed-Rate Reset Non-
Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series RR for $
1.8billion, with quarterly dividends commencing
in April 2022. The Series RR preferred stock has
a liquidation preference of $ 25,000per share and
is subject to certain restrictions in the event
the Corporation fails to declare and pay full
dividends.
On January 31, 2022 the Corporation issued
28,000shares of 4.750% Non-Cumulative Preferred
Stock, Series SS for $ 700million, with quarterly
dividends commencing in May 2022. The Series SS
preferred stock has a liquidation preference of $
25,000per share and is subject to certain
restrictions in the event the Corporation fails
to declare and pay full dividends.
On April 22, 2022, the Corporation issued 80,000shares of 6.125% Fixed-Rate Reset Non-Cumulative
Preferred Stock, Series TT for $ 2.0billion, with quarterly dividends commencing in July 2022. The
Series TT preferred stock has a liquidation preference of $ 25,000per share and is subject to certain
restrictions in the event the Corporation fails to declare and pay full dividends. Through a cash
tender offer announced and completed in the fourth quarter of 2022, the Corporation partially
repurchased Series E, Series FF, Series HH, Series JJ, Series KK, Series LL, Series MM, Series NN,
Series PP, Series QQ, Series RR, Series SS, Series 1 and Series 5 preferred stock with a total
carrying value of $ 737million for $ 654million in cash, with $ 83million recognized in additional
paid-in capital as a preferred stock benefit. All series of preferred stock in the Preferred Stock
Summary table have a par value of $ 0.01per share, are not subject to the operation of a sinking
fund, have no participation rights, and with the exception of the Series L Preferred Stock, are not
convertible. The holders of the Series B Preferred Stock and Series 1 through 5 Preferred Stock have
general voting rights and vote together with the common stock. The holders of the other series
included in the table have no general voting rights. All outstanding series of preferred stock of the
Corporation have preference over the Corporation’s common stock with respect to the payment of
dividends and distribution of the Corporation’s assets in the event of a liquidation or dissolution.
With the exception of the Series B, F and G Preferred Stock, if any dividend payable on these series
is in arrears for threeor more semi-annual or sixor more quarterly dividend periods, as applicable
(whether consecutive or not), the holders of these series and any other class or series of preferred
stock ranking equally as to payment of dividends and upon which equivalent voting rights have been
conferred and are exercisable (voting as a single class) will be entitled to vote for the election of
twoadditional directors. These voting rights terminate when the Corporation has paid in full
dividends on these series for at least twosemi-annual or fourquarterly dividend periods, as
applicable, following the dividend arrearage. The 7.25% Non-Cumulative Perpetual Convertible
Preferred Stock, Series L (Series L Preferred Stock) does not have early redemption/call rights. Each
share of the Series L Preferred Stock may be converted at any time, at the option of the holder, into
20shares of the Corporation’s common stock plus cash in lieu of fractional shares. The Corporation
may cause some or all of the Series L Preferred Stock, at its option, at any time or from time to
time, to be converted into shares of common stock at the then-applicable conversion rate if, for
20trading days during any period of 30consecutive trading days, the closing price of common stock
exceeds 130percent of the then-applicable conversion price of the Series L Preferred Stock. If a
conversion of Series L Preferred Stock occurs at the option of the holder, subsequent to a dividend
record date but prior to the dividend payment date, the Corporation will still pay any accrued
dividends payable.
 137Bank of America 
The table below presents a summary of perpetual preferred stock outstanding at December 31, 2022 .
 P… 
 S… 
 S… 
 (… 
 in Li… 
 m… Pr… Div… 
 e… per Per per 
 as In… To… Sh… An… Sha… 
 n… Is… Sh… (in Ca… Di… (in An… Red… 
 S… De… Da… Ou… do… Va… Ra… dol… Di… Per… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 S… 7.… Ju… 
 B Cu… 19… 7,… $ 100 $ 1 7.… % $ 7 $ — n/a 
 Re… 
 On 
 Fl… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… No… 12… 25… 308 LI… 1.01 13 af… 
 E… No… 20… +3… No… 
 15, 
 20… 
 On 
 Fl… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… Ma… 1,… 10… 141 LI… 4,0… 6 af… 
 F No… 20… +4… Ma… 
 15, 
 20… 
 On 
 Ad… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… Ma… 4,… 10… 492 LI… 4,0… 20 af… 
 G No… 20… +4… Ma… 
 15, 
 20… 
 7.… 
 S… No… Ja… 3,… 1,… 3,… 7.… % 72.… 223 n/a 
 L Pe… 20… 
 Co… 
 5.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… May ex… af… 
 U… Ra… 20… 40… 25… 1,… 6/… 52.… 52 Ju… 
 No… 3-… 1, 
 LI… 20… 
 +3… 
 th… 
 6.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… Se… ex… af… 
 X… Ra… 20… 80… 25… 2,… 9/… 62.… 125 Se… 
 No… 3-… 5, 
 LI… 20… 
 +3… 
 th… 
 6.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… Oc… ex… af… 
 Z… Ra… 20… 56… 25… 1,… 10… 65.… 91 Oc… 
 No… 3-… 23, 
 LI… 20… 
 +4… 
 th… 
 6.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… Ma… ex… af… 
 A… Ra… 20… 76… 25… 1,… 3/… 61.… 116 Ma… 
 No… 3-… 17, 
 LI… 20… 
 +3… 
 th… 
 6.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… Ma… ex… af… 
 D… Ra… 20… 40… 25… 1,… 3/… 63.… 63 Ma… 
 No… 3-… 10, 
 LI… 20… 
 +4… 
 th… 
 5.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… Ma… ex… af… 
 F… Ra… 20… 90… 25… 2,… 3/… 58.… 139 Ma… 
 No… 3-… 15, 
 LI… 20… 
 +2… 
 th… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 6.… May 54… 25… 1,… 6.… % 1.50 81 af… 
 G… No… 20… May 
 16, 
 20… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 5.… Ju… 34… 25… 851 5.… % 1.47 50 af… 
 H… No… 20… Ju… 
 24, 
 20… 
 5.… 
 to, On 
 but or 
 S… Fi… Ju… ex… af… 
 J… Ra… 20… 34… 25… 854 6/… 51.… 51 Ju… 
 No… 3-… 20, 
 LI… 20… 
 +3… 
 th… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 5.… Ju… 55… 25… 1,… 5.… % 1.34 75 af… 
 K… No… 20… Ju… 
 25, 
 20… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 5.… Se… 52… 25… 1,… 5.… % 1.25 66 af… 
 L… No… 20… Se… 
 17, 
 20… 
 On 
 Fi… or 
 S… Ra… Ja… 30… 25… 769 4.… % 43.… 46 af… 
 M… No… 20… Ja… 
 28, 
 20… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 4.… Oc… 42… 25… 1,… 4.… % 1.09 48 af… 
 N… No… 20… No… 
 3, 
 20… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 4.… Ja… 36… 25… 912 4.… % 1.03 38 af… 
 P… No… 20… Fe… 
 2, 
 20… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 4.… Oc… 51… 25… 1,… 4.… % 1.12 58 af… 
 Q… No… 20… No… 
 17, 
 20… 
 4.… 
 to, 
 but On 
 4.… ex… or 
 S… Fi… Ja… 1/… af… 
 R… Re… 20… 66… 25… 1,… 5-… 43.… 77 Ja… 
 No… U.… 27, 
 Tr… 20… 
 Ra… 
 +2… 
 th… 
 On 
 or 
 S… 4.… Ja… 27… 25… 687 4.… % 0.95 27 af… 
 S… No… 20… Fe… 
 17, 
 20… 
 6.… 
 to, 
 but On 
 6.… ex… or 
 S… Fi… Ap… 4/… af… 
 T… Re… 20… 80… 25… 2,… 5-… 46.… 94 Ap… 
 No… U.… 27, 
 Tr… 20… 
 Ra… 
 +3… 
 th… 
 On 
 Fl… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… No… 3,… 30… 96 LI… 0.80 3 af… 
 1… No… 20… +7… No… 
 28, 
 20… 
 On 
 Fl… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… Ma… 9,… 30… 299 LI… 0.80 10 af… 
 2… No… 20… +6… No… 
 28, 
 20… 
 On 
 Fl… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… No… 7,… 30… 210 LI… 1.01 9 af… 
 4… No… 20… +7… No… 
 28, 
 20… 
 On 
 Fl… 3-… or 
 S… Ra… Ma… 13… 30… 400 LI… 1.01 17 af… 
 5… No… 20… +5… May 
 21, 
 20… 
 I… 
 c… 
 a… -3… 
 c… 
 a… 
 T… 4,… $ 28… 
(1) For all series of preferred stock other than Series B, Series F, Series G and Series L, “Dividend
per Share” means the amount of dividends per depositary share of such series.
(2) The Corporation may redeem series of preferred stock on or after the redemption date, in whole or
in part, at its option, at the liquidation preference plus declared and unpaid dividends. Series B
and Series L Preferred Stock do not have early redemption/call rights.
(3) Ownership is held in the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,000th interest in a
share of preferred stock, paying a quarterly cash dividend, if and when declared.
(4) Subject to 4.00% minimum rate per annum.
(5) Ownership is held in the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/25th interest in a
share of preferred stock, paying a semi-annual cash dividend, if and when declared, until the first
redemption date at which time, it adjusts to a quarterly cash dividend, if and when declared,
thereafter.
(6) Ownership is held in the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/25th interest in a
share of preferred stock, paying a quarterly cash dividend, if and when declared.
(7) Ownership is held in the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,200th interest in a
share of preferred stock, paying a quarterly cash dividend, if and when declared.
(8) Subject to 3.00% minimum rate per annum.
n/a = not applicable
 Bank of America138 
NOTE 14 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
The table below presents the changes in accumulated OCI after-tax for 2022, 2021 and 2020.
 (Dolla… Debit Employee 
 in Debt Valuati… Benefit Foreign 
 millio… Securit… Adjustm… Derivati… Plans Currency Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balanc… 
 Decemb… $ 323 $ -1,494 $ -400 $ -4,168 $ -894 $ -6,633 
 31, 
 2019 
 Net 4,799 -498 826 -98 -52 4,977 
 change 
 Balanc… 
 Decemb… $ 5,122 $ -1,992 $ 426 $ -4,266 $ -946 $ -1,656 
 31, 
 2020 
 Net -2,077 356 -2,306 624 -45 -3,448 
 change 
 Balanc… 
 Decemb… $ 3,045 $ -1,636 $ -1,880 $ -3,642 $ -991 $ -5,104 
 31, 
 2021 
 Net -6,028 755 -10,055 -667 -57 -16,052 
 change 
 Balanc… 
 Decemb… $ -2,983 $ -881 $ -11,935 $ -4,309 $ -1,048 $ -21,156 
 31, 
 2022 
The table below presents the net change in fair value recorded in accumulated OCI, net realized gains
and losses reclassified into earnings and other changes for each component of OCI pre- and after-tax
for 2022, 2021 and 2020.
 (D… 
 in 
 mi… 
 De… Pr… Tax Af… Pre… Tax Aft… Pr… Tax Af… 
 se… 20… eff… tax 2021 ef… tax 20… eff… tax 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net 
 in… 
 (d… $ -7… $ 1,9… $ -6… $ -2,… $ 689 $ -2,… $ 6,… $ -1,… $ 5,… 
 in 
 fa… 
 va… 
 Net 
 re… 
 (g… 
 lo… -32 8 -24 -22 5 -17 -4… 103 -3… 
 re… 
 in… 
 ea… 
 Net -8… 1,9… -6… -2,… 694 -2,… 6,… -1,… 4,… 
 ch… 
 De… 
 va… 
 ad… 
 Net 
 in… 
 (d… 980 -237 743 449 -1… 346 -6… 156 -5… 
 in 
 fa… 
 va… 
 Net 
 re… 
 (g… 
 lo… 16 -4 12 13 -3 10 19 -4 15 
 re… 
 in… 
 ea… 
 Net 996 -241 755 462 -1… 356 -6… 152 -4… 
 ch… 
 De… 
 Net 
 in… 
 (d… -1… 3,4… -1… -2,… 703 -2,… 1,… -268 830 
 in 
 fa… 
 va… 
 Re… 
 in… 
 ea… 
 Net 
 in… 332 -84 248 -166 48 -118 6 -1 5 
 in… 
 Co… 
 and -29 7 -22 -55 13 -42 -12 3 -9 
 be… 
 ex… 
 Net 
 re… 
 (g… 
 lo… 303 -77 226 -221 61 -160 -6 2 -4 
 re… 
 in… 
 ea… 
 Net -1… 3,3… -1… -3,… 764 -2,… 1,… -266 826 
 ch… 
 Em… 
 be… 
 pl… 
 Net 
 in… 
 (d… -1… 276 -8… 463 -72 391 -3… 80 -3… 
 in 
 fa… 
 va… 
 Net 
 ac… 
 lo… 
 and 198 -49 149 295 -67 228 261 -63 198 
 ot… 
 re… 
 in… 
 ea… 
 Se… 
 cu… 11 — 11 5 — 5 5 — 5 
 and 
 ot… 
 Net -8… 227 -6… 763 -1… 624 -1… 17 -98 
 ch… 
 Fo… 
 cu… 
 Net 
 in… 
 (d… 332 -390 -58 296 -3… -45 -2… 199 -52 
 in 
 fa… 
 va… 
 Net 
 re… 
 (g… 
 lo… — 1 1 -5 5 — -1 1 — 
 re… 
 in… 
 ea… 
 Net 332 -389 -57 291 -3… -45 -2… 200 -52 
 ch… 
 To… 
 ot… 
 co… $ -2… $ 4,9… $ -1… $ -4,… $ 877 $ -3,… $ 6,… $ -1,… $ 4,… 
 in… 
 (l… 
(1) Reclassifications of pretax debt securities, DVA and foreign currency (gains) losses are recorded
in other income in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
(2) Reclassifications of pretax employee benefit plan costs are recorded in other general operating
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
 NOTE 15 
 Earnings Per Common Share 
The calculation of EPS and diluted EPS for 2022, 2021 and 2020 is presented below. For more
information on the calculation of EPS, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles.
 (In millions, except per share information) 
 Earnings per common share 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 27,528 $ 31,978 $ 17,894 
 Preferred stock dividends and other -1,513 -1,421 -1,421 
 Net income applicable to common $ 26,015 $ 30,557 $ 16,473 
 shareholders 
 Average common shares issued and 8,113.7 8,493.3 8,753.2 
 outstanding 
 Earnings per common share $ 3.21 $ 3.60 $ 1.88 
 Diluted earnings per common share 
 Net income applicable to common $ 26,015 $ 30,557 $ 16,473 
 shareholders 
 Average common shares issued and 8,113.7 8,493.3 8,753.2 
 outstanding 
 Dilutive potential common shares(1) 53.8 65.1 43.7 
 Total diluted average common shares 8,167.5 8,558.4 8,796.9 
 issued and outstanding 
 Diluted earnings per common share $ 3.19 $ 3.57 $ 1.87 
(1) Includes incremental dilutive shares from preferred stock, restricted stock units, restricted
stock and warrants.
 139Bank of America 
For 2022, 2021 and 2020 , 62average dilutive
potential common shares associated with the
Series L preferred stock were not included in the
diluted share count because the result would have
been antidilutive under the “if-converted”
method.
NOTE 16 Regulatory Requirements and Restrictions
The Federal Reserve, Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency (OCC) and FDIC (collectively, U.S.
banking regulators) jointly establish regulatory
capital adequacy rules, including Basel 3, for
U.S. banking organizations. As a financial
holding company, the Corporation is subject to
capital adequacy rules issued by the Federal
Reserve. The Corporation’s banking entity
affiliates are subject to capital adequacy rules
issued by the OCC. The Corporation and its
primary banking entity affiliate, BANA, are
Advanced approaches institutions under Basel 3.
As Advanced approaches institutions, the
Corporation and its
banking entity affiliates are required to report
regulatory risk-based capital ratios and risk-
weighted assets under both the Standardized and
Advanced approaches. The approach that yields the
lower ratio is used to assess capital adequacy,
including under the Prompt Corrective Action
(PCA) framework. The Corporation is required to
maintain a minimum supplementary leverage ratio
(SLR) of 3.0 percent plus a leverage buffer of
2.0 percent in order to avoid certain
restrictions on capital distributions and
discretionary bonus payments. The Corporation’s
insured depository institution subsidiaries are
required to maintain a minimum 6.0 percent SLR to
be considered well capitalized under the PCA
framework. The table below presents capital
ratios and related information in accordance with
Basel 3 Standardized and Advanced approaches as
measured at December 31, 2022 and 2021 for the
Corporation and BANA.
 Regu… 
 Capi… 
 under 
 Basel 
 3 
 (Dol… Bank 
 in of 
 mill… Ameri… 
 exce… Corpo… Bank 
 as Stand… of 
 note… Appro… Ameri… 
 Risk… Decem… N.A. 
 capi… 31, Advan… Regula… Stand… Advanc… Regul… 
 metr… 2022 Appro… Minimu… Appro… Approa… Minim… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Comm… 
 equi… 
 tier $ 180,0… $ 180,0… $ 181,0… $ 181,089 
 1 
 capi… 
 Tier 
 1 208,4… 208,4… 181,0… 181,089 
 capi… 
 Total 238,7… 230,9… 194,2… 186,648 
 capi… 
 Risk… 
 asse… 1,605 1,411 1,386 1,087 
 (in 
 bill… 
 Comm… 
 equi… 
 tier 11.2 % 12.8 % 10.4 % 13.1 % 16.7 % 7.0 % 
 1 
 capi… 
 ratio 
 Tier 
 1 13.0 14.8 11.9 13.1 16.7 8.5 
 capi… 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capi… 14.9 16.4 13.9 14.0 17.2 10.5 
 ratio 
 Leve… 
 metr… 
 Adju… 
 quar… 
 aver… $ 2,997 $ 2,997 $ 2,358 $ 2,358 
 asse… 
 (in 
 bill… 
 Tier 
 1 7.0 % 7.0 % 4.0 7.7 % 7.7 % 5.0 
 leve… 
 ratio 
 Supp… 
 leve… 
 expo… $ 3,523 $ 2,785 
 (in 
 bill… 
 Supp… 
 leve… 5.9 % 5.0 6.5 % 6.0 
 ratio 
 Decem… 
 31, 
 2021 
 Risk… 
 capi… 
 metr… 
 Comm… 
 equi… 
 tier $ 171,7… $ 171,7… $ 182,5… $ 182,526 
 1 
 capi… 
 Tier 
 1 196,4… 196,4… 182,5… 182,526 
 capi… 
 Total 227,5… 220,6… 194,7… 188,091 
 capi… 
 Risk… 
 asse… 1,618 1,399 1,352 1,048 
 (in 
 bill… 
 Comm… 
 equi… 
 tier 10.6 % 12.3 % 9.5 % 13.5 % 17.4 % 7.0 % 
 1 
 capi… 
 ratio 
 Tier 
 1 12.1 14.0 11.0 13.5 17.4 8.5 
 capi… 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capi… 14.1 15.8 13.0 14.4 17.9 10.5 
 ratio 
 Leve… 
 metr… 
 Adju… 
 quar… 
 aver… $ 3,087 $ 3,087 $ 2,414 $ 2,414 
 asse… 
 (in 
 bill… 
 Tier 
 1 6.4 % 6.4 % 4.0 7.6 % 7.6 % 5.0 
 leve… 
 ratio 
 Supp… 
 leve… 
 expo… $ 3,604 $ 2,824 
 (in 
 bill… 
 Supp… 
 leve… 5.5 % 5.0 6.5 % 6.0 
 ratio 
(1) As of December 31, 2022 and 2021, capital ratios are calculated using the regulatory capital rule
that allows a five-year transition period related to the adoption of the current expected credit
losses accounting standard on January 1, 2020.
(2) The capital conservation buffer and global systemically important bank (G-SIB) surcharge were
2.5percent at both December 31, 2022 and 2021. The Corporation’s stress capital buffer applied in
place of the capital conservation buffer under the Standardized approach was 3.4percent at December
31, 2022 and 2.5percent at December 31, 2021. The countercyclical capital buffer for both periods was
zero. The CET1 capital regulatory minimum is the sum of the CET1 capital ratio minimum of 4.5
percent, the Corporation’s G-SIB surcharge of 2.5percent and the Corporation’s capital conservation
buffer of 2.5percent or the SCB, as applicable, of 3.4percent at December 31, 2022 and 2.5percent at
December 31, 2021. The SLR regulatory minimum includes a leverage buffer of 2.0 percent.
(3) Risk-based capital regulatory minimums at December 31, 2022 and 2021 are the minimum ratios under
Basel 3, including a capital conservation buffer of 2.5percent. The regulatory minimums for the
leverage ratios as of both period ends are the percent required to be considered well capitalized
under the PCA framework.
(4) Total capital under the Advanced approaches differs from the Standardized approach due to
differences in the amount permitted in Tier 2 capital related to the qualifying allowance for credit
losses.
(5) Reflects total average assets adjusted for certain Tier 1 capital deductions.
 Bank of America140 
The capital adequacy rules issued by the U.S.
banking regulators require institutions to meet
the established minimums outlined in the table
above. Failure to meet the minimum requirements
can lead to certain mandatory and discretionary
actions by regulators that could have a material
adverse impact on the Corporation’s financial
position. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the
Corporation and its banking entity affiliates
were well capitalized. Other Regulatory Matters
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation
had cash and cash equivalents in the amount of $
5.6billion and $ 4.0billion, and securities with
a fair value of $ 16.6billion and $ 10.6billion
that were segregated in compliance with
securities regulations. Cash and cash equivalents
segregated in compliance with securities
regulations are a component of restricted cash.
For more information, see Note 10 – Securities
Financing Agreements, Short-term Borrowings,
Collateral and Restricted Cash . In addition, at
December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had
cash deposited with clearing organizations of $
20.7billion and $ 28.6billion primarily recorded
in other assets on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet. Bank Subsidiary Distributions The primary
sources of funds for cash distributions by the
Corporation to its shareholders are capital
distributions received from its bank
subsidiaries, BANA and Bank of America
California, N.A. In 2022, the Corporation
received dividends of $ 22.0billion from BANA and
$ 250million from Bank of America California,
N.A. The amount of dividends that a subsidiary
bank may declare in a calendar year without OCC
approval is the subsidiary bank’s net profits for
that year combined with its retained net profits
for the preceding two years. Retained net
profits, as defined by the OCC, consist of net
income less dividends declared during the period.
In 2023, BANA can declare and pay dividends of
approximately $ 16.1billion to the Corporation
plus an additional amount equal to its retained
net profits for 2023 up to the date of any such
dividend declaration. Bank of America California,
N.A. can pay dividends of $ 173million in 2023
plus an additional amount equal to its retained
net profits for 2023 up to the date of any such
dividend declaration.
NOTE 17 Employee Benefit Plans
Pension and Postretirement Plans The Corporation
sponsors a qualified noncontributory trusteed
pension plan (Qualified Pension Plan), a number
of noncontributory nonqualified pension plans and
postretirement health and life plans that cover
eligible employees. Non-U.S.
pension plans sponsored by the Corporation vary
based on the country and local practices. The
Qualified Pension Plan has a balance guarantee
feature for account balances with participant-
selected investments, applied at the time a
benefit payment is made from the plan that
effectively provides principal protection for
participant balances transferred and certain
compensation credits. The Corporation is
responsible for funding any shortfall on the
guarantee feature. Benefits earned under the
Qualified Pension Plan have been frozen.
Thereafter, the cash balance accounts continue to
earn investment credits or interest credits in
accordance with the terms of the plan document.
The Corporation has an annuity contract that
guarantees the payment of benefits vested under a
terminated U.S. pension plan (Other Pension
Plan). The Corporation, under a supplemental
agreement, may be responsible for or benefit from
actual experience and investment performance of
the annuity assets. The Corporation made
nocontribution under this agreement in 2022 or
2021. Contributions may be required in the future
under this agreement. The Corporation’s
noncontributory, nonqualified pension plans are
unfunded and provide supplemental defined pension
benefits to certain eligible employees. In
addition to retirement pension benefits, certain
benefits-eligible employees may become eligible
to continue participation as retirees in health
care and/or life insurance plans sponsored by the
Corporation. These plans are referred to as the
Postretirement Health and Life Plans. The Pension
and Postretirement Plans table summarizes the
changes in the fair value of plan assets, changes
in the projected benefit obligation (PBO), the
funded status of both the accumulated benefit
obligation (ABO) and the PBO, and the weighted-
average assumptions used to determine benefit
obligations for the pension plans and
postretirement plans at December 31, 2022 and
2021. The estimate of the Corporation’s PBO
associated with these plans considers various
actuarial assumptions, including assumptions for
mortality rates and discount rates. The discount
rate assumptions are derived from a cash flow
matching technique that utilizes rates that are
based on Aa-rated corporate bonds with cash flows
that match estimated benefit payments of each of
the plans. The increases in the weighted-average
discount rates in 2022 resulted in a decrease to
the PBO of $ 5.3billion at December 31, 2022. The
increases in the weighted-average discount rates
in 2021 resulted in a decrease to the PBO of
approximately $ 895million at December 31, 2021.
Significant gains and losses related to changes
in the PBO for 2022 and 2021 primarily resulted
from changes in the discount rate.
 141Bank of America 
 … 
 … … … 
 … … … 
 … … … … … 
 … … … … … 
 … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … 
 … 
 1 
 … 
 … 
 … … … … … … … 2 — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — … … … … … … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — 1 1 — — … … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — … … … — — — 
 … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … n… n… n… n… n… n… — — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … n… n… … … n… n… n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … 
 … 
 1 
 … — — … … — — 4 5 
 … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — 1 1 — — … … 
 … 
 … — — 3 — — — — — 
 … 
 … 
 … — — … … … — — — 
 … 
 … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … n… n… n… n… n… n… — — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … n… n… … … n… n… … — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ — $ — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — … … … … … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … … … — … … n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — … … — — n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … … … … … … $ … $ … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … % … % … % … % … % … % … % … % 
 … 
 … 
 … n… n… … … … … n… n… 
 … 
 … 
 … … % … % … … … … n… n… 
 … 
(1) The measurement date for all of the above plans was December 31 of each year reported.
n/a = not applicable
The Corporation’s estimate of its contributions to be made to the Non-U.S. Pension Plans,
Nonqualified and Other Pension Plans, and Postretirement Health and Life Plans in 2023 is $
26million, $ 89million and $ 22million, respectively. The Corporation does not expect to make a
contribution to the Qualified Pension Plan in 2023. It is the policy of the Corporation to fund no
less than the minimum funding amount required by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
(ERISA). Pension Plans with ABO and PBO in excess of plan assets as of December 31, 2022 and 2021 are
presented in the table below. For these plans, funding strategies vary due to legal requirements and
local practices.
 Nonqualified 
 Plans with ABO and PBO in and Other 
 Excess of Plan Assets Non-U.S. Pension Plans 
 (Dollars in millions) Pension Plans 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 PBO $ 458 $ 841 $ 719 $ 945 
 ABO 416 780 719 945 
 Fair value of plan assets 71 207 1 1 
 Bank of America142 
 Co… 
 of 
 Net 
 Pe… 
 Be… 
 Co… 
 (D… 
 in 
 mi… 
 Co… 
 of 
 net 
 pe… Qua… No… 
 be… Pen… Pe… 
 co… Plan Pl… 
 (i… 2022 2021 2020 20… 2021 20… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Se… $ — $ — $ — $ 29 $ 28 $ 20 
 co… 
 In… 438 414 500 53 45 49 
 co… 
 Ex… 
 re… 
 on -1,… -1,… -1,… -59 -70 -66 
 pl… 
 as… 
 Am… 
 of 
 ac… 
 lo… 
 (g… 140 193 173 14 19 9 
 and 
 pr… 
 se… 
 co… 
 Ot… — — — 10 5 8 
 Net 
 pe… 
 be… $ -626 $ -566 $ -481 $ 47 $ 27 $ 20 
 co… 
 (i… 
 We… 
 as… 
 us… 
 to 
 de… 
 net 
 co… 
 for 
 ye… 
 en… 
 De… 
 31 
 Di… 2.86 % 2.57 % 3.32 % 1.… % 1.35 % 1.… % 
 ra… 
 Ex… 
 re… 
 on 5.75 5.75 6.00 2.… 2.30 2.… 
 pl… 
 as… 
 Ra… 
 of n/a n/a n/a 4.… 4.11 4.… 
 co… 
 in… 
 Non… Po… 
 and He… 
 Oth… and 
 Pen… Li… 
 Pla… Pl… 
 (D… 
 in 2022 2021 2020 20… 2021 20… 
 mi… 
 Co… 
 of 
 net 
 pe… 
 be… 
 co… 
 (i… 
 Se… $ — $ — $ 1 $ 4 $ 5 $ 5 
 co… 
 In… 74 67 90 25 24 32 
 co… 
 Ex… 
 re… 
 on -59 -49 -71 -2 -3 -4 
 pl… 
 as… 
 Am… 
 of 
 ac… 
 lo… 
 (g… 54 63 50 -9 20 29 
 and 
 pr… 
 se… 
 co… 
 Ot… 1 — — — — -2 
 Net 
 pe… 
 be… $ 70 $ 81 $ 70 $ 18 $ 46 $ 60 
 co… 
 (i… 
 We… 
 as… 
 us… 
 to 
 de… 
 net 
 co… 
 for 
 ye… 
 en… 
 De… 
 31 
 Di… 2.80 % 2.33 % 3.20 % 2.… % 2.48 % 3.… % 
 ra… 
 Ex… 
 re… 
 on 2.38 1.88 2.77 2.… 2.00 2.… 
 pl… 
 as… 
 Ra… 
 of 4.00 4.00 4.00 n/a n/a n/a 
 co… 
 in… 
n/a = not applicable
The asset valuation method used to calculate the expected return on plan assets component of net
periodic benefit cost for the Qualified Pension Plan recognizes 60percent of the prior year’s market
gains or losses at the next measurement date with the remaining 40percent spread equally over the
subsequent four years. Gains and losses for all benefit plans except postretirement health care are
recognized in accordance with the standard amortization provisions of the applicable accounting
guidance. Net periodic postretirement health and life expense was determined using the “projected
unit credit” actuarial method. For the Postretirement Health and Life Plans, 50percent of the
unrecognized gain or loss at the beginning of the year (or at subsequent remeasurement) is recognized
on a level basis during the year. Assumed health care cost trend rates affect the postretirement
benefit obligation and benefit cost reported for the Postretirement Health and Life Plans. The
assumed health care cost trend rate used to measure the expected cost of benefits covered by the
Postretirement Health and Life Plans is 6.50percent for 2023, reducing in steps to 5.00percent in
2028 and later years. The Corporation’s net periodic benefit cost (income) recognized for the plans
is sensitive to the discount rate and expected return on plan assets. For the Qualified Pension Plan,
Non-U.S. Pension Plans, Nonqualified and Other Pension Plans, and Postretirement Health and Life
Plans, a 25 bp decline in discount rates and expected return on assets would not have had a
significant impact on the net periodic benefit cost for 2022.
 P… 
 A… 
 i… 
 in 
 A… 
 O… N… P… 
 a… a… H… 
 O… Q… N… O… a… 
 (… P… P… P… L… 
 in P… P… P… P… T… 
 m… 2… 20… 2… 20… 2… 20… 2… 20… 2… 20… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 N… 
 a… $ 4… $ 3,… $ 3… $ 456 $ 7… $ 945 $ -… $ 4 $ 5… $ 4,… 
 l… 
 (… 
 P… 
 s… — — 43 17 — — -1 -3 42 14 
 c… 
 (… 
 A… 
 r… 
 in $ 4… $ 3,… $ 3… $ 473 $ 7… $ 945 $ -… $ 1 $ 5… $ 4,… 
 a… 
 O… 
 C… 
 y… 
 a… $ 1… $ -2… $ -… $ -1… $ -… $ 21 $ -… $ -41 $ 1… $ -4… 
 l… 
 (… 
 A… 
 of 
 a… 
 g… 
 (… -… -1… -… -19 -… -63 9 -20 -… -2… 
 a… 
 p… 
 s… 
 c… 
 C… 
 y… 
 p… — — 3 — — — — — 3 — 
 s… 
 c… 
 (… 
 A… 
 r… $ 1… $ -4… $ -… $ -1… $ -… $ -42 $ -… $ -61 $ 8… $ -7… 
 in 
 O… 
 143Bank of America 
Plan Assets The Qualified Pension Plan has been established as a retirement vehicle for participants,
and trusts have been established to secure benefits promised under the Qualified Pension Plan. The
Corporation’s policy is to invest the trust assets in a prudent manner for the exclusive purpose of
providing benefits to participants and defraying reasonable expenses of administration. The
Corporation’s investment strategy is designed to provide a total return that, over the long term,
increases the ratio of assets to liabilities. The strategy attempts to maximize the investment return
on assets at a level of risk deemed appropriate by the Corporation while complying with ERISA and any
applicable regulations and laws. The investment strategy utilizes asset allocation as a principal
determinant for establishing the risk/return profile of the assets. Asset allocation ranges are
established, periodically reviewed and adjusted as funding levels and liability characteristics
change. Active and passive investment managers are employed to help enhance the risk/return profile
of the assets. An additional aspect of the investment strategy used to minimize risk (part of the
asset allocation plan) includes matching the exposure of participant-selected investment measures.
The assets of the Non-U.S. Pension Plans are primarily attributable to a U.K. pension plan. This U.K.
pension plan’s assets are invested prudently so that the benefits promised to members are provided
with consideration given to the nature and the duration of the plans’ liabilities. The selected asset
allocation strategy is designed to achieve a higher return than the lowest risk strategy. The
expected rate of return on plan assets assumption was developed through analysis of historical market
returns, historical asset class volatility and correlations, current market conditions, anticipated
future asset allocations, the funds’ past experience and expectations on potential future market
returns. The expected return on plan assets assumption is determined using the calculated market-
related value for the Qualified Pension Plan and the Other Pension Plan and the fair value for the
Non-U.S. Pension Plans and Postretirement Health and Life Plans. The expected return on plan assets
assumption represents a long-term average view of the performance of the assets in the Qualified
Pension Plan, the Non-U.S. Pension Plans, the Other Pension Plan, and Postretirement Health and Life
Plans, a return that may or may not be achieved during any one calendar year. The Other Pension Plan
is invested solely in an annuity contract, which is primarily invested in fixed-income securities
structured such that asset maturities match the duration of the plan’s obligations. The target
allocations for 2023 by asset category for the Qualified Pension Plan, Non-U.S. Pension Plans, and
Nonqualified and Other Pension Plans are presented in the table below. Equity securities for the
Qualified Pension Plan include common stock of the Corporation in the amounts of $ 296million (
1.72percent of total plan assets) and $ 398million ( 1.80percent of total plan assets) at December
31, 2022 and 2021.
 2023 Target Allocation 
 Percentage 
 Qualified Non-U.S. Nonqualified 
 Asset Category Pension Plan Pension Plans and Other 
 Pension Plans 
 Equity securities 15-50% 0-20% 0-5% 
 Debt securities 45-80% 40-75% 95-100% 
 Real estate 0-10% 0-15% 0-5% 
 Other 0-5% 10-40% 0-5% 
Fair Value Measurements
For more information on fair value measurements, including descriptions of Level 1, 2 and 3 of the
fair value hierarchy and the valuation methods employed by the Corporation, see Note 1 – Summary of
Significant Accounting Principles and Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements . Combined plan investment
assets measured at fair value by level and in total at December 31, 2022 and 2021 are summarized in
the Fair Value Measurements table.
 Bank of America144 
 Fair 
 Val… Level Lev… 
 Mea… 1 1 
 (Do… Dece… Dec… 
 in 31, Level Lev… 31, Level Lev… 
 mil… 2022 2 3 Total 2021 2 3 Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Mon… 
 mar… 
 and $ 1,329 $ — $ — $ 1,329 $ 1,3… $ — $ — $ 1,339 
 int… 
 cash 
 U.S. 
 gov… 
 and 3,313 704 5 4,022 4,9… 934 6 5,888 
 gov… 
 age… 
 obl… 
 Cor… — 3,587 — 3,587 — 4,900 — 4,900 
 debt 
 Non… 
 debt 327 933 — 1,260 925 1,165 — 2,090 
 sec… 
 Ass… — 1,273 — 1,273 — 1,485 — 1,485 
 sec… 
 Mut… 
 and 1,247 — — 1,247 1,3… — — 1,395 
 exc… 
 fun… 
 Col… 
 inv… — 1,988 — 1,988 — 3,419 — 3,419 
 fun… 
 Com… 
 and 3,901 — — 3,901 4,8… — — 4,826 
 pre… 
 sto… 
 Real 
 est… 76 — — 76 87 — — 87 
 inv… 
 tru… 
 Par… — — 6 6 — — 7 7 
 loa… 
 Oth… 1 23 410 434 1 29 630 660 
 inv… 
 Tot… 
 plan 
 inv… 
 ass… $ 10,1… $ 8,508 $ 421 $ 19,1… $ 13,… $ 11,9… $ 643 $ 26,0… 
 at 
 fair 
 val… 
(1) Other investments includes insurance annuity contracts of $ 390million and $ 612million and other
various investments of $ 44million and $ 48million at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
(2) At December 31, 2022 and 2021, excludes $ 1.9billion and $ 1.7billion of certain investments that
are measured at fair value using the net asset value per share (or its equivalent) as a practical
expedient and are not required to be classified in the fair value hierarchy.
The Level 3 Fair Value Measurements table presents a reconciliation of all plan investment assets
measured at fair value using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) during 2022, 2021 and 2020.
 Level 3 Fair 
 Value Actual Return on 
 Measurements Balance Plan Assets Still Purchases, Sales 
 (Dollars in January 1 Held at the and Balance 
 millions) 2022 Reporting Date Settlements December 31 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. government 
 and government $ 6 $ — $ -1 $ 5 
 agency 
 obligations 
 Participant 7 — -1 6 
 Loans 
 Other 630 -8 -212 410 
 investments 
 Total $ 643 $ -8 $ -214 $ 421 
 2021 
 U.S. government 
 and government $ 7 $ — $ -1 $ 6 
 agency 
 obligations 
 Participant 7 — — 7 
 Loans 
 Other 684 -5 -49 630 
 investments 
 Total $ 698 $ -5 $ -50 $ 643 
 2020 
 U.S. government 
 and government $ 8 $ — $ -1 $ 7 
 agency 
 obligations 
 Participant 8 — -1 7 
 loans 
 Other 628 6 50 684 
 investments 
 Total $ 644 $ 6 $ 48 $ 698 
Projected Benefit Payments
Benefit payments projected to be made from the Qualified Pension Plan, Non-U.S. Pension Plans,
Nonqualified and Other Pension Plans, and Postretirement Health and Life Plans are presented in the
table below.
 Projected 
 Benefit Nonqualified 
 Payments Qualified Non-U.S. and Other Postretirement 
 (Dollars in Pension Pension Pension Health and 
 millions) Plan(1) Plans(2) Plans(2) Life Plans(3) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2023 $ 892 $ 114 $ 235 $ 73 
 2024 927 108 232 70 
 2025 918 116 223 67 
 2026 921 117 215 64 
 2027 908 114 209 61 
 2028 - 2032 4,289 580 884 263 
(1) Benefit payments expected to be made from the plan’s assets.
(2) Benefit payments expected to be made from a combination of the plans’ and the Corporation’s
assets.
(3) Benefit payments (net of retiree contributions) expected to be made from a combination of the
plans’ and the Corporation’s assets.
 145Bank of America 
Defined Contribution Plans The Corporation
maintains qualified and non-qualified defined
contribution retirement plans. The Corporation
recorded expense of $ 1.2billion in 2022, 2021
and 2020 related to the qualified defined
contribution plans. At December 31, 2022 and
2021, 179million and 173million shares of the
Corporation’s common stock were held by these
plans. Payments to the plans for dividends on
common stock were $ 153million, $ 139million and
$ 138million in 2022, 2021 and 2020,
respectively. Certain non-U.S. employees are
covered under defined contribution pension plans
that are separately administered in accordance
with local laws. NOTE 18 Stock-based Compensation
Plans The Corporation administers a number of
equity compensation plans, with awards being
granted predominantly from the Bank of America
Corporation Equity Plan (BACEP). Under this plan,
715million shares of the Corporation’s common
stock are authorized to be used for grants of
awards. During 2022 and 2021, the Corporation
granted 102million and 99million RSU awards to
certain employees under the BACEP. These RSUs
were authorized to settle predominantly in shares
of common stock of the Corporation. Certain RSUs
will be settled in cash or contain settlement
provisions that subject these awards to variable
accounting whereby compensation expense is
adjusted to fair value based on changes in the
share price of the Corporation’s common stock up
to the settlement date. The RSUs granted in 2022
will generally vest over four years. Of the RSUs
granted in 2021, 81million will generally vest
over four yearsand 18million will vest over three
years. The four-year awards vest primarily in
one-fourth increments on each of the first four
anniversaries of the grant date while the three-
year awards vest primarily in one-third
increments on each of the first three
anniversaries of the grant date, provided that
the employee remains continuously employed with
the Corporation during that time, and will be
expensed ratably over the vesting period, net of
estimated forfeitures, for non-retirement
eligible employees based on the grant-date fair
value of the shares. Of the RSUs granted in 2022
and 2021 that vest over four years, 39million and
27million do not include retirement eligibility.
For all other RSUs granted to employees who are
retirement eligible, they are deemed authorized
as of the beginning of the year preceding the
grant date when the incentive award plans are
generally approved. As a result, the estimated
value is expensed ratably over the year preceding
the grant date. The compensation cost for the
stock-based plans was $ 2.9billion, $ 3.0billion
and $ 2.1billion, and the related income tax
benefit was $ 697million, $ 723million and $
505million for 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
At December 31, 2022, there was an estimated $
3.6billion of total unrecognized compensation
cost related to certain share-based compensation
awards that is expected to be recognized over a
period of up to four years, with a weighted-
average period of 2.7years.
Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units
The total fair value of restricted stock and
restricted stock units vested in 2022, 2021 and
2020 was $ 3.4billion, $ 2.3billion and $
2.3billion, respectively. The table below
presents the status at December 31, 2022 of the
share-settled restricted stock and restricted
stock units and changes during 2022.
 Stock-settled Restricted Stock and Weighted- 
 Restricted Stock Units Shares/Units average Grant Date Fair Value 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Outstanding at January 1, 2022 185,050,842 $ 31.54 
 Granted 100,108,395 46.10 
 Vested -73,288,792 30.85 
 Canceled -9,310,647 39.80 
 Outstanding at December 31, 2022 202,559,798 38.60 
NOTE 19 Income Taxes
The components of income tax expense for 2022,
2021 and 2020 are presented in the table below.
 Income Tax Expense 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Current income tax expense 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. federal $ 1,157 $ 1,076 $ 1,092 
 U.S. state and local 389 775 1,076 
 Non-U.S. 1,156 985 670 
 Total current expense 2,702 2,836 2,838 
 Deferred income tax expense 
 U.S. federal 110 962 -799 
 U.S. state and local 254 491 -233 
 Non-U.S. 375 -2,291 -705 
 Total deferred expense 739 -838 -1,737 
 Total income tax expense $ 3,441 $ 1,998 $ 1,101 
Total income tax expense does not reflect the tax
effects of items that are included in OCI each
period. For more information, see Note 14 –
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) .
Other tax effects included in OCI each period
resulted in a benefit of $ 4.9billion and $
877million in 2022 and 2021 and an expense of $
1.5billion in 2020.
Income tax expense for 2022, 2021 and 2020 varied
from the amount computed by applying the
statutory income tax rate to income before income
taxes. The Corporation’s federal statutory tax
rate was 21 percent for 2022, 2021 and 2020. A
reconciliation of the expected U.S. federal
income tax expense, calculated by applying the
federal statutory tax rate, to the Corporation’s
actual income tax expense, and the effective tax
rates for 2022, 2021 and 2020 are presented in
the following table.
 Bank of America146 
 Reconciliation 
 of Income Tax 
 Expense 
 (Dollars in Amount Amount Amount 
 millions) 2022 Percent 2021 Percent 2020 Percent 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Expected U.S. 
 federal income $ 6,504 21.0 % $ 7,135 21.0 % $ 3,989 21.0 % 
 tax expense 
 Increase 
 (decrease) in 
 taxes resulting 
 from: 
 State tax 
 expense, net of 756 2.4 1,087 3.2 728 3.8 
 federal 
 benefit 
 Affordable 
 housing/energy/… -3,698 -11.9 -3,795 -11.2 -2,869 -15.1 
 credits 
 Tax-exempt 
 income, -273 -0.9 -352 -1.0 -346 -1.8 
 including 
 dividends 
 Changes in 
 prior-period -273 -0.9 -155 -0.5 -41 -0.2 
 UTBs, including 
 interest 
 Rate 
 differential on 368 1.2 45 0.1 218 1.1 
 non-U.S. 
 earnings 
 Nondeductible 352 1.1 206 0.6 324 1.7 
 expenses 
 Tax law changes 186 0.6 -2,050 -6.0 -699 -3.7 
 Other -481 -1.5 -123 -0.3 -203 -1.0 
 Total income tax $ 3,441 11.1 % $ 1,998 5.9 % $ 1,101 5.8 % 
 expense 
Tax Law changes reflect the impact of the 2022,
2021 and 2020 U.K. enacted corporate income tax
rate changes, which resulted in a negative tax
adjustment of approximately $ 186million in 2022
and positive income tax adjustments of
approximately $ 2.0billion and $ 700million in
2021 and 2020, with corresponding adjustments of
U.K. net deferred tax assets. The U.K. net
deferred tax assets are primarily net operating
losses (NOLs), incurred by the Corporation’s U.K.
broker-dealer entity in historical periods, which
do not expire under U.K. tax law and are assessed
regularly for impairment. If further U.K. tax law
changes are enacted, a corresponding income tax
adjustment will be made based on the amount of
available net deferred tax assets and applicable
tax rate changes. Tax credits originate from ESG
investments in affordable housing and renewable
energy partnerships and similar entities.
Significant increases in the tax credits
recognized over the last three annual periods
have been primarily driven by the Corporation’s
continued growth in the volume of investments in
wind and solar energy production facilities,
consistent with the Corporation’s commitment to
support the transition to a lower carbon economy.
For additional information, see Note 6 –
Securitizations and Other Variable Interest
Entities .
The reconciliation of the beginning unrecognized
tax benefits (UTB) balance to the ending balance
is presented in the table below.
 Reconciliation of the Change in Unrecognized Tax Benefits 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance, January 1 $ 1,322 $ 1,340 $ 1,175 
 Increases related to positions taken 121 208 238 
 during the current year 
 Increases related to positions taken 167 265 99 
 during prior years(1) 
 Decreases related to positions taken -289 -413 -172 
 during prior years(1) 
 Settlements -99 -23 — 
 Expiration of statute of limitations -166 -55 — 
 Balance, December 31 $ 1,056 $ 1,322 $ 1,340 
(1) The sum of the positions taken during prior
years differs from the $( 273) million, $( 155)
million and $( 41) million in the Reconciliation
of Income Tax Expense table due to temporary
items, state items and jurisdictional offsets, as
well as the inclusion of interest in the
Reconciliation of Income Tax Expense table.
At December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, the balance
of the Corporation’s UTBs which would, if
recognized, affect the Corporation’s effective
tax rate was $ 709million, $ 959million and $
976million, respectively. Included in the UTB
balance are some items the recognition of which
would not affect the effective tax rate, such as
the tax effect of certain temporary differences,
the portion of gross state UTBs that would be
offset by the tax benefit of the associated
federal deduction and the portion of gross
non-U.S. UTBs that would be offset by tax
reductions in other jurisdictions. It is
reasonably possible that the UTB balance may
decrease by as much as $ 375million during the
next 12 months, since resolved items will be
removed from the balance whether their resolution
results in payment or recognition. The
Corporation recognized an interest benefit of $
50million in 2022 and interest expense of $
32million and $ 9million in 2021 and 2020. At
December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation’s
accrual for interest and penalties that related
to income taxes, net of taxes and remittances,
was $ 107million and $ 167million. The
Corporation files income tax returns in more than
100state and non-U.S. jurisdictions each year.
The IRS and other tax authorities in countries
and states in which the Corporation has
significant business operations examine tax
returns periodically (continuously in some
jurisdictions). The table below summarizes the
status of examinations by major jurisdiction for
the Corporation and various subsidiaries at
December 31, 2022.
 Tax Examination Status 
 Years under Status at December 31 
 Examination(1) 2022 
 United States 2017-2021 Field Examination 
 California 2012-2014 Appeals 
 California 2015-2017 Field Examination 
 California 2018-2020 To begin in 2023 
 New York 2019-2021 To begin in 2023 
 United Kingdom(2) 2019-2020 Field Examination 
(1) All tax years subsequent to the years shown
remain subject to examination.
(2) Field examination for tax year 2021 to begin
in 2023.
Significant components of the Corporation’s net
deferred tax assets and liabilities at December
31, 2022 and 2021 are presented in the following
table.
 147Bank of America 
 Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities 
 (Dollars in millions) December 31 
 Deferred tax assets 2022 2021 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net operating loss carryforwards $ 9,029 $ 9,360 
 Security, loan and debt valuations 4,788 2,746 
 Allowance for credit losses 3,503 3,097 
 Lease liability 2,443 2,508 
 Employee compensation and retirement 1,625 1,392 
 benefits 
 Accrued expenses 1,143 1,626 
 Available-for-sale securities 960 — 
 Credit carryforwards 769 705 
 Other 1,371 1,160 
 Gross deferred tax assets 25,631 22,594 
 Valuation allowance -2,133 -1,988 
 Total deferred tax assets, net of valuation 23,498 20,606 
 allowance 
 Deferred tax liabilities 
 Equipment lease financing 2,432 3,083 
 Right-of-use asset 2,303 2,358 
 ESG-related tax credit investments 1,759 1,387 
 Fixed Assets 1,200 2,082 
 Available-for-sale securities — 1,016 
 Other 2,459 1,527 
 Gross deferred tax liabilities 10,153 11,453 
 Net deferred tax assets $ 13,345 $ 9,153 
The table below summarizes the deferred tax
assets and related valuation allowances
recognized for the net operating loss (NOL) and
tax credit carryforwards at December 31, 2022.
 Net Operating Loss and 
 Tax Credit Carryforward Net 
 Deferred Tax Assets Deferred Valuation Deferred First Year 
 (Dollars in millions) Tax Asset Allowance Tax Asset Expiring 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net operating losses - $ 7,661 $ — $ 7,661 None 
 U.K.(1) 
 Net operating losses - 331 -147 184 Various 
 other non-U.S. 
 Net operating losses - 1,036 -627 409 Various 
 U.S. states(2) 
 Foreign tax credits 769 -769 — After 2028 
(1) Represents U.K. broker-dealer net operating
losses that may be carried forward indefinitely.
(2) The net operating losses and related
valuation allowances for U.S. states before
considering the benefit of federal deductions
were $ 1.3billion and $ 794million.
Management concluded that novaluation allowance
was necessary to reduce the deferred tax assets
related to the U.K. NOL carryforwards and U.S.
federal and certain state NOL carryforwards since
estimated future taxable income will be
sufficient to utilize these assets prior to their
expiration. The majority of the Corporation’s
U.K. net deferred tax assets, which consist
primarily of NOLs, are expected to be realized by
certain subsidiaries over an extended number of
years. Management’s conclusion is supported by
financial results, profit forecasts for the
relevant entities and the indefinite period to
carry forward NOLs. However, a material change in
those estimates could lead management to reassess
such valuation allowance conclusions.
At December 31, 2022, U.S. federal income taxes
had not been provided on approximately $
5.0billion of temporary differences associated
with investments in non-U.S. subsidiaries that
are essentially permanent in duration. If the
Corporation were to record the associated
deferred tax liability, the amount would be
approximately $ 1.0billion.
NOTE 20 Fair Value Measurements Under applicable accounting standards, fair value is defined as the
exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in
the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants on the measurement date. The Corporation determines the fair values of
its financial instruments under applicable accounting standards that require an entity to maximize
the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. The Corporation categorizes
its financial instruments into three levels based on the established fair value hierarchy and
conducts a review of fair value hierarchy classifications on a quarterly basis. Transfers into or out
of fair value hierarchy classifications are made if the significant inputs used in the financial
models measuring the fair values of the assets and liabilities become unobservable or observable in
the current marketplace. For more information regarding the fair value hierarchy and how the
Corporation measures fair value, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles . The
Corporation accounts for certain financial instruments under the fair value option. For more
information, see Note 21 – Fair Value Option. Valuation Techniques The following sections outline the
valuation methodologies for the Corporation’s assets and liabilities. While the Corporation believes
its valuation methods are appropriate and consistent with other market participants, the use of
different methodologies or assumptions to determine the fair value of certain financial instruments
could result in a different estimate of fair value at the reporting date. During 2022, there were no
significant changes to valuation approaches or techniques that had, or are expected to have, a
material impact on the Corporation’s consolidated financial position or results of operations.
Trading Account Assets and Liabilities and Debt Securities The fair values of trading account assets
and liabilities are primarily based on actively traded markets where prices are based on either
direct market quotes or observed transactions. The fair values of debt securities are generally based
on quoted market prices or market prices for similar assets. Liquidity is a significant factor in the
determination of the fair values of trading account assets and liabilities and debt securities.
Market price quotes may not be readily available for some positions such as positions within a market
sector where trading activity has slowed significantly or ceased. Some of these instruments are
valued using a discounted cash flow model, which estimates the fair value of the securities using
internal credit risk, and interest rate and prepayment risk models that incorporate management’s best
estimate of current key assumptions such as default rates, loss severity and prepayment rates.
Principal and interest cash flows are discounted using an observable discount rate for similar
instruments with adjustments that management believes a market participant would consider in
determining fair value for the specific security. Other instruments are valued using a net asset
value approach which considers the value of the underlying securities. Underlying assets are valued
using external pricing services, where available, or matrix pricing based on the vintages and
ratings. Situations of illiquidity generally are triggered by the market’s perception of credit
uncertainty regarding a single company or a specific market sector. In these instances, fair value is
determined based on limited available market information and other factors,
 Bank of America148 
principally from reviewing the issuer’s financial statements and changes in credit ratings made by
one or more rating agencies. Derivative Assets and Liabilities The fair values of derivative assets
and liabilities traded in the OTC market are determined using quantitative models that utilize
multiple market inputs including interest rates, prices and indices to generate continuous yield or
pricing curves and volatility factors to value the position. The majority of market inputs are
actively quoted and can be validated through external sources, including brokers, market transactions
and third-party pricing services. When third-party pricing services are used, the methods and
assumptions are reviewed by the Corporation. Estimation risk is greater for derivative asset and
liability positions that are either option-based or have longer maturity dates where observable
market inputs are less readily available, or are unobservable, in which case, quantitative-based
extrapolations of rate, price or index scenarios are used in determining fair values. The fair values
of derivative assets and liabilities include adjustments for market liquidity, counterparty credit
quality and other instrument-specific factors, where appropriate. In addition, the Corporation
incorporates within its fair value measurements of OTC derivatives a valuation adjustment to reflect
the credit risk associated with the net position. Positions are netted by counterparty, and fair
value for net long exposures is adjusted for counterparty credit risk while the fair value for net
short exposures is adjusted for the Corporation’s own credit risk. The Corporation also incorporates
FVA within its fair value measurements to include funding costs on uncollateralized derivatives and
derivatives where the Corporation is not permitted to use the collateral it receives. An estimate of
severity of loss is also used in the determination of fair value, primarily based on market data.
Loans and Loan Commitments The fair values of loans and loan commitments are based on market prices,
where available, or discounted cash flow analyses using market-based credit spreads of comparable
debt instruments or credit derivatives of the specific borrower or comparable borrowers. Results of
discounted cash flow analyses may be adjusted, as appropriate, to reflect other market conditions or
the perceived credit risk of the borrower. Mortgage Servicing Rights The fair values of MSRs are
primarily determined using an option-adjusted spread valuation approach, which factors in prepayment
risk to determine the fair value of MSRs. This approach consists of projecting servicing cash flows
under multiple interest rate scenarios and discounting these cash flows using risk-adjusted discount
rates. Loans Held-for-sale The fair values of LHFS are based on quoted market prices, where
available, or are determined by discounting estimated cash flows using interest rates approximating
the Corporation’s current origination rates for similar loans adjusted to reflect the inherent credit
risk. The borrower-specific credit risk is embedded within the quoted market prices or is implied by
considering loan performance when selecting comparables. Short-term Borrowings and Long-term Debt The
Corporation issues structured liabilities that have coupons or repayment terms linked to the
performance of debt or equity securities, interest rates, indices, currencies or commodities. The
fair values of these structured liabilities are estimated using quantitative models for the combined
derivative and debt portions of the notes. These models incorporate observable and, in some
instances, unobservable inputs including security prices, interest rate yield curves, option
volatility, currency, commodity or equity rates and correlations among these inputs. The Corporation
also considers the impact of its own credit spread in determining the discount rate used to value
these liabilities. The credit spread is determined by reference to observable spreads in the
secondary bond market. Securities Financing Agreements The fair values of certain reverse repurchase
agreements, repurchase agreements and securities borrowed transactions are determined using
quantitative models, including discounted cash flow models that require the use of multiple market
inputs including interest rates and spreads to generate continuous yield or pricing curves, and
volatility factors. The majority of market inputs are actively quoted and can be validated through
external sources, including brokers, market transactions and third-party pricing services. Deposits
The fair values of deposits are determined using quantitative models, including discounted cash flow
models that require the use of multiple market inputs including interest rates and spreads to
generate continuous yield or pricing curves, and volatility factors. The majority of market inputs
are actively quoted and can be validated through external sources, including brokers, market
transactions and third-party pricing services. The Corporation considers the impact of its own credit
spread in the valuation of these liabilities. The credit risk is determined by reference to
observable credit spreads in the secondary cash market. Asset-backed Secured Financings The fair
values of asset-backed secured financings are based on external broker bids, where available, or are
determined by discounting estimated cash flows using interest rates approximating the Corporation’s
current origination rates for similar loans adjusted to reflect the inherent credit risk.
 149Bank of America 
Recurring Fair Value
Assets and liabilities carried at fair value on a recurring basis at December 31, 2022 and 2021,
including financial instruments that the Corporation accounts for under the fair value option, are
summarized in the following tables.
 December 31, 
 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fair Value 
 Measurements 
 (Dollars in Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Netting Assets/Liabi… 
 millions) Adjustments… at Fair Value 
 Assets 
 Time 
 deposits 
 placed and $ 868 $ — $ — $ — $ 868 
 other 
 short-term 
 investments 
 Federal 
 funds sold 
 and 
 securities 
 borrowed or — 146,999 — — 146,999 
 purchased 
 under 
 agreements 
 to resell 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets: 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 58,894 212 — — 59,106 
 government 
 agencies 
 Corporate 
 securities, 
 trading — 46,897 2,384 — 49,281 
 loans and 
 other 
 Equity 77,868 35,065 145 — 113,078 
 securities 
 Non-U.S. 
 sovereign 7,392 26,306 518 — 34,216 
 debt 
 Mortgage 
 trading 
 loans, MBS 
 and ABS: 
 U.S. 
 government… — 28,563 34 — 28,597 
 agency 
 guaranteed 
 Mortgage 
 trading 
 loans, ABS — 10,312 1,518 — 11,830 
 and other 
 MBS 
 Total 
 trading 144,154 147,355 4,599 — 296,108 
 account 
 assets(2) 
 Derivative 14,775 380,380 3,213 -349,726 48,642 
 assets 
 AFS debt 
 securities: 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 158,102 920 — — 159,022 
 government 
 agencies 
 Mortgage-b… 
 securities: 
 Agency — 23,442 — — 23,442 
 Agency-col… 
 mortgage — 2,221 — — 2,221 
 obligations 
 Non-agency — 128 258 — 386 
 residential 
 Commercial — 6,407 — — 6,407 
 Non-U.S. — 13,212 195 — 13,407 
 securities 
 Other 
 taxable — 4,645 — — 4,645 
 securities 
 Tax-exempt — 11,207 51 — 11,258 
 securities 
 Total AFS 
 debt 158,102 62,182 504 — 220,788 
 securities 
 Other debt 
 securities 
 carried at 
 fair 
 value: 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 561 — — — 561 
 government 
 agencies 
 Non-agency 
 residential — 248 119 — 367 
 MBS 
 Non-U.S. 
 and other 3,027 5,251 — — 8,278 
 securities 
 Total other 
 debt 
 securities 3,588 5,499 119 — 9,206 
 carried at 
 fair value 
 Loans and — 5,518 253 — 5,771 
 leases 
 Loans — 883 232 — 1,115 
 held-for-s… 
 Other 6,898 897 1,799 — 9,594 
 assets(3) 
 Total $ 328,385 $ 749,713 $ 10,719 $ -349,726 $ 739,091 
 assets(4) 
 Liabilities 
 Interest-b… 
 deposits in $ — $ 311 $ — $ — $ 311 
 U.S. 
 offices 
 Federal 
 funds 
 purchased 
 and 
 securities — 151,708 — — 151,708 
 loaned or 
 sold under 
 agreements 
 to 
 repurchase 
 Trading 
 account 
 liabilitie… 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 13,906 181 — — 14,087 
 government 
 agencies 
 Equity 36,937 4,825 — — 41,762 
 securities 
 Non-U.S. 
 sovereign 9,636 8,228 — — 17,864 
 debt 
 Corporate 
 securities — 6,628 58 — 6,686 
 and other 
 Total 
 trading 60,479 19,862 58 — 80,399 
 account 
 liabilities 
 Derivative 15,431 376,979 6,106 -353,700 44,816 
 liabilities 
 Short-term — 818 14 — 832 
 borrowings 
 Accrued 
 expenses 7,458 2,262 32 — 9,752 
 and other 
 liabilities 
 Long-term — 32,208 862 — 33,070 
 debt 
 Total $ 83,368 $ 584,148 $ 7,072 $ -353,700 $ 320,888 
 liabilitie… 
(1) Amounts represent the impact of legally enforceable master netting agreements and also cash
collateral held or placed with the same counterparties.
(2) Includes securities with a fair value of $ 16.6billion that were segregated in compliance with
securities regulations or deposited with clearing organizations. This amount is included in the
parenthetical disclosure on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Trading account assets also includes
certain commodities inventory of $ 40million that is accounted for at the lower of cost or net
realizable value, which is the current selling price less any costs to sell.
(3) Includes MSRs of $ 1.0billion, which are classified as Level 3 assets.
(4) Total recurring Level 3 assets were 0.35percent of total consolidated assets, and total recurring
Level 3 liabilities were 0.25percent of total consolidated liabilities.
 Bank of America150 
 December 31, 
 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fair Value 
 Measurements 
 (Dollars in Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Netting Assets/Liabi… 
 millions) Adjustments… at Fair Value 
 Assets 
 Time 
 deposits 
 placed and $ 707 $ — $ — $ — $ 707 
 other 
 short-term 
 investments 
 Federal 
 funds sold 
 and 
 securities 
 borrowed or — 150,665 — — 150,665 
 purchased 
 under 
 agreements 
 to resell 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets: 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 44,599 803 — — 45,402 
 government 
 agencies 
 Corporate 
 securities, 
 trading — 31,601 2,110 — 33,711 
 loans and 
 other 
 Equity 61,425 38,383 190 — 99,998 
 securities 
 Non-U.S. 
 sovereign 3,822 25,612 396 — 29,830 
 debt 
 Mortgage 
 trading 
 loans, MBS 
 and ABS: 
 U.S. 
 government… — 25,645 109 — 25,754 
 agency 
 guaranteed 
 Mortgage 
 trading 
 loans, ABS — 10,967 1,418 — 12,385 
 and other 
 MBS 
 Total 
 trading 109,846 133,011 4,223 — 247,080 
 account 
 assets(2) 
 Derivative 34,748 310,581 3,133 -313,118 35,344 
 assets 
 AFS debt 
 securities: 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 198,071 1,074 — — 199,145 
 government 
 agencies 
 Mortgage-b… 
 securities: 
 Agency — 46,339 — — 46,339 
 Agency-col… 
 mortgage — 3,380 — — 3,380 
 obligations 
 Non-agency — 267 316 — 583 
 residential 
 Commercial — 19,604 — — 19,604 
 Non-U.S. — 11,933 — — 11,933 
 securities 
 Other 
 taxable — 2,690 71 — 2,761 
 securities 
 Tax-exempt — 15,381 52 — 15,433 
 securities 
 Total AFS 
 debt 198,071 100,668 439 — 299,178 
 securities 
 Other debt 
 securities 
 carried at 
 fair 
 value: 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 575 — — — 575 
 government 
 agencies 
 Non-agency 
 residential — 343 242 — 585 
 MBS 
 Non-U.S. 
 and other 2,580 5,155 — — 7,735 
 securities 
 Total other 
 debt 
 securities 3,155 5,498 242 — 8,895 
 carried at 
 fair value 
 Loans and — 7,071 748 — 7,819 
 leases 
 Loans — 4,138 317 — 4,455 
 held-for-s… 
 Other 7,657 2,915 1,572 — 12,144 
 assets(3) 
 Total $ 354,184 $ 714,547 $ 10,674 $ -313,118 $ 766,287 
 assets(4) 
 Liabilities 
 Interest-b… 
 deposits in $ — $ 408 $ — $ — $ 408 
 U.S. 
 offices 
 Federal 
 funds 
 purchased 
 and 
 securities — 139,641 — — 139,641 
 loaned or 
 sold under 
 agreements 
 to 
 repurchase 
 Trading 
 account 
 liabilitie… 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 19,826 313 — — 20,139 
 government 
 agencies 
 Equity 41,744 6,491 — — 48,235 
 securities 
 Non-U.S. 
 sovereign 10,400 13,781 — — 24,181 
 debt 
 Corporate 
 securities — 8,124 11 — 8,135 
 and other 
 Total 
 trading 71,970 28,709 11 — 100,690 
 account 
 liabilities 
 Derivative 35,282 314,380 5,795 -317,782 37,675 
 liabilities 
 Short-term — 4,279 — — 4,279 
 borrowings 
 Accrued 
 expenses 8,359 3,130 — — 11,489 
 and other 
 liabilities 
 Long-term — 28,633 1,075 — 29,708 
 debt 
 Total $ 115,611 $ 519,180 $ 6,881 $ -317,782 $ 323,890 
 liabilitie… 
(1) Amounts represent the impact of legally enforceable master netting agreements and also cash
collateral held or placed with the same counterparties.
(2) Includes securities with a fair value of $ 10.6billion that were segregated in compliance with
securities regulations or deposited with clearing organizations. This amount is included in the
parenthetical disclosure on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Trading account assets also includes
certain commodities inventory of $ 752million that is accounted for at the lower of cost or net
realizable value, which is the current selling price less any costs to sell.
(3) Includes MSRs of $ 818million, which are classified as Level 3 assets.
(4) Total recurring Level 3 assets were 0.34percent of total consolidated assets, and total recurring
Level 3 liabilities were 0.24percent of total consolidated liabilities.
 151Bank of America 
The following tables present a reconciliation of all assets and liabilities measured at fair value on
a recurring basis using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) during 2022, 2021 and 2020,
including net realized and unrealized gains (losses) included in earnings and accumulated OCI.
Transfers into Level 3 occur primarily due to decreased price observability, and transfers out of
Level 3 occur primarily due to increased price observability. Transfers occur on a regular basis for
long-term debt instruments due to changes in the impact of unobservable inputs on the value of the
embedded derivative in relation to the instrument as a whole.
 C… 
 in 
 U… 
 G… 
 (… 
 in 
 … N… 
 … I… 
 … G… R… 
 … … T… to 
 … … o… F… 
 … … … … of … I… 
 … … … … … L… … S… 
 1 … … … 3 3 … H… 
 … … … … (… — (… … (… … (… 
 … … — … (… — (… … (… … (… 
 … … … … (… — (… … (… … 56 
 … … — … (… — (… … (… … (… 
 … … … … (… — (… … (… … (… 
 … … — … (… — 2… … (… … 2… 
 … — … — (… — (… … (… … — 
 … … … … — — (… … (… … 1 
 … — 1 — — — (… 1 — … — 
 … … … … (… — (… … (… … 1 
 … … — — — — (… … (… … 14 
 … … — — (… … (… — (… … (… 
 … 9 4 … (… — (… 8 — … 19 
 … … … … (… … (… 5 (… … 2… 
 … 5 — … — — (… … — … 1 
 — 3 — — (… — — … 3 … 2 
 — … — … — — — — — … (… 
 … … … … — 14 … 57 … 2… … (… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 $ … $ … $ — $ … $ -… $ — $ -… $ … $ -… $ … $ -… 
 … … — … -… — — … -… … -… 
 … … … … — — -… … — … 34 
 … … — … -… 7 -… … -… … -… 
 … … … … -… 7 -… … -… … -… 
 … … — … -… — 2… … -… … 8… 
 … … … — -… — -… … -… … 8 
 … … … 8 -… — -4 — -1 … — 
 … … — — — — -2 — -… … -… 
 … 5 … 8 -… — -… … -… … -… 
 … 1 — — -… — -… … -… … 10 
 … … — … -… … -… … -… … 65 
 … … … … -1 — -… … -4 … 18 
 … 7 3 … -… … -… 9 -2 … 3 
 … 6 — — — … — — — … — 
 … … … … 15 … 98 … 1… … -… 
(1) Assets (liabilities). For assets, increase (decrease) to Level 3 and for liabilities, (increase)
decrease to Level 3.
(2) Includes gains (losses) reported in earnings in the following income statement line items:
Trading account assets/liabilities - predominantly market making and similar activities; Net
derivative assets (liabilities) - market making and similar activities and other income; AFS debt
securities - other income; Other debt securities carried at fair value - other income; Loans and
leases - market making and similar activities and other income; Loans held-for-sale - other income;
Other assets - market making and similar activities and other income related to MSRs; Short-term
borrowings - market making and similar activities; Accrued expenses and other liabilities - market
making and similar activities and other income; Long-term debt - market making and similar
activities.
(3) Includes unrealized gains (losses) in OCIon AFS debt securities, foreign currency translation
adjustments and the impact of changes in the Corporation’s credit spreads on long-term debt accounted
for under the fair value option. Amounts include net unrealized gains (losses) of $ 28million and $(
19) million related to financial instruments still held at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
(4) Net derivative assets (liabilities) include derivative assets of $ 3.2billion and $ 3.1billion
and derivative liabilities of $ 6.1billion and $ 5.8billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
(5) Amounts represent instruments that are accounted for under the fair value option.
(6) Issuances represent loan originations and MSRs recognized following securitizations or whole-loan
sales.
(7) Settlements primarily represent the net change in fair value of the MSR asset due to the
recognition of modeled cash flows and the passage of time.
 Bank of America152 
 … 
 3 
 – 
 … 
 … C… 
 … in 
 … U… 
 … G… 
 … (… 
 … in 
 … T… N… 
 … R… I… 
 … G… G… R… 
 … (… G… … T… to 
 … B… in (… … o… F… 
 … J… N… in … of … I… 
 … 1 I… O… … L… … S… 
 … S… I… S… G… 3 3 … H… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 1… $ -… $ -1 $ 4… $ -… $ … $ -… $ … $ -… $ … $ -… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… -… — 78 -… — -3 … -… … -… 
 … 
 … 
 … 4… 45 -… 76 -… — -… … -… … 47 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… -… -3 5… -… … -… … -… … -… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 3… -… -… 1… -… … -… … -… … -… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … -… -… — 1… -… — -… … 1… … -… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 4… -2 3 23 -… — -… … -… … -2 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 67 1 — 9 -5 — -1 … — … 1 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… -… 3 — — — -… … -… … -… 
 … 
 … 
 … 5… -… 6 32 -… — -… … -… … -… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… 26 — — -… — -… … -… … 3 
 … 
 - 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 6… -4 — 1… -… … -… … — … 9 
 … 
 … 3… 26 -… — -… … -… … -… … -5 
 … 
 … 2… -… 3 1… -4 … -… 5 -2 … -… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … -2 1 — — — — — — 1 — — 
 – 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 – -… 8 — -7 -3 — 1 — — … — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … -… -… 2 -… — … 2… … 14 … -5 
 … 
(1) Assets (liabilities). For assets, increase (decrease) to Level 3 and for liabilities, (increase)
decrease to Level 3.
(2) Includes gains/losses reported in earnings in the following income statement line items: Trading
account assets/liabilities - predominantly market making and similar activities; Net derivative
assets (liabilities) - market making and similar activities and other income; AFS debt securities -
other income; Other debt securities carried at fair value - other income; Loans and leases - market
making and similar activities and other income; Loans held-for-sale - other income; Other assets -
market making and similar activities and other income related to MSRs; Long-term debt - market making
and similar activities.
(3) Includes unrealized losses in OCI on AFS debt securities, foreign currency translation
adjustments and the impact of changes in the Corporation’s credit spreads on long-term debt accounted
for under the fair value option. Amounts include net unrealized losses of $ 41million related to
financial instruments still held at December 31, 2020.
(4) Net derivative assets (liabilities) include derivative assets of $ 2.8billion and derivative
liabilities of $ 6.2billion.
(5) Amounts represent instruments that are accounted for under the fair value option.
(6) Issuances represent loan originations and MSRs recognized following securitizations or whole-loan
sales.
(7) Settlements primarily represent the net change in fair value of the MSR asset due to the
recognition of modeled cash flows and the passage of time.
 153Bank of America 
The following tables present information about significant unobservable inputs related to the
Corporation’s material categories of Level 3 financial assets and liabilities at December 31, 2022
and 2021.
 Quantitat… 
 Informati… 
 about 
 Level 3 
 Fair Value 
 Measureme… 
 at 
 December 
 31, 
 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Dollars 
 in Inputs 
 millions) 
 Financial Fair Valuation Significant Ranges of Weighted 
 Instrument Value Technique Unobservab… Inputs Average(1) 
 Inputs 
 Loans and 
 Securitie… 
 Instrumen… 
 backed by Discounted 
 residenti… $ 852 cash flow, Yield 0% to25% 10 % 
 real Market 
 estate comparables 
 assets 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – Prepayment 0% to29% 
 Mortgage 338 speed CPR 12% CPR 
 trading 
 loans, MBS 
 and ABS 
 Loans and 137 Default 0% to3% CDR 1% CDR 
 leases rate 
 AFS debt 
 securities 
 – 258 Price $0to $111 $26 
 Non-agency 
 residenti… 
 Other debt 
 securities 
 carried at Loss 
 fair 119 severity 0% to100% 24 % 
 value – 
 Non-agency 
 residenti… 
 Instrumen… 
 backed by Discounted 
 commercial $ 362 cash Yield 0% to25% 10 % 
 real flow 
 estate 
 assets 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Corporate 292 Price $0to $100 $75 
 securitie… 
 trading 
 loans and 
 other 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Mortgage 66 
 trading 
 loans, MBS 
 and ABS 
 Loans 4 
 held-for-… 
 Commercial 
 loans, Discounted 
 debt $ 4,348 cash flow, Yield 5% to43% 15 % 
 securities Market 
 and comparables 
 other 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Corporate 2,092 Prepayment 10% to20% 15 % 
 securitie… speed 
 trading 
 loans and 
 other 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 518 Default 3% to4% 4 % 
 Non-U.S. rate 
 sovereign 
 debt 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – Loss 
 Mortgage 1,148 severity 35% to40% 38 % 
 trading 
 loans, MBS 
 and ABS 
 AFS debt 
 securities 
 – 51 Price $0to $157 $75 
 Tax-exempt 
 securities 
 AFS debt 
 securities 
 – Non-U.S. 195 
 and other 
 taxable 
 securities 
 Loans and 116 
 leases 
 Loans 228 
 held-for-… 
 Other 
 assets, Discounted 
 primarily $ 779 cash flow, Price $10to $97 $94 
 auction Market 
 rate comparables 
 securities 
 Discount 11 % n/a 
 rate 
 Discounted Weighted-a… 
 MSRs $ 1,020 cash life, fixed 0to14years 6years 
 flow rate(5) 
 Weighted-a… 
 life, 0to12years 4years 
 variable 
 rate(5) 
 Option-adj… 
 spread, 7% to14% 9 % 
 fixed rate 
 Option-adj… 
 spread, 9% to15% 12 % 
 variable 
 rate 
 Structured 
 liabiliti… 
 Discounted 
 cash flow, 
 Market 
 Long-term $ -862 comparable… Yield 22% to43% 23 % 
 debt Industry 
 standard 
 derivative 
 pricing(3) 
 Equity 0% to95% 69 % 
 correlation 
 Price $0to $119 $90 
 Natural gas $3/MMBtu to 
 forward $13/MMBtu $9/MMBtu 
 price 
 Net 
 derivative 
 assets 
 (liabilit… 
 Discounted 
 cash flow, 
 Credit $ -44 Stochastic Credit 3to63bps 22bps 
 derivativ… recovery spreads 
 correlation 
 model 
 Upfront 0to100poin… 83points 
 points 
 Prepayment 15% CPR n/a 
 speed 
 Default 2% CDR n/a 
 rate 
 Credit 18% to53% 44 % 
 correlation 
 Price $0to $151 $63 
 Industry 
 Equity $ -1,534 standard Equity 0% to100% 73 % 
 derivativ… derivative correlation 
 pricing(3) 
 Long-dated 
 equity 4% to101% 44 % 
 volatiliti… 
 Discounted 
 cash flow, Natural gas 
 Commodity $ -291 Industry forward $3/MMBtu to $8/MMBtu 
 derivativ… standard price $13/MMBtu 
 derivative 
 pricing(3) 
 Power 
 forward $9to $123 $43 
 price 
 Interest Industry 
 rate $ -1,024 standard Correlation (35)% to89% 67 % 
 derivativ… derivative (IR/IR) 
 pricing(4) 
 Correlation 11% to58% 43 % 
 (FX/IR) 
 Long-dated 
 inflation 0% to39% 1 % 
 rates 
 Long-dated 
 inflation 0% to5% 2 % 
 volatiliti… 
 Interest 
 rate 0% to2% 1 % 
 volatiliti… 
 Total net 
 derivative $ -2,893 
 assets 
 (liabilit… 
(1) For loans and securities, structured liabilities and net derivative assets (liabilities), the
weighted average is calculated based upon the absolute fair value of the instruments.
(2) The categories are aggregated based upon product type which differs from financial statement
classification. The following is a reconciliation to the line items in the table on page 150: Trading
account assets – Corporate securities, trading loans and other of $ 2.4billion, Trading account
assets – Non-U.S. sovereign debt of $ 518million, Trading account assets – Mortgage trading loans,
MBS and ABS of $ 1.6billion, AFS debt securities of $ 504million, Other debt securities carried at
fair value - Non-agency residential of $ 119million, Other assets, including MSRs, of $ 1.8billion,
Loans and leases of $ 253million and LHFS of $ 232million.
(3) Includes models such as Monte Carlo simulation and Black-Scholes.
(4) Includes models such as Monte Carlo simulation, Black-Scholes and other methods that model the
joint dynamics of interest, inflation and foreign exchange rates.
(5) The weighted-average life is a product of changes in market rates of interest, prepayment rates
and other model and cash flow assumptions.
CPR = Constant Prepayment Rate
CDR = Constant Default Rate
MMBtu = Million British thermal units
IR = Interest Rate
FX = Foreign Exchange
n/a = not applicable
 Bank of America154 
 Quantitati… 
 Information 
 about Level 
 3 
 Fair Value 
 Measuremen… 
 at December 
 31, 
 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Dollars in Inputs 
 millions) 
 Financial Fair Valuation Significant Ranges of Weighted 
 Instrument Value Technique Unobservable Inputs Average(1) 
 Inputs 
 Loans and 
 Securities… 
 Instruments 
 backed by Discounted 
 residential $ 1,269 cash Yield 0% to25% 6 % 
 real flow, Market 
 estate comparables 
 assets 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – Prepayment 
 Mortgage 338 speed 1% to40% CPR 19% CPR 
 trading 
 loans, MBS 
 and ABS 
 Loans and 373 Default rate 0% to3% CDR 1% CDR 
 leases 
 AFS debt 
 securities 
 - 316 Price $0to $168 $92 
 Non-agency 
 residential 
 Other debt 
 securities 
 carried at Loss 
 fair 242 severity 0% to43% 13 % 
 value - 
 Non-agency 
 residential 
 Instruments 
 backed by Discounted 
 commercial $ 298 cash Yield 0% to25% 4 % 
 real flow 
 estate 
 assets 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Corporate 138 Price $0to $101 $57 
 securities, 
 trading 
 loans and 
 other 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Mortgage 77 
 trading 
 loans, MBS 
 and ABS 
 AFS debt 
 securities 
 – Non-U.S. 71 
 and other 
 taxable 
 securities 
 Loans 12 
 held-for-s… 
 Commercial Discounted 
 loans, debt cash flow, 
 securities $ 4,212 Market Yield 0% to19% 10 % 
 and comparables 
 other 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 
 Corporate 1,972 Prepayment 10% to20% 16 % 
 securities, speed 
 trading 
 loans and 
 other 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – 396 Default rate 3% to4% 4 % 
 Non-U.S. 
 sovereign 
 debt 
 Trading 
 account 
 assets – Loss 
 Mortgage 1,112 severity 35% to40% 37 % 
 trading 
 loans, MBS 
 and ABS 
 AFS debt 
 securities 
 – 52 Price $0to $189 $73 
 Tax-exempt 
 securities 
 Loans and Long-dated 
 leases 375 equity 45% n/a 
 volatilities 
 Loans 305 
 held-for-s… 
 Other 
 assets, Discounted 
 primarily $ 754 cash flow, Price $10to $96 $91 
 auction Market 
 rate comparables 
 securities 
 Discount 9% n/a 
 rate 
 Discounted Weighted-av… 
 MSRs $ 818 cash life, fixed 0to14years 4years 
 flow rate(5) 
 Weighted-av… 
 life, 0to10years 3years 
 variable 
 rate(5) 
 Option-adju… 
 spread, 7% to14% 9 % 
 fixed rate 
 Option-adju… 
 spread, 9% to15% 12 % 
 variable 
 rate 
 Structured 
 liabilities 
 Discounted 
 cash flow, 
 Market 
 Long-term $ -1,075 comparables, Yield 0% to19% 18 % 
 debt Industry 
 standard 
 derivative 
 pricing(3) 
 Equity 3% to100% 80 % 
 correlation 
 Long-dated 
 equity 5% to78% 36 % 
 volatilities 
 Price $0to $125 $82 
 Natural gas $2/MMBtu to 
 forward $8/MMBtu $4/MMBtu 
 price 
 Net 
 derivative 
 assets 
 (liabiliti… 
 Discounted 
 cash flow, 
 Credit $ -104 Stochastic Credit 7to155bps 61bps 
 derivatives recovery spreads 
 correlation 
 model 
 Upfront 16to100poin… 68points 
 points 
 Prepayment 15% CPR n/a 
 speed 
 Default rate 2% CDR n/a 
 Credit 20% to60% 55 % 
 correlation 
 Price $0to $120 $53 
 Industry 
 Equity $ -1,710 standard Equity 3% to100% 80 % 
 derivatives derivative correlation 
 pricing(3) 
 Long-dated 
 equity 5% to78% 36 % 
 volatilities 
 Discounted 
 cash flow, Natural gas 
 Commodity $ -976 Industry forward $2/MMBtu to $4/MMBtu 
 derivatives standard price $8/MMBtu 
 derivative 
 pricing(3) 
 Correlation 65% to85% 76 % 
 Power 
 forward $11to $103 $32 
 price 
 Volatilities 41% to69% 63 % 
 Interest Industry 
 rate $ 128 standard Correlation (1)% to90% 54 % 
 derivatives derivative (IR/IR) 
 pricing(4) 
 Correlation (1)% to58% 44 % 
 (FX/IR) 
 Long-dated 
 inflation G(10)% to11% 3 % 
 rates 
 Long-dated 
 inflation 0% to2% 2 % 
 volatilities 
 Interest 
 rates 0% to2% 1 % 
 volatilities 
 Total net 
 derivative $ -2,662 
 assets 
 (liabiliti… 
(1) For loans and securities, structured liabilities and net derivative assets (liabilities), the
weighted average is calculated based upon the absolute fair value of the instruments.
(2) The categories are aggregated based upon product type which differs from financial statement
classification. The following is a reconciliation to the line items in the table on page 151: Trading
account assets – Corporate securities, trading loans and other of $ 2.1billion, Trading account
assets – Non-U.S. sovereign debt of $ 396million, Trading account assets – Mortgage trading loans,
MBS and ABS of $ 1.5billion, AFS debt securities of $ 439million, Other debt securities carried at
fair value - Non-agency residential of $ 242million, Other assets, including MSRs, of $ 1.6billion,
Loans and leases of $ 748million and LHFS of $ 317million.
(3) Includes models such as Monte Carlo simulation and Black-Scholes.
(4) Includes models such as Monte Carlo simulation, Black-Scholes and other methods that model the
joint dynamics of interest, inflation and foreign exchange rates.
(5) The weighted-average life is a product of changes in market rates of interest, prepayment rates
and other model and cash flow assumptions.
CPR = Constant Prepayment Rate
CDR = Constant Default Rate
MMBtu = Million British thermal units
IR = Interest Rate
FX = Foreign Exchange
n/a = not applicable
 155Bank of America 
In the previous tables, instruments backed by residential and commercial real estate assets include
RMBS, commercial MBS, whole loans and mortgage CDOs. Commercial loans, debt securities and other
include corporate CLOs and CDOs, commercial loans and bonds, and securities backed by non-real estate
assets. Structured liabilities primarily include equity-linked notes that are accounted for under the
fair value option. The Corporation uses multiple market approaches in valuing certain of its Level 3
financial instruments. For example, market comparables and discounted cash flows are used together.
For a given product, such as corporate debt securities, market comparables may be used to estimate
some of the unobservable inputs, and then these inputs are incorporated into a discounted cash flow
model. Therefore, the balances disclosed encompass both of these techniques. The levels of
aggregation and diversity within the products disclosed in the tables result in certain ranges of
inputs being wide and unevenly distributed across asset and liability categories. Uncertainty of Fair
Value Measurements from Unobservable Inputs Loans and Securities A significant increase in market
yields, default rates, loss severities or duration would have resulted in a significantly lower fair
value for long positions. Short positions would have been impacted in a directionally opposite way.
The impact of changes in prepayment speeds would have resulted in differing impacts depending on the
seniority of the instrument and, in the case of CLOs, whether prepayments can be reinvested. A
significant increase in price would have resulted in a significantly higher fair value for long
positions, and short positions would have been impacted in a directionally opposite way. Structured
Liabilities and Derivatives For credit derivatives, a significant increase in market yield, upfront
points (i.e., a single upfront payment made by a protection buyer at inception), credit spreads,
default rates or loss severities would have resulted in a significantly lower fair value for
protection sellers and higher fair value for protection buyers. The impact of changes in prepayment
speeds would have resulted in differing impacts depending on the seniority of the instrument.
Structured credit derivatives are impacted by credit correlation. Default correlation is a parameter
that describes the degree of dependence among credit default rates within a credit portfolio that
underlies a credit derivative instrument. The sensitivity of this input on the fair value varies
depending on the level of subordination of the tranche. For senior tranches that are net purchases of
protection, a significant increase in default correlation would have resulted in a significantly
higher fair value. Net short protection positions would have been impacted in a directionally
opposite way. For equity derivatives, commodity derivatives, interest rate derivatives and structured
liabilities, a significant change in long-dated rates and volatilities and correlation inputs (i.e.,
the degree of correlation between an equity security and an index, between two different commodities,
between two different interest rates, or between interest rates and foreign exchange rates) would
have resulted in a significant impact to the fair value; however, the magnitude and direction of the
impact depend on whether the Corporation is long or short the exposure. For structured liabilities, a
significant increase in yield or decrease in price would have resulted in a significantly lower fair
value. Nonrecurring Fair Value The Corporation holds certain assets that are measured at fair value
only in certain situations (e.g., the impairment of an asset), and these measurements are referred to
herein as nonrecurring. The amounts below represent assets still held as of the reporting date for
which a nonrecurring fair value adjustment was recorded during 2022, 2021, and 2020.
 Assets 
 Measured at 
 Fair Value on 
 a 
 Nonrecurring December 31, December 31, 
 Basis 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Dollars in Level 2 Level 3 Level 2 Level 3 
 millions) 
 Assets 
 Loans $ 1,979 $ 3,079 $ 634 $ 24 
 held-for-sale 
 Loans and — 166 — 213 
 leases(1) 
 Foreclosed 
 properties(2, — 7 — 5 
 3) 
 Other assets 88 165 256 2,046 
 Gains (Losses) 
 2022 2021 2020 
 Assets 
 Loans $ -387 $ -44 $ -79 
 held-for-sale 
 Loans and -48 -60 -73 
 leases(1) 
 Foreclosed -6 -2 -6 
 properties 
 Other assets -91 -492 -98 
(1) Includes $ 15million, $ 24million and $ 30million of losses on loans that were written down to a
collateral value of zero during 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2) Amounts are included in other assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheet and represent the carrying
value of foreclosed properties that were written down subsequent to their initial classification as
foreclosed properties. Losses on foreclosed properties include losses recorded during the first 90
days after transfer of a loan to foreclosed properties.
(3) Excludes $ 60million and $ 52million of properties acquired upon foreclosure of certain
government-guaranteed loans (principally FHA-insured loans) at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Bank of America156 
The table below presents information about significant unobservable inputs utilized in the
Corporation's nonrecurring Level 3 fair value measurements at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Quantita… 
 Informat… 
 about 
 Nonrecur… 
 Level 3 
 Fair 
 Value 
 Measurem… 
 Financial 
 Instrume… Fair Value Inputs 
 (Dollars Year Ended Significant 
 in December Valuation Unobservab… Ranges of Weighted 
 millions) 31, 2022 Technique Inputs Inputs Average(1) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans $ 3,079 Pricing Implied 9% to24% n/a 
 held-for… model yield 
 Loans and 166 Market OREO 10% to66% 26 % 
 leases(2) comparabl… discount 
 Costs to 8% to24% 9 % 
 sell 
 Other 165 Discounted Discount 7 % n/a 
 assets(3) cash flow rate 
 Year Ended 
 December 
 31, 2021 
 Loans and $ 213 Market OREO 13% to59% 24 % 
 leases(2) comparabl… discount 
 Costs to 8% to26% 9 % 
 sell 
 Other 1,875 Discounted Discount 7% n/a 
 assets(4) cash flow rate 
 Market Estimated 
 166 comparabl… appraisal n/a n/a 
 value 
(1) The weighted average is calculated based upon the fair value of the loans.
(2) Represents residential mortgages where the loan has been written down to the fair value of the
underlying collateral.
(3) Represents the fair value of certain impaired renewable energy investments.
(4) Represents the fair value of certain impaired renewable energy investments and impaired assets
related to the Corporation’s real estate rationalization.
n/a = not applicable
NOTE 21 Fair Value Option
Loans and Loan Commitments The Corporation elects
to account for certain loans and loan commitments
that exceed the Corporation’s single-name credit
risk concentration guidelines under the fair
value option. Lending commitments are actively
managed and, as appropriate, credit risk for
these lending relationships may be mitigated
through the use of credit derivatives, with the
Corporation’s public side credit view and market
perspectives determining the size and timing of
the hedging activity. These credit derivatives do
not meet the requirements for designation as
accounting hedges and are carried at fair value.
The fair value option allows the Corporation to
carry these loans and loan commitments at fair
value, which is more consistent with management’s
view of the underlying economics and the manner
in which they are managed. In addition, the fair
value option allows the Corporation to reduce the
accounting volatility that would otherwise result
from the asymmetry created by accounting for the
financial instruments at historical cost and the
credit derivatives at fair value. Loans Held-for-
sale The Corporation elects to account for
residential mortgage LHFS, commercial mortgage
LHFS and certain other LHFS under the fair value
option. These loans are actively managed and
monitored and, as appropriate, certain market
risks of the loans may be mitigated through the
use of derivatives. The Corporation has elected
not to designate the derivatives as qualifying
accounting hedges, and therefore, they are
carried at
fair value. The changes in fair value of the
loans are largely offset by changes in the fair
value of the derivatives. The fair value option
allows the Corporation to reduce the accounting
volatility that would otherwise result from the
asymmetry created by accounting for the financial
instruments at the lower of cost or fair value
and the derivatives at fair value. The
Corporation has not elected to account for
certain other LHFS under the fair value option
primarily because these loans are floating-rate
loans that are not hedged using derivative
instruments. Loans Reported as Trading Account
Assets The Corporation elects to account for
certain loans that are held for the purpose of
trading and are risk-managed on a fair value
basis under the fair value option. Other Assets
The Corporation elects to account for certain
long-term fixed-rate margin loans that are hedged
with derivatives under the fair value option.
Election of the fair value option allows the
Corporation to reduce the accounting volatility
that would otherwise result from the asymmetry
created by accounting for the financial
instruments at historical cost and the
derivatives at fair value. Securities Financing
Agreements The Corporation elects to account for
certain securities financing agreements,
including resale and repurchase agreements, under
the fair value option. These elections include
certain agreements collateralized by the U.S.
government and its agencies, which are generally
short-dated and have minimal interest rate risk.
 157Bank of America 
Long-term Deposits The Corporation elects to account for certain long-term fixed-rate and rate-linked
deposits that are hedged with derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting. Election of the
fair value option allows the Corporation to reduce the accounting volatility that would otherwise
result from the asymmetry created by accounting for the financial instruments at historical cost and
the derivatives at fair value. The Corporation has not elected to carry other long-term deposits at
fair value because they are not hedged using derivatives. Short-term Borrowings The Corporation
elects to account for certain short-term borrowings, primarily short-term structured liabilities,
under the fair value option because this debt is risk-managed on a fair value basis. The Corporation
also elects to account for certain asset-backed secured financings, which are also classified in
short-term borrowings, under the fair value option. Election of the fair value option allows the
Corporation to reduce the accounting volatility that would otherwise result from the asymmetry
created by accounting for the asset-backed secured financings at historical cost and the
corresponding mortgage LHFS securing these financings at fair value. Long-term Debt The Corporation
elects to account for certain long-term debt, primarily structured liabilities, under the fair value
option. This long-term debt is either risk-managed on a fair value basis or the related hedges do not
qualify for hedge accounting. Fair Value Option Elections The following tables provide information
about the fair value carrying amount and the contractual principal outstanding of assets and
liabilities accounted for under the fair value option at December 31, 2022 and 2021, and information
about where changes in the fair value of assets and liabilities accounted for under the fair value
option are included in the Consolidated Statement of Income for 2022, 2021 and 2020.
 Fair 
 Val… Dece… Dece… 
 Opt… 31, 31, 
 Ele… 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fair Fair 
 Fair Value Fair Value 
 (Do… Value Cont… Carr… Value Cont… Carry… 
 in Carr… Prin… Amou… Carr… Prin… Amount 
 mil… Amou… Outs… Less Amou… Outs… Less 
 Unpa… Unpaid 
 Prin… Princ… 
 Fed… 
 fun… 
 sold 
 and 
 sec… 
 bor… $ 146,… $ 147,… $ -159 $ 150,… $ 150,… $ -12 
 or 
 pur… 
 und… 
 agr… 
 to 
 res… 
 Loa… 
 rep… 
 as 10,1… 17,6… -7,5… 10,8… 18,8… -8,031 
 tra… 
 acc… 
 ass… 
 Tra… 
 inv… 20,7… n/a n/a 21,9… n/a n/a 
 – 
 oth… 
 Con… 
 and 5,771 5,897 -126 7,819 7,888 -69 
 com… 
 loa… 
 Loa… 1,115 1,873 -758 4,455 5,343 -888 
 hel… 
 Oth… 620 n/a n/a 544 n/a n/a 
 ass… 
 Lon… 311 381 -70 408 401 7 
 dep… 
 Fed… 
 fun… 
 pur… 
 and 
 sec… 
 loa… 151,… 151,… -177 139,… 139,… -41 
 or 
 sold 
 und… 
 agr… 
 to 
 rep… 
 Sho… 832 833 -1 4,279 4,127 152 
 bor… 
 Unf… 
 loan 110 n/a n/a 97 n/a n/a 
 com… 
 Acc… 
 exp… 
 and 1,217 1,161 56 — — — 
 oth… 
 lia… 
 Lon… 33,0… 36,8… -3,7… 29,7… 30,9… -1,195 
 debt 
(1) A significant portion of the loans reported as trading account assets and LHFS are distressed
loans that were purchased at a deep discount to par, and the remainder are loans with a fair value
near contractual principal outstanding.
n/a = not applicable
 Bank of America158 
 Market making 
 Gains (Losses) Related to Assets and Liabilities and similar 
 Accounted for Under the Fair Value Option activities Other 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 Income Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans reported as trading account assets $ -164 $ — $ -164 
 Trading inventory – other(1) -1,159 — -1,159 
 Consumer and commercial loans -58 -27 -85 
 Loans held-for-sale(2) — -304 -304 
 Short-term borrowings 639 — 639 
 Unfunded loan commitments — 8 8 
 Accrued expenses and other liabilities 11 — 11 
 Long-term debt(3) 4,359 -46 4,313 
 Other(4) 74 30 104 
 Total $ 3,702 $ -339 $ 3,363 
 2021 
 Loans reported as trading account assets $ 275 $ — $ 275 
 Trading inventory – other(1) -211 — -211 
 Consumer and commercial loans 78 40 118 
 Loans held-for-sale(2) — 58 58 
 Short-term borrowings 883 — 883 
 Long-term debt(3) -604 -41 -645 
 Other(4) 18 -23 -5 
 Total $ 439 $ 34 $ 473 
 2020 
 Loans reported as trading account assets $ 107 $ — $ 107 
 Trading inventory – other(1) 3,216 — 3,216 
 Consumer and commercial loans 22 -3 19 
 Loans held-for-sale(2) — 103 103 
 Short-term borrowings -170 — -170 
 Unfunded loan commitments — -65 -65 
 Long-term debt(3) -2,175 -53 -2,228 
 Other(4) 35 -22 13 
 Total $ 1,035 $ -40 $ 995 
(1) The gains (losses) in market making and similar activities are primarily offset by (losses) gains
on trading liabilities that hedge these assets.
(2) Includes the value of IRLCs on funded loans, including those sold during the period.
(3) The net gains (losses) in market making and similar activities relate to the embedded derivatives
in structured liabilities and are typically offset by (losses) gains on derivatives and securities
that hedge these liabilities. For the cumulative impact of changes in the Corporation’s own credit
spreads and the amount recognized in accumulated OCI, see Note 14 – Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income (Loss) . For more information on how the Corporation’s own credit spread is determined, see
Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements.
(4) Includes gains (losses) on federal funds sold and securities borrowed or purchased under
agreements to resell, other assets, long-term deposits and federal funds purchased and securities
loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase.
 Gains (Losses) Related to Borrower-specific Credit Risk for 
 Assets and Liabilities Accounted for Under the Fair Value Option 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans reported as trading account assets $ -950 $ 128 $ -172 
 Consumer and commercial loans -51 7 -19 
 Loans held-for-sale -23 28 -105 
 Unfunded loan commitments 8 -1 -65 
NOTE 22 Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Financial instruments are classified within the
fair value hierarchy using the methodologies
described in Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements .
Certain loans, deposits, long-term debt, unfunded
lending commitments and other financial
instruments are accounted for under the fair
value option. For more information, see Note 21 –
Fair Value Option . The following disclosures
include financial instruments that are not
carried at fair value or only a portion of the
ending balance is carried at fair value on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet. Short-term Financial
Instruments The carrying value of short-term
financial instruments, including cash and cash
equivalents, certain time deposits placed and
other short-term investments, federal funds sold
and purchased, certain resale and repurchase
agreements and short-term
borrowings, approximates the fair value of these
instruments. These financial instruments
generally expose the Corporation to limited
credit risk and have no stated maturities or have
short-term maturities and carry interest rates
that approximate market. The Corporation accounts
for certain resale and repurchase agreements
under the fair value option. Under the fair value
hierarchy, cash and cash equivalents are
classified as Level 1. Time deposits placed and
other short-term investments, such as U.S.
government securities and short-term commercial
paper, are classified as Level 1 or Level 2.
Federal funds sold and purchased are classified
as Level 2. Resale and repurchase agreements are
classified as Level 2 because they are generally
short-dated and/or variable-rate instruments
collateralized by U.S. government or agency
securities. Short-term borrowings are classified
as Level 2.
 159Bank of America 
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The carrying values and fair values by fair value
hierarchy of certain financial instruments where
only a portion of the ending balance was carried
at fair value at December 31, 2022 and 2021 are
presented in the table below.
 Fair Value of Financial 
 Instruments 
 (Dollars in millions) Carrying Value Fair Value 
 Financial assets December 31, 2022 Level 2 Level 3 Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans $ 1,014,593 $ 50,194 $ 935,282 $ 985,476 
 Loans held-for-sale 6,871 3,417 3,455 6,872 
 Financial liabilities 
 Deposits(1) 1,930,341 1,930,165 — 1,930,165 
 Long-term debt 275,982 271,993 1,136 273,129 
 Commercial unfunded 
 lending 1,650 77 6,596 6,673 
 commitments(2) 
 December 31, 2021 
 Financial assets 
 Loans $ 946,142 $ 53,544 $ 919,980 $ 973,524 
 Loans held-for-sale 15,635 15,016 627 15,643 
 Financial liabilities 
 Deposits(1) 2,064,446 2,064,438 — 2,064,438 
 Long-term debt 280,117 286,802 1,288 288,090 
 Commercial unfunded 
 lending 1,554 97 6,384 6,481 
 commitments(2) 
(1) Includes demand deposits of $ 918.9billion
and $ 1.0trillion with nostated maturities at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.
(2) The carrying value of commercial unfunded
lending commitments is included in accrued
expenses and other liabilities on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet. The Corporation does
not estimate the fair value of consumer unfunded
lending commitments because, in many instances,
the Corporation can reduce or cancel these
commitments by providing notice to the borrower.
For more information on commitments, see Note 12
– Commitments and Contingencies .
NOTE 23 Business Segment Information The Corporation reports its results of operations through the
following fourbusiness segments: Consumer Banking , Global Wealth & Investment Management, Global
Banking and Global Markets , with the remaining operations recorded in All Other . Consumer Banking
Consumer Banking offers a diversified range of credit, banking and investment products and services
to consumers and small businesses. Consumer Banking product offerings include traditional savings
accounts, money market savings accounts, CDs and IRAs, checking accounts, and investment accounts and
products, as well as credit and debit cards, residential mortgages and home equity loans, and direct
and indirect loans to consumers and small businesses in the U.S. Consumer Banking includes the impact
of servicing residential mortgages and home equity loans. Global Wealth & Investment Management GWIM
provides a high-touch client experience through a network of financial advisors focused on clients
with over $250,000 in total investable assets, including tailored solutions to meet clients’ needs
through a full set of investment management, brokerage, banking and retirement products. GWIM also
provides comprehensive wealth management solutions targeted to high net worth and ultra high net
worth clients, as well as customized solutions to meet clients’ wealth structuring, investment
management, trust and banking needs, including specialty asset management services.
Global Banking Global Banking provides a wide range of lending-related products and services,
integrated working capital management and treasury solutions, and underwriting and advisory services
through the Corporation’s network of offices and client relationship teams. Global Banking also
provides investment banking products to clients. The economics of certain investment banking and
underwriting activities are shared primarily between Global Banking and Global Markets under an
internal revenue-sharing arrangement. Global Banking clients generally include middle-market
companies, commercial real estate firms, not-for-profit companies, large global corporations,
financial institutions, leasing clients, and mid-sized U.S.-based businesses requiring customized and
integrated financial advice and solutions. Global Markets Global Markets offers sales and trading
services and research services to institutional clients across fixed-income, credit, currency,
commodity and equity businesses. Global Markets provides market-making, financing, securities
clearing, settlement and custody services globally to institutional investor clients in support of
their investing and trading activities. Global Markets product coverage includes securities and
derivative products in both the primary and secondary markets. Global Markets also works with
commercial and corporate clients to provide risk management products. As a result of market-making
activities, Global Markets may be required to manage risk in a broad range of financial products. In
addition, the economics of certain investment banking and underwriting activities are shared
primarily between Global Markets and Global Banking under an internal revenue-sharing arrangement.
All Other All Other primarily consists of ALM activities, liquidating businesses and certain expenses
not otherwise allocated to a business segment. ALM activities encompass interest rate and foreign
currency risk management activities for which substantially all of the results are allocated to the
business segments. Basis of Presentation The management accounting and reporting process derives
segment and business results by utilizing allocation methodologies for revenue and expense. The net
income derived for the businesses is dependent upon revenue and cost allocations using an activity-
based costing model, funds transfer pricing, and other methodologies and assumptions management
believes are appropriate to reflect the results of the business. Total revenue, net of interest
expense, includes net interest income on an FTE basis and noninterest income. The adjustment of net
interest income to an FTE basis results in a corresponding increase in income tax expense. The
segment results also reflect certain revenue and expense methodologies that are utilized to determine
net income. The net interest income of the businesses includes the results of a funds transfer
pricing process that matches assets and liabilities with similar interest rate sensitivity and
maturity characteristics. In segments where the total of liabilities and equity exceeds assets, which
are generally deposit-taking segments, the Corporation allocates assets to match liabilities. Net
interest income of the business segments also includes an allocation of net interest income generated
by certain of the Corporation’s ALM activities. The Corporation’s ALM activities include an overall
interest rate risk management strategy that incorporates the use of
 Bank of America160 
various derivatives and cash instruments to manage fluctuations in earnings and capital that are
caused by interest rate volatility. The Corporation’s goal is to manage interest rate sensitivity so
that movements in interest rates do not significantly adversely affect earnings and capital. The
results of a majority of the Corporation’s ALM activities are allocated to the business segments and
fluctuate based on the performance of the ALM activities. ALM activities include external product
pricing decisions including deposit pricing strategies, the effects of the Corporation’s internal
funds transfer pricing process and the net effects of other ALM activities. Certain expenses not
directly attributable to a specific business segment are allocated to the segments. The costs of
certain centralized or shared functions are allocated based on methodologies that reflect
utilization. Effective October 1, 2021, a business activity previously included in the Global Markets
segment is being reported as a liquidating business in All Other , consistent with a realignment in
performance reporting to senior management. While this activity was not material to Global Markets’
results of operations and historical results have not been restated, this activity’s noninterest
expense of $ 309million and $ 473million for the three months ended September 30, 2021 and June 30,
2021 was elevated and would have been excluded from Global Markets’ results of operations for those
periods under the new basis of presentation. The table below presents net income (loss) and the
components thereto (with net interest income on an FTE basis for the business segments, All Other and
the total Corporation) for 2022, 2021 and 2020, and total assets at December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020
for each business segment, as well as All Other.
 Resul… 
 of 
 Busin… 
 Segme… 
 and 
 All 
 Other 
 At and 
 for 
 the 
 year 
 ended 
 Decem… 
 31 
 (Doll… Consu… 
 in Total Banki… 
 milli… Corpor… 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net 
 inter… $ 52,900 $ 43,361 $ 43,859 $ 30,045 $ 24,929 $ 24,698 
 income 
 Nonin… 42,488 46,179 42,168 8,590 9,076 8,564 
 income 
 Total 
 reven… 
 net of 95,388 89,540 86,027 38,635 34,005 33,262 
 inter… 
 expen… 
 Provi… 
 for 2,543 -4,594 11,320 1,980 -1,035 5,765 
 credit 
 losses 
 Nonin… 61,438 59,731 55,213 20,077 19,290 18,882 
 expen… 
 Income 
 before 31,407 34,403 19,494 16,578 15,750 8,615 
 income 
 taxes 
 Income 
 tax 3,879 2,425 1,600 4,062 3,859 2,111 
 expen… 
 Net $ 27,528 $ 31,978 $ 17,894 $ 12,516 $ 11,891 $ 6,504 
 income 
 Year-… 
 total $ 3,051… $ 3,169,… $ 1,126,… $ 1,131… 
 assets 
 Global 
 Wealth Global 
 & Banki… 
 Invest… 
 Manage… 
 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020 
 Net 
 inter… $ 7,466 $ 5,664 $ 5,468 $ 12,184 $ 8,511 $ 9,013 
 income 
 Nonin… 14,282 15,084 13,116 10,045 12,364 9,974 
 income 
 Total 
 reven… 
 net of 21,748 20,748 18,584 22,229 20,875 18,987 
 inter… 
 expen… 
 Provi… 
 for 66 -241 357 641 -3,201 4,897 
 credit 
 losses 
 Nonin… 15,490 15,258 14,160 10,966 10,632 9,342 
 expen… 
 Income 
 before 6,192 5,731 4,067 10,622 13,444 4,748 
 income 
 taxes 
 Income 
 tax 1,517 1,404 996 2,815 3,630 1,282 
 expen… 
 Net $ 4,675 $ 4,327 $ 3,071 $ 7,807 $ 9,814 $ 3,466 
 income 
 Year-… 
 total $ 368,8… $ 438,275 $ 588,466 $ 638,1… 
 assets 
 Global All 
 Markets Other 
 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020 
 Net 
 inter… $ 3,088 $ 4,011 $ 4,646 $ 117 $ 246 $ 34 
 income 
 Nonin… 15,050 15,244 14,119 -5,479 -5,589 -3,605 
 income 
 Total 
 reven… 
 net of 18,138 19,255 18,765 -5,362 -5,343 -3,571 
 inter… 
 expen… 
 Provi… 
 for 28 65 251 -172 -182 50 
 credit 
 losses 
 Nonin… 12,420 13,032 11,417 2,485 1,519 1,412 
 expen… 
 Income 
 (loss) 
 before 5,690 6,158 7,097 -7,675 -6,680 -5,033 
 income 
 taxes 
 Income 
 tax 1,508 1,601 1,845 -6,023 -8,069 -4,634 
 expen… 
 (bene… 
 Net 
 income $ 4,182 $ 4,557 $ 5,252 $ -1,652 $ 1,389 $ -399 
 (loss) 
 Year-… 
 total $ 812,4… $ 747,794 $ 155,074 $ 214,1… 
 assets 
(1) There were no material intersegment revenues.
 161Bank of America 
The tables below present noninterest income and the associated components for 2022, 2021 and 2020 for
each business segment, All Other and the total Corporation. For more information, see Note 2 – Net
Interest Income and Noninterest Income .
 No… 
 In… 
 by 
 Bu… 
 Se… 
 and 
 All 
 Ot… 
 (D… 
 in 
 mi… Gl… 
 Fe… We… 
 and & 
 co… To… Con… In… 
 Ca… Co… Ban… Ma… 
 in… 20… 2021 20… 2022 20… 2020 20… 2021 20… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 In… $ 4,… $ 4,5… $ 3,… $ 3,2… $ 3,… $ 3,0… $ 20 $ 43 $ 36 
 fe… 
 Ot… 
 ca… 1,… 1,6… 1,… 1,9… 1,… 1,6… 50 42 42 
 in… 
 To… 
 ca… 6,… 6,2… 5,… 5,1… 5,… 4,6… 70 85 78 
 in… 
 Se… 
 ch… 
 De… 5,… 6,2… 5,… 2,7… 3,… 3,4… 65 72 67 
 fe… 
 Le… 1,… 1,2… 1,… — — — 8 — — 
 fe… 
 To… 
 se… 6,… 7,5… 7,… 2,7… 3,… 3,4… 73 72 67 
 ch… 
 In… 
 and 
 br… 
 se… 
 As… 
 ma… 12… 12,… 10… 195 188 146 11… 12,… 10… 
 fe… 
 Br… 3,… 3,9… 3,… 109 132 127 1,… 1,7… 1,… 
 fe… 
 To… 
 in… 
 and 15… 16,… 14… 304 320 273 13… 14,… 12… 
 br… 
 se… 
 In… 
 ba… 
 fe… 
 Un… 1,… 5,0… 4,… — — — 189 388 391 
 in… 
 Sy… 1,… 1,4… 861 — — — — — — 
 fe… 
 Fi… 
 ad… 1,… 2,3… 1,… — — — — — — 
 se… 
 To… 
 in… 4,… 8,8… 7,… — — — 189 388 391 
 ba… 
 fe… 
 To… 
 fe… 33… 39,… 34… 8,1… 9,… 8,3… 13… 14,… 12… 
 and 
 co… 
 Ma… 
 ma… 
 and 12… 8,6… 8,… 10 1 2 102 40 63 
 si… 
 ac… 
 Ot… 
 in… -2… -1,… -7… 401 45 199 287 187 247 
 (l… 
 To… 
 no… $ 42… $ 46,… $ 42… $ 8,5… $ 9,… $ 8,5… $ 14… $ 15,… $ 13… 
 in… 
 Gl… Glo… All 
 Ba… Mar… Ot… 
 20… 2021 20… 2022 20… 2020 20… 2021 20… 
 Fe… 
 and 
 co… 
 Ca… 
 in… 
 In… $ 767 $ 700 $ 499 $ 66 $ 220 $ 391 $ 4 $ — $ 1 
 fe… 
 Ot… 
 ca… 7 13 14 — — — — 28 — 
 in… 
 To… 
 ca… 774 713 513 66 220 391 4 28 1 
 in… 
 Se… 
 ch… 
 De… 2,… 2,5… 2,… 101 146 177 8 7 32 
 fe… 
 Le… 983 1,0… 940 224 218 210 — — — 
 fe… 
 To… 
 se… 3,… 3,5… 3,… 325 364 387 8 7 32 
 ch… 
 In… 
 and 
 br… 
 se… 
 As… 
 ma… — — — — — — — — -16 
 fe… 
 Br… 42 104 74 2,0… 1,… 1,9… -8 -25 — 
 fe… 
 To… 
 in… 
 and 42 104 74 2,0… 1,… 1,9… -8 -25 -16 
 br… 
 se… 
 In… 
 ba… 
 fe… 
 Un… 796 2,1… 2,… 1,1… 2,… 2,4… -1… -223 -2… 
 in… 
 Sy… 565 781 482 505 718 379 — — — 
 fe… 
 Fi… 
 ad… 1,… 2,1… 1,… 139 173 163 1 -1 — 
 se… 
 To… 
 in… 3,… 5,1… 4,… 1,8… 3,… 2,9… -1… -224 -2… 
 ba… 
 fe… 
 To… 
 fe… 7,… 9,4… 7,… 4,2… 6,… 5,7… -1… -214 -1… 
 and 
 co… 
 Ma… 
 ma… 
 and 215 145 103 11,… 8,… 8,4… 342 -255 -2… 
 si… 
 ac… 
 Ot… 
 in… 2,… 2,7… 2,… -569 305 -94 -5… -5,… -3… 
 (l… 
 To… 
 no… $ 10… $ 12,… $ 9,… $ 15,… $ 15… $ 14,… $ -5… $ -5,… $ -3… 
 in… 
(1) All Other includes eliminations of intercompany transactions.
 Bank of America162 
 Business Segment Reconciliations 
 (Dollars in millions) 2022 2021 2020 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Segments’ total revenue, net of interest $ 100,750 $ 94,883 $ 89,598 
 expense 
 Adjustments(1): 
 Asset and liability management -164 -4 375 
 activities 
 Liquidating businesses, eliminations and -5,198 -5,339 -3,946 
 other 
 FTE basis adjustment -438 -427 -499 
 Consolidated revenue, net of interest $ 94,950 $ 89,113 $ 85,528 
 expense 
 Segments’ total net income 29,180 30,589 18,293 
 Adjustments, net-of-tax(1): 
 Asset and liability management -122 11 279 
 activities 
 Liquidating businesses, eliminations and -1,530 1,378 -678 
 other 
 Consolidated net income $ 27,528 $ 31,978 $ 17,894 
 December 31 
 2022 2021 
 Segments’ total assets $ 2,896,301 $ 2,955,342 
 Adjustments(1): 
 Asset and liability management 
 activities, including securities 1,133,375 1,363,626 
 portfolio 
 Elimination of segment asset allocations -1,041,793 -1,216,891 
 to match liabilities 
 Other 63,492 67,418 
 Consolidated total assets $ 3,051,375 $ 3,169,495 
(1) Adjustments include consolidated income, expense and asset amounts not specifically allocated to
individual business segments.
 NOTE 24 
 Parent Company Information 
The following tables present the Parent Company-only financial information.
 Condensed Statement of Income 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Income 
 Dividends from subsidiaries: 2022 2021 2020 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Bank holding companies and related $ 22,250 $ 15,621 $ 10,352 
 subsidiaries 
 Interest from subsidiaries 12,420 8,362 8,825 
 Other income (loss) -201 -114 -138 
 Total income 34,469 23,869 19,039 
 Expense 
 Interest on borrowed funds from 236 54 136 
 subsidiaries 
 Other interest expense 7,041 3,383 4,119 
 Noninterest expense 1,322 1,531 1,651 
 Total expense 8,599 4,968 5,906 
 Income before income taxes and equity in 25,870 18,901 13,133 
 undistributed earnings of subsidiaries 
 Income tax expense 683 886 649 
 Income before equity in undistributed 25,187 18,015 12,484 
 earnings of subsidiaries 
 Equity in undistributed earnings 
 (losses) of subsidiaries: 
 Bank holding companies and related 2,333 14,078 5,372 
 subsidiaries 
 Nonbank companies and related 8 -115 38 
 subsidiaries 
 Total equity in undistributed earnings 2,341 13,963 5,410 
 (losses) of subsidiaries 
 Net income $ 27,528 $ 31,978 $ 17,894 
 163Bank of America 
 Condensed Balance Sheet 
 (Dollars in millions) December 31 
 Assets 2022 2021 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash held at bank subsidiaries $ 9,609 $ 5,011 
 Securities 617 671 
 Receivables from subsidiaries: 
 Bank holding companies and related 222,584 217,447 
 subsidiaries 
 Banks and related subsidiaries 220 347 
 Nonbank companies and related 978 368 
 subsidiaries 
 Investments in subsidiaries: 
 Bank holding companies and related 301,207 316,497 
 subsidiaries 
 Nonbank companies and related 3,770 3,645 
 subsidiaries 
 Other assets 7,156 8,602 
 Total assets $ 546,141 $ 552,588 
 Liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
 Accrued expenses and other liabilities $ 14,193 $ 17,394 
 Payables to subsidiaries: 
 Banks and related subsidiaries 260 107 
 Bank holding companies and related 21 3 
 subsidiaries 
 Nonbank companies and related 14,578 11,564 
 subsidiaries 
 Long-term debt 243,892 253,454 
 Total liabilities 272,944 282,522 
 Shareholders’ equity 273,197 270,066 
 Total liabilities and shareholders’ $ 546,141 $ 552,588 
 equity 
 Condensed Statement of Cash Flows 
 (Dollars in millions) 
 Operating activities 2022 2021 2020 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 27,528 $ 31,978 $ 17,894 
 Reconciliation of net income (loss) to 
 net cash provided by (used in) operating 
 activities: 
 Equity in undistributed (earnings) -2,341 -13,963 -5,410 
 losses of subsidiaries 
 Other operating activities, net -31,777 -7,144 14,303 
 Net cash provided by (used in) operating -6,590 10,871 26,787 
 activities 
 Investing activities 
 Net sales (purchases) of securities 25 -14 -4 
 Net payments to subsidiaries -6,044 -10,796 -33,111 
 Other investing activities, net -34 -26 -7 
 Net cash used in investing activities -6,053 -10,836 -33,122 
 Financing activities 
 Net increase (decrease) in other 2,853 503 -422 
 advances 
 Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt 44,123 56,106 43,766 
 Retirement of long-term debt -19,858 -24,544 -23,168 
 Proceeds from issuance of preferred 4,426 2,170 2,181 
 stock and warrants 
 Redemption of preferred stock -654 -1,971 -1,072 
 Common stock repurchased -5,073 -25,126 -7,025 
 Cash dividends paid -8,576 -8,055 -7,727 
 Net cash provided by (used in) financing 17,241 -917 6,533 
 activities 
 Net increase (decrease) in cash held at 4,598 -882 198 
 bank subsidiaries 
 Cash held at bank subsidiaries at 5,011 5,893 5,695 
 January 1 
 Cash held at bank subsidiaries at $ 9,609 $ 5,011 $ 5,893 
 December 31 
 Bank of America164 
NOTE 25 Performance by Geographical Area
The Corporation’s operations are highly
integrated with operations in both U.S. and
non-U.S. markets. The non-U.S. business
activities are largely conducted in Europe, the
Middle East and Africa and in Asia. The
Corporation identifies its geographic performance
based on the business unit structure used to
manage the capital or expense deployed in the
region
as applicable. This requires certain judgments
related to the allocation of revenue so that
revenue can be appropriately matched with the
related capital or expense deployed in the
region. Certain asset, liability, income and
expense amounts have been allocated to arrive at
total assets, total revenue, net of interest
expense, income before income taxes and net
income by geographic area as presented below.
 Total 
 Revenue, Net 
 Total Assets of 
 (Dollars in at Year Interest Income Before 
 millions) End(1) Expense(2) Income Taxes Net Income 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S.(3) 2022 $ 2,631,815 $ 82,890 $ 28,135 $ 25,607 
 2021 2,789,862 78,012 31,392 27,781 
 2020 75,576 18,247 16,692 
 Asia 2022 127,399 4,597 1,144 865 
 2021 117,085 4,439 988 733 
 2020 4,232 1,051 788 
 Europe, 
 Middle East 2022 262,856 6,044 1,121 689 
 and Africa 
 2021 233,356 5,423 1,097 3,134 
 2020 4,491 -596 264 
 Latin 
 America and 2022 29,305 1,419 569 367 
 the 
 Caribbean 
 2021 29,192 1,239 499 330 
 2020 1,229 293 150 
 Total 2022 419,560 12,060 2,834 1,921 
 Non-U.S. 
 2021 379,633 11,101 2,584 4,197 
 2020 9,952 748 1,202 
 Total 2022 $ 3,051,375 $ 94,950 $ 30,969 $ 27,528 
 Consolidated 
 2021 3,169,495 89,113 33,976 31,978 
 2020 85,528 18,995 17,894 
(1) Total assets include long-lived assets, which are primarily located in the U.S.
(2) There were no material intercompany revenues between geographic regions for any of the periods
presented.
(3) Substantially reflects the U.S.
 165Bank of America 
 Glossary 
Alt-A Mortgage – A type of U.S. mortgage that is
considered riskier than A-paper, or “prime,” and
less risky than “subprime,” the riskiest
category. Typically, Alt-A mortgages are
characterized by borrowers with less than full
documentation, lower credit scores and higher
LTVs.
Assets Under Management (AUM) – The total market
value of assets under the investment advisory
and/or discretion of GWIM which generate asset
management fees based on a percentage of the
assets’ market values. AUM reflects assets that
are generally managed for institutional, high net
worth and retail clients, and are distributed
through various investment products including
mutual funds, other commingled vehicles and
separate accounts.
Banking Book – All on- and off-balance sheet
financial instruments of the Corporation except
for those positions that are held for trading
purposes.
Brokerage and Other Assets – Non-discretionary
client assets which are held in brokerage
accounts or held for safekeeping.
Committed Credit Exposure – Any funded portion of
a facility plus the unfunded portion of a
facility on which the lender is legally bound to
advance funds during a specified period under
prescribed conditions.
Credit Derivatives – Contractual agreements that
provide protection against a specified credit
event on one or more referenced obligations.
Credit Valuation Adjustment (CVA) – A portfolio
adjustment required to properly reflect the
counterparty credit risk exposure as part of the
fair value of derivative instruments.
Debit Valuation Adjustment (DVA) – A portfolio
adjustment required to properly reflect the
Corporation’s own credit risk exposure as part of
the fair value of derivative instruments and/or
structured liabilities.
Funding Valuation Adjustment (FVA) – A portfolio
adjustment required to include funding costs on
uncollateralized derivatives and derivatives
where the Corporation is not permitted to use the
collateral it receives.
Interest Rate Lock Commitment (IRLC) – Commitment
with a loan applicant in which the loan terms are
guaranteed for a designated period of time
subject to credit approval.
Letter of Credit – A document issued on behalf of
a customer to a third party promising to pay the
third party upon presentation of specified
documents. A letter of credit effectively
substitutes the issuer’s credit for that of the
customer.
Loan-to-value (LTV) – A commonly used credit
quality metric. LTV is calculated as the
outstanding carrying value of the loan divided by
the estimated value of the property securing the
loan.
Macro Products – Include currencies, interest
rates and commodities products.
Margin Receivable – An extension of credit
secured by eligible securities in certain
brokerage accounts.
Matched Book – Repurchase and resale agreements
or securities borrowed and loaned transactions
where the overall asset and liability position is
similar in size and/or maturity. Generally, these
are entered into to accommodate customers where
the Corporation earns the interest rate spread.
Mortgage Servicing Rights (MSR) – The right to
service a mortgage loan when the underlying loan
is sold or securitized. Servicing includes
collections for principal, interest and escrow
payments from borrowers and accounting for and
remitting principal and interest payments to
investors.
Nonperforming Loans and Leases – Includes loans
and leases that have been placed on nonaccrual
status, including nonaccruing loans whose
contractual terms have been restructured in a
manner that grants a concession to a borrower
experiencing financial difficulties.
Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) – A framework
established by the U.S. banking regulators
requiring banks to maintain certain levels of
regulatory capital ratios, comprised of five
categories of capitalization: “well capitalized,”
“adequately capitalized,” “undercapitalized,”
“significantly undercapitalized” and “critically
undercapitalized.” Insured depository
institutions that fail to meet certain of these
capital levels are subject to increasingly strict
limits on their activities, including their
ability to make capital distributions, pay
management compensation, grow assets and take
other actions.
Subprime Loans – Although a standard industry
definition for subprime loans (including subprime
mortgage loans) does not exist, the Corporation
defines subprime loans as specific product
offerings for higher risk borrowers.
Troubled Debt Restructurings (TDRs) – Loans whose
contractual terms have been restructured in a
manner that grants a concession to a borrower
experiencing financial difficulties. Certain
consumer loans for which a binding offer to
restructure has been extended are also classified
as TDRs.
Value-at-Risk (VaR) – VaR is a model that
simulates the value of a portfolio under a range
of hypothetical scenarios in order to generate a
distribution of potential gains and losses. VaR
represents the loss the portfolio is expected to
experience with a given confidence level based on
historical data. A VaR model is an effective tool
in estimating ranges of potential gains and
losses on our trading portfolios.
 Bank of America166 
 Key Metrics 
Active Digital Banking Users – Mobile and/or
online active users over the past 90 days.
Active Mobile Banking Users – Mobile active users
over the past 90 days.
Book Value – Ending common shareholders’ equity
divided by ending common shares outstanding.
Common Equity Ratio - Ending common shareholders’
equity divided by ending total assets.
Deposit Spread – Annualized net interest income
divided by average deposits.
Dividend Payout Ratio – Common dividends declared
divided by net income applicable to common
shareholders.
Efficiency Ratio – Noninterest expense divided by
total revenue, net of interest expense.
Gross Interest Yield – Effective annual
percentage rate divided by average loans.
Net Interest Yield – Net interest income divided
by average total interest-earning assets.
Operating Margin – Income before income taxes
divided by total revenue, net of interest
expense.
Return on Average Allocated Capital – Adjusted
net income divided by allocated capital.
Return on Average Assets – Net income divided by
total average assets.
Return on Average Common Shareholders ’ Equity –
Net income applicable to common shareholders
divided by average common shareholders’ equity.
Return on Average Shareholders ’ Equity – Net
income divided by average shareholders’ equity.
Risk-adjusted Margi n – Difference between total
revenue, net of interest expense, and net credit
losses divided by average loans.
 167Bank of America 
 Acronyms 
 ABS Asset-backed securities 
 AFS Available-for-sale 
 AI Artificial intelligence 
 ALM Asset and liability management 
 ARR Alternative reference rates 
 AUM Assets under management 
 AVM Automated valuation model 
 BANA Bank of America, National Association 
 BHC Bank holding company 
 BofAS BofA Securities, Inc. 
 BofASE BofA Securities Europe SA 
 bps Basis points 
 CAE Chief Audit Executive 
 CCAR Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 
 CDO Collateralized debt obligation 
 CDS Credit default swap 
 CECL Current expected credit losses 
 CET1 Common equity tier 1 
 CFPB Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
 CFTC Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
 CLO Collateralized loan obligation 
 CLTV Combined loan-to-value 
 CRO Chief Risk Officer 
 CVA Credit valuation adjustment 
 DIF Deposit Insurance Fund 
 DVA Debit valuation adjustment 
 ECL Expected credit losses 
 EPS Earnings per common share 
 ERC Enterprise Risk Committee 
 ESG Environmental, social and governance 
 EU European Union 
 FCA Financial Conduct Authority 
 FDIC Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
 FDICIA Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 
 FHA Federal Housing Administration 
 FHLB Federal Home Loan Bank 
 FHLMC Freddie Mac 
 FICC Fixed income, currencies and commodities 
 FICO Fair Isaac Corporation (credit score) 
 FLUs Front line units 
 FNMA Fannie Mae 
 FTE Fully taxable-equivalent 
 FVA Funding valuation adjustment 
 GAAP Accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America 
 GDPR General Data Protection Regulation 
 GLS Global Liquidity Sources 
 GNMA Government National Mortgage Association 
 GRM Global Risk Management 
 GSE Government-sponsored enterprise 
 G-SIB Global systemically important bank 
 GWIM Global Wealth & Investment Management 
 HELOC Home equity line of credit 
 HQLA High Quality Liquid Assets 
 HTM Held-to-maturity 
 IBOR Interbank Offered Rates 
 ICAAP Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process 
 IRLC Interest rate lock commitment 
 ISDA International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc. 
 LCR Liquidity Coverage Ratio 
 LHFS Loans held-for-sale 
 LIBOR London Interbank Offered Rate 
 LTV Loan-to-value 
 MBS Mortgage-backed securities 
 MD&A Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 
 MLI Merrill Lynch International 
 MLPCC Merrill Lynch Professional Clearing Corp 
 MLPF&S Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated 
 MRC Management Risk Committee 
 MSA Metropolitan Statistical Area 
 MSR Mortgage servicing right 
 NOL Net operating loss 
 NSFR Net Stable Funding Ratio 
 OCC Office of the Comptroller of the Currency 
 OCI Other comprehensive income 
 OREO Other real estate owned 
 OTC Over-the-counter 
 PCA Prompt Corrective Action 
 PPP Paycheck Protection Program 
 RMBS Residential mortgage-backed securities 
 RSU Restricted stock unit 
 RWA Risk-weighted assets 
 SBA Small Business Administration 
 SBLC Standby letter of credit 
 SCB Stress capital buffer 
 SEC Securities and Exchange Commission 
 SLR Supplementary leverage ratio 
 TDR Troubled debt restructurings 
 TLAC Total loss-absorbing capacity 
 UDAAP Unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or practices 
 VA U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs 
 VaR Value-at-Risk 
 VIE Variable interest entity 
 Bank of America168 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial │
│ DisclosureNoneItem 9A. Controls and ProceduresDisclosure Controls and ProceduresAs of the end │
│ of the period covered by this report and pursuant to Rule 13a-15 of the Securities Exchange Act │
│ of 1934, as amended (Exchange Act), Bank of America’s management, including the Chief Executive │
│ Officer and Chief Financial Officer, conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness and design of │
│ our disclosure controls and procedures (as that term is defined in Rule 13a-15(e) of the │
│ Exchange Act). Based upon that evaluation, Bank of America’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief │
│ Financial Officer concluded that Bank of America’s disclosure controls and procedures were │
│ effective, as of the end of the period covered by this report.Report of Management on Internal │
│ Control Over Financial ReportingThe Report of Management on Internal Control Over Financial │
│ Reporting is set forth on page 87 and incorporated herein by reference. The Report of │
│ Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm with respect to the Corporation’s internal │
│ control over financial reporting is set forth on pages 88 and 89 and incorporated herein by │
│ reference.Changes in Internal Control Over Financial ReportingThere have been no changes in our │
│ internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) of the Exchange Act) │
│ during the quarter ended December 31, 2022, that materially affected, or are reasonably likely │
│ to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.Item 9B. Other │
│ InformationDisclosure Pursuant to Section 13(r) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934Pursuant │
│ to Section 13(r) of the Exchange Act, an issuer is required to disclose in its annual or │
│ quarterly reports, as applicable, whether it or any of its affiliates knowingly engaged in │
│ certain activities, transactions or dealings relating to Iran or with individuals or entities │
│ designated pursuant to certain Executive Orders. Disclosure may be required even where the │
│ activities, transactions or dealings were conducted in compliance with applicable law. As │
│ previously disclosed in its related quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, the Corporation identified │
│ and reported certain activities pursuant to Section 13(r) for the first, second and third │
│ quarters of 2022. The information provided pursuant to Section 13(r) of the Exchange Act in │
│ Item 5 of the quarters ended March 31, 2022, June 30, 2022 and September 30, 2022 is hereby │
│ incorporated by reference to such reports. Except as set forth below, as of the date of this │
│ Annual Report on Form 10-K, the Corporation is not aware of any other activity, transaction or │
│ dealing by any of its affiliates during the quarter ended December 31, 2022 that requires │
│ disclosure under Section 13(r) of the Exchange Act.During the fourth quarter of 2022, Bank of │
│ America, National Association (BANA), a U.S. subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation, │
│ processed two authorized wire deposits totaling $596,890 pursuant to a specific license issued │
│ on April 21, 2022, by the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Foreign Assets Control. The wire deposits were processed by BANA on behalf of a U.S. client │
│ into its account at BANA and settled invoices owed to the U.S. client. The deposits were │
│ unblocked funds belonging to Jammal Trust Bank, which at the time of the deposits was │
│ designated pursuant to Executive Order 13224. There was no measurable gross revenue or net │
│ profit to the Corporation relating to these transactions. The Corporation may in the future │
│ engage in similar transactions for its clients to the extent permitted by U.S. law.Item 9C. │
│ Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent InspectionsNot applicable.Part IIIBank │
│ of America Corporation and SubsidiariesItem 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate │
│ GovernanceInformation about our Executive OfficersThe name, age, position and office, and │
│ business experience of our current executive officers are:Dean C. Athanasia (56)President, │
│ Regional Bankingsince October 2021; President, Retail and Preferred & Small Business Banking │
│ from January 2019 to October 2021;Co-Head -- Consumer Bankingfrom September 2014 to January │
│ 2019; and Preferred and Small Business Banking Executive from April 2011 to September │
│ 2014.Aditya Bhasin (49)Chief Technology & Information Officersince October 2021; Chief │
│ Information Officer and Head of Technology for Consumer, Small Business, Wealth Management and │
│ Employee Technology from October 2017 to October 2021; CIO, Retail, Preferred & Wealth │
│ Management Technology, and Wealth Management Operations from June 2015 to October 2017.Darrin │
│ Steve Boland (54) Chief Administrative Officersince October 2021;President, Retail from │
│ February 2020 to October 2021; Head of Consumer Lending from May 2017 to February 2020; │
│ Consumer Lending Executive from May 2015 to May 2017.Alastair M. Borthwick (54) Chief Financial │
│ Officersince November 2021; President of Global Commercial Banking from October 2012 to October │
│ 2021.Sheri Bronstein (54) Chief Human Resources Officersince January 2019; Global Human │
│ Resources Executive from July 2015 to January 2019; and HR Executive for Global Banking & │
│ Markets from March 2010 to July 2015.James P. DeMare (53) President, Global Marketssince │
│ September 2020; Global Co-Head of FICC Trading and Commercial Real Estate Banking from February │
│ 2015 to September 2020.Paul M. Donofrio (62) Vice Chairsince November 2021; Chief Financial │
│ Officer from August 2015 to November 2021; Strategic Finance Executive from April 2015 to │
│ August 2015; and Head of Global Corporate Credit and Transaction Banking from January 2012 to │
│ April 2015.Geoffrey S. Greener (58) Chief Risk Officersince April 2014; Head of Enterprise │
│ Capital Management from April 2011 to April 2014.Kathleen A. Knox (59) President, The Private │
│ Banksince November 2017; Head of Business Banking from October 2014 to November 2017; and │
│ Retail Banking & Distribution Executive from June 2011 to October 2014. │
 169Bank of America 
Matthew M. Koder (51) President, Global Corporate
& Investment Banking since December 2018;
President of APAC from March 2012 to December
2018.
Bernard A. Mensah (54) President, International,
CEO of Merrill Lynch International (MLI), BANA
London Branch Head since August 2020. President
of UK and Central and Eastern Europe, the Middle
East, Africa, CEO of MLI, BANA London Branch and
Co-Head of Global Fixed Income Currency and
Commodities (FICC) Trading from September 2019 to
August 2020; Co-Head of Global FICC Trading from
March 2015 to September 2019.
Lauren A. Mogensen (60) Global General Counsel
since November 2021; Head of Global Compliance &
Operational Risk, and Reputational Risk from
December 2013 to October 2021.
Brian T. Moynihan (63) Chair of the Board since
October 2014, and President, Chief Executive
Officer, and member of the Board of Directors
since January 2010.
Thong M. Nguyen (64) Vice Chair, Head of Global
Strategy & Enterprise Platforms since October
2021; Vice Chairman from January 2019 to October
2021; Co-Head -- Consumer Banking from September
2014 to January 2019; Retail Banking Executive
from April 2014 to September 2014; and Retail
Strategy, and Operations & Digital Banking
Executive from September 2012 to April 2014.
Thomas M. Scrivener (51) Chief Operations
Executive since October 2021; Head of Consumer,
Small Business & Wealth Management Operations
from October 2019 to October 2021; Global Real
Estate and Enterprise Initiatives Executive from
September 2018 to October 2019; Enterprise
Scenario Planning and Execution Executive from
May 2016 to September 2018; Enterprise Stress
Testing, Recovery & Resolution Planning Executive
from June 2014 to March 2016.
Andrew M. Sieg (55) President, Merrill Wealth
Management since January 2017; and Head of Global
Wealth & Retirement
Solutions with Merrill Lynch from October 2011 to
January 2017.
Bruce R. Thompson (58) Vice Chair , Head of
Enterprise Credit since October 2021; Vice
Chairman, Head of Institutional Credit Exposure
Management (from December 2020) and Wholesale
Credit Underwriting and Monitoring (from May
2021) to October 2021; Vice Chairman, President
of the EU & Switzerland and CEO of Bank of
America Europe DAC from May 2018 to December
2020; Vice Chairman of Bank of America
Corporation from March 2016 to May 2018; Managing
Director from July 2015 to March 2016; Chief
Financial Officer from July 2011 to July 2015.
Information included under the following captions
in the Corporation’s proxy statement relating to
its 2023 annual meeting of shareholders (the 2023
Proxy Statement) is incorporated herein by
reference:
● “Proposal 1: Electing directors – Our director
nominees;”
● “Corporate governance – Additional corporate
governance information;”
● “Corporate governance – Committees and
membership;” and
● “Corporate governance – Board meetings and
attendance.”
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 11. Executive Compensation │
Information included under the following captions
in the 2023 Proxy Statement is incorporated
herein by reference:
● “Compensation discussion and analysis;”
● “Compensation and Human Capital Committee
Report;”
● “Executive compensation;”
● “CEO pay ratio;”
● “Corporate governance;” and
● “Director compensation.”
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder │
│ Matters │
Information included under the following caption in the 2023 Proxy Statement is incorporated herein
by reference:
● “Stock ownership of directors, executive officers, and certain beneficial owners.”
The table below presents information on equity compensation plans at December 31, 2022:
 -c) 
 -a) -b) Number of Shares 
 Number of Shares tobe Weighted-average Remaining for Future 
 Plan Category(1) Issued Exercise Price of Issuance Under Equity 
 UnderOutstanding Outstanding Options, Compensation Plans 
 Options, Warrants and Warrants and Rights(3 (excluding securities 
 Rights(2 reflected in column 
 (a))(4 
 Plans approved by 206,439,608 — 164,047,513 
 shareholders 
 Plans not approved — — — 
 by shareholders 
 Total 206,439,608 — 164,047,513 
(1) This table does not include 522,076 vested restricted stock units and stock option gain deferrals
at December 31, 2022 that were assumed by the Corporation in connection with prior acquisitions under
whose plans the awards were originally granted.
(2) Consists of outstanding restricted stock units. Includes 3,914,068 vested restricted stock units
subject to a required 12-month holding period.
(3) Restricted stock units do not have an exercise price and are delivered without any payment or
consideration.
(4) Amount represents shares of common stock available for future issuance under the Bank of America
Corporation Equity Plan.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director IndependenceInformation │
│ included under the following captions in the 2023 Proxy Statement is incorporated herein by │
│ reference:●“Related person and certain other transactions;” and●“Corporate governance – │
│ Director independence.” │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 14.Principal Accounting Fees and ServicesInformation included under the following caption │
│ in the 2023 Proxy Statement is incorporated herein by reference:●“Proposal 4: Ratifying the │
│ appointment of our independent registered public accounting firm for 2023.” │
 Bank of America170 
║ Part IV ║
 Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules │
The following documents are filed as part of this report:
(1) Financial Statements:
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (PCAOB ID 238)
Consolidated Statement of Income for the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020
Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2022 and 2021
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021
and 2020
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(2) Schedules:
None
(3) Index to Exhibits
With the exception of the information expressly incorporated herein by reference, the 2023 Proxy
Statement shall not be deemed filed as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 Incorporat… 
 by 
 Reference 
 Exhibit Descripti… Notes Form Exhibit Filing File No. 
 No. Date 
 Restated 
 Certifica… 
 of 
 Incorpora… 
 3.1 as amended 10-Q 3.1 04/29/22 1-6523 
 and in 
 effect on 
 the date 
 hereof 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restated 
 Bylaws of 
 3.2 the 1 
 Corporati… 
 as in 
 effect on 
 the date 
 hereof 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of January 
 1, 1995 
 (for 
 senior 
 debt 
 securitie… 
 between 
 4.1 registrant S-3 4.1 2/1/95 33-57533 
 (successor 
 to 
 NationsBa… 
 Corporati… 
 and 
 BankAmeri… 
 National 
 Trust  
 Company 
 First 
 Supplemen… 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of 
 September  
 18, 1998 
 between 
 registrant 
 and U.S. 
 Bank Trust 
 National 
 Associati… 
 4.2 (successor 8-K 4.3 11/18/98 1-6523 
 to 
 BankAmeri… 
 National 
 Trust  
 Company) 
 to the 
 indenture 
 dated as 
 of January 
 1, 1995 
 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.1) 
 Second 
 Supplemen… 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of May 7, 
 2001 
 between 
 registran… 
 U.S. Bank 
 Trust  
 National 
 Associati… 
 as Prior 
 4.3 Trustee, 8-K 4.4 6/14/01 1-6523 
 and The 
 Bank of 
 New York, 
 as 
 Successor 
 Trustee to 
 the 
 indenture 
 dated as 
 of January 
 1, 1995 
 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.1) 
 Third 
 Supplemen… 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of July  
 28, 2004 
 between 
 registrant 
 and The 
 4.4 Bank of 8-K 4.2 8/27/04 1-6523 
 New York 
 to the 
 indenture 
 dated as 
 of January 
 1, 1995 
 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.1) 
 Fourth 
 Supplemen… 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of April  
 28, 2006 
 between 
 the 
 registrant 
 4.5 and The S-3 4.6 5/5/06 333-133852 
 Bank of 
 New York 
 to the 
 indenture 
 dated as 
 of January 
 1, 1995 
 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.1) 
 Fifth 
 Supplemen… 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of 
 December  
 1, 2008 
 between 
 registrant 
 and The 
 Bank of 
 New York 
 Mellon 
 4.6 Trust  8-K 4.1 12/5/08 1-6523 
 Company, 
 N.A. 
 (successor 
 to The 
 Bank of 
 New York) 
 to the 
 indenture 
 dated as 
 of January 
 1, 1995 
 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.1) 
 Sixth 
 Supplemen… 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of 
 February 
 23, 2011 
 between 
 registrant 
 and The 
 Bank of 
 4.7 New York 10-K 4(ee) 2/25/11 1-6523 
 Mellon 
 Trust 
 Company, 
 N.A. to 
 the 
 indenture 
 dated as 
 of January 
 1, 1995 
 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.1) 
 Seventh 
 Supplemen… 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of January 
 13, 2017 
 between 
 registrant 
 and The 
 Bank of 
 New York 
 4.8 Mellon 8-K 4.1 1/13/17 1-6523 
 Trust 
 Company, 
 N.A. to 
 the 
 indenture 
 dated as 
 of January 
 1, 1995 
 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.1) 
 Eighth 
 Supplemen… 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of 
 February 
 23, 2017 
 between 
 registrant 
 and the 
 Bank of 
 4.9 New York 10-K 4(a) 2/23/17 1-6523 
 Mellon 
 Trust 
 Company, 
 N.A. to 
 the 
 indenture 
 dated as 
 of January 
 1, 1995 
 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.1) 
 Successor 
 Trustee 
 Agreement 
 effective 
 December 
 15, 1995 
 between 
 registrant 
 (successor 
 to 
 NationsBa… 
 4.10 Corporati… S-3 4.2 6/28/96 333-07229 
 and First 
 Trust of 
 New York, 
 National 
 Associati… 
 as 
 successor 
 trustee to 
 BankAmeri… 
 National 
 Trust 
 Company 
 Agreement 
 of 
 Appointme… 
 and 
 Acceptance 
 dated as 
 of 
 December  
 4.11 29, 2006 10-K 4(aaa) 2/28/07 1-6523 
 between 
 registrant 
 and The 
 Bank of 
 New York 
 Trust  
 Company, 
 N.A. 
 Form of 
 4.12 Senior S-3 4.12 5/1/15 333-202354 
 Registered 
 Note 
 Form of 
 Registered 
 Global 
 4.13 Senior S-3 4.13 5/1/15 333-202354 
 Medium-Te… 
 Note, 
 Series L 
 Form of 
 Master 
 Registered 
 4.14 Global S-3 4.14 5/1/15 333-202354 
 Senior 
 Medium-Te… 
 Note, 
 Series L 
 Form of 
 Registered 
 Global 
 4.15 Senior 8-K 4.2 1/13/17 1-6523 
 Medium-Te… 
 Note, 
 Series M 
 Form of 
 Master 
 Registered 
 4.16 Global 8-K 4.3 1/13/17 1-6523 
 Senior 
 Medium-Te… 
 Note, 
 Series M 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of January 
 1, 1995 
 (for 
 subordina… 
 debt 
 securitie… 
 4.17 between S-3 4.5 2/1/95 33-57533 
 registrant 
 (successor 
 to 
 NationsBa… 
 Corporati… 
 and The 
 Bank of 
 New York 
 First 
 Supplemen… 
 Indenture 
 dated as 
 of August 
 28, 1998 
 between 
 registrant 
 and The 
 4.18 Bank of 8-K 4.8 11/18/98 1-6523 
 New York 
 to the 
 indenture 
 dated as 
 of January 
 1, 1995 
 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.17) 
 171Bank of America 
 Incorporat… 
 by 
 Reference 
 Exhibit Description Notes Form Exhibit Filing File No. 
 No. Date 
 Second 
 Supplement… 
 Indenture 
 dated as of 
 January 25, 
 2007 
 between 
 registrant 
 and The 
 Bank of New 
 York Trust 
 4.19 Company, S-4 4.3 3/16/07 333-141361 
 N.A. 
 (successor 
 to The Bank 
 of New 
 York) to 
 the 
 indenture 
 dated as of 
 January 1, 
 1995 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.17) 
 Third 
 Supplement… 
 Indenture 
 dated as of 
 February 
 23, 2011 
 between 
 registrant 
 and The 
 Bank of New 
 York Mellon 
 Trust 
 Company, 
 4.20 N.A. 10-K 4(ff) 2/25/11 1-6523 
 (formerly 
 The Bank of 
 New York 
 Trust 
 Company, 
 N.A.) to 
 the 
 indenture 
 dated as of 
 January 1, 
 1995 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.17) 
 Fourth 
 Supplement… 
 Indenture 
 dated as of 
 February 
 23, 2017 
 between 
 registrant 
 and The 
 4.21 Bank of New 10-K 4(i) 2/23/17 1-6523 
 York Mellon 
 Trust 
 Company, 
 N.A. to the 
 indenture 
 dated as of 
 January 1, 
 1995 (See 
 Exhibit 
 4.17) 
 Indenture 
 dated as of 
 June 27, 
 2018 (for 
 senior debt 
 securities) 
 4.22 between the S-3 4.3 6/27/18 333-224523 
 registrant 
 and The 
 Bank of New 
 York Mellon 
 Trust 
 Company, 
 N.A. 
 Form of 
 Registered 
 Global 
 Senior 
 4.23 Medium-Term S-3 4.4 6/27/18 333-224523 
 Note, 
 Series 
 N(prior to 
 August 
 2021) 
 Form of 
 Master 
 Registered 
 Global 
 Senior 
 4.24 Medium-Term S-3 4.5 6/27/18 333-224523 
 Note, 
 Series 
 N(prior to 
 August 
 2021) 
 Form of 
 Registered 
 Global 
 Senior 
 4.25 Medium-Term S-3 4.4 8/2/21 333-257399 
 Note, 
 Series 
 N(from 
 August 
 2021) 
 Form of 
 Master 
 Registered 
 Global 
 Senior 
 4.26 Medium-Term S-3 4.5 8/2/21 333-257399 
 Note, 
 Series 
 N(from 
 August 
 2021) 
 Indenture 
 dated as of 
 June 27, 
 2018 (for 
 subordinat… 
 debt 
 securities) 
 4.27 between the S-3 4.6 6/27/18 333-224523 
 registrant 
 and The 
 Bank of New 
 York Mellon 
 Trust 
 Company, 
 N.A. 
 Form of 
 Registered 
 Global 
 Subordinat… 
 4.28 Medium-Term S-3 4.7 6/27/18 333-224523 
 Note, 
 Series 
 N(prior to 
 August 
 2021) 
 Form of 
 Registered 
 Global 
 Subordinat… 
 4.29 Medium-Term S-3 4.7 8/2/21 333-257399 
 Note, 
 Series 
 N(from 
 August 
 2021) 
 Registrant 
 and its 
 subsidiari… 
 have other 
 long-term 
 debt 
 agreements, 
 but these 
 are omitted 
 pursuant to 
 Item 
 601(b)(4)(… 
 of 
 Regulation 
 S-K. Copies 
 of these 
 agreements 
 will be 
 furnished 
 to the 
 Commission 
 on request 
 Description 
 4.30 of the 1 
 Corporatio… 
 Securities 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Pension 
 Restoration 
 Plan, as 
 amended and 
 10.1 restated 2 10-K 10(c) 2/27/09 1-6523 
 effective 
 January 1, 
 2009 
 (Pension 
 Restoration 
 Plan) 
 First 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 10.2 Pension 2 10-K 10(c) 2/26/10 1-6523 
 Restoration 
 Plan dated 
 December 
 18, 2009 
 Second 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 10.3 Pension 2 10-K 10(a) 2/28/13 1-6523 
 Restoration 
 Plan dated 
 June 29, 
 2012 
 Third 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 10.4 Pension 2 10-K 10.4 2/19/20 1-6523 
 Restoration 
 Plan dated 
 March 26, 
 2013 
 Fourth 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 10.5 Pension 2 10-K 10.5 2/19/20 1-6523 
 Restoration 
 Plan dated 
 August 22, 
 2013 
 Fifth 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 10.6 Pension 2 10-K 10.6 2/19/20 1-6523 
 Restoration 
 Plan dated 
 December 5, 
 2014 
 Sixth 
 Amendment 
 to the 
 10.7 Pension 2 10-K 10.7 2/19/20 1-6523 
 Restoration 
 Plan dated 
 December 
 15, 2016 
 NationsBank 
 Corporation 
 Benefit 
 10.8 Security 2 10-K 10(t) 3/27/91 1-6523 
 Trust dated 
 as of June  
 27, 1990 
 First 
 Supplement 
 to 
 NationsBank 
 Corporation 
 10.9 Benefit 2 10-K 10(v) 3/24/93 1-6523 
 Security 
 Trust dated 
 as of 
 November  
 30, 1992 
 NationsBank 
 Corporation 
 Benefit 
 Security 
 Trust 
 10.10 Trustee 2 10-K 10(o) 3/29/96 1-6523 
 Removal/Ap… 
 Agreement 
 dated as of 
 December  
 19, 1995 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Deferred 
 Compensati… 
 Plan 
 (formerly 
 known as 
 the Bank of 
 10.11 America 2 10-K 10(c) 2/25/15 1-6523 
 401(k) 
 Restoration 
 Plan) as 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 1, 
 2015 
 First 
 Amendment 
 to the Bank 
 of America 
 Deferred 
 Compensati… 
 Plan 
 (formerly 
 known as 
 10.12 the Bank of 2 10-K 10(vv) 2/24/16 1-6523 
 America 
 401(k) 
 Restoration 
 Plan), as 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 1, 
 2015 
 Second 
 Amendment 
 to the Bank 
 of America 
 Deferred 
 Compensati… 
 Plan 
 (formerly 
 known as 
 10.13 the Bank of 2 S-8 4(c) 11/19/19 333-234780 
 America 
 401(k) 
 Restoration 
 Plan), as 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 1, 
 2015 
 Third 
 Amendment 
 to the Bank 
 of America 
 Deferred 
 Compensati… 
 Plan 
 (formerly 
 known as 
 10.14 the Bank of 2 10-K 10.14 2/19/20 1-6523 
 America 
 401(k) 
 Restoration 
 Plan), as 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 1, 
 2015 
 Fourth 
 Amendment 
 to the Bank 
 of America 
 Deferred 
 Compensati… 
 Plan 
 (formerly 
 known as 
 10.15 the Bank of 2 10-K 10.15 2/24/21 1-6523 
 America 
 401(k) 
 Restoration 
 Plan), as 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 1, 
 2015 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Executive 
 Incentive 
 Compensati… 
 10.16 Plan, as 2 10-K 10(g) 3/3/03 1-6523 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective 
 December 
 10, 2002 
 Amendment 
 to Bank of 
 America 
 Executive 
 10.17 Incentive 2 10-K 10(d) 2/28/13 1-6523 
 Compensati… 
 Plan, dated 
 January 23, 
 2013 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Director 
 Deferral 
 10.18 Plan, as 2 10-K 10(g) 2/28/07 1-6523 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 1, 
 2005 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Director 
 Deferral 
 10.19 Plan, as 2 10-K 10(f) 2/26/19 1-6523 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 1, 
 2019 
 Bank of 
 America 
 Corporation 
 Key 
 Employee 
 Equity Plan 
 (formerly 
 known as 
 10.20 the Key 2 8-K 10.2 5/7/15 1-6523 
 Associate 
 Stock 
 Plan), as 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective 
 May 6, 2015 
 (2015 KEEP) 
 First 
 Amendment 
 10.21 to the 2015 2 10-K 10(mm) 2/26/19 1-6523 
 KEEP dated 
 December 
 19, 2018 
 Second 
 Amendment 
 10.22 to the 2015 2 8-K 10.1 4/24/19 1-6523 
 KEEP dated 
 April 24, 
 2019 
 Bank of America172 
 Incorporated 
 by Reference 
 Exhibit No. Description Notes Form Exhibit Filing Date File No. 
 Bank of America 
 Corporation 
 Equity Plan 
 (formerly known 
 as the Key 
 10.23 Employee Equity 2 8-K 10.1 4/22/21 1-6523 
 Plan), as 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective April 
 20, 2021 (2021 
 BACEP) 
 Form of 
 Cash-settled 
 Restricted 
 Stock Units 
 10.24 Award Agreement 2 10-Q 10(a) 5/2/16 1-6523 
 (February 2016 
 and subsequent 
 grants) under 
 the 2015 KEEP 
 Form of 
 Restricted 
 Stock Award 
 Agreement for 
 10.25 Non-Employee 2 10-K 10(h) 2/26/19 1-6523 
 Directors under 
 the 2015 KEEP 
 and the 2021 
 BACEP 
 Form of 
 Time-based 
 Restricted 
 10.26 Stock Units 2 10-Q 10.1 5/1/20 1-6523 
 Award Agreement 
 (February 2020) 
 under the 2015 
 KEEP 
 Form of 
 Performance 
 Restricted 
 10.27 Stock Units 2 10-Q 10.2 5/1/20 1-6523 
 Award Agreement 
 (February 2020) 
 under the 2015 
 KEEP 
 Form of 
 Time-based 
 Restricted 
 10.28 Stock Units 2 10-Q 10.1 4/29/21 1-6523 
 Award Agreement 
 (February 2021) 
 under the 2015 
 KEEP 
 Form of 
 Performance 
 Restricted 
 10.29 Stock Units 2 10-Q 10.2 4/29/21 1-6523 
 Award Agreement 
 (February 2021) 
 under the 2015 
 KEEP 
 Form of 
 Cash-settled 
 Restricted 
 10.30 Stock Units 2 10-K 10.32 2/22/22 1-6523 
 Award Agreement 
 under the 2021 
 BACEP 
 Form of 
 Time-Based 
 Restricted 
 10.31 Stock Units 2 10-K 10.33 2/22/22 1-6523 
 Award Agreement 
 under the 2021 
 BACEP 
 Form of 
 Performance-Ba… 
 Restricted 
 10.32 Stock Units 2 10-K 10.34 2/22/22 1-6523 
 Award Agreement 
 under the 2021 
 BACEP 
 Form of Phantom 
 10.33 Restricted 2 10-K 10.35 2/22/22 1-6523 
 Stock Units 
 Award Agreement 
 Amendment to 
 various plans 
 in connection 
 with 
 10.34 FleetBoston 2 10-K 10(v) 3/1/04 1-6523 
 Financial 
 Corporation 
 merger dated 
 October 27, 
 2003 
 FleetBoston 
 Supplemental 
 Executive 
 10.35 Retirement Plan 2 10-K 10(r) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 effective 
 December 31, 
 2004 
 FleetBoston 
 Executive 
 Deferred 
 10.36 Compensation 2 10-K 10(u) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Plan No. 2 
 effective 
 December 16, 
 2003 
 FleetBoston 
 Executive 
 10.37 Supplemental 2 10-K 10(v) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Plan effective 
 December 31, 
 2004 
 Retirement 
 Income 
 Assurance Plan 
 for Legacy 
 10.38 Fleet, as 2 10-K 10(p) 2/26/10 1-6523 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 1, 2009 
 First Amendment 
 to the 
 Retirement 
 Income 
 Assurance Plan 
 10.39 for Legacy 2 10-K 10(I) 2/28/13 1-6523 
 Fleet, as 
 amended and 
 restated 
 effective 
 January 1, 2009 
 Officer's 
 Certificate of 
 Global 
 Compensation, 
 10.40 Benefits and 2 10-K 10(c) 2/25/11 1-6523 
 Shared Services 
 Executive 
 Regarding 
 Wanger 
 Divestiture 
 Trust Agreement 
 for the 
 FleetBoston 
 Executive 
 10.41 Deferred 2 10-K 10(x) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Compensation 
 Plans No. 1 and 
 2 dated 
 December 17, 
 1997 
 Trust Agreement 
 for the 
 FleetBoston 
 10.42 Executive 2 10-K 10(y) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Supplemental 
 Plan dated June 
 19, 1996 
 Trust Agreement 
 for the 
 FleetBoston 
 Retirement 
 Income 
 Assurance Plan 
 10.43 and the 2 10-K 10(z) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 FleetBoston 
 Supplemental 
 Executive 
 Retirement Plan 
 dated June 19, 
 1996 
 FleetBoston 
 Directors 
 Deferred 
 10.44 Compensation 2 10-K 10(aa) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 and Stock Unit 
 Plan effective 
 January 1, 2004 
 BankBoston 
 Corporation and 
 its 
 Subsidiaries 
 10.45 Deferred 2 10-K 10(cc) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Compensation 
 Plan dated 
 December 24, 
 2001 
 BankBoston 
 Director Stock 
 10.46 Award Plan 2 10-K 10(hh) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 effective July 
 1, 1998 
 BankBoston 
 Corporation 
 Directors’ 
 10.47 Deferred 2 10-K 10(ii) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Compensation 
 Plan effective 
 March 1, 1988 
 BankBoston, 
 N.A. Directors’ 
 10.48 Deferred 2 10-K 10(jj) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Compensation 
 Plan effective 
 March 1, 1988 
 Description of 
 BankBoston 
 Director 
 10.49 Retirement 2 10-K 10(ll) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 Benefits 
 Exchange 
 Program 
 Global 
 amendment to 
 definition of 
 “change in 
 control” or 
 10.50 “change of 2 10-K 10(oo) 3/1/05 1-6523 
 control,” 
 together with a 
 list of plans 
 affected by 
 such amendment 
 Employment 
 Agreement dated 
 October 27, 
 10.51 2003 between 2 S-4 10(d) 12/4/03 333-110924 
 registrant and 
 Brian T. 
 Moynihan 
 Cancellation 
 Agreement dated 
 October 26, 
 10.52 2005 between 2 8-K 10.1 10/26/05 1-6523 
 registrant and 
 Brian T. 
 Moynihan 
 Agreement 
 Regarding 
 Participation 
 in the Fleet 
 Boston 
 Supplemental 
 10.53 Executive 2 8-K 10.2 10/26/05 1-6523 
 Retirement Plan 
 dated October  
 26, 2005 
 between 
 registrant and 
 Brian T. 
 Moynihan 
 Employment 
 Letter dated 
 May 1, 2008 
 between Merrill 
 Lynch & Co., 
 Inc. and Thomas 
 10.54 K. Montag and 2 10-K 10(bbb) 2/26/10 1-6523 
 Summary of 
 Agreement with 
 respect to 
 Post-Employment 
 Medical 
 Coverage 
 Securities 
 Purchase 
 Agreement dated 
 August 25, 2011 
 between 
 registrant and 
 Berkshire 
 10.55 Hathaway Inc. 8-K 1.1 8/25/11 1-6523 
 (including 
 forms of the 
 certificate of 
 Designations, 
 Warrant and 
 Registration 
 Rights 
 Agreement) 
 Amended and 
 Restated 
 Aircraft Time 
 Sharing 
 Agreement 
 10.56 (Multiple 2 10-Q 10 7/30/18 1-6523 
 Aircraft) dated 
 June 26, 2018 
 between Bank of 
 America, N.A. 
 and Brian T. 
 Moynihan 
 173Bank of America 
 Incorporated 
 by Reference 
 Exhibit No. Description Notes Form Exhibit Filing Date File No. 
 Form of 
 Aircraft Time 
 Sharing 
 Agreement 
 (Multiple 
 Aircraft) 
 between Bank of 
 10.57 America, N.A. 2 10-Q 10(b) 7/29/19 1-6523 
 and certain 
 executive 
 officers of the 
 Corporation, 
 including 
 certain Named 
 Executive 
 Officers 
 Amended Exhibit 
 B to the Form 
 of Aircraft 
 Time Sharing 
 Agreement 
 (Multiple 
 Aircraft) 
 between Bank of 
 10.58 America, N.A. 2 10-Q 10.1 10/28/22 1-6523 
 and certain 
 executive 
 officers of the 
 Corporation, 
 including 
 certain Named 
 Executive 
 Officers 
 Letter 
 Agreement dated 
 November 9, 
 10.59 2021 between 2, 3 10-Q 10.1 4/29/22 1-6523 
 the Corporation 
 and James P. 
 DeMare 
 Employment 
 Offer Letter 
 dated March 4, 
 10.60 2019 between 2, 3 10-Q 10.2 4/29/22 1-6523 
 the Corporation 
 and Matthew M. 
 Koder 
 Letter of 
 Understanding 
 dated March 4, 
 10.61 2019 between 2, 3 10-Q 10.3 4/29/22 1-6523 
 the Corporation 
 and Matthew M. 
 Koder 
 Appointment 
 Letter dated 
 December 1, 
 2022 between 
 Bank of America 
 Europe 
 Designated 
 10.62 Activity 1, 2, 3 
 Company and 
 Paul M. 
 Donofrio with 
 respect to 
 board service 
 as Chair and 
 Non-Executive 
 Director 
 Direct and 
 Indirect 
 Subsidiaries of 
 21 Bank of America 1 
 Corporation As 
 of December 
 31,2022 
 Subsidiary 
 22 Issuers of 1 
 Guaranteed 
 Securities 
 Consent of 
 23 Pricewaterhous… 1 
 LLP 
 24 Power of 1 
 Attorney 
 Certification 
 of the Chief 
 Executive 
 Officer 
 31.1 pursuant to 1 
 Section 302 of 
 the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley 
 Act of 2002 
 Certification 
 of the Chief 
 Financial 
 Officer 
 31.2 pursuant to 1 
 Section 302 of 
 the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley 
 Act of 2002 
 Certification 
 of the Chief 
 Executive 
 Officer 
 pursuant to 18  
 U.S.C. Section  
 32.1 1350, as 4 
 adopted 
 pursuant to 
 Section 906 of 
 the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley 
 Act of 2002 
 Certification 
 of the Chief 
 Financial 
 Officer 
 pursuant to 18  
 U.S.C. Section  
 32.2 1350, as 4 
 adopted 
 pursuant to 
 Section 906 of 
 the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley 
 Act of 2002 
 Bank of America 
 Corporation 
 Corporate 
 Policy 
 Regarding 
 99.1 Seeking 1 
 Stockholder 
 Approval of 
 Future 
 Severance 
 Agreements 
 Inline XBRL 
 101.INS Instance 5 
 Document 
 Inline XBRL 
 101.SCH Taxonomy 1 
 Extension 
 Schema Document 
 Inline XBRL 
 Taxonomy 
 101.CAL Extension 1 
 Calculation 
 Linkbase 
 Document 
 Inline XBRL 
 Taxonomy 
 101.LAB Extension Label 1 
 Linkbase 
 Document 
 Inline XBRL 
 Taxonomy 
 101.PRE Extension 1 
 Presentation 
 Linkbase 
 Document 
 Inline XBRL 
 Taxonomy 
 101.DEF Extension 1 
 Definitions 
 Linkbase 
 Document 
 Cover Page 
 Interactive 
 Data File 
 104 (formatted as 
 Inline XBRL and 
 contained in 
 Exhibit 101) 
(1) Filed Herewith.
(2) Exhibit is a management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
(3) As permitted by Regulation S-K, Item 601(b)(10)(iv) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended, certain portions of this exhibit have been redacted from the publicly filed document.
(4) Furnished herewith. This exhibit shall not be deemed “filed” for purposes of Section 18 of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, or otherwise subject to the liability of that Section. Such exhibit
shall not be deemed incorporated into any filing under the Securities Act of 1933 or the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934.
(5) The instance document does not appear in the interactive data file because its XBRL tags are
embedded within the inline XBRL document.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 16. Form 10-K Summary │
Not applicable.
 Bank of America174 
 Signatures 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has
duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
Date: February 22, 2023
 Bank of America Corporation 
 By: /s/ Brian T.Moynihan 
 Brian T.Moynihan 
 Chief Executive Officer 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates
indicated.
 Title 
 Chief Executive Officer, President, Chair and 
 Signature Director Date 
 /s/ Brian T.Moynihan (Principal Executive Officer) February 22, 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Brian T.Moynihan 
 */s/ Alastair M. Borthwick Chief Financial Officer February 22, 2023 
 (Principal Financial Officer) 
 Alastair M. Borthwick 
 */s/ Rudolf A. Bless Chief Accounting Officer February 22, 2023 
 (Principal Accounting Officer) 
 Rudolf A. Bless 
 */s/ Sharon L. Allen Director February 22, 2023 
 Sharon L. Allen 
 */s/ José E. Almeida Director February 22, 2023 
 José E. Almeida 
 */s/ Frank P.Bramble, Sr. Director February 22, 2023 
 Frank P.Bramble, Sr. 
 */s/ Pierre J.P. de Weck Director February 22, 2023 
 Pierre J.P. de Weck 
 */s/ Arnold W. Donald Director February 22, 2023 
 Arnold W. Donald 
 */s/ Linda P.Hudson Director February 22, 2023 
 Linda P.Hudson 
 */s/ Monica C. Lozano Director February 22, 2023 
 Monica C. Lozano 
 */s/ Lionel L. Nowell III Director February 22, 2023 
 Lionel L. Nowell III 
 */s/ Denise L. Ramos Director February 22, 2023 
 Denise L. Ramos 
 175Bank of America 
 Signature Title Date 
 */s/ Clayton S. Rose Director February 22, 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Clayton S. Rose 
 */s/ Michael D. White Director February 22, 2023 
 Michael D. White 
 */s/ Thomas D. Woods Director February 22, 2023 
 Thomas D. Woods 
 */s/ R. David Yost Director February 22, 2023 
 R. David Yost 
 */s/ Maria T.Zuber Director February 22, 2023 
 Maria T.Zuber 
 *By /s/ Ross E. Jeffries, Jr. 
 Ross E. Jeffries, Jr. 
 Attorney-in-Fact 
 Bank of America176