UNITED STATES 
 SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
 Washington, D.C. 20549 
 FORM 10-K/A 
 (Amendment No. 1) 
 ☒ ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2023 
 or 
 ☐ TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 For the transition period from __________ to __________. 
 Commission File Number 001-38842 
 Delaware 83-0940635 
 State or Other Jurisdiction of Incorporation or I.R.S. Employer Identification 
 Organization 
 500 South Buena Vista Street 
 Burbank, California 91521 
 Address of Principal Executive Offices and Zip Code 
 ( 818) 560-1000 
 Registrant’s Telephone Number, Including Area Code 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
 Title of each class Trading Symbol(s) Name of each exchange on which registered 
 Common Stock, $0.01 par value DIS New York Stock Exchange 
Securities Registered Pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None.
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of
the Securities Act. Yes x No o
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or
Section 15(d) of the Act. Yes ☐ No x
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for
such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject
to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes x No o
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data
File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the preceding 12 months
(or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files). Yes x No o
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company or an emerging growth company. See the definitions
of “large accelerated filer”, “accelerated filer”, “smaller reporting company”, and “emerging growth
company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
 Large accelerated filer x Accelerated filer ☐ 
 Non-accelerated filer ☐ Smaller reporting company ☐ 
 Emerging growth company ☐ 
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the
extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards
provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its
management’s assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting under
Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm
that prepared or issued its audit report. ☒
If securities are registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act, indicate by check mark whether the
financial statements of the registrant included in the filing reflect the correction of an error to
previously issued financial statements. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether any of those error corrections are restatements that required a
recovery analysis of incentive-based compensation received by any of the registrant’s executive
officers during the relevant recovery period pursuant to §240.10D-1(b). ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Act). Yes ☐No x
The aggregate market value of common stock held by non-affiliates (based on the closing price on the
last business day of the registrant’s most recently completed second fiscal quarter as reported on
the New York Stock Exchange-Composite Transactions) was $ 182.9billion. All executive officers and
directors of the registrant and all persons filing a Schedule 13D with the Securities and Exchange
Commission in respect to registrant’s common stock have been deemed, solely for the purpose of the
foregoing calculation, to be “affiliates” of the registrant.
There were 1,834,285,760shares of common stock outstanding as of January 17, 2024.
 Auditor Name:PricewaterhouseCoopers Auditor Location:Los Angeles, Auditor Firm ID:238 
 LLP California 
 CAUTIONARY NOTE ON FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS 
This report contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities
Litigation Reform Act of 1995, including statements regarding mandates, expectations, beliefs,
business plans and other statements that are not historical in nature. These statements are made on
the basis of the Company’s views and assumptions regarding future events and business performance and
plans as of the time the statements are made. The Company does not undertake any obligation to update
these statements unless required by applicable laws or regulations and you should not place undue
reliance on forward-looking statements. These statements are subject to known and unknown risks,
uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be
materially different from expectations or results projected or implied by forward-looking statements.
Such differences may result from actions taken by the Company, including restructuring or strategic
initiatives (including capital investments, asset acquisitions or dispositions, new or expanded
business lines or cessation of certain operations), our execution of our business plans (including
the content we create and IP we invest in, our pricing decisions, our cost structure and our
management and other personnel decisions), our ability to quickly execute on cost rationalization
while preserving revenue, the discovery of additional information or other business decisions, as
well as from developments beyond the Company’s control, including: the occurrence of subsequent
events; deterioration in domestic and global economic conditions or failure of conditions to improve
as anticipated; deterioration in or pressures from competitive conditions, including competition to
create or acquire content, competition for talent and competition for advertising revenue; consumer
preferences and acceptance of our content, offerings, pricing model and price increases, and
corresponding subscriber additions and churn, and the market for advertising sales on our direct-to-
consumer services and linear networks; health concerns and their impact on our businesses and
productions; international, political or military developments; regulatory and legal developments;
technological developments; labor markets and activities, including work stoppages; adverse weather
conditions or natural disasters; and availability of content. Such developments may further affect
entertainment, travel and leisure businesses generally and may, among other things, affect (or
further affect, as applicable): our operations, business plans or profitability, including direct-to-
consumer profitability; demand for our products and services; the performance of the Company’s
content; our ability to create or obtain desirable content at or under the value we assign the
content; the advertising market for programming; income tax expense; and performance of some or all
Company businesses either directly or through their impact on those who distribute our products.
Additional factors include those described in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal
year ended September 30, 2023, including under the captions “Risk Factors,” “Management’s Discussion
and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” and “Business,” in our subsequent
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, including under the captions “Risk Factors” and “Management’s
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” and in our subsequent
filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”).
EXPLANATORY NOTE
This Amendment No. 1 on Form 10-K/A (this “Amendment”) amends The Walt Disney Company’s Annual Report
on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2023, originally filed with the SEC on November
21, 2023 (the “Original Form 10-K”).
We are filing this Amendment pursuant to General Instruction G(3) of Form 10-K, as we currently
expect that our definitive proxy statement for the 2024 annual meeting of stockholders (“Annual
Meeting”) will be filed later than the 120th day after the end of the last fiscal year. Accordingly,
this Amendment is being filed solely to:
• amend Part III, Items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 of the Original Form 10-K to include the information
required by and not included in such Items;
• delete the reference on the cover of the Original Form 10-K to the incorporation by reference of
certain information from our proxy statement into Part III of the Original Form 10-K; and
• file new certifications of our principal executive officer and principal financial officer as
exhibits to this Amendment under Item 15 of Part IV hereof pursuant to Rule 12b-15 under the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
This Amendment does not otherwise change or update any of the disclosures set forth in the Original
Form 10-K.
References to the “Company,” “Disney,” “we” or “our” in this Amendment refer to The Walt Disney
Company and, as applicable, its consolidated subsidiaries.
 THE WALT DISNEY COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Page 
 PART III 
 ITEM 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance 1 
 ITEM 11. Executive Compensation 17 
 ITEM 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related 68 
 Stockholder Matters 
 ITEM 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence 71 
 ITEM 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services 73 
 PART IV 
 ITEM 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules 74 
 SIGNATURES 75 
║ PART III ║
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance │
 Executive Officers 
Information regarding executive officers of the Company is set forth under “Information About Our
Executive Officers” at the end of Part I of the Original Form 10-K.
 Directors 
The names of the members of the Company’s Board of Directors (the “Board”), their respective ages,
their positions with the Company and other biographical information as of January 16, 2024 are set
forth below. Mr. Gorman is not a current Director but will join the Board on February 5, 2024 and is
included below as a nominee to the Board at the Annual Meeting. All Directors serve for a term ending
at the next annual meeting following the annual meeting at which the Director was elected or
following their appointment, as applicable, and until their successors are elected and qualified, or
until their earlier death, resignation, disqualification or removal.
 1 
 Mary T. Barra 
 CHAIR AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
 OFFICER, 
 GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY 
 Notable Experience Aligned 
 with Disney’s Strategy and Key 
 Board Contributions 
 •Ms. Barra has deep experience 
 in strategy, innovation and 
 brand evolution through her 
 role in driving General 
 Motors’ transformation to 
 electric vehicles by 
 prioritizing strategic 
 investments in connectivity 
 and electrification driving 
 technologies, which provides 
 an important perspective on 
 the Board throughout the 
 Company’s own strategic 
 progression and embracing of 
 technological change and 
 shifts in consumer sentiment 
 •As Chief Executive Officer of 
 General Motors, she provides 
 invaluable insight on 
 large-scale cost 
 rationalization, 
 organizational restructuring 
 and maintaining strong brand 
 Age:62 leadership 
 Director since: •She brings meaningful 
 2017 experience in human capital 
 Committees: management and executive 
 Compensation compensation-related matters 
 in her role on the Company’s 
 Compensation Committee, where 
 she focuses on aligning 
 incentive structures with 
 shareholder value creation and 
 execution of long-term 
 strategic priorities 
 Other Key Skill Sets 
 •Overseeing and managing 
 diverse and inclusive 
 executive teams and a sizeable 
 global workforce, with an 
 emphasis on development and 
 marketing of technology-based 
 consumer-facing products 
 through her various executive 
 roles at General Motors 
 •Governance and public policy 
 thought leadership, 
 understanding of worldwide 
 consumer markets and risks 
 facing large public companies 
 with complex retail operations 
 through her previous role as 
 chair of the Business 
 Roundtable 
 Employment Experience: 
 Chair and Chief Executive 
 2016–Present Officer,General Motors Company 
 (an automotive manufacturing 
 company) 
 2014–2016 Chief Executive 
 Officer,General Motors Company 
 Executive Vice President, 
 2013–2014 Global Product Development, 
 Purchasing and Supply 
 Chain,General Motors Company 
 Senior Vice President, Global 
 2011–2013 Product Development,General 
 Motors Company 
 Vice President, Global Human 
 2009–2011 Resources,General Motors 
 Company 
 Vice President, Global 
 2008–2009 Manufacturing 
 Engineering,General Motors 
 Company 
 Other Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 General Motors Company 
 (2014–Present) 
 2 
 Safra A. Catz 
 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, 
 ORACLE 
 CORPORATION 
 Notable Experience Aligned 
 with Disney’s Strategy and Key 
 Board Contributions 
 •Through Ms. Catz’s position 
 as Chief Executive Officer and 
 formerly Chief Financial 
 Officer of Oracle Corporation, 
 she provides invaluable 
 insight to both the leadership 
 team and fellow Board members 
 on long-term strategic 
 planning and execution and 
 large-scale cost 
 rationalization and 
 organizational structure 
 evaluation 
 •Ms. Catz oversaw the 
 successful acquisition and 
 integration of companies at 
 Oracle and led the company 
 through a period of tremendous 
 growth and innovation, a key 
 skill set to contribute to the 
 Board throughout Disney’s 
 prior acquisition strategies 
 and future development 
 •Ms. Catz’s executive 
 Age:62 leadership roles at Oracle 
 Director since: also allow her to offer 
 2018 impactful guidance to the 
 Committees: Board and leadership team on 
 Audit the rapidly changing 
 technological landscape that 
 affects our businesses 
 •Her experience leading the 
 financial function of a 
 complex, global technology 
 company strengthens her role 
 on the Audit Committee through 
 the extensive financial and 
 accounting and risk management 
 expertise she brings to the 
 Board and committee 
 Other Key Skill Sets 
 •Cybersecurity and artificial 
 intelligence oversight, 
 including the protection of 
 electronically stored data 
 from her executive roles at 
 Oracle and through her 
 experience reviewing advances 
 in artificial intelligence as 
 a commissioner of the National 
 Security Commission on 
 Artificial Intelligence 
 •Brand management and 
 governance thought leadership 
 developed through the 
 oversight of the strategic 
 direction of Oracle 
 Employment Experience: 
 Chief Executive Officer,Oracle 
 2014–Present Corporation (a computer 
 technology corporation) 
 2011–2014 President and Chief Financial 
 Officer,Oracle Corporation 
 2008–2011 President,Oracle Corporation 
 2005–2008 President and Chief Financial 
 Officer,Oracle Corporation 
 2004–2005 President,Oracle Corporation 
 1999–2004 Various positions,Oracle 
 Corporation 
 Other Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 Oracle Corporation 
 (2001–Present) 
 3 
 Amy L. Chang 
 FORMER EXECUTIVE VICE 
 PRESIDENT, CISCO 
 SYSTEMS, INC. 
 Notable Experience Aligned 
 with Disney’s Strategy and Key 
 Board Contributions 
 •Ms. Chang has developed 
 expertise across the 
 technology sector from her 
 time as an Executive Vice 
 President at Cisco Systems, 
 Inc., leading product 
 development for Google Ads 
 Measurement and Reporting and 
 a founder of a digital startup 
 •She provides a unique 
 viewpoint of emerging 
 technology trends and their 
 implications for consumer and 
 retail businesses and the 
 implementation of innovative 
 technological business 
 strategies that are 
 particularly important as the 
 company evaluates the impact 
 of, and opportunities 
 presented by, new technologies 
 in content production, our 
 Age:47 direct-to-consumer businesses 
 Director since: and our parks 
 2021 •Ms. Chang also provides 
 Committees: valuable perspective on talent 
 Governance and Nominating attraction and retention for 
 key technical roles that are 
 vital to Disney’s content 
 creation and digitally driven 
 teams and an understanding of 
 large-scale cost 
 rationalization and analysis 
 of organizational structure 
 from her tenure as a public 
 company director and an 
 executive at Google and Cisco 
 Other Key Skill Sets 
 •Risk management oversight 
 experience specific to digital 
 and technology-forward 
 companies, including 
 cybersecurity and artificial 
 intelligence, gained through 
 her tenure at Cisco and 
 Accompany 
 •Deep understanding of 
 strategic planning, corporate 
 governance, social initiatives 
 and executive management 
 succession planning gained 
 through public company board 
 leadership 
 Employment Experience: 
 Executive Vice President and 
 General Manager, 
 2018–2020 Collaboration, 
 Cisco Systems, Inc. (a 
 networking hardware company) 
 Founder and Chief Executive 
 Officer,Accompany, Inc. (an 
 2013–2018 artificial 
 intelligence/machine 
 learning-based relationship 
 intelligence platform company) 
 Global Head of Product, Google 
 2005–2012 Ads Measurement; various 
 additional positions,Google 
 LLC (a technology company) 
 Other Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 Procter & Gamble 
 (2017–Present) 
 Former Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 Marqeta, Inc. (2021–2022) 
 Cisco Systems, Inc. 
 (2016–2018) 
 4 
 D. Jeremy Darroch 
 FORMER EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN AND 
 GROUP 
 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, SKY 
 Notable Experience Aligned 
 with Disney’s Strategy and Key 
 Board Contributions 
 •As Group Chief Executive 
 Officer of Sky, Mr. Darroch 
 led the company’s tremendous 
 growth and transformation from 
 a linear satellite broadcaster 
 into one of Europe’s largest 
 multi-platform TV providers, 
 providing valuable insights to 
 the Board and management in 
 navigating its strategic 
 expansion of DTC offerings and 
 changing media and 
 entertainment landscapes 
 •Mr. Darroch’s experience 
 leading Sky’s executive teams 
 and creative content 
 investments and advising 
 MultiChoice Group as senior 
 Age:61 advisor, provide key 
 Director since: perspectives for the Company 
 2024 regarding its content 
 Committees: creation, management of 
 Audit creative talent and brand 
 evolution 
 •As former Chief Financial 
 Officer of Sky, Mr. Darroch’s 
 financial executive experience 
 and extensive finance, 
 accounting and risk management 
 expertise strengthen his role 
 on the Audit Committee 
 Other Key Skill Sets 
 •Deep knowledge of management 
 succession planning, global 
 brands and risk management 
 •Strong experience in 
 governance and sustainability 
 and social impact thought 
 leadership through his 
 experience leading Sky’s 
 corporate responsibility 
 programs and as Chairman of 
 the National Oceanography 
 Centre 
 Employment Experience: 
 Executive Chairman,Sky (a 
 2021 media and entertainment 
 company and a division of 
 Comcast Corporation) 
 2018–2021 Group Chief Executive 
 Officer,Sky 
 2007–2018 Chief Executive Officer,Sky 
 PLC 
 2004–2007 Chief Financial Officer,Sky 
 PLC 
 Other Public Company 
 Directorships:Reckitt 
 Benckiser Group PLC 
 (2022–Present) 
 Former Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 Ahren Acquisition Corp. 
 (2021–2023) 
 Burberry Group plc (2014–2019) 
 Sky PLC (2004–2018) 
 5 
 Francis A. deSouza 
 FORMER PRESIDENT AND CHIEF 
 EXECUTIVE 
 OFFICER, ILLUMINA, INC 
 Notable Experience Aligned 
 with Disney’s Strategy and Key 
 Board Contributions 
 •Mr. deSouza has unique 
 experience with the growth and 
 maturation of technology 
 businesses, including leading 
 Illumina through a pivotal 
 strategic shift from being a 
 research genomics leader to 
 also serving clinical markets, 
 which are important as the 
 Board considers the Company's 
 efforts to innovate for the 
 future and leverage technology 
 to advance its strategy 
 •As former Chief Executive 
 Officer of Illumina, Inc. and 
 from his experience in prior 
 senior leadership roles at 
 Symantec Corporation and other 
 technology companies, he 
 provides an understanding of 
 executive management and 
 international business 
 operations, in addition to a 
 Age:53 strong knowledge of brand 
 Director since: management and product 
 2018 development 
 Committees: •Through first-hand 
 Audit experience, he brings deep 
 knowledge of overseeing 
 business operations while 
 incorporating public health 
 considerations, which has 
 served as an invaluable 
 perspective as the Company 
 navigates the continued 
 challenges coming out of the 
 COVID-19 pandemic 
 Other Key Skill Sets 
 •Cybersecurity expertise 
 through experience at Symantec 
 •Knowledge of finance and 
 accounting gained through 
 experience in Chief Executive 
 Officer and other leadership 
 positions 
 •Oversight of strategic 
 integration and experience 
 with consumer awareness of 
 corporate social 
 responsibility practices 
 through his leadership of and 
 commitment to Illumina’s 
 corporate social 
 responsibility program 
 Experience: 
 President and Chief Executive 
 2016–2023 Officer,Illumina, Inc. (a 
 biotechnology company) 
 2013–2016 President,Illumina, Inc. 
 President, Products and 
 2011–2013 Services,Symantec Corporation 
 (a cybersecurity company) 
 Senior Vice President, 
 2009–2011 Enterprise Security 
 Group,Symantec Corporation 
 Prior Founder of various technology 
 businesses 
 Former Public Company 
 Directorships:Illumina, Inc. 
 (2014–2023) 
 6 
 Carolyn N. Everson 
 FORMER PRESIDENT, 
 INSTACART 
 Notable Experience 
 Aligned with Disney’s 
 Strategy and Key Board 
 Contributions 
 •From her experience 
 leading marketing 
 solutions and global 
 sales teams at 
 Instacart, Meta 
 Platforms, Inc. and 
 Microsoft Corporation 
 and as a former board 
 member of Creative 
 Artists Agency, Ms.  
 Everson offers strong 
 insight to the Board 
 and leadership team on 
 navigating evolving 
 media landscapes and 
 advertising 
 environments as well 
 as branded, 
 consumer-facing 
 technology and its 
 intersection with 
 marketing, which has 
 been critical to the 
 Board's oversight of 
 the Company’s 
 operations and 
 strategy as we 
 continue to expand our 
 customer base 
 •As a senior advisor 
 for Permira, a private 
 equity firm focused on 
 technology and 
 consumer brands, and a 
 senior advisor for 
 Boston Consulting 
 Group in the 
 Technology, Media & 
 Telecom and Marketing, 
 Sales & Pricing 
 practice areas, Ms. 
 Everson brings 
 experience evaluating 
 Age:52 internet and digital 
 Director since: media businesses from 
 2022 an investor 
 Committees: perspective 
 Compensation •Through her public 
 company board 
 leadership experience, 
 Ms. Everson maintains 
 an understanding of 
 large-scale cost 
 rationalization and 
 effective 
 organizational 
 structure 
 •Ms. Everson further 
 expands the Board’s 
 collective skill sets 
 through her experience 
 in the advertising 
 technology space and 
 enhances its strategic 
 oversight 
 Other Key Skill Sets 
 •Understanding of 
 business development 
 and executive 
 management processes 
 gained through 
 leadership of strategy 
 teams at global 
 technology companies 
 •Risk management and 
 corporate governance 
 oversight through her 
 public company board 
 experience 
 The Company entered 
 into a support 
 agreement with Third 
 Point LLC pursuant to 
 which the Company 
 appointed Ms. Everson 
 as a director and 
 agreed to include Ms.  
 Everson as a director 
 nominee for the Annual 
 Meeting, and Third 
 Point LLC agreed to 
 customary standstill, 
 voting and other 
 provisions through the 
 Annual Meeting. 
 Employment 
 Experience: 
 President,Instacart 
 2021 (a grocery retail 
 company) 
 Vice President, 
 Global Marketing 
 2011–2021 Solutions,Meta 
 Platforms, Inc. (a  
 technology company) 
 Corporate Vice 
 President, Global 
 Advertising Sales, 
 2010–2011 Strategy & 
 Marketing,Microsoft 
 Corporation (a 
 technology 
 corporation) 
 Various positions 
 (most recently Chief 
 Operating Officer and 
 Executive Vice 
 2004–2010 President, 
 Advertising 
 Sales),MTV Networks 
 Company (a media 
 entertainment 
 company) 
 Various positions 
 (including Vice 
 President, 
 Classifieds and 
 Direct Response 
 2000–2003 Advertising, and Vice 
 President and General 
 Manager, PriMedia 
 Teen Digital 
 Group),PriMedia, Inc. 
 (an advertising 
 company) 
 Other Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 Under Armour, Inc. 
 (2023–Present) 
 The Coca-Cola Company 
 (2022–Present) 
 Former Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 Hertz Global Holdings, 
 Inc. (2016–2018) 
 7 
 Michael B. G. Froman 
 PRESIDENT, COUNCIL ON FOREIGN 
 RELATIONS 
 Notable Experience Aligned 
 with Disney’s Strategy and Key 
 Board Contributions 
 •Mr. Froman delivers strategic 
 insight to the Board and 
 leadership team on complex 
 international affairs and 
 global issues gained from his 
 experience as President of the 
 Council on Foreign Relations, 
 the Assistant to the President 
 and Deputy National Security 
 Advisor for International 
 Economic Policy, and as the 
 United States Trade 
 Representative 
 •His roles as President of the 
 Council on Foreign Relations 
 and as former Vice Chairman 
 and President, Strategic 
 Growth, of Mastercard 
 Incorporated, overseeing 
 strategic growth and 
 leveraging technology to 
 expand digital inclusion at 
 Mastercard enable him to offer 
 guidance to the Company on 
 Age:61 international markets in which 
 Director since: we participate, factors 
 2018 affecting international trade 
 Committees: and the balance of risks and 
 Governance and Nominating opportunities in a dynamic 
 marketplace 
 •Mr. Froman has deep expertise 
 in the complex digital 
 governance and cyber issues 
 facing global companies, 
 including international 
 regulation of digital 
 platforms, cross border data 
 flows and data usage, as well 
 as concerns about privacy 
 protection and cybersecurity 
 •Mr. Froman’s perspective is 
 particularly impactful given 
 our strategic focus on 
 innovation in changing markets 
 and the global growth of our 
 customer base 
 Other Key Skill Sets 
 •International trade, finance, 
 executive and brand management 
 and risk management gained 
 through executive leadership 
 roles 
 •Meaningful experience with 
 alternative investments 
 business and environmental and 
 social policy implementation 
 Employment Experience: 
 President,Council on Foreign 
 Relations (an independent, 
 non-partisan membership 
 organization, think tank, 
 2023–Present publisher and educational 
 institution that serves as a 
 resource on foreign policy, 
 national security issues and 
 international economic 
 affairs) 
 Vice Chairman and President, 
 2018–2023 Strategic Growth,Mastercard 
 Incorporated (a financial 
 services company) 
 United States Trade 
 2013–2017 Representative,Executive 
 Office of the President 
 Assistant to the President and 
 Deputy National Security 
 2009–2013 Advisor for International 
 Economic Policy,Executive 
 Office of the President 
 Various positions (including 
 Chief Executive Officer of 
 CitiInsurance and Chief 
 1999–2009 Operating Officer of 
 alternative investments 
 business),Citigroup (a 
 financial services company) 
 8 
 Notable Experience Aligned 
 with Disney’s Strategy and Key 
 Board Contributions 
 •As Executive Chairman and 
 former Chief Executive Officer 
 of Morgan Stanley, Mr. Gorman 
 has an established record 
 driving strategic 
 transformation of a global 
 financial institution with a 
 long-term sustainable business 
 model, bringing important 
 insight for the Company’s 
 strategic progression 
 •Mr. Gorman successfully 
 executed innovative 
 technological strategies 
 leading Morgan Stanley’s 
 acquisition and integration of 
 online trading platform, 
 E-Trade, providing key 
 perspectives as the Company 
 leverages technology to 
 advance its strategy 
 •Through his roles at Morgan 
 Stanley and Merrill Lynch and 
 as former president of the 
 Federal Advisory Council to 
 the U.S. Federal Reserve 
 Board, Mr. Gorman has deep 
 finance management, investment 
 and fiduciary expertise 
 evaluating businesses 
 Other Key Skill Sets 
 •Successfully oversaw a 
 multi-year CEO succession 
 process and director 
 succession planning 
 •Managing diverse and 
 inclusive executive teams and 
 a sizeable global workforce 
 James P. Gorman •Brand and risk management and 
 EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN, MORGAN governance and public policy 
 STANLEY thought leadership developed 
 Age:65 through his roles at The 
 Director since: Business Council, Business 
 February 5, 2024 Roundtable and the Council on 
 (Incoming) Foreign Relations 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Employment Experience: 
 Executive Chairman,Morgan 
 2024–Present Stanley (a global financial 
 services firm) 
 2012–2023 Chairman and Chief Executive 
 Officer,Morgan Stanley 
 2010–2011 President and Chief Executive 
 Officer,Morgan Stanley 
 2007–2009 Co-President,Morgan Stanley 
 2006–2007 Various positions,Morgan 
 Stanley 
 Various positions,Merrill 
 1999–2005 Lynch & Co., Inc. (a global 
 financial services firm) 
 Other Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 Morgan Stanley (2010–Present) 
 9 
 Robert A. Iger 
 CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
 OFFICER, THE WALT 
 DISNEY 
 COMPANY 
 Notable Experience 
 Aligned with Disney’s 
 Strategy and Key Board 
 Contributions 
 •Gained through his 
 experience serving as 
 Chief Executive 
 Officer of Disney for 
 15 years and former 
 Executive Chairman, 
 Mr. Iger has an 
 unmatched knowledge of 
 the Company and the 
 creative content it 
 produces, and an 
 in-depth understanding 
 of fostering 
 innovation through 
 technology and 
 connecting to 
 audiences in our 
 markets around the 
 world 
 •Throughout Mr. Iger’s 
 tenure at Disney, he 
 successfully expanded 
 the Company’s 
 geographic presence, 
 identified new revenue 
 streams and initiated 
 the Company’s DTC 
 efforts, expanding the 
 scale and global reach 
 of Disney’s 
 storytelling and 
 streaming services 
 •Mr. Iger has also 
 furthered Disney’s 
 rich history of 
 storytelling through 
 the successful 
 landmark acquisitions 
 and integration of 
 Age:72 Pixar, Marvel, 
 Director since: Lucasfilm and 21st 
 2022; 2000-2021 Century Fox 
 Committees: •His detailed 
 Executive understanding of all 
 facets of the Company, 
 and prior experience 
 leading Disney through 
 various market 
 conditions and 
 implementing 
 successful strategic 
 shifts throughout his 
 career, have uniquely 
 positioned Mr. Iger to 
 serve as Chief 
 Executive Officer of 
 Disney and a member of 
 the Board of Directors 
 at this time 
 Other Key Skill Sets 
 •Knowledge of finance 
 and accounting and 
 operational expertise 
 gained through 
 experience in Chief 
 Executive Officer and 
 other leadership 
 positions 
 •Deep understanding of 
 risk management and 
 corporate governance 
 and social initiatives 
 gained through his 
 public company board 
 experience 
 The Company has agreed 
 in Mr. Iger’s 
 employment agreement 
 to nominate him for 
 re-election as a 
 member of the Board at 
 the expiration of each 
 term of office during 
 the term of the 
 agreement, and he has 
 agreed to continue to 
 serve on the Board if 
 elected. 
 Employment 
 Experience: 
 Chief Executive 
 2022–Present Officer,The Walt 
 Disney Company 
 Chairman of the Board 
 2020–2021 and Executive 
 Chairman,The Walt 
 Disney Company 
 Chairman and Chief 
 2012–2020 Executive Officer,The 
 Walt Disney Company 
 President and Chief 
 2005–2012 Executive Officer,The 
 Walt Disney Company 
 President and Chief 
 2000–2005 Operating Officer,The 
 Walt Disney Company 
 Chairman, ABC Group; 
 1999–2000 President,Walt Disney 
 International 
 President and Chief 
 1994–1999 Operating 
 Officer,ABC, Inc. (a 
 broadcasting company) 
 Former Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 The Walt Disney 
 Company (2000–2021) 
 Apple Inc. 
 (2011–2019) 
 10 
 Maria Elena Lagomasino 
 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND 
 MANAGING 
 PARTNER, WE FAMILY OFFICES 
 Notable Experience Aligned 
 with Disney’s Strategy and Key 
 Board Contributions 
 •As a founder of the Institute 
 for the Fiduciary Standard and 
 advisory board member of the 
 Millstein Center for Global 
 Markets and Corporate 
 Ownership, Ms. Lagomasino is 
 an expert in the field of 
 governance and social thought 
 leadership 
 •As an executive leader in 
 private banking industries and 
 as a member of the Council on 
 Foreign Relations, she has 
 deep wealth management, 
 investment and fiduciary 
 expertise and extensive 
 experience in leading complex 
 organizations and evaluating 
 businesses from an investor 
 Age:74 perspective in a variety of 
 Director since: industries with varying size 
 2015 and complexities 
 Committees: •She brings meaningful 
 Governance and Nominating; experience in executive 
 Compensation (Chair) compensation-related matters 
 from her role as Chair of the 
 Company’s Compensation 
 Committee, where she focuses 
 on overseeing the alignment of 
 incentive structures with 
 shareholder value creation and 
 execution of long-term 
 strategic priorities 
 Other Key Skill Sets 
 •Extensive experience across 
 domestic and international 
 finance, investment and 
 capital markets through her 
 roles at WE Family Offices and 
 JP Morgan 
 •Significant knowledge of 
 global brands, business 
 development, executive 
 management succession planning 
 and risk management through 
 experience on public company 
 boards 
 Employment Experience: 
 Chief Executive Officer and 
 Managing Partner,WE Family 
 2013–Present Offices (a wealth management 
 company and registered 
 investment advisor) 
 Chief Executive 
 Officer,GenSpring Family 
 2005–2012 Offices, LLC, an affiliate of 
 SunTrust Banks, Inc. (a bank 
 holding company) 
 Chairman and Chief Executive 
 Officer,JP Morgan Private 
 2001–2005 Bank, a division of JP Morgan 
 Chase & Co. (an investment 
 banking company) 
 Various positions (most 
 recently Managing Director, 
 1983–2001 Global Private Banking 
 Group),The Chase Manhattan 
 Bank (a consumer banking 
 company) 
 Other Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 The Coca-Cola Company 
 (2008–Present) 
 11 
 Calvin R. McDonald 
 CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
 OFFICER, LULULEMON 
 ATHLETICA INC. 
 Notable Experience 
 Aligned with Disney’s 
 Strategy and Key 
 Board Contributions 
 •Mr. McDonald has 
 over 25 years of 
 retail and 
 brand-building 
 experience, bringing 
 powerful insight to 
 the Board on 
 integrating customer 
 experience across 
 multiple channels 
 •As Chief Executive 
 Officer of lululemon 
 athletica, he has led 
 the company in 
 innovating integrated 
 guest experiences and 
 offers valuable 
 perspective on the 
 growth, development 
 and guest innovation 
 of an international 
 consumer business 
 that is particularly 
 relevant to Disney’s 
 leadership team 
 •Mr. McDonald is 
 Age:52 responsible for the 
 Director since: growth, development 
 2021 and consumer product 
 Committees: operations of 
 Compensation lululemon athletica, 
 including overseeing 
 the company’s 
 incorporation and 
 expansion of a DTC 
 offering and creative 
 product design, 
 providing him a 
 fundamental 
 understanding of 
 consumer strategies 
 that support and 
 accelerate customer 
 engagement 
 Other Key Skill Sets 
 •Deep understanding 
 of management, 
 leadership and 
 executive management 
 from his experience 
 at lululemon 
 athletica 
 •Strong knowledge of 
 finance and 
 accounting, risk 
 management and 
 corporate governance 
 and social 
 initiatives gained 
 through his role as a 
 public company chief 
 executive officer 
 Employment Experience: 
 Chief Executive 
 Officer,lululemon 
 2018–Present athletica inc. (an 
 athletic apparel 
 company) 
 President and Chief 
 Executive 
 2013–2018 Officer,Sephora 
 Americas, a division 
 of the LVMH group of 
 luxury brands 
 President and Chief 
 Executive 
 2011–2013 Officer,Sears Canada 
 (a department store 
 company) 
 Other Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 lululemon athletica 
 inc. (2018–Present) 
 Former Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 Sephora Americas 
 (2013–2018) 
 12 
 Mark G. Parker 
 EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN, 
 NIKE, INC. 
 Notable Experience 
 Aligned with Disney’s 
 Strategy and Key 
 Board Contributions 
 •As the former 
 President and Chief 
 Executive Officer of 
 NIKE, Mr. Parker has 
 overseen and managed 
 the growth of a 
 complex, global 
 organization, and has 
 experience exercising 
 cost discipline and 
 oversight of 
 organizational 
 structure, as well as 
 successful executive 
 management succession 
 planning, bringing a 
 valuable perspective 
 to fellow directors 
 and the broader 
 leadership team 
 •Through this 
 experience, Mr.  
 Parker brings 
 first-hand knowledge 
 of workforce and 
 human capital 
 management including 
 managing creative 
 talent and 
 compensation, a 
 critical skill set 
 for Disney’s Board 
 Age:68 given our continued 
 Director since: focus on human 
 2016 capital management 
 Committees: oversight 
 Governance and •Mr. Parker offers a 
 Nominating (Chair); unique insight to the 
 Executive (Chair) Company regarding 
 leading 
 direct-to-consumer 
 expansion and the 
 design, production, 
 marketing and 
 distribution of 
 consumer products, in 
 addition to managing 
 a major international 
 consumer brand 
 through various 
 market evolutions 
 over a more than 
 40-year time period 
 Other Key Skill Sets 
 •Financial and 
 executive management 
 and risk management 
 background gained 
 through roles as 
 President and Chief 
 Executive Officer, as 
 well as Executive 
 Chairman of NIKE 
 •Experience in 
 integrating 
 environmental and 
 social practices into 
 corporate strategy 
 through his 
 leadership at NIKE as 
 the company 
 integrated 
 sustainable 
 innovation into 
 product development 
 and manufacturing 
 Employment Experience: 
 Executive 
 2020–Present Chairman,NIKE, Inc. (a 
 footwear and apparel 
 company) 
 2016–2020 Chairman,NIKE, Inc. 
 President and Chief 
 2006–2020 Executive 
 Officer,NIKE, Inc. 
 Various positions 
 (including product 
 1979–2006 research, design and 
 development, marketing 
 and brand 
 management),NIKE, Inc. 
 Other Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 NIKE, Inc. 
 (2006–Present) 
 13 
 Derica W. Rice 
 FORMER EXECUTIVE 
 VICE PRESIDENT, CVS 
 HEALTH CORPORATION 
 Notable Experience 
 Aligned with Disney’s 
 Strategy and Key 
 Board Contributions 
 •Mr. Rice offers 
 extensive experience 
 on the alignment of 
 financial and 
 strategic objectives 
 and an understanding 
 of cost discipline 
 and effective 
 organizational 
 structure, a primary 
 focus of the 
 Company’s Board and 
 management team 
 particularly 
 throughout Disney’s 
 strategic evolution, 
 through his 
 experience in key 
 financial and 
 operational roles at 
 global companies, 
 including as Chief 
 Financial Officer of 
 Eli Lilly for more 
 than a decade 
 •His strong knowledge 
 of large 
 brand-focused 
 organizations gained 
 through experience 
 leading the pharmacy 
 benefits management 
 Age:58 business of CVS 
 Director since: Health and as Chief 
 2019 Financial Officer of 
 Committees: Eli Lilly has been a 
 Audit (Chair) valuable addition to 
 the Board 
 •Mr. Rice provides 
 expertise in 
 financial oversight 
 and accounting 
 through his financial 
 executive experience, 
 as well his 
 experience on the 
 audit committee of 
 the boards of public 
 companies, enhancing 
 Disney’s Audit 
 Committee oversight 
 of risks that may 
 arise out of 
 financial planning 
 and reporting, 
 internal controls and 
 information 
 technology 
 Other Key Skill Sets 
 •Strong understanding 
 of broader risk 
 management oversight 
 and complex, global 
 business operations 
 through senior 
 operation roles at 
 CVS and Eli Lilly 
 •Deep understanding 
 of strategic 
 planning, corporate 
 governance and social 
 initiatives through 
 service on other 
 public company boards 
 Employment Experience: 
 Executive Vice 
 2018–2020 President,CVS Health 
 Corporation (a 
 pharmacy company) 
 President, CVS 
 Caremark, the pharmacy 
 2018–2020 benefits management 
 business ofCVS Health 
 Corporation 
 Chief Financial 
 Officer and Executive 
 Vice President of 
 2006–2017 Global Services,Eli 
 Lilly and Company (a 
 pharmaceutical 
 company) 
 Vice President and 
 2003–2006 Controller,Eli Lilly 
 and Company 
 Various Executive 
 1990–2005 Positions,Eli Lilly 
 and Company 
 Other Public Company 
 Directorships: 
 The Carlyle Group Inc. 
 (2021–Present) 
 Bristol-Myers Squibb 
 Company (2020–Present) 
 Target Corporation 
 (2007–2018); 
 (2020–Present) 
 Audit Committee 
Members: Safra A. Catz, D. Jeremy Darroch, Francis A. deSouza and Derica W. Rice (Chair)
The Audit Committee is responsible for, among other things, overseeing the Company’s financial
statements, internal controls, compliance with legal and regulatory requirements, internal audit
function and Company’s relationship with its independent auditor. The Committee also oversees
cybersecurity and data security risks and mitigation strategies. The Committee reviews the Company’s
policies and practices with respect to risk assessment and risk management. The Committee met 9 times
during fiscal 2023. All of the members of the Committee are independent within the meaning of SEC
regulations, the listing standards of the New York Stock Exchange and the Company’s Corporate
Governance Guidelines . The Board has determined that all members of the Committee, Ms. Catz, Mr.
Darroch, Mr. deSouza and Mr. Rice, are qualified as audit committee financial experts within the
meaning of SEC regulations and that they have accounting and related financial management expertise
within the meaning of the listing standards of the New York Stock Exchange. The Board has
 14 
determined that Mr. Rice’s simultaneous service on the audit committees of more than three public
companies will not impair his ability to effectively serve on the Committee. In fiscal 2024, the
Board appointed Mr. Darroch to the Committee and, following the Annual Meeting, Mr. deSouza will no
longer be a member of the Board.
 Corporate Governance Documents 
The Board has adopted Corporate Governance Guidelines, which set forth a flexible framework within
which the Board, assisted by its committees, directs the affairs of the Company. The Corporate
Governance Guidelines address, among other things, the composition and functions of the Board,
Director independence, stock ownership by and compensation of Directors, management succession and
review, Board leadership, Board committees and selection of new Directors.
The Company has Standards of Business Conduct, which are applicable to all employees of the Company,
including the principal executive officer, the principal financial officer and the principal
accounting officer. The Board has a separate Code of Business Conduct and Ethics for Directors ,
which contains provisions specifically applicable to Directors.
Each standing committee of the Board is governed by a charter adopted by the Board.
The Corporate Governance Guidelines, the Standards of Business Conduct, the Code of Business Conduct
and Ethics for Directors and each of the Audit, Compensation and Governance and Nominating Committee
charters are available on the Company’s Investor Relations website under the “Corporate Governance”
heading at www.disney.com/investors and in print to any shareholder who requests them from the
Company’s Secretary. If the Company amends or waives the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics for
Directors or the Standards of Business Conduct with respect to the principal executive officer,
principal financial officer or principal accounting officer, it will post the amendment or waiver at
the same location on its website.
 Director Selection Process 
Working closely with the full Board, the Governance and Nominating Committee develops criteria for
open Board positions. Applying these criteria, the Committee considers candidates for Board
membership suggested by Committee members, other Board members, management and shareholders. The
Committee retains third-party executive search firms to identify and review candidates and generate
candidate pools consistent with the criteria below, upon request of the Committee from time to time.
Once the Committee has identified a prospective nominee — including prospective nominees recommended
by shareholders — it determines whether to conduct a full evaluation. The Committee may request the
third-party search firm to gather additional information about the prospective nominee’s background
and experience and to report its findings. The Committee then evaluates the prospective nominee
against the specific criteria that it has established for the position, as well as the standards and
qualifications set out in the Company’s Corporate Governance Guidelines , including but not limited
to:
• the ability of the prospective nominee to represent the interests of the shareholders of the
Company;
• the ability of the prospective nominee to dedicate sufficient time, energy and attention to ensure
the diligent performance of the prospective nominee’s duties, including by attending shareholder
meetings and meetings of the Board and committees of the Board of which such prospective nominee
would be a member, and by reviewing in advance all meeting materials;
• the extent to which the prospective nominee contributes to the range of talent, skill and expertise
appropriate for the Board; and
• the extent to which the prospective nominee helps the Board reflect the diversity of the Company’s
shareholders, employees, customers and guests and the communities in which it operates.
After completing this evaluation and an interview, the Committee makes a recommendation to the full
Board, which makes the final determination whether to nominate or appoint the new director after
considering the Committee’s report.
In selecting director nominees, the Board seeks to achieve a mix of members who together bring
experience and personal backgrounds relevant to the Company’s strategic priorities and the scope and
complexity of the Company’s business. The current nominees’ qualifications set forth in their
individual biographies under the section titled “ Directors” sets out how each of the current
nominees (comprised of all current Directors, other than Mr. deSouza, and Mr. Gorman) contributes to
the mix of experience and qualifications the Board seeks. The Board also considers the tenure policy
under the Corporate Governance Guidelines , pursuant to which the Board will not nominate for re-
election any non-management Director that completed fifteen years of service as a member of the Board
on or prior to the date of election or that turned 75 years of age or older in the calendar year
preceding the related annual meeting, in each case, unless the Board concludes that such Director’s
continuing service would better serve the best interests of the shareholders. In addition, the Board
seeks candidates whose service on other boards will not adversely affect their ability to dedicate
the requisite time to service on the Board. The Board believes that Directors who are executive
officers of public companies should not serve on more than two public company boards (including the
Board of the Company) at a time, and that other Directors should not serve on more than four public
company boards (including the Board of the Company).
 15 
The Committee regularly assesses the composition of the Board and considers the extent to which the
Board continues to reflect the criteria set forth above. The Committee identifies any gaps in skill
sets to inform the search process. Based on such assessment, the Committee will recommend to the
Board the nomination for election or re-election of existing Directors at the annual shareholders
meeting. The Board will review the Committee’s recommendation and evaluate which candidates to
nominate for election or re-election.
As a result of a comprehensive search for directors that reflect its selection criteria discussed
above, the Board appointed two new directors: James Gorman and Jeremy Darroch. Recommendations: Those
who identified Mr. Gorman for consideration as a candidate included a third-party search firm and a
non-management director. Those who identified Mr. Darroch for consideration as a candidate included a
third-party search firm, a non-management director, the Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) and another
executive officer.
A shareholder who wishes to recommend a prospective nominee for the Board should notify the Company’s
Secretary or any member of the Governance and Nominating Committee in writing with whatever
supporting material the shareholder considers appropriate. The Governance and Nominating Committee
will also consider whether to nominate any person nominated by a shareholder pursuant to the
provisions of the Company’s Bylaws relating to shareholder nominations.
 Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports 
Based solely on a review of the reports filed for fiscal year 2023 and related written
representations from reporting persons, we are not aware of any late or delinquent filings under
Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, except (i) a Form 4 for each of Ms. Chang, Mr.
deSouza, Mr. McDonald and Mr. Parker that was filed one day late due to a filing software error on
October 5, 2022, in each case reporting one transaction; and (ii) a Form 4 for Ms. Coleman that was
filed late due to an administrative oversight on August 3, 2023, with respect to the vesting of a
portion of two previously granted restricted stock unit awards and related exempt dispositions of
some of such vested shares to the Company to satisfy the tax withholding obligations, reporting four
transactions.
 16 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 11. Executive Compensation │
 Director Compensation 
 Elements of Director Compensation 
The elements of annual Director compensation for fiscal 2023 were as follows:
 Annual Board retainer $115,000 
 Annual committee retainer (except Executive $10,000 
 Committee)1 
 Annual Governance and Nominating Committee chair $20,000 
 retainer2 
 Annual Compensation Committee chair retainer2 $25,000 
 Annual Audit Committee chair retainer2 $27,500 
 Annual deferred stock unit grant $240,000 
 Annual retainer for independent Chairman3 $145,000 
1 Per committee.
2 This is in addition to the annual committee retainer the Director receives for serving on the
committee.
3 This is in addition to the annual Board retainer, annual committee retainer and annual deferred
stock unit grant and at least 50% must be paid in stock.
To encourage Directors to experience the Company’s products, services and entertainment offerings
personally, each non-employee Director may receive Company products and services up to a maximum of
$15,000 in fair market value per calendar year plus reimbursement of associated tax liabilities. Each
first-year non-employee Director may receive Company products and services up to a maximum of $25,000
in fair market value plus reimbursement of associated tax liabilities for one year following their
respective start date. Such first-year non-employee Directors will have an additional allowance of
$15,000 prorated to reflect the balance of the calendar year remaining after the first anniversary of
their start date. Directors’ spouses, children and grandchildren may also participate in this benefit
within each Director’s limit.
Family members of Directors may accompany Directors traveling on Company aircraft for business
purposes on a space-available basis.
Directors participate in the Company’s employee gift matching program. Under this program, the
Company matches contributions of up to $20,000 per calendar year per Director to charitable and
educational institutions meeting the Company’s criteria.
Directors who are also employees of the Company receive no additional compensation for service as a
Director.
Under the Company’s Corporate Governance Guidelines , non-employee Director compensation is
determined annually by the Board acting on the recommendation of the Governance and Nominating
Committee. In formulating its recommendation, the Governance and Nominating Committee receives input
from the third-party compensation consultant retained by the Compensation Committee regarding market
practices for Director compensation.
 17 
 Director Compensation for Fiscal 2023 
The following table sets forth compensation earned during fiscal 2023 by each person who served as a
non-employee Director during the year.
 Fees Earned or Paid Stock Awards All Other Total 
 In Cash Compensation 
 Susan E. Arnold $109,945 $159,976 $28,876 $298,797 
 Mary T. Barra 125,000 240,767 — 365,767 
 Safra A. Catz 138,901 240,767 — 379,668 
 Amy L. Chang 125,000 240,767 54,061 419,828 
 Francis A. deSouza 125,000 240,767 16,274 382,041 
 Carolyn N. Everson 91,280 208,439 20,000 319,719 
 Michael B.G. Froman 125,000 240,767 13,394 379,161 
 Maria Elena 160,000 240,767 7,903 408,670 
 Lagomasino 
 Calvin R. McDonald 125,000 240,767 13,652 379,419 
 Mark G. Parker 168,242 276,384 7,533 452,159 
 Derica W. Rice 138,599 240,767 29,224 408,590 
Fees Earned or Paid in Cash. “Fees Earned or Paid in Cash” includes the annual Board retainer and
annual committee and committee-chair retainers, whether paid currently or deferred by the Director to
be paid in cash or shares after service ends. Directors are permitted to elect each year to receive
all or part of their retainers in Disney stock and, whether paid in cash or stock, to defer all or
part of their retainers until after service as a Director ends. Directors who elect to receive
deferred compensation in cash receive a credit each quarter and the balance in their deferred cash
account earns interest at an annual rate equal to 120% of the Applicable Long-Term Federal Interest
Rate, as determined from time to time by the United States Internal Revenue Service. For fiscal 2023,
the average interest rate was 5.30%.
The following table sets forth the form of fees received by each Director. The number of stock units
awarded is equal to the dollar amount of fees accruing each quarter divided by the average over the
last ten trading days of the quarter of the average of the high and low trading price for shares of
Company common stock on each day in the ten-day period. Stock units distributed currently were
accumulated throughout the year and distributed as shares following December 31, 2023.
 18 
 Cash Stock 
 Units 
 Paid Value Value Number 
 Currently Deferred Distribu… Deferred of Units 
 Currently 
 Susan E. $109,945 — — — — 
 Arnold 
 Mary T. — — — $125,000 1,417 
 Barra 
 Safra A. — — $138,901 — 1,569 
 Catz 
 Amy L. 125,000 — — — — 
 Chang 
 Francis 
 A. — — 125,000 — 1,417 
 deSouza 
 Carolyn 
 N. 13,040 — 39,120 39,120 886 
 Everson 
 Michael 
 B.G. — — 125,000 — 1,417 
 Froman 
 Maria 
 Elena — — — 160,000 1,814 
 Lagomas… 
 Calvin 
 R. — — 125,000 — 1,417 
 McDonald 
 Mark G. — — — 168,242 1,923 
 Parker 
 Derica — — — 138,599 1,576 
 W. Rice 
Stock Awards. “Stock Awards” sets forth the market value of the deferred stock unit grants to
Directors and the amount reported is equal to the market value of the Company’s common stock on the
date of the award times the number of shares underlying the units. Units are awarded at the end of
each quarter and the number of units is determined by dividing the amount payable with respect to the
quarter by the average over the last ten trading days of the quarter of the average of the high and
low trading price for shares of the Company common stock on each day in the ten-day period. Each
Director other than Ms. Everson, Mr. Parker and Ms. Arnold was awarded 2,721 units in fiscal 2023.
Ms. Everson was awarded 2,346 units as she served only a portion of fiscal 2023. Mr. Parker and Ms.
Arnold, who both served as independent Chairman for a portion of fiscal 2023, were awarded 3,141
units and 1,731 units, respectively, in fiscal 2023 due to the annual retainer for independent
Chairman.
Unless a Director elects to defer receipt of shares until after the Director’s service ends, shares
with respect to annual deferred stock unit grants are normally distributed to the Director on the
second anniversary of the award date, whether or not the Director is still a Director on the date of
distribution.
At the end of any quarter in which dividends are distributed to shareholders, Directors receive
additional stock units with a value (based on the average of the high and low trading prices of the
Company common stock averaged over the last ten trading days of the quarter) equal to the amount of
dividends they would have received on all stock units held by them at the end of the prior quarter.
Shares with respect to these additional units are distributed when the underlying units are
distributed. Units awarded in respect of dividends are included in the fair value of the stock units
when the units are initially awarded and therefore are not included in the tables above, but they are
included in the total units held at the end of the fiscal year in the table below.
The following table sets forth all stock units held by each non-management Director serving during
fiscal 2023, as of the end of fiscal 2023. All stock units are fully vested when granted, but shares
are distributed with respect to the units only later, as described above. Stock units in this table
are included in the stock ownership table in Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners
and Management and Related Stockholder Matters — “Stock Ownership” except to the extent they may have
been distributed as shares and sold prior to the date of the stock ownership table.
 19 
 Stock Units 
 Susan E. Arnold 4,276 
 Mary T. Barra 17,181 
 Safra A. Catz 5,895 
 Amy L. Chang 5,138 
 Francis A. deSouza 8,809 
 Carolyn N. Everson 3,175 
 Michael B.G. Froman 5,822 
 Maria Elena Lagomasino 23,868 
 Calvin R. McDonald 6,196 
 Mark G. Parker 22,827 
 Derica W. Rice 12,830 
The Company’s Corporate Governance Guidelines encourage Directors to own or acquire, within three
years of first becoming a Director, shares of Company common stock (including stock units received as
Director compensation) having a market value of at least five times the amount of the annual Board
retainer for the Director. Unless the Board exempts a Director, each Director is also required to
retain stock representing no less than 50% of the after-tax value of exercised options and shares
received upon distribution of deferred stock units until such Director meets the stock holding
guideline described above.
All Other Compensation. “All Other Compensation” includes:
• The incremental cost to the Company of perquisites and other personal benefits for Ms. Arnold,
including security charges and product familiarization and travel benefits. In fiscal 2023, the
Company provided security services and equipment to Ms. Arnold totaling $20,185. Except for Ms.
Arnold, the value of perquisites and other benefits, including product familiarization and travel
benefits, for each Director is not included in the table as permitted by SEC rules because the
aggregate incremental cost to the Company did not exceed $10,000 for such Director.
• Reimbursement of tax liabilities associated with the product familiarization and travel benefits.
The reimbursement of associated tax liabilities was $1,681 for Ms. Arnold, $34,061 for Ms. Chang,
$16,274 for Mr. deSouza, $13,394 for Mr. Froman, $7,903 for Ms. Lagomasino, $13,652 for Mr. McDonald,
$7,533 for Mr. Parker and $9,224 for Mr. Rice.
• Interest earned on deferred cash compensation, which was less than $10,000 for each Director.
• The matching charitable contribution of the Company, which was $20,000 for Ms. Chang, $20,000 for
Ms. Everson and $20,000 for Mr. Rice.
 20 
 Executive Compensation 
 Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
 Fiscal 2023 Performance Highlights 
As described in more detail under “Executive Compensation — Compensation Discussion and Analysis —
Individual Compensation Decisions” below, our named executive officers (“NEOs”) who remain with the
Company showed strong performance and leadership both in managing the Company and in driving a
transformation of our businesses, building long-term value. Over the past century, we have built a
strong foundation of creative excellence and innovation, which has only been reinforced by the
important restructuring and cost efficiency work we’ve done this year. Our new structure is restoring
creativity to the center of our Company. Our results reflect the significant progress we’ve made on
our priorities over the past year and while we still have work to do to continue improving
performance, our progress has allowed us to move beyond this period of fixing and begin building our
businesses again.
• Revenues increased 7% year over year to $88.9 billion
• Cash provided by continuing operations increased 64% year over year to $9.9 billion.
Fiscal 2023 share price performance was challenging for the Company. As we look forward, our
leadership team remains focused on building long-term value for our shareholders, and our
Compensation Committee remains committed to an executive compensation program that motivates
executives to achieve these goals and aligns pay outcomes with Company performance.
 Fiscal 2023 Compensation Practices 
 EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION OBJECTIVES AND METHODS 
We maintain an integrated approach to attract and retain high-caliber executives in a competitive
market for talent, while adhering to key corporate governance best practices summarized below.
 Independent members of the Board and Investor Relations 
 regularly engage in investor outreach. With regard to 
 executive compensation, the Compensation Committee has 
 addressed shareholder feedback and made changes to 
 compensation for fiscal 2023, including: 
 •Upon hire, set the CEO's total direct compensation below 
 the market median of our peers. In connection with his 
 contract extension, Mr. Iger’s target bonus increased to 
 500% of base salary, in order to align his target total 
 direct compensation with the median. 
 •Utilized the structure of 60% of the CEO’s fiscal 2023 
 equity award as performance-based restricted stock units 
 (“PBUs”), in response to feedback to prioritize pay for 
 performance. 
 •As financial uncertainties related to the pandemic have 
 Shareholder engagement and decreased, the portion of fiscal 2023 PBUs vesting 
 responsiveness subject to return on invested capital (“ROIC”) 
 performance have a single 3-year performance period. In 
 fiscal 2020 - 2022, PBUs vesting subject to ROIC 
 performance had three 1-year performance periods. 
 •For the fiscal 2023 annual bonus plan, significantly 
 increased the required adjusted revenue, adjusted segment 
 operating income and adjusted after-tax free cash flow 
 amounts to achieve target-level payouts year-over-year. 
 Specifically, targets were raised 10%, 35% and more than 
 100%, respectively. In addition, performance ranges were 
 adjusted to further incentivize performance. 
 •The Compensation Committee adopted a cash severance 
 policy pursuant to which any cash severance payment will 
 not exceed 2.99 times the sum of base salary plus target 
 bonus for Section 16 officers without shareholder 
 approval of such payment. 
 Fiscal 2023 bonus plan maintains incorporation of 
 Incentive plan non-financial metrics diversity and inclusion, creativity and innovation and 
 collaboration as key strategic objectives. 
 NEOs must hold a meaningful amount of the Company’s 
 stock. The CEO must hold equity valued at five times his 
 Equity retention guidelines salary within five years of becoming CEO. Other NEOs must 
 hold equity valued at three times their salary within 
 five years of becoming an executive officer. 
 A majority of NEO compensation is tied to either short- 
 or long-term Company performance. For Mr. Iger in fiscal 
 2023, 96% of his total target compensation (including 60% 
 Compensation at risk of his annual equity grant, comprised of PBUs) was tied 
 to financial performance, contributions towards 
 organization goals, equity compensation or stock price 
 performance. 
 21 
 Each year, the Compensation Committee’s compensation 
 consultant completes a risk assessment of the Company’s 
 compensation programs. Based on this assessment for 
 Annual risk assessment fiscal 2023, the Compensation Committee determined that 
 risks arising from the Company’s policies and practices 
 are not reasonably likely to have a material adverse 
 effect on the Company. 
 The Company is required to recoup certain incentive-based 
 compensation erroneously awarded to a current or former 
 NEO or other Section 16 officers based on financial 
 Clawback policies reporting measures that are required to be restated. In 
 addition, under the 2011 Stock Incentive Plan, equity 
 awards pursuant to the plan may be clawed back where 
 there is reputational or financial harm to the Company. 
 Board members, NEOs and all other Section 16 filers are 
 Disallow hedging and pledging prohibited from hedging and pledging the Company’s 
 securities. 
 No option re-pricing or cash buyouts The Company does not allow re-pricing or cash buyouts of 
 underwater stock options without shareholder approval. 
 No excise tax gross-ups The Company does not provide excise tax gross-ups. 
 The Compensation Committee has retained a compensation 
 Independent compensation consultant consultant whose relationship with the Company was 
 confirmed to be independent for fiscal 2023. 
 Given the unique security risks posed by the position, 
 the Company pays the cost of security services and 
 CEO Security & Aircraft Usage equipment for the CEO in an amount that the Board 
 believes is reasonable in light of the security needs 
 and, in the interest of security, requires the CEO to use 
 corporate aircraft for all personal travel. 
Executive Compensation Program Structure — Objectives and Methods
We design our executive compensation program to drive the creation of long-term shareholder value. We
do this by linking compensation payouts to the achievement of preset performance goals that promote
the creation of sustainable shareholder value and by designing compensation to attract and retain
high-caliber executives in a competitive market for talent. We aim to provide compensation
opportunities that take into account compensation levels and practices of our peers. For a more
detailed description of the peer groups we use for compensation purposes, see the discussion under
the heading, “Executive Compensation — Other Compensation Information — Peer Groups,” set forth
below. Total direct compensation comprises a mix of variable and fixed compensation that is heavily
weighted toward variable performance-based compensation. Our performance-based compensation includes
a short-term annual performance-based bonus and longer-term equity awards that deliver value based on
stock price performance. Our performance-based compensation also includes PBUs, which vest only upon
meeting performance targets. As prospective performance targets are central to our business strategy,
for competitive reasons we do not publicly disclose them for either the short-term annual
performance-based bonus plan or the long-term incentive plan. The Company enters into employment
agreements with our senior executives when the Compensation Committee determines that it is
appropriate to attract or retain an executive or where an employment agreement is consistent with our
practices with respect to other similarly situated executives.
 22 
The following table sets forth the elements of total direct compensation in fiscal 2023 and the
objectives and key features of each element:
 OBJECTIVES AND KEY FEATURES 
 SALARY 
 Objectives: 
 The Compensation Committee 
 sets salaries to reflect job 
 responsibilities and to 
 provide competitive fixed pay 
 to balance performance-based 
 risks. 
 Key Features: 
 •Minimum salaries set in 
 employment agreement 
 •Committee discretion to 
 adjust annually based on 
 changes in experience, nature 
 and responsibility of the 
 position, competitive 
 considerations and CEO 
 recommendation (except in the 
 case of the CEO) 
 PERFORMANCE-BASED BONUS 
 Objectives: 
 The Compensation Committee 
 structures the bonus program 
 to incentivize performance at 
 the high end of the financial 
 performance measure ranges 
 that it establishes each year. 
 The Committee believes that 
 incentivizing performance in 
 this fashion will lead to 
 long-term, sustainable gains 
 in shareholder value. 
 Key Features: 
 •Target bonus for each NEO set 
 by the Committee early in the 
 fiscal year in light of 
 employment agreement 
 provisions, competitive 
 considerations, CEO 
 recommendation (except targets 
 for the CEO) and other factors 
 the Committee deems 
 appropriate; bonus opportunity 
 normally limited to 200% of 
 target bonus 
 •Unless otherwise adjusted 
 downward by the Committee, 
 payout on 70% of target is 
 formulaic and determined by 
 performance against financial 
 performance ranges developed 
 by the Committee early in the 
 fiscal year 
 •Unless otherwise determined 
 by the Committee, payout on 
 30% of target determined by 
 Company-wide Other Performance 
 Factors and the Committee’s 
 assessment of individual 
 performance based both on 
 other performance objectives 
 and on CEO recommendation 
 (except the payouts for the 
 CEO) 
 EQUITY AWARDS 
 Objectives: 
 The Compensation Committee 
 structures equity awards to 
 directly reward long-term 
 gains in shareholder value. 
 Equity awards carry vesting 
 terms that now extend for 
 three years and include PBUs 
 whose value depends on Company 
 performance, including 
 performance relative to the 
 S&P 500. These awards provide 
 incentives to create and 
 sustain long-term growth in 
 shareholder value. 
 Key Features: 
 •Combined value of options, 
 performance units and 
 time-based units determined by 
 the Committee in light of 
 employment agreement 
 provisions, competitive market 
 conditions, evaluation of 
 executive’s performance and 
 CEO recommendation (except 
 awards for the CEO) 
 •Allocation of annual awards 
 for CEO: 60% PBUs and 40% 
 stock options 
 •Allocation of annual awards 
 for other NEOs (other than the 
 Interim CFO and Senior 
 Executive Vice President & 
 Chief Human Resources Officer, 
 as their awards relate to 
 their prior roles) in fiscal 
 2023 (based on award value): 
 50% PBUs; 25% time-based 
 restricted stock units; 25% 
 stock options 
 ANNUAL PERFORMANCE-BASED 
 RESTRICTED STOCK UNITS 
 Key Features: 
 •PBUs reward executives only 
 if preset performance targets 
 are met 
 •PBUs vest subject to the 
 level of achievement under 
 multi-year performance tests. 
 Starting with fiscal 2022 
 awards, payout ranges from 0% 
 if performance is under 
 threshold to up to 200% if 
 performance is at maximum 
 •Half of awards vest based on 
 three-year cumulative total 
 shareholder return (“TSR”) 
 relative to the S&P 500 (two 
 years for Mr. Iger in fiscal 
 2023); the other half vest 
 based on three-year ROIC 
 performance (two years for 
 Mr. Iger in fiscal 2023). 
 Awards as described in the 
 section titled “Executive 
 Compensation — Compensation 
 Tables — Fiscal 2023 Grants 
 of Plan Based Awards Table” 
 STOCK OPTION AWARDS 
 Key Features: 
 •Exercise price equal to 
 average of the high and low 
 trading prices on day of 
 award 
 •Option re-pricing without 
 shareholder approval is 
 prohibited 
 •Ten-year term 
 •Vest one-third per year 
 ANNUAL TIME-BASED RESTRICTED 
 STOCK UNITS 
 Key Features: 
 •Vest one-third per year 
 •For fiscal 2023, Mr. Iger 
 did not receive time-based 
 RSUs 
 23 
 COMPENSATION AT RISK 
The Compensation Committee believes that most of the compensation for NEOs should be at risk and tied
to a combination of long-term and short-term Company performance. In fiscal 2023, our NEOs consisted
of Mr. Iger, Mr. Lansberry, Mr. Gutierrez, Ms. Schake, Ms. Coleman, Mr. Chapek and Ms. McCarthy.
In establishing a mix of fixed to variable compensation, the composition of equity awards, target
bonus levels, grant date equity award values and performance ranges, the Committee seeks to maintain
its goal of making compensation overwhelmingly tied to performance, while also providing compensation
opportunities that are competitive with alternatives available to the executive. In particular, the
Committee expects that performance at the high-end of ranges will result in overall compensation that
is sufficiently attractive relative to compensation available at successful competitors and that
performance at the low-end of ranges will result in overall compensation that is less than that
available from competitors with more successful performance.
The following charts show the percentage of the target total direct annual compensation for first,
Mr. Iger, and second, all NEOs other than Mr. Iger and Mr. Chapek, that is variable or at risk versus
being fixed with respect to fiscal 2023. At risk compensation includes both the target performance-
based cash bonus and equity awards while the only fixed component of pay is base salary.
 CEO – MR. IGER* Non-CEO NEOs** 
 CEO – MR. IGER* Non-CEO NEOs** 
 *Target mix for fiscal 2023 
 compensation, including the proration of 
 Mr. Iger’s fiscal 2023 target annual 
 incentive. Mr. Iger’s target fiscal 2024 ** Target mix for fiscal 2023 compensation. Includes 
 compensation will be 97% at risk target compensation for all NEOs other than Mr. Iger 
 compensation: and Mr. Chapek. 
 3% base salary, 16% target annual 
 incentive, 49% PBUs and 32% stock 
 options. 
 24 
Beginning in fiscal 2022, the Compensation Committee determined to increase PBUs from 30% to 50% of
the overall long-term incentive grant value for the NEOs other than the CEO, who already had 50% in
the form of PBUs (and who has 60% in the form of PBUs for fiscal 2023). This shift reflects a
meaningful increase in performance-based compensation and was directly responsive to shareholder
feedback. The below table reflects the annual PBU grants vesting over the last five years, all of
which resulted in below target payouts:
 Vested In Vested Vested Vested Vested 
 December 2019 InDecember InDecember InDecember InDecember 
 2020 2021 2022 2023 
 % of Target 96% 62% 48% 50% 67% 
 Payout 
 Value of a 
 $100.00 PBU 
 Grant, as of $133.58 $95.87 $64.37 $30.49 $35.85 
 Vest 
 Date1 
1 Assumes stock purchase was made at the closing price of the grant date and sold on the third
anniversary of grant date (or the nearest trading date if third anniversary falls on a non-trading
day) and then adjusted for the actual % payout. Awards vested in 2019 were granted on December 21,
2016; awards vested in 2020 were granted on December 19, 2017; awards vested in 2021 were granted on
December 19, 2018; awards vested in 2022 were granted on December 17, 2019; awards vested in 2023
were granted on December 17, 2020.
For awards granted in fiscal 2021 (December 2020) and vested in fiscal 2024 (December 2023), TSR
performance relative to the S&P 500 was below threshold and therefore no payout was earned for 50% of
the award. For the 50% of the award that vested subject to ROIC performance, there were three one-
year performance periods for fiscal 2021, fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2023 with payout at the following
percentages:
• Fiscal 2021: 150% of target
• Fiscal 2022: 148.05% of target
• Fiscal 2023: 103.38% of target
Fiscal 2023 had a threshold, target and maximum of 3.1%, 5.6% and 6.9%, respectively. Actual fiscal
2023 performance was just over 5.7%, resulting in a 103.38% payout for the fiscal 2023 portion.
Overall, the fiscal 2021 PBUs vested at 66.9%, underscoring the Committee’s belief that this PBU
structure strongly aligns pay and performance.
The fiscal 2023 ROIC test also applied to the outstanding PBU grants made in fiscal 2022 (December
2021). For these awards, maximum payout increased from 150% to 200% of target, consistent with market
practice. Actual fiscal 2023 ROIC performance was just over 5.7%, which resulted in a 106.75% payout
for the fiscal 2023 portion of the December 2021 ROIC test.
ROIC for the Company is calculated by dividing Annual After-Tax Operating Performance by the average
of Invested Capital at the end of such fiscal year and the end of the immediately prior fiscal year.
Annual After-Tax Operating Performance is calculated as the sum of segment operating income for each
segment and corporate and unallocated shared expenses, minus tax at 21% on segment operating income
and corporate and unallocated shared expenses. Invested Capital is defined as the remainder of
Disney’s total assets at fiscal year end minus the sum of: (i) Disney’s cash, cash equivalents and
restricted cash as the last day of the fiscal year, (ii) Disney’s deferred tax assets and (iii)
Disney’s Non-Interest Bearing Liabilities. ROIC for the Company is adjusted (i) to exclude the effect
of extraordinary, unusual and/or nonrecurring items and (ii) to reflect such other factors, as the
Committee deems appropriate to fairly reflect ROIC for the applicable fiscal year.
 25 
 COMPENSATION PROCESS 
The following table outlines the process for determining annual compensation awards for NEOs:
 SALARIES PERFORMANCE-BASED BONUS 
 •Compensation Committee participates in regular 
 Board of Director review of operating plans and 
 results and review of annual operating plan at 
 the beginning of the fiscal year 
 •Management recommends financial and other 
 performance measures, weightings and ranges 
 •Early in the fiscal year, the Committee 
 reviews proposed performance measures and 
 ranges with input from its consultant and 
 •Annually at the end of the calendar year, the develops performance measures and ranges that 
 CEO recommends salaries for NEOs other than it believes establish appropriate goals 
 himself for the following calendar year •CEO recommends bonus targets for NEOs other 
 •Compensation Committee reviews proposed than himself 
 salary changes with input from its consultant •Early in the fiscal year, the Committee 
 (described under“Executive Compensation — reviews bonus measure ranges with input from 
 Compensation Discussion and Analysis — its consultant and in light of the targets 
 Executive Compensation Program established by employment agreements and 
 Structure—Objectives and Methods — competitive conditions and determines bonus 
 Compensation Consultant”) target opportunity as a percentage of fiscal 
 •Committee determines annual salaries for all year-end salary for each NEO 
 NEOs •After the end of the fiscal year, management 
 •Committee reviews determinations with the presents financial results to the Committee 
 other non-management directors •CEO recommends Other Performance Factor 
 multipliers for NEOs other than himself 
 •Committee reviews the results and determines 
 whether to make any adjustments to financial 
 results, determines other performance factor 
 multipliers and establishes bonus 
 •Committee reviews determinations with the 
 other non-management directors and, in the case 
 of the CEO, seeks their concurrence in the 
 Committee’s determination 
 EQUITY AWARDS 
 •In the first fiscal quarter, the CEO 
 recommends grant date fair value of awards for 
 NEOs other than himself 
 •Compensation Committee reviews proposed 
 awards with input from its consultant and 
 reviews with other non-management directors 
 •Committee determines the dollar values of 
 awards 
 •Exercise price and number of options and 
 restricted stock units are determined by 
 formula based on market price of common shares 
 on the date of award 
 MANAGEMENT INPUT 
In addition to the CEO recommendations described above, management regularly:
• provides data, analysis and recommendations to the Compensation Committee regarding the Company’s
executive compensation programs and policies;
• administers those programs and policies as directed by the Committee;
• provides an ongoing review of the effectiveness of the compensation programs, including
competitiveness and alignment with the Company’s objectives; and
• recommends changes to compensation programs if needed to help achieve program objectives.
The Committee meets regularly in executive session without management present to discuss compensation
decisions and matters relating to the design and operation of the executive compensation program.
 COMPENSATION CONSULTANT 
The Compensation Committee retained Pay Governance LLC as the compensation consultant for fiscal
2023. The consultant assists the Committee’s development and evaluation of compensation policies and
practices and the Committee’s determinations of compensation awards through various services,
including providing third-party data, advice and expertise on proposed executive compensation awards
and plan designs; reviewing briefing materials prepared by management and outside advisers; and
advising the Committee on the matters included in these materials and preparing its own analysis of
compensation matters.
The Committee considers input from the consultant as one factor in making decisions on compensation
matters, along with information and analyses it receives from management and its own judgment and
experience.
The Committee has adopted a policy requiring its consultant to be independent of Company management.
The Committee performs an annual assessment of the consultant’s independence to determine whether the
consultant is independent. The Committee assessed Pay Governance LLC’s independence in November 2023
and confirmed that the firm’s work has not raised any conflict of interest and the firm is
independent. Pay Governance LLC does not provide any services to the Company other than the services
provided to the Compensation Committee.
 26 
 Fiscal 2023 Compensation Decisions 
This section discusses the specific decisions made by the Compensation Committee in fiscal 2023.
These decisions were made taking into consideration shareholder feedback received as members of
management and the Board engaged in outreach to shareholders. The Board took several actions in
response to the shareholder feedback received.
 2023 ANNUAL INCENTIVE PLAN 
 PERFORMANCE GOALS 
The Compensation Committee normally develops performance goals for each fiscal year early in that
year and evaluates performance against those goals after the fiscal year has ended to arrive at its
compensation decisions.
 ANNUAL INCENTIVE GOALS 
Annual Incentive Financial Performance
In November 2022, the Compensation Committee reviewed the annual performance-based bonus program. The
Committee determined to retain the financial measures and relative weights for calculating the
portion of the NEOs bonuses that is based on financial performance as follows:
• adjusted segment operating income—50%
• adjusted revenue—25%
• adjusted after-tax free cash flow—25%
The Committee also developed performance ranges for each of the measures in November 2022. These
ranges are used to determine the multiplier that is applied to 70% of each NEO’s target bonus. The
overall financial performance multiple is equal to the weighted average of the performance multiples
for each of these three measures. The performance multiple for each measure is zero if performance is
below the bottom of the range and varies from 35% at the low end of the range to a maximum of 200% at
the top end of the range. The Committee believes the top of each range represents extraordinary
performance and the bottom represents satisfactory performance, below which no award would be
provided. In addition, 30% of each NEO’s target bonus is based on performance against key strategic
goals for the Company, called “Other Performance Factors.” We believe the mix between key financial
and strategic factors is appropriate, given the majority of the bonus opportunity is focused on
Company financial performance, while still recognizing the importance that Other Performance Factors
have on establishing a successful culture that supports the Company’s strategic goals.
With our desire to deliver strong results for our shareholders for fiscal 2023, the Committee
meaningfully increased performance targets year-over-year for all three financial metrics (increases
were 10% for adjusted revenue, 35% for adjusted segment operating income and more than 100% for
adjusted after-tax free cash flow). In addition, in order to further drive performance in fiscal
2023, the Committee: (i) expanded the width of the performance range (i.e., the difference between
the maximum performance and threshold performance) for adjusted after-tax free cash flow and (ii)
increased the maximum performance and threshold performance for adjusted segment operating income and
adjusted revenue, respectively. The following table shows the performance ranges approved by the
Committee for fiscal 2023 and actual performance (dollars in millions):
 Fiscal 2023 
 Fiscal 2023 Fiscal 2023 Fiscal 2023 Fiscal 2023 Actual 
 Performance Performance Performance Actual Performance 
 Threshold Target Maximum Performance Payout as % 
 of Target 
 Adjusted 
 Segment $9,957 $13,257 $16,300 $12,863 92% 
 Operating 
 Income* 
 Adjusted 82,857 91,927 97,973 88,898 78% 
 Revenue 
 Adjusted 
 After-Tax -1,552 1,448 4,448 2,449 133% 
 Free Cash 
 Flow** 
* For purposes of the annual performance-based bonuses, “adjusted segment operating income” was
defined as total segment operating income and reflects adjustments, if any, described under “
Evaluating Performance ” below. "Total segment operating income” consists of the total of segment
operating income from each of our segments, which is equivalent to income from continuing operations
before income taxes, adjusted for corporate and unallocated shared expenses, restructuring and
impairment charges, A+E gain, net other income, net interest expense and amortization of TFCF
Corporation (“TFCF”) and Hulu intangible assets and fair value step-up on film and television costs.
** For purposes of the annual performance-based bonuses, “adjusted after-tax free cash flow” was
defined as cash provided by operations less investments in parks, resorts and other properties, all
on a consolidated basis and reflects the adjustments described under “ Evaluating Performance ”
below.
 27 
Other Performance Factors
For fiscal 2023, the Other Performance Factors for the fiscal 2023 annual bonus, developed by the
Compensation Committee during the fiscal year, continued to emphasize the importance of diversity and
inclusion, which had the highest weighting among the Other Performance Factors. The Committee
established the following factors based on the strategic objectives of the Company:
• Diversity & Inclusion – Actively engage in creating a culture of respect for everyone, everywhere,
at every level. Work to grow the diversity of our executives and managers to reflect the guests and
audiences we serve. Support broadly resonant entertainment and experiences that reflect the world
around us and help us develop meaningful relationships with our consumers.
• Collaboration on strategic priorities – Actively promote collaboration and synergy on key strategic
priorities of the Company with a one-company mindset and drive clear accountabilities and partnership
across all lines of business, in support of developing content and product for our key franchises,
accelerating our direct-to-consumer initiatives and enabling the success of creative, operating and
corporate teams.
• Efforts towards creativity & innovation – Drive Company growth through innovation and the creation
of potential new sources of revenue while ensuring strong controls on costs and operational
efficiencies.
 Evaluating Performance 
The Compensation Committee reviewed the overall operating results of the Company in fiscal 2023,
evaluating them against the bonus plan performance ranges developed by the Committee early in the
fiscal year. The Compensation Committee approved no adjustments to actual fiscal 2023 total segment
operating income and revenue. After-tax free cash flow performance for incentive purposes was overall
adjusted downward to exclude the content spend benefit of the Writers Guild of America and SAG-AFTRA
work stoppages and the deferral in the timing of income tax payments as well as non-recurring items,
such as restructuring payments.
In fiscal 2023, the Company achieved strong financial growth for all three financial metrics, even
after ranges were significantly increased for fiscal 2023 and after-tax free cash flow was adjusted
as discussed above. The financial performance achieved included: total segment operating income of
$12,863 million, revenue of $88,898 million and adjusted after-tax free cash flow of $2,449 million.
Based on these adjusted results and due to the increase in targets, the weighted financial
performance factor was 99% in fiscal 2023 compared to a weighted financial performance factor of 159%
in fiscal 2022. As referenced above, and in order to responsibly assess performance, management
suggested, and the Committee decided, to adjust after-tax free cash flow downward to exclude the
content spend benefit of the Writers Guild of America and SAG-AFTRA work stoppages and the deferral
in the timing of income tax payments. Had the Committee not opted to adjust for these one-time
events, after-tax free cash flow would have been $5,209 million and that portion of the bonus plan
would have paid out at 200%. Overall, the weighted financial performance factor would have been 116%.
Additional details regarding the performance of the Company are set forth in our Annual Report on
Form 10-K for fiscal 2023.
With respect to the Other Performance Factors, the Committee recognizes that while we still have more
work ahead of us, the NEOs delivered results on these key strategic objectives, including:
Diversity & Inclusion
• Adjusted pay ratios were over 99% for base pay for U.S. women and people of color. For more details
on the adjusted pay ratio analysis and our commitment to expand pay ratio analyses further going
forward, please see our Pay Ratio Dashboard on the “ESG Reporting” page of our Impact website.
• The Company expanded efforts to increase diverse representation, which helped produce year-over-
year growth, especially at the executive and management levels. Representation for women increased
0.1 and 0.5 percentage points at the executive and management levels, respectively. Representation
for people of color increased 1.0 percentage points at each of the executive and management levels.
For more detailed results, please see our Diversity Dashboard on the “ESG Reporting” page of our
Impact website. The Diversity Dashboard includes our commitment to further disclosures in the future.
• With the continuation of Disney Aspire, growth in a diverse talent pipeline of employees and
leaders continues. In fiscal 2023, the Company promoted over 1,250 employees who were Aspire
participants, with 59% being women and 41% being people of color.
• Continued to create and promote content with diversity both in front of and behind the camera such
as Avatar: The Way of Water , Black Panther: Wakanda Forever , Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3 , The
Little Mermaid , Chevalier , Flamin’ Hot , Elemental and The Bear .
Collaboration on strategic priorities
• Successfully increased subscribers at Disney+ Core (+9.7M), Hulu (+1.3M) and ESPN+ (+1.7M) during
fiscal 2023, which reflected strong technology and content collaboration .
• Drove a restructuring plan of $5.5 billion in target efficiencies, which required strong
collaboration throughout the entire organization.
 28 
• Avatar: The Way of Water generated $2.3 billion in worldwide box office, is the third highest
grossing film of all time, and garnered strong viewership on Disney+. In addition, in fiscal 2023
Experiences announced an Avatar experience planned for Disneyland.
• Launched Disney+ domestic ad tier, increasing ad sales revenue with strong subscriber usage of the
tier, reflecting technology, advertising and content collaboration.
Efforts towards creativity & innovation
• Launched several new innovative attractions, including TRON Lightcycle at Walt Disney World, as
well as Mickey & Minnie’s Runaway Railway, Toontown refresh and San Fransokyo Square at Disneyland
Resort.
• Finalized a 10-year licensing deal with PENN Entertainment for the launch of an ESPN-branded sports
betting platform, ESPN Bet, with an aim to increase fan engagement, brand loyalty and monetization.
• Launched first-ever, fully animated, live NHL game simulcast leveraging Disney Channel’s Big City
Greens .
See tabular disclosure for each NEO below under “Executive Compensation — Compensation Discussion and
Analysis — Individual Compensation Decisions” for additional information regarding key contributions
and accomplishments of each NEO.
 2023 EQUITY AWARDS 
The Compensation Committee structures equity awards to directly reward long-term gains in shareholder
value. Equity awards carry vesting terms that now extend for three years and include PBUs whose value
depends on Company performance, including performance relative to the S&P 500. These awards provide
incentives to create and sustain long-term growth in shareholder value.
Key Features:
• Combined value of options, performance units and time-based units determined by the Committee in
light of employment agreement provisions, competitive market conditions, evaluation of executive’s
performance and CEO recommendation (except awards for the CEO)
• Allocation of annual awards for CEO: 60% PBUs and 40% stock options
• Allocation of annual awards for other NEOs in fiscal 2023 (based on award value): 50% PBUs; 25%
time-based restricted stock units (“RSUs”); 25% stock options. For most equity recipients other than
the executive officers, the fiscal 2023 annual grant was split into two equal installments, with the
first half being granted on December 15, 2022 and the second half being granted on July 17, 2023. As
both Mr. Lansberry and Ms. Coleman were not serving as executive officers at the time of the first
installment of the annual grant, consistent with the treatment for most equity recipients other than
the executive officers, they received their fiscal 2023 equity awards in two equal installments. As
fiscal 2023 awards relate to time in their prior roles , Mr. Lansberry and Ms. Coleman received their
equity in the allocation typical of executives at their respective levels. Mr. Lansberry’s award was
allocated as 70% RSUs and 30% stock options (i.e. the standard Executive Vice President allocation)
and Ms. Coleman’s award was allocated as 100% RSUs (i.e. the standard Senior Vice President
allocation). Ms. Coleman received a promotion award in June in connection with her promotion to
Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer, which was delivered with the same
allocation as other NEOs: 50% PBUs; 25% RSUs; 25% stock options.
 Time-Based Restricted Stock Units 
• RSUs provide retention value to our senior executives and align interests with our shareholders.
• RSUs vest one-third per year.
• In fiscal 2023, Mr. Iger did not receive RSUs as part of his equity allocation. Other NEOs receive
25% of their total equity value in RSUs.
 Stock Options 
• Stock options incentivize sustained growth in long-term stock appreciation and align interests with
our shareholders.
• Exercise price equal to average of the high and low trading prices on day of award.
• Option re-pricing without shareholder approval is prohibited.
• Options have a ten-year term from the grant date.
• Options vest one-third per year.
• Mr. Iger receives 40% of his total equity value in stock options. Other NEOs receive 25% of their
total equity value in Stock Options.
 29 
 Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units 
• PBUs align pay and performance by ensuring that shares are only earned when certain performance
criteria are met. 50% of PBUs vest based on TSR performance relative to the S&P 500; 50% of PBUs vest
based on ROIC performance.
• Performance is measured over a three-year performance period (two-year performance period for Mr.
Iger in fiscal 2023). As financial uncertainties related to the pandemic have mostly abated, the
portion of fiscal 2023 PBUs vesting subject to ROIC performance have a single 3-year performance
period. In fiscal 2020 - 2022, PBUs vesting subject to ROIC performance had three 1-year performance
periods.
• Starting with fiscal 2022 awards, payout ranges from 0% if performance is under threshold to up to
200% if performance is at maximum.
• For the portion vesting subject to TSR relative to the S&P 500, payout at target requires
performance at the 55th percentile of the S&P 500.
 Payout as a % of Target Performance - TSR Percentile Relative to S&P 500 
 200% 75th Percentile or Above 
 100% 55th Percentile 
 50% 25th Percentile 
 0% Below 25th Percentile 
• PBUs are denominated and settled in shares of Company stock.
• As pay-for-performance alignment is key to the Committee, PBUs are weighted the highest of the
three equity vehicles. Mr. Iger receives 60% of his total equity value in PBUs. Other NEOs receive
50% of their total equity value in PBUs.
 Recent PBU Payout Detail 
PBUs Vested in Fiscal 2023
For awards granted in fiscal 2020 (December 2019) and vested in fiscal 2023 (December 2022), TSR
performance relative to the S&P 500 was below threshold and therefore no payout was earned for 50% of
the award. For the 50% of the award that vested subject to ROIC performance, there were three one-
year performance periods for fiscal 2020, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2022. Overall, fiscal 2020 PBUs paid
out at:
• TSR Relative to S&P 500 Payout: 0% of target
• ROIC Payout: 99.35% of target
 • 
 Total Payout: 49.7% of target 
The below-target payout underscores the Committee’s belief that this PBU structure strongly aligns
pay and performance.
PBUs Vested in Fiscal 2024
For awards granted in fiscal 2021 (December 2020) and vested in fiscal 2024 (December 2023), TSR
performance relative to the S&P 500 was below threshold and therefore no payout was earned for 50% of
the award. For the 50% of the award that vested subject to ROIC performance, there were three one-
year performance periods for fiscal 2021, fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2023. Overall, fiscal 2021 PBUs paid
out at:
• TSR Relative to S&P 500 Payout: 0% of target
• ROIC Payout: 133.81% of target
 • 
 Total Payout: 66.9% of target 
The below-target payout underscores the Committee’s belief that this PBU structure strongly aligns
pay and performance.
 30 
 Individual Compensation Decisions 
 ANNUAL COMPENSATION DECISIONS 
The following table summarizes annual compensation decisions made by the Compensation Committee with
respect to each of the NEOs. The Committee established the salary and performance-based bonus target
multiple of salary for each of the NEOs early in the fiscal year following the processes described
above. The final bonus award was calculated after the fiscal year ended using the financial
performance factor of 99% described above. Given the enterprise-wide nature of the Other Performance
Factors and the contributions of each currently employed NEO, the Committee established an Other
Performance Factor for the NEOs listed in the following table below.
Severance for Mr. Chapek, who separated from the Company on November 20, 2022, conforms to the terms
of his employment agreement. For more discussion of Mr. Chapek’s separation, including the rationale,
see the section titled “Executive Compensation — Compensation Tables — Potential Payments and Rights
on Termination or Change in Control.”
 Sal… 
 Fis… 
 Year 
 End 
 2023 Per… Fin… Oth… Equi… Tar… 
 Ann… Bon… Per… Per… Awa… Awar… Per… Tim… 
 Sal… Tar… Fac… Fac… Amo… Valu… Uni… Uni… Opt… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Ro… 
 A. $1,… $1,… 99% 145% $2,… $26,… 181,… — 278,… 
 Ig… 
 Ke… 
 A. 1,0… 588… 99% N/A 1,0… 1,97… — 15,… 18,2… 
 La… 
 Ho… 
 E. 1,3… 2,6… 99% 145% 3,0… 7,20… 38,8… 18,1… 48,2… 
 Gu… 
 Kr… 
 K. 780… 1,1… 99% 125% 1,2… 1,85… 9,2… 5,0… 13,… 
 Sc… 
 So… 
 L. 750… 1,1… 99% 139% 1,2… 2,03… 4,8… 15,… 6,6… 
 Co… 
 Ch… 
 M. 2,0… 3,1… 99% 91% 3,0… 12,9… 69,… 32,… 87,… 
 Mc… 
1 Multiplied by 70% of the target amount.
2 Multiplied by 30% of the target amount.
3 Includes ROIC portions of fiscal 2021 and 2022 PBUs.
4 The number of restricted stock units and options was calculated from the value of the award as
described in the table in the section titled “ Executive Compensation — Compensation Tables — Fiscal
2023 Grants of Plan Based Awards Table .”
5 Mr. Iger was appointed Chief Executive Officer effective November 20, 2022. In connection with his
July 12, 2023 extension, Mr. Iger’s annual bonus target increased from 100% to 500% of base salary to
further incentivize Company performance. For fiscal 2023, Mr. Iger’s target bonus was based on the
sum of the pro-rated target bonus opportunity previously in effect and the pro-rated amended target
bonus opportunity, which has been calculated to be 190% of base salary.
6 Mr. Lansberry was appointed Interim Chief Financial Officer effective July 1, 2023. Base salary
reflects annualized Interim amount approved by the Committee, while target bonus is prorated between
Mr. Lansberry’s previous bonus target and his Interim Chief Financial Officer target. The decision on
his performance-based bonus took into account his exemplary performance as Interim CFO.
7 Ms. Coleman was appointed Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer
effective April 8, 2023.
8 Ms. McCarthy began a leave of absence and ceased to serve as Senior Executive Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer effective July 1, 2023. Ms. McCarthy’s target bonus has been pro-rated to
reflect the three quarters she served as Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer.
For more discussion of the terms of Ms. McCarthy’s leave of absence, see the section titled “
Executive Compensation — Compensation Tables — Potential Payments and Rights on Termination or Change
in Control .”
The compensation set forth above and described below differs from the total compensation reported in
the Summary Compensation Table as follows:
• The compensation set forth above does not include the change in pension value and non-qualified
deferred compensation earnings, as these items do not reflect decisions made by the Committee during
the fiscal year.
• The compensation set forth above does not include perquisites and benefits and other compensation,
as these items are generally determined by contract and do not reflect decisions made by the
Committee during the fiscal year.
 31 
The Compensation Committee’s determination on each of these matters was based on the recommendation
of Mr. Iger (except in the case of his own compensation), the parameters established by the
executive’s employment agreement and the factors described below. In determining equity awards, the
Committee considered its overall long-term incentive guidelines for all executives, which, in the
context of the competitive market for executive talent, attempt to balance the benefits of incentive
compensation tied to performance of the Company’s common stock with the dilutive effect of equity
compensation awards.
 MR. IGER 
 SALARY Mr. Iger’s 2023 annual salary was equal to the amount set in his 
 employment agreement. 
 Target Bonus 
 When Mr. Iger was hired by the Company on November 20, 2022, his 
 annual bonus target was set at an amount equal to his base salary. In 
 connection with his July 12, 2023 extension, Mr. Iger’s annual bonus 
 target increased to five times his base salary to further incentivize 
 Company performance. For fiscal 2023, Mr. Iger’s target bonus was 
 based on the sum of the pro-rated target bonus opportunity previously 
 in effect and the pro-rated amended target bonus opportunity, which 
 has been calculated to be 1.9 times his base salary. 
 Other Performance Factor 
 The Compensation Committee applied a factor of145% with respect to 
 Other Performance Factors for Mr. Iger in fiscal 2023. 
 Performance Highlights: 
 •In fiscal 2023, we restructured the Company to restore creativity to 
 the heart of the business. We implemented financial discipline across 
 PERFORMANCE-BASED BONUS all of our operations, including over-achieving our target of 
 identifying cost savings of $5.5 billion. 
 •Studio led the global box office in calendar 2023, with four of the 
 top 10 highest grossing films of the year. In fiscal 2023,Avatar: The 
 Way of Watergenerated $2.3 billion in worldwide box office, the third 
 highest box office of all time. 
 •Mr. Iger created a Chief Brand Officer position, significantly 
 enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of our brand management 
 process. 
 •Mr. Iger assisted the Succession Planning Committee in ongoing 
 leadership succession planning. 
 •Disney was named one of “America’s Most Trustworthy Public Companies” 
 by Newsweek and was #1 in a “Brand Intimacy Study” recognizing our 
 power in building bonds with consumers. The Company was also named one 
 of the “World’s Most Admired Companies” by Fortune, and Fast Company 
 ranked Disney as one of the “Most Innovative Companies." 
 The annual equity award value for Mr. Iger of $26,103,448 reflects 83% 
 of his total annual compensation for fiscal 2023. Mr. Iger’s fiscal 
 EQUITY AWARD VALUE 2023 award was awarded 60% as PBUs and 40% as stock options. The 
 annual equity award value includes the fiscal 2023 ROIC portion of Mr. 
 Iger’s fiscal 2021 and 2022 awards. 
 32 
 MR. LANSBERRY 
 SALARY The Committee set Mr. Lansberry’s 2023 annual salary upon his 
 appointment as Interim Chief Financial Officer. 
 Target Bonus 
 Mr. Lansberry’s target bonus of $588,561 reflects a pro-ration of his 
 bonus target as both CFO of our Experiences segment and Interim CFO of 
 the Company. 
 Other Performance Factor 
 The Compensation Committee did not apply an Other Performance Factor 
 for Mr. Lansberry as he was in his role on an interim basis. Based on 
 the recommendation of Mr. Iger, the Compensation Committee approved 
 Mr. Lansberry's bonus to recognize his contributions while serving as 
 Interim CFO. 
 Performance Highlights: 
 PERFORMANCE-BASED BONUS •Showed exemplary leadership and decision making on behalf of the 
 Company during his tenure as Interim CFO. 
 •Successfully refinanced the Company’s $5.25 billion 364-day revolving 
 credit facility, with comparable pricing terms. 
 •Successfully negotiated amendment to Hulu put/call provision with 
 Comcast. 
 •Continued to align real estate footprint and projects with business 
 priorities and objective of promoting creativity and collaboration 
 through in-person work. 
 •Ranked #1 in our industry in Institutional Investor’s rankings across 
 the board, including for Investor Relations program and 
 Investor/Analysts Event. 
 The annual equity award value of $1,976,257 for Mr. Lansberry reflects 
 50% of his total annual compensation for fiscal 2023. The value of Mr. 
 Lansberry’s fiscal 2023 equity awards was set when he was CFO of our 
 EQUITY AWARD VALUE former Parks, Experiences and Products segment, and was granted in two 
 equal installments on December 15, 2022 and July 17, 2023. Mr.  
 Lansberry’s fiscal 2023 award was awarded 70% as RSUs and 30% as stock 
 options. 
 33 
 MR. GUTIERREZ 
 The Committee increased Mr. Gutierrez’s 2023 annual salary by 2.3% to 
 SALARY reflect changes in the market for executive talent and his continued 
 outstanding performance. 
 Target Bonus 
 As set forth in his employment agreement, Mr. Gutierrez’s target bonus 
 for fiscal 2023 is equal to two times his fiscal year-end salary. 
 Other Performance Factor 
 The Compensation Committee applied a factor of 145% with respect to 
 Other Performance Factors for Mr. Gutierrez in fiscal 2023. In fiscal 
 2022 the Other Performance Factor was 114%. 
 Performance Highlights: 
 •Continued promotion of diversity and inclusion in the Legal and 
 Global Affairs department, resulting in positive trends within the 
 PERFORMANCE-BASED BONUS Legal and Global Affairs department for promotions and new hires among 
 women and people of color. 
 •Advised on corporate governance and public policy issues. 
 •Oversaw the regulatory work associated with launches of our DTC 
 products. 
 •Mapped out strategy to protect Disney content as generative 
 artificial intelligence services proliferate and move towards video 
 content, including identifying key services that may have the most 
 impact on Disney content from an infringement perspective. 
 •Continued leadership of the Company’s legal and public policy 
 positions on litigation matters, transactions and regulatory 
 developments. 
 The annual equity award value of $7,206,862 for Mr. Gutierrez reflects 
 62% of his total annual compensation for fiscal 2023. Mr. Gutierrez’s 
 EQUITY AWARD VALUE fiscal 2023 award was awarded 50% as PBUs, 25% as RSUs and 25% as 
 stock options. The annual equity award value includes the fiscal 2023 
 ROIC portion of Mr. Gutierrez’s fiscal 2022 award. 
 34 
 MS. SCHAKE 
 The Committee increased Ms. Schake’s 2023 annual salary in January 
 2023 by 2.0% to reflect changes in the market for executive talent and 
 SALARY her continued outstanding performance. In connection with her contract 
 extension and with the addition of Corporate Social Responsibility to 
 her scope, the Committee increased Ms. Schake’s base salary by an 
 additional 5.5% given performance and market positioning. 
 Target Bonus 
 As set forth in her employment agreement, Ms. Schake’s target bonus 
 for fiscal 2023 is equal to 1.5 times her fiscal year-end salary. 
 Other Performance Factor 
 The Compensation Committee applied a factor of 125% with respect to 
 Other Performance Factors for Ms. Schake in fiscal 2023. In fiscal 
 2022 the Other Performance Factor was 114%. 
 PERFORMANCE-BASED BONUS Performance Highlights: 
 •Created a communications task force across key divisions to advise on 
 major PR initiatives, including resetting narratives through media 
 relations and executive engagement. 
 •Led significant efforts to protect and enhance the Company’s 
 reputation with a wide range of stakeholders. 
 •Realigned communications teams to streamline functions for greater 
 efficiency and effectiveness, enabling a more unified, collaborative 
 and nimble approach to drive business success. 
 The annual equity award value of $1,852,537 for Ms. Schake reflects 
 47% of her total annual compensation for fiscal 2023. Ms. Schake’s 
 EQUITY AWARD VALUE fiscal 2023 award was awarded 50% as PBUs, 25% as RSUs and 25% as 
 stock options. The annual equity award value includes the fiscal 2023 
 ROIC portion of Ms. Schake’s fiscal 2022 award. 
 35 
 MS. COLEMAN 
 SALARY The Committee set Ms. Coleman’s 2023 annual salary upon her promotion 
 to Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer. 
 Target Bonus 
 As set forth in her employment agreement, Ms. Coleman’s target bonus 
 for fiscal 2023 is equal to 1.5 times her fiscal year-end salary. 
 Other Performance Factor 
 The Compensation Committee applied a factor of 139% with respect to 
 Other Performance Factors for Ms. Coleman in fiscal 2023. 
 Performance Highlights: 
 PERFORMANCE-BASED BONUS •Bolstered outreach and engagement to amplify the Company’s brand in 
 an authentic manner in order to attract top, diverse talent from 
 underrepresented communities. 
 •Provided leadership through the company-wide strategic transformation 
 and cost reduction efforts in fiscal 2023. 
 •Launched a team, partnering with technology and legal, to identify 
 opportunities to integrate and enable technology within human 
 resources to drive efficiencies and elevate the overall employee and 
 human resources experience. 
 The total equity award value of $2,036,279 for Ms. Coleman reflects 
 51% of her total annual compensation for fiscal 2023, reflecting the 
 annual equity award for her previous role as Senior Vice President, 
 Human Resources for our Television businesses, which was granted in 
 EQUITY AWARD VALUE two equal installments on December 15, 2022 and July 17, 2023 and was 
 awarded 70% in RSUs and 30% in stock options. In addition, in 
 connection with her promotion, Ms. Coleman received additional grants 
 of RSUs, PBUs and options on June 23, 2023, which was awarded 50% as 
 PBUs, 25% as RSUs and 25% as stock options. 
 MS. MCCARTHY 
 The Committee increased Ms. McCarthy’s 2023 annual salary by 3.5% to 
 reflect changes in the market for executive talent. 
 Target Bonus 
 As set forth in her employment agreement, Ms. McCarthy’s target bonus 
 for fiscal 2023 is equal to two times her fiscal year-end salary. As 
 Ms. McCarthy began a leave of absence on July 1, 2023, her fiscal 2023 
 target bonus has been pro-rated 75% to reflect the period of fiscal 
 2023 she served as Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Financial 
 Officer. 
 Other Performance Factor 
 The Compensation Committee applied a factor of 91% with respect to 
 Other Performance Factors for Ms. McCarthy in fiscal 2023. In fiscal 
 2022 the Other Performance Factor was 114%. 
 The annual equity award value of $12,953,949 for Ms. McCarthy reflects 
 71% of her total annual compensation for fiscal 2023. Ms. McCarthy’s 
 SALARY fiscal 2023 award was awarded 50% as PBUs, 25% as RSUs and 25% as 
 PERFORMANCE-BASED BONUS stock options. The annual equity award value includes the fiscal 2023 
 EQUITY AWARD VALUE ROIC portion of Ms. McCarthy’s fiscal 2021 and 2022 awards. 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 36 
 Other Compensation Information 
 Risk Management Considerations 
The Compensation Committee believes that the following features of performance-based bonus and equity
programs appropriately incentivize the creation of long-term shareholder value while discouraging
behavior that could lead to excessive risk:
• Financial Performance Measures. The financial metrics used to determine the amount of an
executive’s bonus are measures the Committee believes drive long-term shareholder value. The ranges
set for these measures are intended to reward success without encouraging excessive risk-taking.
• Limit on Bonus. The overall bonus opportunity is not expected to exceed two times the target
amount, no matter how much financial performance exceeds the ranges established at the beginning of
the fiscal year.
• Equity Vesting Periods. Performance-based stock units generally vest in three years. Time-based
stock units and options vest annually for up to four years and options remain exercisable for ten
years. These periods are designed to reward sustained performance over several periods, rather than
performance in a single period.
• Equity Retention Guidelines. NEOs are required to acquire within five years of becoming an
executive officer and hold as long as they are executive officers of the Company, shares (including
restricted stock units) having a value of at least three times their base salary amounts, or five
times in the case of the Chief Executive Officer. If these levels have not been reached, these
officers are required to retain ownership of shares representing at least 75% of the net after-tax
gain (100% in the case of the Chief Executive Officer) realized on exercise of options for a minimum
of twelve months.
• No Hedging or Pledging. The Company’s insider trading compliance program prohibits members of the
Board of Directors, NEOs and all other employees subject to the Company’s insider trading compliance
program from entering into any transaction designed to hedge, or having the effect of hedging, the
economic risk of owning the Company’s securities and prohibits certain persons, including members of
the Board of Directors and the NEOs, from pledging Company securities.
• Clawback Policy. In connection with the SEC’s and NYSE’s recently-approved rules requiring adoption
of a clawback policy applicable to incentive-based compensation for Section 16 officers of listed
companies, the Company has adopted The Walt Disney Company Clawback Policy, and current Section 16
officers of the Company have agreed in writing that employment agreements and other compensation
agreements and plans are subject to the policy. Under such policy, if the Company is required to
restate its financial results due to material noncompliance with financial reporting requirements
under the securities laws, the Company will recoup any erroneously awarded incentive-based
compensation from the Company’s current and former executive officers. Further, under the 2011 Stock
Incentive Plan approved at the Company’s 2020 Annual Meeting, equity awards pursuant to the plan may
be clawed back where there is reputational or financial harm to the Company, even in the absence of a
restatement.
Equity awards are generally approved on dates the Compensation Committee meets. Committee meetings
are normally scheduled well in advance and are not scheduled with an eye to announcements of material
information regarding the Company. The Committee may make an award with an effective date in the
future, including awards contingent on commencement of employment, execution of a new employment
agreement or some other subsequent event, or may act by unanimous written consent on the date of such
an event when the proposed issuances have been reviewed by the Committee prior to the date of the
event.
At the Compensation Committee’s request, management conducted its annual assessment of the risk
profile of our compensation programs in November 2023. The assessment included an inventory of the
compensation programs at each of the Company’s segments and an evaluation of whether any program
contained elements that created risks that could have a material adverse impact on the Company.
Management provided the results of this assessment to Pay Governance LLC, the Committee’s
compensation consultant, which evaluated the findings and reviewed them with the Committee. As a
result of this review, the Committee determined that the risks arising from the Company’s policies
and practices are not reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on the Company.
 37 
 Peer Groups 
 SUMMARY OF PEER GROUPS 
The following graph summarizes the three distinct peer groups we use for three distinct purposes and
the companies that met these criteria and were included at the beginning of fiscal 2023, described in
more detail below:
 PERFORMANCE PEERS S&P 
 500 
 GENERAL INDUSTRY 
 PEERS 
 •Alphabet, Inc. •Comcast Corporation •Oracle Corporation 
 •Amazon.com, Inc. •IBM Corporation •Paramount Global 
 •Apple, Inc. •Meta Platforms, Inc. •Verizon 
 •AT&T Inc. •Microsoft Corporation Communications Inc. 
 •Charter •Netflix, Inc. •Warner Bros. 
 Communications, Inc. •NIKE, Inc. Discovery, Inc. 
 MEDIA INDUSTRY PEERS 
 •Alphabet, Inc. •Netflix, Inc. 
 •Amazon.com, Inc. •Comcast Corporation •Paramount Global 
 •Apple, Inc. •Meta Platforms, Inc. •Warner Bros. 
 Discovery, Inc. 
 MEDIA INDUSTRY PEERS 
The media industry peer group helps evaluate compensation levels for the NEOs. The Compensation
Committee believes that there is a limited pool of talent with the set of creative and organizational
skills needed to run a global creative organization like the Company. The Committee also understands
that executives with the background needed to manage a company such as ours have career options with
compensation opportunities that normally exceed those available in most other industries, and that
compensation levels within the peer group are driven by the dynamics of compensation in the
entertainment industry and not the ownership structure of a particular company. Accordingly, the
market for executive talent to lead the Company, and the group against which to compare our executive
compensation, is best represented by the companies in our media industry peer group.
 GENERAL INDUSTRY PEERS 
The general industry peer group helps evaluate general compensation structure, policies and
practices. The Compensation Committee believes that the features of the Company’s overall
compensation structure, policies and practices should normally be consistent for all executives.
Because our operations span multiple industries, the Committee believes that a consistent approach
across the breadth of the Company’s operations with respect to features of our overall executive
compensation structure is best achieved by reference to a group of General Industry Peers that is
broader than the Media Industry Peers.
The peer group used for establishing compensation structure, policies and practices consists of
companies that have:
• A consumer orientation and/or strong brand recognition;
• A global presence and operations;
• Annual revenue no less than 40% and no more than two and a half times our annual revenue; and
• As a general matter, a market capitalization in the range of approximately one-quarter to four
times our market capitalization.
Additionally, the general industry peer group includes companies that do not meet the revenue or
market cap test, but that are included in the peer groups used by one or more of the Media Industry
Peers.
 38 
 PERFORMANCE PEERS 
The performance peers help evaluate relative economic performance of the Company. The overall
financial performance of the Company is driven by the Company’s diverse businesses, which compete in
multiple sectors of the overall market. The Compensation Committee believes that, given the span of
the Company’s businesses, the best measure of relative performance is how the Company’s diverse
businesses have fared in the face of the economic trends that impact companies in the overall market
and that the best benchmark for measuring such success is the Company’s relative performance compared
to that of the companies comprising the S&P 500. Accordingly, the Committee has selected the S&P 500
to set the context for evaluating the Company’s performance and to measure relative performance for
PBU awards.
The Committee will continue to monitor the competitive landscapes in which the Company’s various
business units operate and implement changes to the peer group as it deems appropriate.
 Deductibility of Compensation 
For taxable years commencing after 2017, Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code generally
disallows a tax deduction to public corporations for compensation over $1 million paid to any person
whose compensation was required to be included in this report for any fiscal year after 2016 because
such person was either the Company’s Chief Executive Officer or Chief Financial Officer or was one of
the Company’s three other most highly compensated executive officers for such fiscal year.
Accordingly, to the extent that compensation in excess of $1 million is payable to any such person in
any fiscal year after fiscal 2018, such excess amount is likely to be non-deductible by the Company
for federal income tax purposes. However, Section 162(m) exempts qualifying performance-based
compensation paid after fiscal 2018 pursuant to a binding written agreement in effect on November 2,
2017. Thus, performance-based awards that were outstanding on that date or awarded thereafter
pursuant to a binding written agreement can be exempt from the deduction limit if applicable
requirements are met. For fiscal 2023, none of the executive officers served under employment
agreements that were in place without amendment prior to November 2, 2017.
However, awards to executive officers under the annual performance-based bonus program and the long-
term incentive program that were (i) granted prior to November 2, 2017, or (ii) may continue to
qualify for the exemption because they were granted pursuant to a binding written agreement in effect
on such date, have been or will be made payable or vest subject to achievement of a performance test
based on adjusted net income in order to qualify for the exemption from Section 162(m), to the extent
available. If this test is satisfied, the additional performance tests described in the Compensation
Discussion and Analysis are applied to determine the actual payout of such bonuses and awards, which
in order to remain deductible may not be more than the maximum level funded based on achievement of
the Section 162(m) test. Adjusted net income means net income adjusted, as appropriate, to exclude
the following items or variances: change in accounting principles; acquisitions; dispositions of a
business; asset impairments; restructuring charges; extraordinary, unusual or infrequent items; and
extraordinary litigation costs and insurance recoveries. For fiscal 2023, the adjusted net income
target was $3.5 billion and the Company achieved adjusted net income of $6.9 billion. Net income was
adjusted to account for transaction purchase accounting, restructuring and impairment charges, gain
on sale of equity investments, content license early termination and legal compliance.
Therefore, we believe the Section 162(m) test was satisfied with respect to restricted stock units
vesting based on fiscal 2023 results.
 39 
 Compensation Committee Report 
The Compensation Committee has:
1. reviewed and discussed the Compensation Discussion and Analysis required by Item 402(b) of
Regulation S-K with management; and
2. based on this review and discussion, recommended to the Board of Directors that the Compensation
Discussion and Analysis be included in the Company’s annual report on Form 10-K, amendment to its
annual report on Form 10-K/A and proxy statement relating to the 2024 Annual Meeting of Shareholders.
Members of the fiscal 2023 Compensation Committee
Maria Elena Lagomasino (Chair)
Mary T. Barra
Carolyn N. Everson
Calvin R. McDonald
 40 
 Compensation Tables 
 Fiscal 2023 Summary Compensation Table 
The following table provides information concerning the total compensation earned in fiscal
2021(except for Mr. Lansberry, Mr. Gutierrez, Ms. Schake and Ms. Coleman), fiscal 2022 (except for
Mr. Lansberry and Ms. Coleman) and fiscal 2023 by persons who served as Chief Executive Officer or
Chief Financial Officer and the three other persons serving as executive officers at the end of
fiscal 2023 who were the most highly compensated executive officers of the Company in fiscal 2023.
These seven officers are referred to as the named executive officers or NEOs in this report.
Information regarding the amounts in each column follows the table.
 Change 
 In 
 Pensi… 
 Name Non-Eq… Value All 
 and Fiscal Salary Bonus Stock Option Incent… and Other Total 
 Prin… Year Award… Awards Plan Non- Compen… 
 Posi… Compen… Quali… 
 Defer… 
 Compe… 
 Earni… 
 Robe… 
 A. 
 Iger 
 Chief 
 Exec… 2023 $865,… $— $16,1… $10,0… $2,140… $— $2,478… $31,5… 
 Offi… 
 Form… 
 Exec… 
 Chai… 
 2022 1,096… — 4,670… 2,395… 4,370… — 2,466… 14,998… 
 2021 3,000… — 9,479… 9,293… 22,92… — 1,205… 45,899… 
 Kevin 
 A. 
 Lans… 
 Inte… 2023 765,1… — 1,383… 592,8… 1,000,… 169,4… 35,964 3,946… 
 Chief 
 Fina… 
 Offi… 
 Hora… 
 E. 
 Guti… 
 Seni… 
 Exec… 
 Vice 
 Pres… 2023 1,322… — 5,544… 1,662… 3,000,… — 123,073 11,65… 
 Gene… 
 Coun… 
 and 
 Chief 
 Comp… 
 Offi… 
 2022 870,0… 2,000… 5,951… 2,500… 3,783… — 93,194 15,198… 
 Kris… 
 K. 
 Scha… 
 Seni… 
 Exec… 
 Vice 2023 755,3… — 1,390… 462,2… 1,250,… — 86,898 3,944… 
 Pres… 
 and 
 Chief 
 Comm… 
 Offi… 
 2022 361,2… 1,500… 2,132… 913,2… 1,320… — 5,444 6,232,… 
 Sonia 
 L. 
 Cole… 
 Seni… 
 Exec… 
 Vice 2023 646,5… — 1,827… 209,0… 1,250,… 73,971 25,277 4,032… 
 Pres… 
 and 
 Chief 
 Human 
 Reso… 
 Offi… 
 Robe… 
 A. 
 Chap… 
 Form… 2023 673,0… — 1,324… — — 220,5… 7,722,… 9,940… 
 Chief 
 Exec… 
 Offi… 
 2022 2,500… — 10,81… 3,750… 6,750… — 372,1… 24,183… 
 2021 2,500… — 10,21… 3,750… 14,33… 1,358,… 310,3… 32,464… 
 Chri… 
 M. 
 McCa… 
 Form… 
 Seni… 
 Exec… 2023 2,052… — 9,953… 3,000… 3,000,… — 127,890 18,13… 
 Vice 
 Pres… 
 and 
 Chief 
 Fina… 
 Offi… 
 2022 1,980… — 8,935… 3,375… 5,820… — 124,8… 20,235… 
 2021 1,903… — 6,922… 5,000… 7,680… 103,152 119,4… 21,729… 
 41 
1 Stock awards for each fiscal year include awards subject to performance conditions that were valued
based on the probability that performance targets will be achieved. For Mr. Iger, Mr. Gutierrez, Ms.
Schake, Mr. Chapek and Ms. McCarthy, fiscal 2023 includes $1,103,364, $556,679, $3,712, $1,324,503
and $953,844, respectively, related to the portion of awards from fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2022 having
ROIC targets, which were established on November 29, 2022. Assuming the highest level of performance
conditions are achieved, the grant date stock awards values are outlined below:
 Fiscal Mr. Iger Mr. Mr. Ms. Ms. Mr. Ms. 
 Year Lansberry Gutierrez Schake Coleman Chapek McCarthy 
 2023 $33,073,… $1,383,3… $8,817,1… $2,149,… $2,270,3… $2,351,… $15,660,… 
 2022 7,489,338 — 8,694,020 2,143,6… — 15,733,… 12,969,1… 
 2021 12,101,1… — — — — 11,963,… 7,767,106 
2 In fiscal 2020, Mr. Iger served as Chief Executive Officer until February 24, 2020, when he was
appointed Executive Chairman. Mr. Chapek was appointed Chief Executive Officer on February 24, 2020
and served as Chief Executive Officer until November 20, 2022, at which time Mr. Iger again assumed
the role of Chief Executive Officer. In fiscal 2022, Mr. Chapek was entitled to receive compensation
under the annual performance-based bonus program pursuant to his employment agreement because his
termination occurred after the end of the fiscal year. For details on the treatment of Mr. Chapek’s
equity awards following his separation from the Company, please see the section titled “ Executive
Compensation — Compensation Tables — Potential Payments and Rights on Termination or Change in
Control — Termination Pursuant to Company Termination Right Other Than for Cause or By Executive for
Good Reason ” below.
3 Ms. McCarthy began a leave of absence on July 1, 2023, at which point she ceased to serve as Senior
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, and began serving as Strategic Advisor. On July
1, 2023, Mr. Lansberry began serving as Interim CFO, remaining in this role through the end of fiscal
2023 and until Hugh Johnston joined the Company on December 4, 2023.
4 Mr. Gutierrez joined the Company on February 1, 2022. In connection with his hiring, Mr. Gutierrez
received a cash sign-on bonus of $2,000,000, primarily to replace forgone compensation from his
previous employer.
5 Ms. Schake joined the Company on April 1, 2022 as Executive Vice President, Global Communications.
In connection with her hiring, Ms. Schake received a cash sign-on bonus of $1,500,000 given her
outstanding qualifications and extraordinary experience in both the public and private sectors, and
to secure her acceptance of employment with the Company. On June 29, 2022, Ms. Schake was promoted to
Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Communications Officer.
Salary. This column sets forth the base salary earned during each fiscal year. On July 1, 2023, Ms.
McCarthy began a leave of absence and started serving in her new role as Strategic Advisor. In her
capacity as Strategic Advisor, for fiscal 2023 she received $517,500.
Stock Awards. This column sets forth the grant date fair value of the restricted stock unit awards
granted to the NEOs during each fiscal year as part of the Company’s long-term incentive compensation
program. The grant date fair value of these awards was calculated by multiplying the number of units
awarded by the average of the high and low trading price of the Company’s common stock on the grant
date, subject to valuation adjustments for restricted stock unit awards subject to vesting conditions
other than, with respect to certain legacy awards to Ms. McCarthy, the test to assure deductibility
under Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code. The valuation adjustments for performance-based
awards reflect the fact that the number of shares received on vesting varies based on the level of
performance achieved and were determined using a Monte Carlo simulation that determines the
probability that the performance targets will be achieved. The grant date fair value of the
restricted stock unit awards granted during fiscal 2023 is also included in the Fiscal 2023 Grants of
Plan Based Awards Table.
Option Awards. This column sets forth the grant date fair value of options to purchase shares of the
Company’s common stock granted to the NEOs during each fiscal year. The grant date fair value of
these options was calculated using a binomial option pricing model. The assumptions used in
estimating the fair value of these options are set forth in footnote 12 to the Company’s Audited
Financial Statements for fiscal 2023. The grant date fair value of the options granted during fiscal
2023 is also included in the Fiscal 2023 Grants of Plan Based Awards Table.
Non-Equity Incentive Plan Compensation. This column sets forth the amount of compensation earned by
the NEOs under the Company’s annual performance-based bonus program during each fiscal year. A
description of the Company’s annual performance-based bonus program is included in the section
“Executive Compensation — Compensation Discussion and Analysis — Executive Compensation Program
Structure—Objectives and Methods ” and the determination of performance-based bonuses for fiscal 2023
is described in the section “ Executive Compensation — Compensation Discussion and Analysis — Fiscal
2023 Compensation Decisions. ”
Change in Pension Value and Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation Earnings. This column reflects the
aggregate change in the actuarial present value of each NEO’s accumulated benefits under all defined
benefit plans, including supplemental plans, during each fiscal year. The amounts reported in this
column vary with a number of factors, including the discount rate applied to determine the value of
future payment streams, the NEO’s age and additional earned benefits as a result of an additional
year of service. The discount rate used pursuant to pension accounting rules to calculate the present
value of future payments for fiscal 2021 was 2.88%, for fiscal 2022 was 5.44% and for fiscal 2023 was
5.94%. Neither increases nor decreases in pension value resulting from changes in the discount rate
result in any increase or decrease in benefits payable to participants under the plan. As Mr.
Gutierrez and Ms. Schake joined the
 42 
Company in 2022, they are not eligible for the Company’s defined benefit pension. For Mr. Iger and
Ms. McCarthy, their age factors drove the change in pension value for such year to be negative
(-$1,337,423 and -$118,908, respectively). Mr. Lansberry, Mr. Chapek and Ms. McCarthy were credited
with earnings on deferred compensation as disclosed below under “ Executive Compensation —
Compensation Tables — Fiscal 2023 Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation Table .” These earnings were at
rates that were not above market rates and therefore are not reported in this column.
All Other Compensation. This column sets forth all of the compensation for each fiscal year that we
could not properly report in any other column of the table, including:
• the incremental cost to the Company of perquisites and other personal benefits;
• the amount of Company contributions to employee savings plans;
• the dollar value of insurance premiums paid by the Company with respect to excess liability
insurance for the NEOs; and
• the dollar amount of matching charitable contributions made to charities pursuant to the Company’s
charitable gift matching program, which is available to all regular U.S. employees with at least one
year of service.
The dollar amount of matching charitable contributions in fiscal 2023 was $50,000 for Mr. Iger,
$12,250 for Mr. Gutierrez, $3,100 for Ms. Coleman, $40,000 for Mr. Chapek and $50,000 for Ms.
McCarthy.
The dollar amount the Company contributed to both the Disney Retirement Savings Plan (for Mr.
Gutierrez, Ms. Schake and Mr. Iger) and Key Employee Retirement Savings Plan (for Mr. Iger) in fiscal
2023 was $104,850 for Mr. Iger, $9,900 for Mr. Gutierrez and $9,900 for Ms. Schake. The Retirement
Savings Plan is a defined contribution plan for eligible salaried employees funded by the Company.
After a year of service, the Company will make quarterly contributions based on a combination of age
and years of service and eligible pay. The Key Employee Retirement Savings Plan is a defined
contribution plan funded by the Company. The Plan is a non-qualified plan under IRS regulations that
is intended to restore or replace certain benefits that cannot be provided under the qualified
Retirement Savings Plan due to IRS compensation limits.
Upon his retirement on December 31, 2021, the consulting period established under Mr. Iger’s then
current employment agreement with the Company commenced. In connection with his consulting agreement,
Mr. Iger received quarterly payments of $500,000 for each quarter he served in this capacity; for
fiscal 2023 he received $271,739.
On November 20, 2022, the Board decided to exercise its right to terminate Mr. Chapek’s employment
without cause. In connection with this termination, Mr. Chapek received cash termination payments in
fiscal 2023 of $6,527,397 in remaining base salary through the scheduled expiration date of his
amended employment agreement and $1,027,397 in the form of a pro-rated target bonus.
In accordance with the SEC’s interpretations of its rules, this column also sets forth the
incremental cost to the Company of certain items that are provided to the NEOs for business purposes
but which may not be considered integrally related to their duties. The following table sets forth
the incremental cost to the Company of each other perquisite and other personal benefit that exceeded
the greater of $25,000 or 10% of the total amount of perquisites and personal benefits for an NEO in
fiscal 2023.
 Personal Air Security Relocation Other Total 
 Travel 
 Robert A. $793,993 $1,236,703 $— $15,244 $2,045,940 
 Iger 
 Kevin A. — — 14,800 13,136 27,936 
 Lansberry 
 Horacio E. 76,589 — — 15,400 91,989 
 Gutierrez 
 Kristina K. — — 57,480 14,400 71,880 
 Schake 
 Sonia L. — — — 13,840 13,840 
 Coleman 
 Robert A. 35,226 73,743 — 17,200 126,169 
 Chapek 
 Christine 53,536 — — 15,400 68,936 
 M. McCarthy 
 43 
The incremental cost to the Company of the items specified above was determined as follows:
• Personal air travel: the actual catering costs, landing and ramp fees, fuel costs and lodging costs
incurred by flight crew plus a per hour charge based on the average hourly maintenance costs for the
aircraft during the year for flights that were purely personal in nature, and a pro-rata portion of
catering costs where personal guests accompanied an NEO on flights that were business in nature.
Where a personal flight coincided with the repositioning of an aircraft following a business flight,
only the incremental costs of the flight compared to an immediate repositioning of the aircraft are
included. Our CEO is required for security reasons to use corporate aircraft for all personal travel.
• Security: the actual costs incurred by the Company for providing security services and equipment.
• Relocation: the actual amount provided to accommodate the cost expended by Mr. Lansberry and Ms.
Schake with regard to their relocations.
The “Other” column in the table above reflects the incremental cost to the Company of vehicle
benefits including a fixed monthly payment to offset the costs of owning and maintaining an
automobile, personal air travel (except for personal air travel that is separately identified in the
“personal air travel” column in the table above), reimbursement of up to $1,000 per calendar year for
wellness-related purposes such as fitness and nutrition management and reimbursement of expenses for
financial consulting.
The Company provides employees with benefits and perquisites based on competitive market conditions.
All salaried employees, including the NEOs, receive the following benefits: (i) health care coverage;
(ii) life and disability insurance protection; (iii) reimbursement of certain educational expenses;
(iv) access to favorably priced group insurance coverage; (v) Company matching of gifts of up to
$25,000 per employee (and $50,000 per Senior Executive Vice President and Chairman directly reporting
to the CEO) each calendar year to qualified charitable organizations; and (vi) complimentary
streaming subscription for the ad-supported Disney Bundle. Additionally, employees at the vice
president level and above, including NEOs, receive the following benefits, each of which involved no
incremental cost to the Company: (i) complimentary access to the Company’s theme parks and some
resort facilities; (ii) discounts on Company merchandise and resort facilities; and (iii) personal
use of tickets acquired by the Company for business entertainment when they become available because
no business use has been arranged.
 44 
 Fiscal 2023 Grants of Plan Based Awards Table 
The following table provides information concerning the range of awards available to the NEOs under
the Company’s annual performance-based bonus program for fiscal 2023 and information concerning the
option grants and restricted stock unit awards made to the NEOs during fiscal 2023. Additional
information regarding the amounts reported in each column follows the table.
 … 
 E… … … A… … G… 
 F… … … O… E… … D… 
 P… … … O… or … F… 
 U… … … A… B… … V… 
 N… … … N… P… … of 
 I… … … of of … S… 
 P… … … S… O… … a… 
 A… … … U… A… … O… 
 … O… A… 
 … 
 … … … T… M… T… … … 
 … … 
 … … … $… … $… 
 … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … 
 … $… $… 
 … … 1… 9… … 4… 
 … … 7… 9… 9… … 
 … … 1… 8… 8… … 
 … … 8… 8… 8… … 
 … … 1… … 
 … … 6… … 
 … … 1… … 
 … … 6… … 
 … $… $… 
 … … 4… 9… … 1… 
 … … 1… … 
 … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … 
 … $… $… 
 … … 1… 9… … 4… 
 … … 5… … 
 … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … 
 … $… $… 
 … … 6… 8… … 2… 
 … … 1… … 
 … … 4… … 
 … … 2… … 
 … … 1… … 
 … … 5… … 
 … … … … … … 
 … $… $… 
 … … … … … 2… 1… 
 … … 8… 9… … 3… 
 … … 3… … 
 … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … 
 … $… $… 
1 Stock awards for fiscal 2023 subject to performance conditions were valued based on the probability
that performance targets will be achieved. Assuming the highest level of performance conditions are
achieved, the grant date stock award values would be $33,073,344, $7,154,615, $1,686,956, $861,192,
$2,351,227 and $12,660,170 for Mr. Iger, Mr. Gutierrez, Ms. Schake, Ms. Coleman, Mr. Chapek and Ms.
McCarthy, respectively, for the performance-based awards made on November 20, 2022 (for Mr. Iger),
November 29, 2022 (for Mr. Iger, Mr. Gutierrez, Ms. Schake, Mr. Chapek and Ms. McCarthy), December
15, 2022 (for Mr. Gutierrez, Ms. Schake and Ms. McCarthy) and June 23, 2023 (for Ms. Coleman).
2 Mr. Chapek separated from the Company effective November 20, 2022. While he was not with the
Company at the time, awards shown reflect ROIC portions of awards from previous fiscal years granted
on November 29, 2022, which Mr. Chapek will continue to vest in, as further discussed in the section
“ Executive Compensation — Potential Payments and Rights on Termination or Change in Control ” below.
 45 
Grant Date. The Compensation Committee made the annual grant of stock options and restricted stock
unit awards for fiscal 2023 on December 15, 2022 for those executives (other than Mr. Iger) serving
as NEOs at that date. Mr. Iger’s awards for fiscal year 2023 were made on November 20, 2022, the date
he recommenced his employment with the Company. As ROIC targets for fiscal 2023 were set on November
29, 2022, for purposes of the above chart for fiscal 2021 and 2022 ROIC portions were considered
granted on that date. A portion of the fiscal 2023 PBUs granted on December 15, 2022 are subject to
the ROIC performance test, as described below. Based on the Company’s fiscal 2023 ROIC, 103.38% of
the reported portion of fiscal 2021 awards will vest and 106.75% of the reported portion of fiscal
2022 awards will vest. The ROIC target for fiscal 2024 was set in November 2023 for the remaining
portion of those grants, and the grant date values for the remaining portions of those grants will be
reported for the appropriate fiscal year when the applicable targets are established. For most equity
recipients other than the executive officers, the fiscal 2023 annual grant was split into two equal
installments, with the first half being granted on December 15, 2022 and the second half being
granted on July 17, 2023. As both Mr. Lansberry and Ms. Coleman were not serving as executive
officers at the time of the first portion of the annual grant, consistent with the treatment for most
equity recipients other than the executive officers, they received their annual equity awards in two
equal installments. In addition, Ms. Coleman received a promotion grant on June 23, 2023.
Estimated Future Payouts Under Non-Equity Incentive Plan Awards. As described in the section “
Executive Compensation — Compensation Discussion and Analysis ,” the Compensation Committee sets the
target bonus opportunity for the NEOs at the beginning of the fiscal year as a percentage of fiscal
year-end salary, and the actual bonuses for the NEOs may, except in special circumstances such as
unusual challenges or extraordinary successes, range from 35% to 200% o f the target level based on
the Compensation Committee’s evalu ation of financial and other performance factors for the fiscal
year. The bonus amount may be zero if actual performance is below the specified threshold levels or
less than the calculated amounts if the Compensation Committee otherwise decides to reduce the bonus.
As addressed in the discussion of “ Executive Compensation — Compensation Discussion and Analysis ,”
the employment agreements of each executive officer require that the target used to calculate the
bonus opportunity (but not the actual bonus awarded) be at least the amount specified in each
agreement. As Mr. Lansberry served as Interim CFO for a portion of fiscal 2023 on an at-will basis,
his target is prorated between his previous bonus and Interim CFO bonus amount based on the portion
of the year he served in either role. This column shows the range of potential bonus payments for
each NEO from the threshold to the maximum based on the target range set at the beginning of the
fiscal year. The actual bonus amounts received for fiscal 2023 are set forth in the “ Non-Equity
Incentive Plan Compensation ” column of the “ Fiscal 2023 Summary Compensation Table .”
Estimated Future Payouts Under Equity Incentive Plan Awards. This column sets forth the number of
restricted stock units awarded to the NEOs during fiscal 2023 that are subject to performance tests
as described below. These include units awarded to each of the NEOs then serving as an executive
officer as part of the annual grant in December 2022 and, for Mr. Iger, Mr. Gutierrez, Ms. Schake,
Mr. Chapek and Ms. McCarthy, when fiscal 2023 ROIC targets were set with respect to fiscal 2021 and
2022 grants in November 2022. In addition, in connection with her promotion, Ms. Coleman received a
promotion award including PBUs on June 23, 2023. The vesting dates for all of the outstanding
restricted stock unit awards held by the NEOs as of the end of fiscal 2023 are set forth in the “
Fiscal 2023 Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End Table ” below.
All units in Row (A) are subject to the following vesting conditions: Half of the units subject to
the performance test are subject to a TSR test and half of the units are subject to an ROIC test.
• For the half of the units subject to the TSR performance test:
◦ None of the units related to this measure vest if the Company’s TSR is below the 25th percentile of
the S&P 500 for that measure.
◦ If the Company’s TSR is at or above the 25th percentile of the S&P 500 for the related measure, the
number of units related to that measure that vest will vary from 50% of the target number related to
that measure (at the 25th percentile) to 100% of the target number related to that measure (at the
55th percentile) to 200% of the target number related to that measure (at or above the 75th
percentile) (in each case, plus dividend equivalent units).
• For the half of the units subject to the ROIC performance test:
◦ None of the units related to this measure vest if the Company’s fiscal year ROIC performance in the
applicable performance period is below the threshold of target ROIC.
◦ If the Company’s ROIC is above the threshold in the two-year period with respect to the award made
November 20, 2022 and the three-year period for awards made on December 15, 2022 and June 23, 2023,
the number of units related to that measure for that year that vest will vary from 50% of the target
number related to that measure (equals threshold) to 200% of the target number related to that
measure (exceeds maximum) (in each case, plus dividend equivalent units).
 46 
All units in Row (B) are subject to a ROIC test.
• None of the units related to this measure will vest if the Company’s fiscal year ROIC performance
in each of the applicable performance periods is below the threshold of target ROIC.
• If the Company’s ROIC is above the threshold in any fiscal year, the number of units related to
that measure for that year that vest will vary from 50% of the target number related to that measure
(equals threshold) to 200% of the target number related to that measure for fiscal 2022 and 150% for
fiscal 2021(exceeds maximum) (in each case, plus dividend equivalent units).
See “ Executive Compensation — Compensation Discussion and Analysis — Executive Compensation Program
Structure — Objectives and Methods — Compensation at Risk” above for a discussion of how ROIC for the
Company is calculated.
When dividends are distributed to shareholders, dividend equivalents are credited in an amount equal
to the dollar amount of dividends on the number of units held on the dividend record date divided by
the fair market value of the Company’s shares of common stock on the dividend distribution date.
Dividend equivalents vest only when, if and to the extent that the underlying units vest.
All Other Stock Awards : Number of Shares of Stock or Units. This column sets forth the number of
restricted stock units awarded to the NEOs during fiscal 2023. For all executive officers that
received restricted stock units, awards were made on December 15, 2022. For most equity recipients
other than the executive officers, the fiscal 2023 annual grant was split into two equal
installments, with the first half being granted on December 15, 2022 and the second half being
granted on July 17, 2023. As both Mr. Lansberry and Ms. Coleman were not serving as executive
officers at the time of the first portion of the annual grant, consistent with the treatment for most
equity recipients other than the executive officers, they received their annual equity awards in two
equal installments. In addition, in connection with her promotion, Ms. Coleman received a promotion
award including restricted stock units on June 23, 2023. The vesting dates for these options are set
forth in the “ Fiscal 2023 Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End Table ” below.
All Other Option Awards: Number of Securities Underlying Options. This column sets forth the options
to purchase shares of the Company’s common stock granted to the NEOs then serving as an executive
officer as part of the annual grant in December 2022. As previously discussed, Mr. Lansberry received
his annual grants of options in two equal installments on December 15, 2022 and July 17, 2023. In
addition, in connection with her promotion, Ms. Coleman received a promotion award including options
on June 23, 2023. The vesting dates for these options are set forth in the “ Fiscal 2023 Outstanding
Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End Table ” below. These options are scheduled to expire ten years after
the date of grant.
Exercise or Base Price of Option Awards; Grant Date Closing Price of Shares Underlying Options. These
columns set forth the exercise price for each option grant and the closing price of the Company’s
common stock on the date of grant. The exercise price is equal to the average of the high and low
trading price on the grant date, which may be higher or lower than the closing price on the grant
date.
Grant Date Fair Value of Stock and Option Awards. This column sets forth the grant date fair value of
the stock and option awards granted during fiscal 2023 calculated in accordance with applicable
accounting requirements. The grant date fair value of all restricted stock unit awards and options is
determined as described in the section “ Grant Date ” above.
 47 
Fiscal 2023 Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End Table
The following table provides information concerning outstanding unexercised options and unvested
restricted stock unit awards held by the NEOs as of September 30, 2023. Additional information
regarding the amounts reported in each column follows the table.
 Opt… Sto… 
 Awa… Awa… 
 (A) 
 Num… 
 of Equi… 
 Sec… Ince… 
 Und… Plan 
 Une… Awar… 
 Opt… 
 Mar… Numb… Mark… 
 Num… Val… of Value 
 of of Unea… of 
 Opt… Opt… Uni… Uni… Units Unea… 
 Gra… Exe… Une… Exe… Exp… That That That Units 
 Date Pri… Date Have Have Have That 
 Not Not Not Have 
 Ves… Ves… Vest… Not 
 (A) (B) (C)(… Vest… 
 (B) 
 Ro… 
 A. 12/… 372… — $92… 12/… 
 Ig… 
 12/… 271… — 113… 12/… 
 12/… 321… — 105… 12/… 
 12/… 295… — 111… 12/… 
 12/… 291… — 110… 12/… 
 3/2… 46,… — 109… 3/2… 
 12/… 197… 65,… 148… 12/… 
 12/… 111… 55,… 173… 12/… 35,… 2,8… 
 12/… 16,… 33,… 150… 12/… 10,… 862… 
 11/… — 278… 92.… 11/… 169… 13,… 
 (E) 
 Ke… 
 A. 12/… 2,5… — 105… 12/… 
 La… 
 12/… 6,4… — 111… 12/… 
 12/… 12,… — 110… 12/… 
 12/… 11,… 3,8… 148… 12/… 1,4… 115… 
 12/… 2,9… 1,4… 173… 12/… 1,1… 90,… 
 3/8… 2,4… 1,2… 198… 3/8… 980 79,… 
 6/2… 3,1… 1,5… 173… 6/2… 1,1… 90,… 
 12/… 5,1… 5,1… 150… 12/… 3,8… 311… 
 (F) (G) 
 12/… 1,2… 6,1… 91.… 12/… 5,4… 438… 
 (H) (I) 
 12/… 199 1,0… 91.… 12/… 876 71,… 
 (H) (I) 
 7/1… — 1,3… 86.… 7/1… 1,1… 89,… 
 (J) (K) 
 7/1… — 8,3… 86.… 7/1… 6,8… 555… 
 (J) (K) 
 Ho… 38,… 12,… 23,3… 
 E. 3/8… 19,… (L) 132… 3/8… (M) 1,0… (N) 1,89… 
 Gu… 
 12/… — 48,… 91.… 12/… 18,… 1,4… 32,… 2,6… 
 48 
 Opt… Sto… 
 Awa… Awa… 
 (A) 
 Num… 
 of Equ… 
 Sec… Inc… 
 Und… Plan 
 Une… Awa… 
 Opt… 
 Mark… Num… Mar… 
 Num… Value of Val… 
 of of Une… of 
 Opt… Opt… Uni… Units Uni… Une… 
 Gra… Exe… Une… Exe… Exp… That That That Uni… 
 Date Pri… Date Have Have Have That 
 Not Not Not Have 
 Ves… Vest… Ves… Not 
 (A) (B) (C)… Ves… 
 (B) 
 Kr… 16,… 14,… 
 K. 6/2… 8,4… (O) 97.… 6/2… (P) 1,16… — — 
 Sc… 
 9/2… 121 242 97.… 9/2… 90 7,2… 155 12,5… 
 12/… — 13,… 91.… 12/… 5,0… 408… 9,166 742,… 
 So… 
 L. 12/… 1,7… — 110… 12/… 
 Co… 
 12/… 4,9… 1,6… 148… 12/… 608 49,… 
 12/… 1,4… 718 173… 12/… 538 43,… 
 3/8… 1,1… 577 198… 3/8… 471 38,… 
 6/2… 1,5… 764 173… 6/2… 538 43,… 
 12/… — — — — 3,9… 324… 
 (G) 
 3/8… — — — — 5,2… 428… 
 (Q) 
 12/… — — — — 1,3… 110… 
 (I) 
 12/… — — — — 4,0… 331… 
 (I) 
 6/2… — 6,6… 88.… 6/2… 2,3… 192… 4,893 396,… 
 7/1… — — — — 1,7… 139… 
 (K) 
 7/1… — — — — 5,1… 419… 
 (K) 
 49 
 Opt… Sto… 
 Awa… Awa… 
 (A) 
 Num… 
 of Equ… 
 Sec… Inc… 
 Und… Plan 
 Une… Awa… 
 Opt… 
 Mark… Num… Mar… 
 Num… Value of Val… 
 of of Une… of 
 Opt… Opt… Uni… Units Uni… Une… 
 Gra… Exe… Une… Exe… Exp… That That That Uni… 
 Date Pri… Date Have Have Have That 
 Not Not Not Have 
 Ves… Vest… Ves… Not 
 (A) (B) (C)… Ves… 
 (B) 
 Ro… 
 A. 12/… 53,… — 72.… 12/… — — — — 
 Ch… 
 12/… 53,… — 92.… 12/… — — — — 
 12/… 39,… — 113… 12/… — — — — 
 12/… 49,… — 105… 12/… — — — — 
 12/… 45,… — 111… 12/… — — — — 
 12/… 75,… — 110… 12/… — — — — 
 12/… 47,… 15,… 148… 12/… 2,7… 224… — — 
 2/2… 29,… 9,7… 115… 2/2… 2,2… 180… — — 
 12/… 44,… 22,… 173… 12/… 6,8… 558… 25,0… 2,02… 
 12/… 26,… 52,… 150… 12/… 15,… 1,2… 30,6… 2,48… 
 Ch… 
 M. 12/… 30,… — 72.… 12/… — — — — 
 Mc… 
 12/… 28,… — 92.… 12/… — — — — 
 12/… 41,… — 113… 12/… — — — — 
 12/… 50,… — 105… 12/… — — — — 
 12/… 64,… — 111… 12/… — — — — 
 12/… 76,… — 110… 12/… — — — — 
 12/… 77,… 25,… 148… 12/… — — 4,771 386,… 
 12/… 59,… 29,… 173… 12/… 6,8… 558… 12,5… 1,01… 
 12/… 23,… 47,… 150… 12/… 14,… 1,1… 27,5… 2,23… 
 12/… — 87,… 91.… 12/… 32,… 2,6… 59,4… 4,82… 
Number of Securities Underlying Unexercised Options: Exercisable and Unexercisable. These columns set
forth, for each NEO and for each grant made to the officer, the number of shares of the Company’s
common stock that could be acquired upon exercise of outstanding options at the end of fiscal 2023.
The vesting schedule for each option with unexercisable shares is shown under “ Vesting Schedule ”
below. The vesting of options held by the NEOs may be accelerated in the circumstances described
under the section “ Executive Compensation — Compensation Tables — Potential Payments and Rights on
Termination or Change in Control ” below.
Number; Market Value of Units of Stock That Have Not Vested. These columns report the number and
market value, respectively, of shares underlying each grant of restricted stock units to each officer
that is not subject to performance vesting conditions nor the test to assure eligibility for
deduction pursuant to Section 162(m). The number of shares includes dividend equivalent units that
have accrued for dividends payable through September 30, 2023. The market value is equal to the
number of shares underlying the units times the closing market price of the Company’s common stock on
September 29, 2023, the last trading day of the Company’s fiscal year. The vesting schedule for each
grant is shown below, with grants identified by the letter following the number of shares underlying
the grant. Vesting of
 50 
restricted stock units held by NEOs may be accelerated in the circumstances described under the
section “ Executive Compensation — Compensation Tables — Potential Payments and Rights on Termination
or Change in Control ” below.
Number; Market Value of Unearned Units That Have Not Vested. These columns set forth the target
number and market value, respectively, of shares of the Company’s common stock underlying each
restricted stock unit award held by each NEO that is subject to performance-based vesting conditions
and/or the test to assure eligibility for deduction pursuant to Section 162(m). The number of shares
includes dividend equivalent units that have accrued for dividends payable through September 30,
2023. The market value is equal to the number of shares underlying the units multiplied by the
closing market price of the Company’s common stock on September 29, 2023, the last trading day of the
Company’s fiscal year. The vesting schedule and performance tests and/or the test to assure
eligibility under Section 162(m) are shown in “ Vesting Schedule ” below.
Vesting Schedule. The options reported above that are not yet exercisable and restricted stock unit
awards that have not yet vested are scheduled to become exercisable and vest as set forth below.
(A) Unless otherwise noted, stock options and restricted stock units granted before December 2020
will vest 25% on each of the first four anniversaries of the grant date. Grants made in or after
December 2020 will vest one-third on each of the first three anniversaries of the grant date.
(B) Amounts may not sum to total due to rounding.
(C) Unless otherwise noted, PBUs will cliff vest on the third anniversary of grant date, based on
3-year TSR versus S&P 500 and absolute ROIC tests for each of the fiscal years in the 3-year period
(targets set each year for awards made in 2020 and 2021; 3-year target set for awards made in
December 2022 and June 2023).
(D) While restricted stock units will vest 25% on each of the first four anniversaries of the grant
date for grants made before December 2020 and one-third on each of the first three anniversaries of
the grant date for grants made in or after December 2020, grants before 2020 for Ms. McCarthy are
also subject to a performance test to assure eligibility for deduction under Section 162(m).
(E) PBUs will cliff vest on November 20, 2024, based on 2-year TSR versus S&P 500 and absolute ROIC
test for the fiscal years in the 2-year period.
(F) Unexercisable options will vest one-third on December 14, 2023, June 14, 2024 and December 14,
2024.
(G) Restricted stock units will vest one-third on December 14, 2023, June 14, 2024 and December 14,
2024.
(H) Unexercisable options will vest one-fifth on December 15, 2023, June 15, 2024, December 15, 2024,
June 15, 2025 and December 15, 2025.
(I) Restricted stock units will vest one-fifth on December 15, 2023, June 15, 2024, December 15,
2024, June 15, 2025 and December 15, 2025.
(J) Unexercisable options will vest one-sixth on January 17, 2024, July 17, 2024, January 17, 2025,
July 17, 2025, January 17, 2026 and July 17, 2026.
(K) Restricted stock units will vest one-sixth on January 17, 2024, July 17, 2024, January 17, 2025,
July 17, 2025, January 17, 2026 and July 17, 2026.
(L) Unexercisable options will vest one-half on December 14, 2023 and December 14, 2024.
(M) Restricted stock units will vest one-half December 14, 2023 and December 14, 2024.
(N) PBUs will cliff vest on December 14, 2024, based on 3-year TSR versus S&P 500 and absolute ROIC
tests for each of the fiscal years in the 3-year period (targets set each year).
(O) Unexercisable options will vest one-fourth on December 27, 2023, June 27, 2024, December 27, 2024
and June 27, 2025.
(P) Restricted stock units will vest one-fourth on December 27, 2023, June 27, 2024, December 27,
2024 and June 27, 2025.
(Q) Restricted stock units will vest in full on March 8, 2024.
 51 
 Vesting of Equity 
Options and restricted stock units continue to vest beyond retirement (and options remain
exercisable) if (1) they were awarded at least one year prior to the date of an employee’s retirement
and (2) the employee was age 60 or older and had at least ten years of service on the date such
employee retired. In these circumstances:
• Options continue to vest following retirement according to the original vesting schedule. They
remain exercisable for up to five years following retirement. Options do not, however, remain
exercisable beyond the original expiration date of the option.
• Restricted stock units continue to vest following retirement according to the original vesting
schedule, but vesting remains subject to any applicable performance conditions (except, in some
cases, the test to ensure that the compensation is deductible pursuant to Section 162(m)).
The extended vesting and exercisability is not available to certain employees outside the United
States.
Options and restricted stock units awarded to executive officers with employment agreements also
continue to vest (and options remain exercisable) beyond termination of employment if the executive’s
employment is terminated by the Company without cause or by the executive with good reason. In this
case, options and restricted stock units continue to vest (and options remain exercisable) as though
the executive remained employed through the end of the stated term of the employment agreement. If
the executive would be age 60 or older and have at least ten years of service as of the end of the
stated term of the employment agreement, the options and restricted stock units awarded at least one
year prior to the end of the stated term of the agreement would continue to vest (and options remain
exercisable) beyond the stated term of the employment agreement.
Fiscal 2023 Option Exercises and Stock Vested Table
The following table provides information concerning the exercise of options and vesting of restricted
stock unit awards held by the NEOs during fiscal 2023.
 Option Awards Stock Awards 
 Number of Number of 
 Shares Acquired Value Realized Shares Value Realized 
 on Exercise on Exercise Acquired on on Vesting 
 Vesting 
 Robert A. Iger — $— 32,261 $2,898,206 
 Kevin A. — — 10,129 927,022 
 Lansberry 
 Horacio E. — — 6,295 592,013 
 Gutierrez 
 Kristina K. — — 7,261 638,704 
 Schake 
 Sonia L. — — 6,599 608,053 
 Coleman 
 Robert A. 60,860 2,888,923 44,675 4,058,593 
 Chapek 
 Christine M. 42,533 2,006,282 33,140 2,995,761 
 McCarthy 
The value realized on the exercise of options is equal to the amount per share at which the NEO sold
shares acquired on exercise (all of which occurred on the date of exercise) minus the exercise price
of the option times the number of shares acquired on exercise of the options. The value realized on
the vesting of stock awards is equal to the closing market price of the Company’s common stock on the
date of vesting times the number of shares acquired upon vesting. The number of shares and value
realized on vesting includes shares that were withheld at the time of vesting to satisfy tax
withholding requirements.
 52 
 Equity Compensation Plans 
The following table summarizes information, as of September 30, 2023, relating to equity compensation
plans of the Company pursuant to which grants of options, restricted stock, restricted stock units or
other rights to acquire shares of the Company’s common stock may be granted from time to time.
 Number of Securities 
 Number of Securities Remaining Available 
 to be Issued Upon Weighted-Average for Future Issuance 
 Exercise of Exercise Price of Under Equity 
 Plan Category Outstanding Options, Outstanding Options, Compensation Plans 
 Warrants and Rights Warrants and Rights (Excluding Securities 
 (A) (B) Reflected in 
 Column(A)) 
 (C) 
 Equity compensation 
 plans approved by 42,410,1882;3 $120.204 92,644,2263;5 
 security holders1 
 Equity compensation 
 plans not approved — — — 
 by security holders 
 Total 42,410,1882;3 $120.204 92,644,2263;5 
1 These plans are the Company’s Amended and Restated 2011 Stock Incentive Plan, The Walt Disney
Company/Pixar 2004 Equity Incentive Plan (the “Disney/Pixar Plan”, which was assumed by the Company
in connection with the acquisition of Pixar) and The Walt Disney Company/TFCF 2013 Equity Incentive
Plan (the “Disney/TFCF Plan”, which was assumed by the Company in connection with the acquisition of
TFCF). The Disney/TFCF Plan expired on October 18, 2023 and these shares are no longer able to be
granted.
2 Includes an aggregate of 24,191,694 time-based restricted stock units and PBUs. Includes an
aggregate of 11,640 restricted stock units granted under the Disney/Pixar Plan, which was approved by
the shareholders of Pixar prior to the Company’s acquisition.
3 Assumes shares issued upon vesting of PBUs vest at 100% of target number of units. For awards
granted in fiscal 2021, the actual number of shares issued on vesting of PBUs could be zero to 150%
of the target number of PBUs. For awards granted in fiscal 2022 and 2023, the actual number of shares
issued on vesting of PBUs could be zero to 200% of the target number of PBUs.
4 Reflects the weighted average exercise price of outstanding options; excludes restricted stock
units and PBUs.
5 Includes 382,356 securities available for future issuance under the Disney/Pixar Plan, which was
approved by the shareholders of Pixar prior to the Company’s acquisition. Includes 27,720,535
securities available for future issuance under the Disney/TFCF Plan, which was approved by the
shareholders of TFCF prior to the Company’s acquisition and has since expired on October 18, 2023. No
shares remain available for future issuance under the Disney/TFCF Plan. Assumes all awards are made
in the form of options. Each award of one restricted stock unit under the 2011 Stock Incentive Plan
reduces the number of shares available under the plan by two, so the number of securities available
for issuance will be smaller to the extent awards are made as restricted stock units.
 Pension Benefits 
The Company maintains a tax-qualified, noncontributory retirement plan, called the Disney Salaried
Pension Plan D, for salaried employees who commenced employment before January 1, 2012. Benefits are
based on a percentage of total average monthly compensation multiplied by years of credited service.
For service years after 2012, average monthly compensation includes overtime, commission and regular
bonus and is calculated based on the highest five consecutive years of compensation during the ten-
year period prior to termination of employment or retirement, whichever is earlier. For service years
prior to 2012, average monthly compensation considers only base salary, benefits were based on a
somewhat higher percentage of average monthly compensation and benefits included a flat dollar amount
based solely on years and hours of service. Retirement benefits are non-forfeitable after three years
of vesting service (five years of vesting service prior to 2012) or at age 65 after one year of
service. Actuarially reduced benefits are paid to participants whose benefits are non-forfeitable and
who retire before age 65 but on or after age 55. The early retirement reduction is 50% at age 55,
decreasing to 0% at age 65.
In calendar year 2023, the maximum compensation limit under a tax-qualified plan wa s $330,000 and
the maximum annual benefit that may be accrued under a tax-qualified defined benefit plan was
$265,000. The Company maintains a supplemental non-qualified, unfunded plan, the Amended and Restated
Key Plan, which provides to key salaried employees the retirement benefits that cannot be provided
under our tax-qualified plans because of these limitations and certain other limitations applicable
to qualified plans. Under this plan, benefits are calculated in the same manner as under the Disney
Salaried Pension Plan D (with the amounts payable offset by the benefits that are provided under the
qualified plans), including the differences in benefit determination for years before and after
January 1, 2012, described above, except as follows:
• starting on January 1, 2017, average annual compensation used for calculating benefits under the
plans for any participant was capped at the greater of $1,000,000 or the participant’s average annual
compensation determined as of January 1, 2017; and
• benefits for persons who were NEOs on January 1, 2012 are limited to the amount the executive
officer would have received had the plan in effect prior to its January 1, 2012 amendment continued
without change.
 53 
Company employees who either transferred to the Company from ABC, Inc. after the Company’s
acquisition of ABC or worked for a legacy ABC company (e.g., ESPN) are also eligible to receive
benefits under the Disney Salaried Pension Plan A (formerly known as the ABC, Inc. Retirement Plan)
and a Benefit Equalization Plan, which, like the Amended and Restated Key Plan, provides eligible
participants retirement benefits in excess of the compensation limits and maximum benefit accruals
that apply to tax-qualified plans. Mr. Iger received credited years of service under those plans for
the years prior to the Company’s acquisition of ABC, Inc. A term of the 1995 purchase agreement
between ABC, Inc. and the Company provides that employees transferring employment to coverage under a
Disney pension plan will receive an additional benefit under Disney plans equal to (a) the amount the
employee would receive under the Disney pension plans if all of the employee’s ABC service were
counted under the Disney pension less (b) the combined benefits the employee receives under the ABC
plan (for service prior to the transfer) and the Disney plan (for service after the transfer). Mr.
Iger transferred from ABC and, as such, receives a pension benefit under the Disney plans to bring
his total benefit up to the amount he would have received if all his years of service had been
credited under the Disney plans. The effect of these benefits is reflected in the present value of
benefits under the Disney plans in the table below.
The Company also maintains the Disney Associated Companies’ Retirement Plan for certain hourly, union
employees. Prior to 2005, hourly non-union employees could participate if they satisfied the
participant requirements. Benefits under the Disney Associated Companies’ Retirement Plan are
determined by a participant’s Credited Years of Service and Credited Hours of Service according to
the schedule which applies to their employee group. Mr. Lansberry had 2 years of service, with 2,389
hours, under the Disney Associated Companies’ Retirement Plan from 1986 to 1988 before becoming
eligible for the Disney Salaried Plan D.
As of the end of fiscal 2023, Mr. Lansberry was eligible for early retirement; Ms. McCarthy was
eligible for retirement and Mr. Chapek’s separation constituted early retirement. Mr. Iger initially
retired from the Company on December 31, 2021, at which point his accrued benefits were finalized.
 54 
 Fiscal 2023 Pension Benefits Table 
The following table sets forth the present value of the accumulated pension benefits that each NEO is
eligible to receive under each of the plans described above.
 Number of Present Value 
 Years of of Accumulated Payments 
 Name Plan Name Credited Benefit at During Last 
 Service at Fiscal Fiscal Year1 
 Fiscal Year-End1 
 Year-End 
 Robert A. Disney 
 Iger Salaried 22 $1,428,760 $108,751 
 Pension Plan D 
 Disney 
 Amended and 22 11,539,258 856,335 
 Restated Key 
 Plan 
 Disney 
 Salaried 25 697,649 53,148 
 Pension Plan 
 A 
 Benefit 
 Equalization 25 5,507,939 408,110 
 Plan of ABC, 
 Inc. 
 Total 19,173,606 1,426,345 
 Kevin A. Disney 
 Lansberry Salaried 36 2,363,350 — 
 Pension Plan D 
 Disney 
 Amended and 36 1,587,344 — 
 Restated Key 
 Plan 
 Disney 
 Associated 
 Companies’ 2 3,202 — 
 Retirement 
 Plan 
 Total 3,953,896 — 
 Sonia L. Disney 
 Coleman Salaried 16 459,461 — 
 Pension Plan D 
 Disney 
 Amended and 16 542,061 
 Restated Key 
 Plan 
 Total 1,001,523 — 
 Robert A. Disney 
 Chapek Salaried 30 2,816,618 175,195 
 Pension Plan D 
 Disney 
 Amended and 30 11,359,642 646,250 
 Restated Key 
 Plan 
 Total 14,176,260 821,445 
 Christine M. Disney 
 McCarthy Salaried 24 1,539,638 — 
 Pension Plan D 
 Disney 
 Amended and 24 3,725,250 — 
 Restated Key 
 Plan 
 Total 5,264,888 — 
1 Amounts may not sum to total due to rounding.
These present values assume that each NEO retires at age 65 (or their age on September 30, 2023, if
older) for purposes of the Disney Salaried Pension Plan D and the Amended and Restated Key Plan, and
age 62 (or their age on September 30, 2023, if older) for purposes of the Disney Salaried Pension
Plan A and the Benefit Equalization Plan of ABC, Inc. Age 65 is the normal retirement age under each
of the plans and is also the age at which unreduced benefits are payable, except the earliest age at
which unreduced benefits are payable under the ABC plans is age 62 for service years prior to 2012.
The values also assume a straight life-annuity payment for an unmarried participant. Participants may
elect other actuarially reduced forms of payment, such as joint and survivor benefits and payment of
benefits for a period certain irrespective of the death of the participant. The present values were
calculated using the 5.94% discount rate assumption set forth in footnote 10 to the Company’s Audited
Financial Statements for fiscal 2023 and using actuarial factors including Pri-2012 annuitant
mortality table, projected generationally with a modified version of the MP-2021 scale for males and
females. The present values reported in the table are not available as lump sum payments under the
plans.
 55 
Fiscal 2023 Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation Table
Under the Company’s Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation Plan, U.S.-based executives at the level of
Vice President or above may defer a portion of their compensation and applicable taxes with an
opportunity to earn a tax-deferred return on the deferred amounts. The plan gives eligible executives
the opportunity to defer up to 50% of their base salary and up to 100% of their annual performance-
based bonus award until retirement or termination of employment or, at the executive’s election,
until an earlier date at least five years following the date the compensation is earned. The Company
also has the option to make a contribution into an executive’s deferred compensation account on terms
and subject to any conditions (such as vesting conditions) the Company chooses. Amounts in an
executive’s deferred account earn a return based on the executive’s election among a series of mutual
funds designated by the Company, which are generally the same funds available under the Company’s
qualified deferred compensation plans. Returns on the funds available for the deferred account ranged
from 0.75% to 26.49% for the year ended September 30, 2023.
The deferred amounts and any deemed earnings on the amounts are not actual investments and are
obligations of the Company. Ms. McCarthy participated in this plan in fiscal 2023 and her
contributions and aggregate earnings during the fiscal year and aggregate balance at the end of the
fiscal year are reflected in the table below. Ms. McCarthy’s contributions represent deferred salary
in the amount of $1,025,577 and bonus in the amount of $2,868,993. Mr. Lansberry and Mr. Chapek had
positive returns on the year, but did not make a contribution in fiscal 2023.
The Key Employees Retirement Savings Plan is a defined contribution plan funded by the Company. The
Plan is a non-qualified plan under IRS regulations that is intended to restore or replace certain
benefits that cannot be provided under the qualified Retirement Savings Plan due to IRS compensation
limits. Eligible pay under the Key Employees Retirement Savings Plan includes base salary, regular
bonuses, overtime pay and commissions up to a $1,000,000 annual limit. The Company contributes 3%, 6%
or 9% of eligible pay that exceeds the annual IRS compensation limit based on age and years of
service as of the end of the plan year. Mr. Iger began participating in the plan when he was re-hired
by the Company on November 20, 2022 and based on his age and service he is eligible for a 9%
contribution.
 Executive Company Aggregate Aggregate Aggregate 
 Contributi… Contributio… Earnings in Withdrawals Balance at 
 in Last in Last Last Fiscal in Last Last Fiscal 
 Fiscal Year Fiscal Year Year Fiscal Year Year-End 
 Robert A. $— $62,550 -$749.1 $— $61,801 
 Iger 
 Kevin A. — — 366,022 — $2,605,595 
 Lansberry 
 Robert A. — — 944,536.33 150,434 $7,683,049 
 Chapek 
 Christine 3,894,570 — 7,446,037 — $58,005,491 
 M. McCarthy 
Because the earnings accrued under these programs were not “above market” or preferential, these
amounts are not reported in the “ Fiscal 2023 Summary Compensation Table . ” A portion of the
aggregate balances at last fiscal year-end were however included in the Summary Compensation Table
since fiscal 2021, as follows:
 Amount Included 
 in Summary 
 Compensation 
 Table 
 Fiscal Year Salary Non-Equity All Other Total 
 Incentive Plan Compensation 
 Robert A. 2023 $— $— $62,550 $62,550 
 Iger 
 2022 — — — — 
 2021 — — — — 
 Kevin A. 2023 — — — — 
 Lansberry 
 2022 — — — — 
 2021 — — — — 
 Robert A. 2023 — — — — 
 Chapek 
 2022 — — — — 
 2021 — — — — 
 Christine M. 2023 1,025,577 — — 1,025,577 
 McCarthy 
 2022 989,231 5,565,846 — 6,555,077 
 2021 951,242 7,336,137 — 8,287,379 
 56 
Potential Payments and Rights on Termination or Change in Control
Our NEOs may receive compensation in connection with termination of their employment. This
compensation is payable pursuant to (a) the terms of compensation plans applicable by their terms to
all participating employees and (b) the terms of employment agreements with each of our NEOs (with
the exception of Mr. Lansberry, who is employed on an at-will basis). During fiscal 2023, the
employment agreements with our applicable NEOs had the following end dates: December 31, 2026 for Mr.
Iger, December 31, 2024 for Mr. Gutierrez, June 29, 2026 for Ms. Schake, April 7, 2026 for Ms.
Coleman, June 30, 2025 for Mr. Chapek and June 30, 2024 for Ms. McCarthy. As Mr. Chapek exited the
Company as Chief Executive Officer before fiscal year end, he was not entitled to termination
payments as of September 30, 2023. In fiscal 2023, the Company entered into a new employment
agreement with Mr. Iger as Chief Executive Officer with an end date of December 31, 2024. In July
2023, the Board agreed to extend Mr. Iger’s employment agreement to December 31, 2026, noting that
the extension of Mr. Iger’s employment agreement provides continuity of leadership during the
Company’s ongoing transformation and allows more time to execute a transition plan for CEO
succession, which remains a priority for the Board. In fiscal 2024, the Company entered into an
amendment to Mr. Gutierrez’s employment agreement, pursuant to which the term of the agreement was
extended to December 31, 2026.
On November 20, 2022 (after the commencement of fiscal 2023), the Board decided to exercise its right
to terminate Mr. Chapek’s employment without cause. In connection with this termination, in the event
that Mr. Chapek successfully completed all of the terms of his post-employment consulting agreement
and did not violate the terms of the employment agreement that survive his termination or the general
release, Mr. Chapek’s severance would strictly conform to the terms of his employment agreement such
that he would be entitled to the following cash termination payments:
• $6,527,397 in remaining base salary through the scheduled expiration date of his employment
agreement, as amended; and
• $1,027,397 equivalent to a pro-rated target bonus for fiscal 2023.
The treatment of the equity awards held by Mr. Chapek at his termination date under his employment
agreement is described below in the section titled “ Executive Compensation — Compensation Tables —
Potential Payments and Rights on Termination of Change in Control —Termination Pursuant to Company
Termination Right Other Than For Cause or By Executive For Good Reason .”
In June 2023, in connection with her leave of absence, which commenced on July 1, 2023, Ms. McCarthy
and the Company entered into an amendment to Ms. McCarthy’s employment agreement, pursuant to which
Ms. McCarthy ceased to serve as Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer and has
the title “Strategic Advisor” during her leave of absence. Ms. McCarthy’s duties as Strategic Advisor
are to assist the Company with the transition of duties to the Company’s Chief Financial Officer and
the last day of Ms. McCarthy’s leave and employment with the Company will be June 30, 2024. The terms
of Ms. McCarthy’s compensation are unchanged, and she did not receive an equity grant in fiscal 2024.
The termination provisions included in our executive officers’ employment agreements serve a variety
of purposes, including: providing the benefits of equity incentive plans to the executive and the
executive’s family in case of death or disability; defining when the executive may be terminated with
cause and receive no further compensation; and clearly defining rights in the event of a termination
in other circumstances. The availability, nature and amount of compensation on termination differ
depending on whether employment terminates because of:
• death or disability;
• the Company’s termination of the executive pursuant to the Company’s termination right or the
executive’s decision to terminate because of action the Company takes or fails to take;
• the Company’s termination of the executive for cause; or
• expiration of an employment agreement, retirement or other voluntary termination.
The compensation that each of our NEOs may receive under each of these termination circumstances is
described below.
In December 2023, the Compensation Committee adopted a cash severance policy pursuant to which the
Company will not enter into any new agreement that provides, or amend any existing agreement to
provide, any Section 16 officer of the Company the right to any cash severance payment that would
exceed 2.99 times the sum of base salary plus target bonus for such officer unless such cash payment
is approved by the Company’s shareholders.
It is important to note that the amounts of compensation set forth in the tables below are based on
the specific assumptions noted and do not predict the actual compensation that our NEOs would
receive. Actual compensation received would be a function of a number of factors that are unknowable
at this time, including: the date of the executive’s termination of employment; the executive’s base
salary at the time of termination; the executive’s age and service with the Company at the time of
termination; and, because many elements of the compensation are performance-based pursuant to the
Company’s compensation philosophy described in “ Executive Compensation — Compensation Discussion and
Analysis ” above, the future performance of the Company.
 57 
Moreover, the option and restricted stock unit acceleration amounts in case of a termination without
cause or by the executive for good reason assume that these awards immediately accelerate, which is
not the case in the absence of a change in control. Rather, options and units continue to vest over
time and in most cases are subject to the same performance measures that apply as if there had been
no termination. (There is a deemed performance measure for vesting of restricted stock unit awards
when termination is due to death or disability and the test to assure deductibility under Section
162(m) does not apply if it is not necessary to preserve deductibility.)
In each of the circumstances described below, our NEOs are eligible to receive earned, unpaid salary
through the date of termination and benefits that are unconditionally accrued as of the date of
termination pursuant to policies applicable to all employees. This includes the deferred compensation
and earnings on these deferred amounts as described under the “ Fiscal 2023 Non-Qualified Deferred
Compensation Table. ” This earned compensation is not described or quantified below because these
amounts represent earned, vested benefits that are not contingent on the termination of employment,
but we do describe and quantify benefits that continue beyond the date of termination that are in
addition to those provided for in the applicable benefit plans. The executive’s accrued benefits
include the pension benefits described under “ Executive Compensation — Compensation Tables — Pension
Benefits ,” which become payable to all participants who have reached retirement age. Because they
have reached early retirement or retirement age under the plans, Mr. Lansberry and Ms. McCarthy would
have been eligible to receive these benefits if their employment had terminated at the end of fiscal
2023, and Mr. Iger is already receiving these benefits. Because the pension benefits do not differ
from those described under “ Executive Compensation — Compensation Tables — Pension Benefits ” except
in ways that are equally applicable to all salaried employees, the nature and amount of their pension
benefits are not described or quantified below.
 DEATH AND DISABILITY 
The employment agreement of each NEO provides for payment of any unpaid bonus for any fiscal year
that had been completed at the time of the executive’s death or termination of employment due to
disability. The amount of the bonus will be determined by the Compensation Committee using the same
criteria used for determining a bonus as if the executive remained employed. As Mr. Lansberry served
as Interim CFO on an at-will basis, he is not due a cash payment at the time of death or termination
of employment due to disability.
In addition to the compensation and rights in employment agreements, the 2011 Stock Incentive Plan
and award agreements thereunder provide that all options awarded to a participant (including the
NEOs) become fully exercisable upon the death or disability of the participant. Following the death
or disability of the participant, options terminate on the earlier of (a) the scheduled expiration
date and (b) in the case of death, 18 months and in the case of disability, 12 months. With respect
to performance-based restricted stock units, if the performance measurement has not been made at the
time of death or disability, all restricted stock units awarded to the participant under the 2011
Stock Incentive Plan will, to the extent the units had not previously been forfeited, fully vest (and
deemed to have been satisfied at the 50th percentile of comparative performance) and become payable
upon the death or disability of the participant. If a performance measurement has been made at the
time of death or disability with respect to restricted stock units, the restricted stock units will
vest and accelerate based on the performance measurement. Time-based restricted stock units become
fully vested or payable upon death or disability to the extent not previously forfeited.
The following table sets forth the value of the estimated payments and benefits each of our NEOs
(other than Mr. Chapek who exited the Company in November 2022) would have received under our
compensation plans and their employment agreements if their employment had terminated at the close of
business on the last day of fiscal 2023 as a result of death or disability. The value of option
acceleration is equal to the difference between the $81.05 closing market price of shares of the
Company’s common stock on September 29, 2023 (the last trading day in fiscal 2023) and the weighted
average exercise price of options with an exercise price less than the market price times the number
of shares subject to such options that would accelerate as a result of termination. The value of
restricted stock unit acceleration is equal to the $81.05 closing market price of shares of the
Company’s common stock on September 29, 2023 multiplied by the number of units that would accelerate
as a result of termination, which, for PBUs, is equal to the target number of units.
 Cash Option Restricted Stock 
 Payment1 Acceleration Unit Acceleration 
 Robert A. Iger $2,140,000 $— $17,536,870 
 Kevin A. Lansberry — — 1,843,320 
 Horacio E. Gutierrez2 3,000,000 — 7,059,414 
 Sonia L. Coleman 1,250,000 — 2,518,629 
 Kristina K. Schake 1,250,000 — 2,341,372 
 Christine M. McCarthy 3,000,000 — 12,830,863 
1 This amount is equal to the bonus awarded to the NEOs with respect to fiscal 2023 and set forth in
the “ Non-Equity Incentive Plan Compensation ” column of the “ Fiscal 2023 Summary Compensation Table
.”
2 Effective December 21, 2023, Mr. Gutierrez entered into an amended employment agreement with an end
date of December 31, 2026. The above values reflect values calculated using a December 31, 2024
contract end date, which was the date in effect at the end of the fiscal year.
 58 
 TERMINATION PURSUANT TO COMPANY TERMINATION RIGHT OTHER THAN FOR CAUSE OR BY EXECUTIVE FOR GOOD 
 REASON 
The employment agreement with each NEO provides that the executive officer will receive a bonus for
any fiscal year that had been completed at the time of termination of employment if the executive
officer’s employment is terminated by the Company pursuant to the Company’s termination right other
than for cause (as described below) or by the NEO with good reason (as described below). The amount
of the bonus will be determined by the Compensation Committee using the same criteria used for
determining a bonus if the executive remained employed.
In addition, each NEO’s employment agreement provides that the NEO will receive the following
compensation and rights conditioned on the NEO executing a general release of claims and, except for
Mr. Iger (who has a separate consulting arrangement), agreeing to provide the Company with consulting
services (the “Consulting Agreement”) for a period of six months after the NEO’s termination (or, if
shorter, until the employment agreement expiration date):
• A lump sum payment equal to the base salary the NEO would have earned had the NEO remained employed
during the term of the NEO’s Consulting Agreement (or, in the case of Mr. Iger, for up to six
months), paid six months and one day after termination of employment.
• If the employment agreement expiration date is later than the end of the term of the NEO’s
Consulting Agreement (or, in the case of Mr. Iger, six months after his employment termination date),
a further lump sum payment equal to the base salary the NEO would have earned had the NEO remained
employed after such period and until the termination of the NEO’s Consulting Agreement (subject to
compliance with the terms of the Consulting Agreement).
• A bonus for the year in which the NEO is terminated equal to a pro-rata portion of a target bonus
amount determined in accordance with the employment agreement.
• All options that had vested as of the termination date or were scheduled to vest no later than
three months after the employment agreement expiration date will remain or become exercisable as
though the NEO were employed until that date. The options will remain exercisable until the earlier
of (a) the scheduled expiration date of the options and (b) three months after the employment
agreement expiration date. In addition, as is true for all employees, options awarded at least one
year before termination will continue to vest and will remain exercisable until the earlier of the
expiration date of the option and five years after the termination date if the officer would have
attained age 60 and have completed at least ten years of service as of that date. Pursuant to
employment agreements with each of the NEOs, the termination date for these purposes will be deemed
to be the employment agreement expiration date. For any employee that is eligible for immediate
retirement benefits, options awarded within, but less than, one year of termination will vest to the
extent they are scheduled to vest within three months of termination and will remain exercisable for
18 months following termination.
• All restricted stock units that were scheduled to vest prior to the employment agreement expiration
date will vest as though the NEO were employed until that date to the extent applicable performance
tests are met (but any test to assure deductibility of compensation under Section 162(m) will be
waived for any units scheduled to vest after the fiscal year in which the termination of employment
occurs unless application of the test is necessary to preserve deductibility). As is true for all
employees, restricted stock units awarded at least one year before termination will continue to vest
through the end of the vesting schedule to the extent applicable performance criteria are met if the
officer would be over 60 years of age and have at least ten years of service as of the termination
date. Pursuant to employment agreements with each of the NEOs, the termination date for these
purposes will be deemed to be the employment agreement expiration date. Based on these provisions,
all of the equity awards held by Mr. Chapek at the date of his termination, including the grants made
on December 14, 2021, have continued to vest in accordance with the applicable vesting schedules.
The employment agreements provide that the Company has the right to terminate the NEO’s employment
subject to payment of the foregoing compensation in its sole, absolute and unfettered discretion for
any reason or no reason whatsoever. A termination for cause does not constitute an exercise of this
right and would be subject to the compensation provisions described below under the section “
Termination for Cause .”
The employment agreements provide that an NEO can terminate the NEO’s employment for “good reason”
following notice to the Company within three months of the NEO having actual notice of the occurrence
of any of the following events (except that the Company will have 30 days after receipt of the notice
to cure the conduct specified in the notice):
(i) a reduction in the NEO’s base salary, annual target bonus opportunity or (where applicable)
annual target long-term incentive award opportunity;
(ii) the removal from the NEO’s position;
(iii) a material reduction in the NEO’s duties and responsibilities;
(iv) the assignment to the NEO of duties that are materially inconsistent with the NEO’s position or
duties or that materially impair the NEO’s ability to function in the NEO’s office;
(v) relocation of the NEO’s principal office to a location that is more than 50 miles outside of the
greater Los Angeles area; or
(vi) a material breach of any material provision of the NEO’s employment agreement by the Company.
 59 
An NEO (or any employee holding equity awards) can also terminate for “good reason” after a change in
control (as defined in the 2011 Stock Incentive Plan) if, within 12 months following the change in
control, a “triggering event” occurs and in that case the 2011 Stock Incentive Plan provides that any
outstanding options, restricted stock units, PBUs or other plan awards will generally become fully
vested and, in certain cases, paid to the plan participant. A “triggering event” is defined to
include: (a) a termination of employment by the Company other than for death, disability or “cause;”
or (b) a termination of employment by the participant following a reduction in position, pay or other
“constructive termination.” Under the 2011 Stock Incentive Plan, “cause” has the same meaning as in
the NEO’s employment agreement, as defined below under “ — Termination for Cause .” Any such payments
that become subject to the excess parachute tax rules may be reduced in certain circumstances.
Each NEO’s employment agreement specifies that any compensation resulting from subsequent employment
will not be offset against amounts described above.
As Mr. Lansberry was serving as Interim CFO on an at-will basis, his cash severance payment would be
dictated by the Company’s severance policy. Given both Mr. Lansberry's level and over 37 years with
the Company, he would be eligible to receive a lump sum payment equal to 52 weeks of base salary. As
Mr. Lansberry is over the age of 60 and has been with the Company for over 10 years, any award he has
held for over one year at the time of separation would be eligible for continued vesting for
restricted stock units and vesting and exercisability of options.
The following table provides a quantification of benefits (as calculated in the following paragraph)
each of the NEOs would have received if their employment had been terminated at the end of fiscal
2023 (under their employment agreements as in effect at that time and, for Mr. Lansberry, under the
Company's severance plan) by the Company pursuant to its termination right or by the executive with
good reason.
The “option valuation” amount is (a) the difference between the $ 81.05 closing market price of
shares of the Company’s common stock on September 29, 2023 and the weighted average exercise price of
options with an exercise price less than the market price times (b) the number of options with in-
the-money exercise prices that would become exercisable despite the termination. The “restricted
stock unit valuation” amount is the $81.05 closing market price on September 29, 2023, times the
target number of units that could vest. However, as described above, options do not become
immediately exercisable and restricted stock units do not immediately vest (and would eventually vest
only to the extent applicable performance conditions are met) absent a change in control. The actual
value realized from the exercise of the options and the vesting of restricted stock units may
therefore be more or less than the amount shown below depending on changes in the market price of the
Company’s common stock and the satisfaction of applicable performance tests.
 Cash Payment1 Option Valuation Restricted Stock 
 Unit Valuation 
 Robert A. Iger 
 No change in $5,405,385 $— $17,536,870 
 control 
 Change in control 5,405,385 — 17,536,870 
 Kevin A. Lansberry 
 No change in 694,485 — 688,196 
 control 
 Change in control 694,485 — 1,843,320 
 Horacio E. 
 Gutierrez2 
 No change in 4,672,731 — 3,896,925 
 control 
 Change in control 4,672,731 — 7,059,414 
 Kristina K. Schake 
 No change in 3,398,000 — 2,341,372 
 control 
 Change in control 3,398,000 — 2,341,372 
 Sonia L. Coleman 
 No change in 3,145,192 — 1,964,571 
 control 
 Change in control 3,145,192 — 2,518,629 
 60 
 Cash Payment1 Option Valuation Restricted Stock Unit 
 Valuation 
 Christine M. 
 McCarthy 
 No change in control 4,552,500 — 12,830,863 
 Change in control 4,552,500 — 12,830,863 
1 This amount is equal to the bonus awarded to the NEOs with respect to fiscal 2023 and set forth in
the “Non-Equity Incentive Plan Compensation” column of the “Fiscal 2023 Summary Compensation Table,”
plus the lump sum payments based on salary through the end of the employment term as described above.
2 Effective December 21, 2023, Mr. Gutierrez entered into an amended employment agreement with an end
date of December 31, 2026. The above values reflect values calculated using a December 31, 2024
contract end date, as that was the date in effect at the end of the fiscal year.
 TERMINATION FOR CAUSE 
Each NEO’s employment agreement provides that, if the NEO’s employment is terminated by the Company
for cause, the NEO will only be eligible to receive the compensation earned and benefits vested
through the date of such termination of employment, including any rights the NEO may have under the
NEO’s indemnification agreement with the Company or the equity plans of the Company.
“Termination for Cause” is defined in each NEO’s employment agreement as termination based on a
felony conviction, unauthorized disclosure of confidential information, failure to substantially
perform such NEO’s duties, or any other significant policy violation that is significantly injurious
to the Company unless, if the Company determines that the conduct or cause is curable, such conduct
or cause is timely cured by the NEO.
 EXPIRATION OF EMPLOYMENT TERM; RETIREMENT 
Each of the NEOs is eligible to receive earned, unpaid salary and unconditionally vested accrued
benefits (including continued vesting of restricted stock units and vesting and exercisability of
options awarded more than one year prior to retirement if they are over 60 years of age with at least
ten years of service) if the NEO’s employment terminates at the expiration of the NEO’s employment
agreement or the NEO otherwise retires, but except as described below, they are not contractually
entitled to any additional compensation in this circumstance.
Under the terms of Mr. Iger’s employment agreement as in effect at December 31, 2021, to enable the
Company to have access to Mr. Iger’s unique skills, knowledge and experience with regard to the media
and entertainment business and his institutional knowledge of the Company and its strategic
evolution, upon his retirement, Mr. Iger was to serve as a consultant to the Company for a period of
five years. In this capacity, Mr. Iger would provide assistance, up to certain specified monthly and
annual maximum time commitments, on such matters as his successor as Chief Executive Officer may
request from time to time. In consideration of his consulting services, Mr. Iger is to receive a
quarterly fee of $500,000 for each of the quarters of this five-year period. For the five years
following termination of employment, the Company would also provide Mr. Iger with the same security
services (other than the personal use of a Company-provided or Company-leased aircraft) as it has
made available to him as Chief Executive Officer. Under his employment agreement entered into on
November 20, 2022, upon the re-commencement of his employment, the parties’ obligations in respect of
these post-employment commitments are suspended and will resume to be fulfilled for the remaining
term when Mr. Iger again terminates his employment with the Company. Under the amendment to his
employment agreement entered into on July 12, 2023, the post-retirement security benefits will not be
reduced for the approximately 11-month period such services were provided following Mr. Iger’s prior
retirement on December 31, 2021.
Other NEO employment agreements each provide that the Chief Executive Officer may recommend to the
Compensation Committee an annual cash bonus for the fiscal year in which their respective employment
agreements end based on the executive’s contributions during that fiscal year.
As in the case of a termination under the Company’s termination right other than for cause or the
executive’s right to terminate for good reason, vested options and restricted stock units will remain
exercisable for 18 months for executives eligible to receive retirement benefits, and options and
restricted stock units outstanding for at least one year will continue to vest, and options will
remain exercisable, for up to three or five years (depending on the original grant date) if the NEO
was age 60 or greater and had at least ten years of service at the date of retirement. In addition,
under the terms of his employment agreement as in effect at December 31, 2021, the equity grants made
to Mr. Iger in fiscal 2022 became eligible to continue to vest (and options remain exercisable) upon
his retirement at December 31, 2021.
 61 
 Pay Ratio 
In accordance with SEC rules, we are providing the ratio of the annual total compensation of our
Chief Executive Officer to the annual total compensation of the Company’s median employee. The ratio
is a reasonable estimate calculated in a manner consistent with SEC rules and the methodology
described below.
Per SEC rules, the Company is permitted to use the same median employee as was used in fiscal 2022,
and the Company determined that no change was needed to the median employee since there has been no
change in the Company’s employee population or employee compensation arrangements that we believe
would significantly impact the pay ratio disclosure. Our methodology to confirm the median employee
is consistent with last year. We reviewed the annual base salary of the global workforce as of the
last business day of the fiscal year, September 29, 2023. Due to population size, we identified a
band of employees with a base salary that approximates the median base salary for the Company. The
median base salary reflects a workforce with large populations of seasonal, part-time and
international employees working in multiple, distinct lines of business. We calculated the median
employee’s total annual compensation for fiscal 2023 (which consisted of an increase to base salary,
overtime pay and the Company’s contribution to health insurance premiums), and the median employee’s
compensation did not contain distortive compensation features (e.g., abnormal amounts of overtime,
special premium pay or commissions/tips, etc.).
The median Disney employee works in a full-time hourly role in parks and has been with the Company
for over twelve years. For fiscal 2023, the median employee’s total annual compensation was $54,010.
Mr. Iger was Chief Executive Officer on September 29, 2023. Mr. Iger’s total annual compensation,
including the Company’s contribution to health insurance premiums (which are not included in the
Fiscal 2023 Summary Compensation Table in this report), was $32,123,717. Since Mr. Iger became CEO
beginning November 20, 2022, we have annualized his salary, other compensation and the Company’s
contribution to health insurance premiums and included reported values for equity grants and change
in pension value, as they are reflective of annual compensation. The ratio of these amounts was
595:1.
 62 
Pay Versus Performance
This disclosure has been prepared in accordance with Item 402(v) of Regulation S-K under the Exchange
Act and does not necessarily reflect how the Compensation Committee evaluates compensation decisions
in light of Company or individual performance. The Compensation Committee did not consider the pay
versus performance disclosure below in making its compensation decisions for any of the fiscal years
shown. For discussion of how the Compensation Committee seeks to align pay with performance when
making compensation decisions, please review the section above titled “ Executive Compensation —
Compensation Discussion and Analysis.”
Pay Versus Performance Table
The following table sets forth compensation information of our CEOs (Mr. Iger and Mr. Chapek) and our
non-CEO NEOs and Company performance for the fiscal years listed below, in accordance with Item
402(v) of Regulation S-K.
 S… S… A… A… V… 
 C… C… C… C… S… C… of G… 
 T… A… T… A… C… A… an N… A… 
 … T… P… T… P… T… P… i… I… S… 
 … f… to f… to T… to $… ($ O… 
 M… M… M… M… f… N… I… M… I… 
 I… I… C… C… N… N… B… 
 N… o… 
 P… 
 … G… 
 … T… 
 … S… 
 R… 
 2… $… $… $… $… $… $… $… $… $… $… 
 2… — — 2… 2… 1… -… 7… 9… 3… 1… 
 2… — — 3… 4… 2… 4… 1… 1… 1… 4… 
1 Mr. Igerhas served as the Company’s CEO since November 20, 2022.Mr. Iger also served as Executive
Chairman from February 24, 2020 until his retirement on December 31, 2021. Value shown relates to Mr.
Iger’s service as CEO during fiscal 2023.
2 Represents the amount of total compensation reported for our CEO, Mr. Iger, in the “Total” column
of the “Summary Compensation Table” for fiscal 2023.
3 We made certain assumptions in valuing equity for our compensation actually paid (“CAP”)
calculations to determine the fair value or change in fair value as of the applicable year-end date.
The assumptions used for each valuation date included stock price, risk-free rate, stock price
volatility, expected exercise behavior and the probable outcome of any applicable performance
conditions. These assumptions were determined based on the same methodologies as used to determine
grant date fair values and were estimated in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 718.
4 The dollar amounts reported in the “ Compensation Actually Paid to Mr. Iger” column have been
calculated in accordance with Item 402(v) of Regulation S-K and do not reflect compensation actually
earned, realized, or received by the CEO. These amounts reflect the amount set forth in the “ Total”
column of the “ Summary Compensation Table” for each fiscal year presented, with certain adjustments
as described in the table below, in accordance with the requirements of Item 402(v) of Regulation
S-K. Amounts in the below reconciliation table may not sum to total due to rounding:
 Reconciliation of 
 Summary Compensation 
 Table Total Fiscal Year 2023 Fiscal Year 2022 Fiscal Year 2021 
 to Compensation Actually 
 Paid for Mr. Iger 
 Summary Compensation $31,587,166 — — 
 Table Total 
 Minus:Grant Date Fair 
 Value of Option 26,103,448 — — 
 and Stock Awards Granted 
 in Fiscal Year 
 Plus:Fair Value at 
 Fiscal Year-End of 
 Option and Stock Awards 
 Granted in 20,260,990 — — 
 Fiscal Year That Were 
 Outstanding and 
 Unvested at Fiscal 
 Year-End 
 Plus:Year-Over-Year 
 Change in Fair Value 
 at Fiscal Year-End of 
 Option and Stock 
 Awards Granted in Any -2,934,893 — — 
 Prior Fiscal Year 
 That Were Outstanding 
 and Unvested at 
 Fiscal Year-End 
 Plus:Fair Value at 
 Vesting Date of 
 Option and Stock Awards 
 Granted in — — — 
 Fiscal Year That Vested 
 During Fiscal 
 Year 
 Plus:Change in Fair 
 Value as of Vesting 
 Date (From the End of 
 the Prior Fiscal 
 Year) of Option and 
 Stock Awards Granted -1,055,039 — — 
 in Any Prior Fiscal Year 
 For Which 
 Applicable Vesting 
 Conditions Were 
 Satisfied During Fiscal 
 Year 
 Minus:Fair Value as of 
 Prior Fiscal 
 Year-End of Option and 
 Stock Awards 
 Granted in Any Prior — — — 
 Fiscal Year That 
 Failed to Meet 
 Applicable Vesting 
 Conditions During Fiscal 
 Year 
 Plus:Value of Dividends 
 or Other 
 Earnings Paid on Option 
 and Stock Awards 
 in the Fiscal Year Not — — — 
 Otherwise 
 Reflected in Total 
 Compensation for the 
 Fiscal Year 
 63 
 Reconciliation of 
 Summary Compensation 
 Table Total Fiscal Year 2023 Fiscal Year 2022 Fiscal Year 2021 
 to Compensation Actually 
 Paid for Mr. Iger 
 Minus:Change in Pension 
 Value From the 
 Summary Compensation — — — 
 Table for the 
 Fiscal Year 
 Plus:Pension Service 
 Costs in Fiscal — — — 
 Year 
 Compensation Actually $21,754,776 — — 
 Paid 
5 Mr. Chapekserved as the Company’s CEO during fiscal 2022 & 2021 until his separation during fiscal
2023.
6 Represents the amount of total compensation reported for Mr. Chapek in the “ Total” column of the “
Summary Compensation Table” for each fiscal year presented.
7 The dollar amounts reported in the “ Compensation Actually Paid to Mr. Chapek” column have been
calculated in accordance with Item 402(v) of Regulation S-K and do not reflect compensation actually
earned, realized, or received by Mr. Chapek. These amounts reflect the amount set forth in the “
Total” column of the “ Summary Compensation Table” for each fiscal year presented, with certain
adjustments as described in the table below, in accordance with the requirements of Item 402(v) of
Regulation S-K. Amounts in the below reconciliation table may not sum to total due to rounding:
 Reconcilia… 
 of Summary 
 Compensati… 
 Table Total Fiscal Year Fiscal Year Fiscal Year 
 to 2023 2022 2021 
 Compensati… 
 Actually 
 Paid for 
 Mr. Chapek 
 Summary 
 Compensati… $9,940,392 $24,183,003 $32,464,293 
 Table Total 
 Minus:Grant 
 Date Fair 
 Value of 
 Option 1,324,503 14,560,852 13,965,478 
 and Stock 
 Awards 
 Granted in 
 Fiscal Year 
 Plus:Fair 
 Value at 
 Fiscal 
 Year-End of 
 Option and 
 Stock 
 Awards 
 Granted in 1,102,906 8,788,726 14,286,960 
 Fiscal Year 
 That Were 
 Outstanding 
 and 
 Unvested at 
 Fiscal 
 Year-End 
 Plus:Year-… 
 Change in 
 Fair Value 
 at Fiscal 
 Year-End of 
 Option and 
 Stock 
 Awards 
 Granted in -3,444,195 -14,852,667 6,002,525 
 Any Prior 
 Fiscal Year 
 That Were 
 Outstanding 
 and 
 Unvested at 
 Fiscal 
 Year-End 
 Plus:Fair 
 Value at 
 Vesting 
 Date of 
 Option and 
 Stock 
 Awards — — — 
 Granted in 
 Fiscal Year 
 That Vested 
 During 
 Fiscal 
 Year 
 Plus:Change 
 in Fair 
 Value as of 
 Vesting 
 Date (From 
 the End of 
 the Prior 
 Fiscal 
 Year) of 
 Option and 
 Stock 
 Awards -512,231 -2,247,055 3,231,102 
 Granted 
 in Any 
 Prior 
 Fiscal Year 
 For Which 
 Applicable 
 Vesting 
 Conditions 
 Were 
 Satisfied 
 During 
 Fiscal Year 
 Minus:Fair 
 Value as of 
 Prior 
 Fiscal 
 Year-End of 
 Option and 
 Stock 
 Awards 
 Granted in 
 Any Prior — — — 
 Fiscal Year 
 That 
 Failed to 
 Meet 
 Applicable 
 Vesting 
 Conditions 
 During 
 Fiscal Year 
 Plus:Value 
 of 
 Dividends 
 or Other 
 Earnings 
 Paid on 
 Option and 
 Stock 
 Awards -439 -9,809 24,261 
 in the 
 Fiscal Year 
 Not 
 Otherwise 
 Reflected 
 in Total 
 Compensati… 
 for the 
 Fiscal Year 
 Minus:Chan… 
 in Pension 
 Value From 
 the 
 Summary 220,581 — 1,358,505 
 Compensati… 
 Table for 
 the 
 Fiscal Year 
 Plus:Pensi… 
 Service 
 Costs in 612,108 800,858 797,062 
 Fiscal 
 Year 
 Compensati… 
 Actually $6,153,457 $2,102,205 $41,482,221 
 Paid 
8 The individuals comprising the non-CEO NEOs are as follows:
Fiscal 2023: Ms. Coleman, Mr. Gutierrez, Mr. Lansberry, Ms. McCarthy, Ms. Schake
Fiscal 2022: Mr. Gutierrez, Mr. Iger, Ms. McCarthy, Geoffrey Morrell, Paul Richardson, Ms. Schake
Fiscal 2021: Alan Braverman, Mr. Iger, Ms. McCarthy, Zenia Mucha, Jayne Parker
9 Represents the average of the amounts of total compensation reported for our non-CEO NEOs, as a
group, in the “ Total” column of the “ Summary Compensation Table” for each fiscal year presented.
 64 
10 The dollar amounts reported in the ”Average Compensation Actually Paid to Non-CEO NEOs ” column
have been calculated in accordance with Item 402(v) of Regulation S-K and do not reflect compensation
actually earned, realized, or received by the non-CEO NEOs. These amounts reflect the average of the
amounts set forth in the ” Total” column of the ”Summary Compensation Table” for each fiscal year
presented for the applicable non-CEO NEOs, with certain adjustments as described in the table below,
in accordance with the requirements of Item 402(v) of Regulation S-K. Amounts in the below
reconciliation table may not sum to total due to rounding:
 Reconcilia… 
 of Average 
 Summary 
 Compensati… 
 Table Total Fiscal Year Fiscal Year Fiscal Year 
 to Average 2023 2022 2021 
 Compensati… 
 Actually 
 Paid for 
 Non-CEO 
 NEOs 
 Summary 
 Compensati… $8,342,092 $11,755,869 $20,269,748 
 Table Total 
 Minus:Grant 
 Date Fair 
 Value of 
 Option 5,205,176 6,313,149 9,372,260 
 and Stock 
 Awards 
 Granted in 
 Fiscal Year 
 Plus:Fair 
 Value at 
 Fiscal 
 Year-End of 
 Option and 
 Stock 
 Awards 
 Granted in 4,114,435 4,136,272 8,367,110 
 Fiscal Year 
 That Were 
 Outstanding 
 and 
 Unvested at 
 Fiscal 
 Year-End 
 Plus:Year-… 
 Change in 
 Fair Value 
 at Fiscal 
 Year-End of 
 Option and 
 Stock 
 Awards 
 Granted in -1,075,192 -6,214,511 20,182,305 
 Any Prior 
 Fiscal Year 
 That Were 
 Outstanding 
 and 
 Unvested at 
 Fiscal 
 Year-End 
 Plus:Fair 
 Value at 
 Vesting 
 Date of 
 Option and 
 Stock 
 Awards 52,223 — — 
 Granted in 
 Fiscal Year 
 That Vested 
 During 
 Fiscal 
 Year 
 Plus:Change 
 in Fair 
 Value as of 
 Vesting 
 Date (From 
 the End of 
 the Prior 
 Fiscal 
 Year) of 
 Option and 
 Stock 
 Awards -170,899 -13,291,126 5,188,583 
 Granted 
 in Any 
 Prior 
 Fiscal Year 
 For Which 
 Applicable 
 Vesting 
 Conditions 
 Were 
 Satisfied 
 During 
 Fiscal Year 
 Minus:Fair 
 Value as of 
 Prior 
 Fiscal 
 Year-End of 
 Option and 
 Stock 
 Awards 
 Granted in 
 Any Prior — — — 
 Fiscal Year 
 That 
 Failed to 
 Meet 
 Applicable 
 Vesting 
 Conditions 
 During 
 Fiscal Year 
 Plus:Value 
 of 
 Dividends 
 or Other 
 Earnings 
 Paid on 
 Option and 
 Stock 
 Awards -147 -230,670 335,626 
 in the 
 Fiscal Year 
 Not 
 Otherwise 
 Reflected 
 in Total 
 Compensati… 
 for the 
 Fiscal Year 
 Minus:Chan… 
 in Pension 
 Value From 
 the 
 Summary 48,694 — 257,407 
 Compensati… 
 Table for 
 the 
 Fiscal Year 
 Plus:Pensi… 
 Service 
 Costs in 60,552 92,853 279,661 
 Fiscal 
 Year 
 Compensati… 
 Actually $6,069,195 -$10,064,462 $44,993,365 
 Paid 
11 Required by Item 201(e) of Regulation S-K included in the report for each listed fiscal year.
Total Shareholder Return represents the cumulative return on a fixed investment of $100 in the common
stock (including reinvested dividends) of (a) the Company and (b) our general industry peer group,
respectively, for the period starting October 3, 2020 through the end of the listed fiscal year.
The peer group TSR uses the following peer companies from our general industry peer group for each
year:
– Fiscal 2023: Alphabet, Inc., Amazon.com, Inc., Apple, Inc., AT&T Inc., Charter Communications,
Inc., Comcast Corporation, IBM Corporation, Meta Platforms, Inc., Microsoft Corporation, Netflix,
Inc., NIKE, Inc., Oracle Corporation, Paramount Global, Verizon Communications Inc., Warner Bros.
Discovery, Inc.
– Fiscal 2022: Alphabet, Inc., Amazon.com, Inc., Apple, Inc., AT&T Inc., Charter Communications,
Inc., Cisco Systems, Comcast Corporation, IBM Corporation, Intel, Meta Platforms, Inc., Microsoft
Corporation, Netflix, Inc., Oracle Corporation, Paramount Global, Verizon Communications Inc., Warner
Bros. Discovery, Inc.
– Fiscal 2021: Alphabet, Inc., Amazon.com, Apple, Inc., AT&T Inc., Charter Communications, Inc.,
Cisco Systems, Comcast Corporation, Discovery, IBM Corporation, Intel, Meta Platforms, Inc.,
Microsoft Corporation, Netflix, Inc., Oracle Corporation, Verizon Communications Inc., ViacomCBS
12 Reflects net income calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles
(”GAAP”) in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Income included in the Company’s Annual Reports
on Form 10-K for the applicable fiscal year.
13 Adjusted Segment Operating Income consists of total segment operating income, as adjusted based on
the Compensation Committee's evaluation against the bonus plan performance each fiscal year. ”Total
segment operating income” consists of the total of segment operating income from each of our
segments, which is equivalent to income from continuing operations before income taxes, adjusted for
corporate and unallocated shared expenses, restructuring and impairment charges, A+E gain (for fiscal
2023), net other (income) expense, net interest expense, amortization of TFCF and Hulu intangible
assets and fair value step-up on film and television costs and the impact of content license early
terminations (for fiscal 2022). In addition, in fiscal 2021 the Committee adjusted actual total
segment operating income to exclude the net benefits the Company received from timing variances
related to the pandemic, such as savings from delayed programming and domestic parks operating
efficiencies, partially offset by delays in park openings. We determined Adjusted Segment Operating
Income to be the most important financial performance measure used to link Company performance to CAP
to our CEOs and non-CEO NEOs in fiscal 2023, as required pursuant to Item 402(v) of Regulation S-K.
This performance measure may not have been the most important financial performance measure for prior
fiscal years, and we may determine a different financial performance measure to be the most important
financial performance measure in future years.
 65 
 Description of Relationships 
The following charts show graphically the relationships over the past three fiscal years of the CAP
amounts for our CEOs and non-CEO NEOs as compared to our cumulative TSR, peer group TSR, GAAP net
income, and Adjusted Segment Operating Income.
 66 
 Tabular List of Performance Metrics 
The following table lists the five financial performance measures that, in the Company’s assessment,
represent the most important performance measures used to link CAP for our NEOs to Company
performance for fiscal 2023.
 Performance Metrics 
 Adjusted Segment Operating Income 
 Adjusted Revenue 
 Adjusted After-Tax Free Cash Flow 
 Return on Invested Capital 
 TSR Performance Relative to the S&P 500 
 67 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder │
│ Matters │
 Stock Ownership 
Based on a review of filings with the SEC, the Company has determined that the following persons hold
more than 5% of the outstanding shares of Disney common stock. Applicable percentage ownership is
based 1,833,541,083 shares outstanding as of January 3, 2024.
To our knowledge, except as noted below no person or entity is the beneficial owner of more than 5%
of the voting power of the Company’s stock.
 Name and Address of Beneficial Owner Shares Percent of Class 
 The Vanguard Group 
 100 Vanguard Blvd. 146,328,5091 8.0% 
 Malvern, PA 19355 
 Blackrock, Inc. 
 55 East 52nd Street 120,970,2142 6.6% 
 New York, NY 10055 
1 According to Vanguard’s Schedule 13G/A filing with the SEC, Vanguard has sole voting power with
respect to no shares, shared voting power with respect to 2,539,313 shares, sole dispositive power
with respect to 138,851,722 shares and shared dispositive power with respect to 7,476,787 shares.
2 According to Blackrock’s Schedule 13G/A filing with the SEC, Blackrock has sole voting power with
respect to 107,134,578 shares, shared voting power with respect to no shares, sole dispositive power
with respect to 120,970,214 shares and shared dispositive power with respect to no shares.
The following table shows the amount of Disney common stock beneficially owned (unless otherwise
indicated) by Directors, nominees and NEOs and by Directors, nominees and executive officers as a
group. Except as otherwise indicated, all information is as of January 3, 2024.
 68 
 Name Shares1,2 Stock Units3 Shares Acquirable Percent of Class 
 Within 60 Days4 
 Mary T. Barra 229 18,175 - * 
 Safra A. Catz 11,131 6,498 - * 
 Amy L. Chang 1,198 5,792 - * 
 Robert A. Chapek 216 - 487,445 * 
 Sonia L. Coleman 2,637 - 14,331 * 
 D. Jeremy Darroch 1,156 - - * 
 Francis A. deSouza 6,056 9,803 - * 
 Carolyn N. Everson 265 4,085 - * 
 Michael B.G. Froman 8,623 6,425 - * 
 James P. Gorman - - - * 
 Horacio E. Gutierrez 9,407 - 54,519 * 
 Robert A. Iger 204,899 - 2,156,346 * 
 Maria Elena 2,815 24,957 - * 
 Lagomasino 
 Kevin A. Lansberry 16,534 - 59,825 * 
 Christine M. McCarthy 207,788 - 531,474 * 
 Calvin R. McDonald 1,671 7,190 - * 
 Mark G. Parker 129 24,301 - * 
 Derica W. Rice 1 13,899 - * 
 Kristina K. Schake 6,875 - 17,324 * 
 All Directors, 
 nominees and 
 executive 257,342.65 121,123.70 2,242,520.00 * 
 officers as a group 
 (17 persons) 
* Less than 1% of outstanding shares.
1 The number of shares shown includes shares that are individually or jointly owned, as well as
shares over which the individual has either sole or shared investment or voting authority. Some
Directors and executive officers disclaim beneficial ownership of some of the shares included in the
table, as follows: Ms. Barra — 229 shares held in a trust and by spouse in trust; Ms. Chang — 120
shares held in a trust; Mr. Chapek — 214 shares held in a trust and by an adult child; Mr. Froman —
20 shares held in a trust; and Mr. Iger — 156 shares held by his spouse. All Directors and executive
officers as of January 3, 2024 as a group disclaim beneficial ownership of a total of 747 shares.
2 For NEOs, the number of shares listed includes interests in shares held in Company savings and
investment plans as of January 3, 2024: Ms. Coleman — 776 shares; Mr. Iger — 20,552 shares; Mr.
Lansberry — 767 shares; Ms. McCarthy — 4,307 shares; and all executive officers as of January 3, 2024
as a group — 21,328 shares.
3 Reflects the number of stock units credited as of January 3, 2024 to the account of each non-
employee Director participating in the 2011 Stock Incentive Plan. These units are payable solely in
shares of Company common stock as described in Item 11. Executive Compensation — “ Director
Compensation ,” but do not have current voting or investment power. Excludes unvested restricted
stock units awarded to executives under the 2011 Stock Incentive Plan that vest on a performance
basis and other restricted stock units awarded to executives that have not vested under their vesting
schedules.
4 Reflects the number of shares that could be purchased by exercise of options exercisable at January
3, 2024, or within 60 days thereafter under the Company’s stock option plans and the number of shares
underlying restricted stock units that vest within 60 days of January 3, 2024, excluding dividend
equivalent units that will vest in that period.
 69 
 Equity Compensation Plans 
Information regarding the equity compensation plans of the Company is set forth in Item 11. Executive
Compensation — “Executive Compensation — Compensation Tables — Equity Compensation Plans.”
 70 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence │
Certain Relationships and Related Person Transactions
The Board has adopted a written policy for review of transactions in any fiscal year in which the
Company is a participant and in which any Director, Director nominee, executive officer, holder of
more than 5% of our outstanding shares or any immediate family member of any of these persons has a
direct or indirect material interest. Directors, Director nominees, 5% shareholders and executive
officers are required to inform the Company of any such transaction promptly after they become aware
of it and the Company collects information from Directors, Director nominees and executive officers
about their affiliations and affiliations of their family members so the Company can search its
records for any such transactions. Transactions are presented to the Governance and Nominating
Committee of the Board (or to the Chair of the Committee if the Committee delegates this
responsibility) for approval before they are entered into or, if this is not possible, for
ratification after the transaction has been entered into. The Committee approves or ratifies a
transaction if it determines that the transaction is consistent with the best interests of the
Company, including whether the transaction impairs independence of a Director.
Each of the investment management firms, Vanguard Group, Inc. and Blackrock, Inc., through their
affiliates, held more than 5% of the Company’s shares during fiscal 2023. Funds managed by affiliates
of Vanguard and Blackrock are included as investment options in defined contribution plans offered to
Company employees. In addition, Blackrock manages investment portfolios for the Company’s pension
funds and provides a risk analytics platform related to management of investments in the pension
funds. Vanguard and Blackrock received fees of approxim ately $1 million and $9 million,
respectively, in fiscal 2023 based on the amounts invested in funds managed by them. The ongoing
relationships were reviewed and approved in fiscal 2023 by the Governance and Nominating Committee
under the Related Person Transaction Approval Policy .
Beginning in fiscal 2021, MVL Productions LLC, a subsidiary of the Company, contracted with a company
wholly owned by Mr. Chapek’s son, Brian Chapek (“Mr. B. Chapek”), for Mr. B. Chapek’s exclusive
services for a three-year period. The contract provided for Mr. B. Chapek to receive an annual base
payment of $322,000 in fiscal 2021, $342,000 in fiscal 2022 and $367,000 in fiscal 2023. These
amounts are inclusive of a payment in lieu of benefits. Additionally, Mr. B. Chapek would receive a
$200,000 fee for each film on which he served as lead producer and an additional bonus calculated by
a predetermined formula based on the worldwide box office of films on which he worked ($31,000 for
fiscal 2023), consistent with a range and structure typical of producer deals at Walt Disney Studios.
From October 2022 to June 2023, Mr. B. Chapek received $276,500 of the $367,000 annual base payment,
plus an additional $74,667 for production work on a film, under the contract.
In June 2023, MVL Productions LLC terminated the contract and re-hired Mr. B. Chapek as an employee
with the title of Executive, Production & Development. Compensation terms for Mr. B. Chapek include a
base salary of $320,000 (prorated for the final three months of fiscal 2023), with a year-end bonus
of $94,000, a long-term incentive award of $48,000 granted in December 2023, a signing bonus of
$400,000 that was paid in July 2023 and estimated benefits of approximately $5,663. Mr. B. Chapek is
also eligible for Marvel film bonuses. For fiscal 2023, Mr. B. Chapek earned total compensation and
benefits of $963,061. Mr. B. Chapek was paid an amount and his compensation was structured the same
as similarly situated employees. This relationship was reviewed and approved in fiscal 2023 by the
Governance and Nominating Committee under the Related Person Transaction Approval Policy .
In fiscal 2023, Daniel McCormick, son of Christine McCarthy was employed as Senior Manager-Research
in the General Entertainment Content business. For fiscal 2023, Mr. McCormick’s base salary was
$133,157, his benefits were approximately $11,736 and his bonus was $18,554. Mr. McCormick was paid
an amount and his compensation was structured the same as similarly situated employees. This
relationship was reviewed and approved in fiscal 2023 by the Governance and Nominating Committee
under the Related Person Transaction Approval Policy .
 Director Independence 
The provisions of the Company’s Corporate Governance Guidelines regarding Director independence meet
and, in some respects, exceed the listing standards of the New York Stock Exchange. The Corporate
Governance Guidelines are available on the Company’s Investor Relations website under the “Corporate
Governance” heading at www.disney.com/investors and in print to any shareholder who requests them
from the Company’s Secretary.
Pursuant to the Corporate Governance Guidelines , the Board undertook its annual review of Director
independence in November 2023 . During this review, the Board considered transactions and
relationships between the Company and its subsidiaries and affiliates on the one hand, and on the
other hand, Directors, immediate family members of Directors or entities of which a Director or an
immediate family member is an executive officer, general partner or significant equity holder. The
Board also considered whether there were any transactions or relationships between any of these
persons or entities and the Company’s executive officers or their affiliates. As provided in the
Corporate Governance Guidelines , the purpose of this review was to determine whether any such
relationships or transactions existed that were inconsistent with a determination that the Director
is independent.
 71 
As a result of this review, the Board affirmatively determined that all of the Directors serving in
fiscal 2023 or nominated for election at the Annual Meeting are independent of the Company and its
management under the standards set forth in the Corporate Governance Guidelines , with the exception
of Mr. Iger and Mr. Chapek, neither of whom is considered independent because of employment as a
senior executive of the Company. Additionally, Mr. Chapek’s son provided producer services to the
Company and was re-hired as an employee in fiscal 2023, as discussed under the section titled “
Certain Relationships and Related Person Transactions ” above.
In determining the independence of each Director, the Board considered and deemed immaterial to the
Directors’ independence transactions involving the sale of products and services in the ordinary
course of business between the Company on the one hand, and on the other, companies or organizations
at which some of our Directors or their immediate family members were officers or employees during
fiscal 2023. In each case, the amount paid to or received from these companies or organizations in
each of the last three years was below the 2% of total revenue threshold in the Corporate Governance
Guidelines . The Board determined that none of the relationships it considered impaired the
independence of the Directors.
 72 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services │
 Auditor Fees and Services 
The following table presents fees for professional services rendered by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
for the audit of the Company’s annual financial statements and internal control over financial
reporting for fiscal 2023 and fiscal 2022, together with fees for audit-related, tax and other
services rendered by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP during fiscal 2023 and fiscal 2022. Audit-related
services consisted principally of audits and agreed upon procedures of other entities related to the
Company, viewership rankings and other attest projects. Tax services consisted principally of
planning and advisory services and tax compliance assistance. Other services consisted of other
miscellaneous services, including accounting research software. The Audit Committee directs and
reviews the negotiations associated with the Company’s retention of its independent registered public
accountants.
 Fiscal 2023 Fiscal 2022 
 -in millions 
 Audit fees $28.9 $30.1 
 Audit-related fees 1.9 2.3 
 Tax fees 3.0 2.5 
 All other fees 0.1 0.1 
Policy for Approval of Audit and Permitted Non-Audit Services
All audit, audit-related, tax and other services were pre-approved by the Audit Committee, which
concluded that the provision of such services by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP was compatible with the
maintenance of that firm’s independence in the conduct of its auditing functions. The Audit
Committee’s Outside Auditor Independence and Pre-Approval Policy provides for pre-approval of
specifically described audit, audit-related, tax and other services by the Committee on an annual
basis, but individual engagements anticipated to exceed pre-established thresholds must be separately
approved. The policy also requires specific approval by the Committee if total fees for audit-
related, tax and other services would exceed total fees for audit services in any fiscal year. The
policy authorizes the Committee to delegate to one or more of its members pre-approval authority with
respect to permitted services, and the Committee has delegated to the Chair of the Committee the
authority to pre-approve services in certain circumstances.
 73 
║ PART IV ║
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules │
1. Financial Statements and Schedules
No financial statement or supplemental data are filed with this report on Form 10-K/A. See Index to
Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of the Original Form 10-K.
2. Exhibits
The documents set forth below are filed herewith or incorporated herein by reference to the location
indicated.
 Exhibit 
 Amended and Restated Bylaws of The Walt Location 
 Disney Company, effective as of November Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 
 3.3 30, 2023 8-K of the Company filed November 30, 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Rule 13a-14(a) Certification of Chief 
 31(a) Executive Officer of the Company in Filed herewith 
 accordance with Section 302 of the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 
 Rule 13a-14(a) Certification of Chief 
 31(b) Financial Officer of the Company in Filed herewith 
 accordance with Section 302 of the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 
 104 Cover Page Interactive Data File (embedded Filed herewith 
 within the Inline XBRL document) 
 74 
 SIGNATURES 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the
registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized.
 THE WALT DISNEY COMPANY 
 (Registrant) 
 Date: January 24, 2024 /s/    ROBERT A. IGER 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Robert A. Iger 
 Chief Executive Officer and Director) 
 75