╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1. Business │
The Walt Disney Company, together with its subsidiaries, is a diversified worldwide entertainment
company with operations in two segments: Disney Media and Entertainment Distribution (DMED) and
Disney Parks, Experiences and Products (DPEP).
The terms “Company”, “we”, “our” and “us” are used in this report to refer collectively to the parent
company and the subsidiaries through which businesses are conducted.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Since early 2020, the world has been, and continues to be, impacted by the novel coronavirus
(COVID-19) and its variants. COVID-19 and measures to prevent its spread have impacted our segments
in a number of ways, most significantly at DPEP where our theme parks and resorts were closed and
cruise ship sailings and guided tours were suspended. In addition, at DMED we delayed, or in some
cases, shortened or cancelled theatrical releases and experienced disruptions in the production and
availability of content. Operations have resumed at various points since May 2020, with certain theme
park and resort operations and film and television productions resuming by the end of fiscal 2020 and
throughout fiscal 2021. Although operations resumed, many of our businesses continue to experience
impacts from COVID-19, such as incremental health and safety measures and related increased expenses,
capacity restrictions and closures (including at some of our international parks and in theaters in
certain markets), and disruption of content production activities.
The impact of COVID-19 related disruptions on our financial and operating results will be dictated by
the currently unknowable duration and severity of COVID-19 and its variants, and among other things,
governmental actions imposed in response to COVID-19 and individuals’ and companies’ risk tolerance
regarding health matters going forward. We have incurred and will continue to incur additional costs
to address government regulations and the safety of our employees, guests and talent.
Human Capital
The Company’s key human capital management objectives are to attract, retain and develop the highest
quality talent. To support these objectives, the Company’s human resources programs are designed to
develop talent to prepare them for critical roles and leadership positions for the future; reward and
support employees through competitive pay, benefit, and perquisite programs; enhance the Company’s
culture through efforts aimed at making the workplace more engaging and inclusive; acquire talent and
facilitate internal talent mobility to create a high-performing, diverse workforce; engage employees
as brand ambassadors of the Company’s content, products and experiences; and evolve and invest in
technology, tools, and resources to enable employees at work.
The Company employed approximately 220,000 people as of October 1, 2022, of which approximately
166,000 were employed in the U.S. and approximately 54,000 were employed internationally. Our global
workforce is comprised of approximately 78% full time and 15% part time employees, with another 7%
being seasonal employees. A significant number of employees in various parts of our businesses,
including employees of our theme parks, and writers, directors, actors and production personnel for
our productions are covered by collective bargaining agreements. In addition, some of our employees
outside the U.S. are represented by works councils, trade unions or other employee associations.
Some of our key programs and initiatives to attract, develop and retain our diverse workforce
include:
• Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DE&I): Our DE&I objectives are to build teams that reflect the
life experiences of our audiences, while employing and supporting a diverse array of voices in our
creative and production teams. Our DE&I initiatives and programs include:
◦ The Company’s Reimagine Tomorrow efforts, which build on Disney’s longstanding commitment to
diversity, equity and inclusion, and features a website, Disney’s first large-scale platform for
amplifying underrepresented voices
◦ Executive Incubator, Creative Talent Development and Inclusion, and the Disney Launchpad: Shorts
Incubator, which are designed to create a pipeline of next-generation creative executives from
underrepresented backgrounds
◦ Development programs, which target underrepresented talent
◦ Innovative learning opportunities, which spark dialogue among employees, leaders, Disney talent and
external experts
◦ Over 100 employee-led Business Employee Resource Groups (BERGs), which represent and support the
diverse communities that make up our workforce
◦ The Disney Look appearance guidelines, which were updated to cultivate a more inclusive environment
that encourages and celebrates authentic expressions of belonging among employees
 2 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
• Health, wellness, family resources, and other benefits: Disney’s benefit offerings are designed to
meet the varied and evolving needs of a diverse workforce across businesses and geographies while
helping our employees care for themselves and their families. We provide:
◦ Healthcare options aimed at improving quality of care while limiting out-of-pocket costs
◦ Family care resources, such as childcare programs for employees, including access to
onsite/community centers, enhanced back-up care choices to include personal caregivers, childcare
referral assistance and center discounts, homework help, a variety of parenting educational resources
and a family building benefit supporting fertility treatments, adoptions or surrogacy
◦ Free mental and behavioral health resources, including on-demand access to the Employee Assistance
Program for employees and their dependents
◦ Two Centers for Living Well that offer convenient, on-demand access to board-certified physicians
and counselors
◦ A multi-layered response to COVID-19, including testing and treatment under all Company medical
plans at no cost to employees and dependents
◦ Global Well-Being Week (introduced in 2022), a dedicated week for employees around the world to
celebrate, learn and engage in well-being through in-person and virtual events and activities focused
on physical, emotional, financial, and social well-being
• Disney Aspire: We support the long-term career aspirations of our hourly employees and further our
commitment to strengthening the communities in which we work through our education investment
program, Disney Aspire. We pay 100% of the tuition costs upfront for participating employees at a
variety of in-network learning providers and universities and reimburse employees for applicable
books and fees. The program helps our employees achieve their goals professionally - whether at
Disney or beyond - by equipping them with the skills they need to succeed in the rapidly changing 21
st century career landscape. More than 16,000 current employees have enrolled in or graduated from a
Disney Aspire program, and more than two-thirds of our program graduates have earned an Associate,
Bachelor’s or Master’s degree.
• Talent Development: We prioritize and invest in creating opportunities to help employees grow and
build their careers through a multitude of training and development programs. These include online,
instructor-led and on-the-job learning formats as well as executive talent and succession planning
paired with an individualized development approach.
• Social Responsibility and Community: The Company’s longstanding commitment to Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) helps differentiate the Company as an employer. In 2021, we refreshed our CSR
strategy to connect it more closely with the Company’s mission and commercial offerings and
environmental and social opportunities relevant to our business and employees. Our CSR priorities
include diversity, equity, and inclusion; environmental stewardship and conservation; giving back to
our communities with a special focus on supporting children and families; human capital management;
and operating responsibly. The strategy provides a path to embedding these CSR priorities into our
offerings and operations in addition to our philanthropy. The Company also supports employees who
give back to our communities with a generous matching gifts program and a unique employee
volunteering program, Disney VoluntEARS, which rewards volunteer hours with the opportunity to direct
not-for-profit donations by the Company.
Environmental and Sustainability
The Company has developed measurable environmental and sustainability goals for 2030, grounded in
science and an assessment of where the Company’s operations have the most significant impact on the
environment, as well as the areas where it can most effectively mitigate that impact. These goals
include, among others, achieving net zero Scope 1 and 2 greenhouse gas emissions for our direct
operations, and zero waste to landfill at our wholly owned and operated parks and resorts by 2030.
 DISNEY MEDIA AND ENTERTAINMENT DISTRIBUTION 
DMED encompasses the Company’s global film and episodic television content production and
distribution activities. Content is distributed by a single organization across three significant
lines of business: Linear Networks, Direct-to-Consumer and Content Sales/Licensing. Content is
generally created/licensed by four groups: Studios, General Entertainment, Sports and International.
The distribution organization has full accountability for the financial results of the entire media
and entertainment business.
 3 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The operations of DMED’s significant lines of business are as follows:
• Linear Networks
◦ Domestic Channels: ABC Television Network (ABC) and eight owned ABC television stations
(Broadcasting), and Disney, ESPN, Freeform, FX and National Geographic branded domestic television
networks (Cable)
◦ International Channels: Disney, ESPN, Fox, National Geographic and Star branded television networks
outside of the U.S.
◦ A 50% equity investment in A+E Television Networks (A+E), which operates a variety of cable
channels including A&E, HISTORY and Lifetime
• Direct-to-Consumer
◦ Disney+, Disney+ Hotstar, ESPN+, Hulu and Star+ direct-to-consumer (DTC) video streaming services
• Content Sales/Licensing
◦ Sale/licensing of film and television content to third-party television and
subscription/advertising video-on-demand (TV/SVOD) services
◦ Theatrical distribution
◦ Home entertainment distribution (DVD, Blu-ray discs and electronic home video licenses)
◦ Music distribution
◦ Staging and licensing of live entertainment events on Broadway and around the world (Stage Plays)
DMED also includes the following activities that are reported with Content Sales/Licensing:
• Post-production services by Industrial Light & Magic and Skywalker Sound
• National Geographic magazine and online business
• A 30% ownership interest in Tata Play Limited (formerly Tata Sky Limited), which operates a direct-
to-home satellite distribution platform in India
The significant revenues of DMED are as follows:
• Affiliate fees - Fees charged by our Linear Networks to multi-channel video programming
distributors (i.e. cable, satellite, telecommunications and digital over-the-top (e.g. YouTube TV)
service providers) (MVPDs) and television stations affiliated with ABC for the right to deliver our
programming to their customers
• Subscription fees - Fees charged to customers/subscribers for our DTC streaming services
• Advertising - Sales of advertising time/space at Linear Networks and Direct-to-Consumer
• TV/SVOD distribution - Licensing fees and other revenue for the right to use our film and
television productions and revenue from fees charged to customers to view our sports programming
(“pay-per-view”) and fees for streaming access to films that are also playing in theaters (“Premier
Access”). TV/SVOD distribution revenue is primarily reported in Content Sales/Licensing, except for
pay-per-view and Premier Access revenues, which are reported in Direct-to-Consumer.
• Theatrical distribution - Rentals from licensing our film productions to theaters
• Home entertainment - Sales of our film and television content to retailers and distributors in home
video formats
• Other content sales/licensing revenue - Revenues from licensing our music, ticket sales from stage
play performances and fees from licensing our intellectual properties (“IP”) for use in stage plays
• Other revenue - Fees from sub-licensing of sports programming rights (reported in Linear Networks)
and sales of post-production services (reported with Content Sales/Licensing)
The significant expenses of DMED are as follows:
• Operating expenses consist primarily of programming and production costs, technical support costs,
operating labor, distribution costs and costs of sales. Programming and production costs include
amortization of licensed programming rights (including sports rights), amortization of capitalized
production costs, subscriber-based fees for programming our Hulu services, production costs related
to live programming such as news and sports and amortization of participations and residual
obligations. Programming and production costs also include fees paid to Linear Networks from other
DMED businesses for the right to air our linear networks and related services. These costs are
largely incurred across four content creation/licensing groups, as follows:
◦ Studios - Primarily capitalized production costs related to films produced under the Walt Disney
Pictures, Twentieth Century Studios, Marvel, Lucasfilm, Pixar and Searchlight Pictures banners
 4 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
◦ General Entertainment - Primarily internal production of and acquisition of rights to episodic
television programs and news content. Internal content is generally produced by the following
television studios: ABC Signature; 20th Television; Disney Television Animation; FX Productions; and
various studios for which we commission productions for our branded channels and DTC streaming
services
◦ Sports - Primarily acquisition of professional and college sports programming rights and related
production costs
◦ International - Primarily internal production of and acquisition of rights to local content outside
the U.S. and Canada
• Selling, general and administrative costs, including marketing costs
• Depreciation and amortization
 Media and Entertainment Distribution Strategy 
The Company has significantly increased its focus on distribution of content via our own DTC
streaming services relative to traditional distribution of content. In general, film content was
traditionally distributed first in the theatrical market, followed by the home entertainment market
and then in the TV/SVOD market. In general, episodic television content was traditionally launched on
our domestic linear networks and licensed for use globally in other TV/SVOD windows. Although the
Company continues to monetize a significant amount of its content in the traditional manner, our
focus on our own DTC distribution has had a number of impacts including but not limited to:
• in some cases, we are producing exclusive content for our DTC streaming services;
• rather than selling our content in the TV/SVOD market, we generally distribute it on our DTC
streaming services; and
• in part because of the impact of COVID-19 on theatrical markets around the world, we may alter our
traditional theatrical distribution approach, for example by making a film available on our DTC
streaming services at the same time it is in theaters or shortly thereafter (e.g. Premier Access).
Over time, all else being equal, these impacts will tend to increase revenue and costs at Direct-to-
Consumer and reduce revenue and costs at Content Sales/Licensing and Linear Networks. Our
distribution approach is based on flexibility in our windowing strategy, and we may change our
original launch and distribution strategy for any particular piece of content. Distribution decisions
may impact revenues and viewership, and the allocation of costs to our businesses/distribution
platforms, particularly programming, production and marketing costs, depends on the distribution
approach.
A more detailed discussion of our distribution businesses and production groups follows.
 Linear Networks 
The majority of Linear Networks revenue is derived from affiliate fees and advertising sales. The
Company’s linear networks businesses provide programming under multi-year licensing agreements with
MVPDs and/or affiliated television stations that are generally based on contractually specified rates
on a per subscriber basis. The amounts that we can charge to MVPDs for our networks is largely
dependent on the quality and quantity of programming that we can provide and the competitive market
for programming services. The ability to sell advertising time and the rates received are primarily
dependent on the size and nature of the audience that the network can deliver to the advertiser as
well as overall advertiser demand.
Linear Networks consist of our domestic and international branded television channels.
Domestic Channels
Our domestic channels include Cable operations comprising Disney, ESPN, Freeform, FX and National
Geographic branded channels and Broadcasting operations comprising ABC and eight owned ABC affiliated
television stations.
Cable
Disney Channels
Branded television channels include: Disney Channel; Disney Junior; and Disney XD (collectively
Disney Channels).
Disney Channel - the Disney Channel airs original series and movie programming 24 hours a day
targeted to kids ages 2 to 14. The channel features live-action comedy series, animated programming
and preschool series as well as original movies and theatrical films.
Disney Junior - the Disney Junior channel airs programming 24 hours a day targeted to kids ages 2 to
7 and their parents and caregivers. The channel features animated and live-action programming that
blends Disney’s storytelling and characters with learning. Disney Junior also airs as a programming
block on the Disney Channel.
Disney XD - the Disney XD channel airs programming 24 hours a day targeted to kids ages 6 to 11. The
channel features a mix of live-action and animated programming.
 5 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ESPN
Branded television channels include eight 24-hour domestic television sports channels: ESPN and ESPN2
(both of which are dedicated to professional and college sports as well as sports news and original
programming); ESPNU (which is dedicated to college sports); ESPNEWS (which re-airs select ESPN studio
shows and airs a variety of other programming); SEC Network (which is dedicated to Southeastern
Conference college athletics); Longhorn Network (which is dedicated to The University of Texas
athletics); ESPN Deportes (which airs professional and college sports as well as studio shows in
Spanish); and ACC Network (which is dedicated to Atlantic Coast Conference college athletics). In
addition, ESPN programs the sports schedule on ABC, which is branded ESPN on ABC.
ESPN also includes the following:
• ESPN.com, which delivers sports news, information and video on internet-connected devices, with
approximately 20 editions in five languages globally. In the U.S., ESPN.com also features live video
streams of ESPN channels to authenticated MVPD subscribers. Non-subscribers have limited access to
certain content.
• ESPN app, which is an all-in-one sports content platform, serving fans with a personalized digital
destination on streaming devices. The app content includes news, highlights and real-time interactive
features, including real-time scores, play-by-play and fantasy sports scores. ESPN+ subscribers can
access the ESPN+ content from the app. In the U.S., the app also features live video streams of
ESPN’s linear channels and exclusive events to authenticated MVPD subscribers. Non-subscribers have
limited access to certain content.
• ESPN Radio, which is the largest sports radio network in the U.S. In fiscal 2022, the Company sold
its four owned radio stations for an amount that was not material.
In addition, ESPN owns and operates the following events: ESPYs (annual awards show); X Games (winter
and summer action sports competitions), which were sold in October 2022 for an amount that was not
material; and a portfolio of collegiate sporting events including: football bowl games, basketball
games, softball games and post-season award shows.
ESPN is owned 80% by the Company and 20% by Hearst Corporation (Hearst).
Freeform
Freeform is a channel targeted to viewers ages 18 to 34 that airs original, Company owned (“library”)
and licensed television series, films and holiday programming events.
FX Channels
Branded general entertainment television channels include: FX; FXM; and FXX (collectively FX
Channels), which air a mix of original, library and licensed television series and films.
National Geographic Channels
Branded television channels include: National Geographic; Nat Geo Wild; and Nat Geo Mundo
(collectively National Geographic Channels). National Geographic Channels air scripted and
documentary programming on such topics as natural history, adventure, science, exploration and
culture.
National Geographic, including the magazine and online business reported in Content Sales/Licensing,
is owned 73% by the Company and 27% by the National Geographic Society.
 6 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The number of subscribers (in millions) for the Company’s significant domestic cable channels are as
follows:
 Subscribers(1) 
 Disney 
 Disney Channel 74 
 Disney Junior 54 
 Disney XD 53 
 ESPN 
 ESPN 74 
 ESPN2 74 
 ESPNU 51 
 ESPNEWS(2) 56 
 SEC Network(2) 51 
 ACC Network(2) 50 
 Freeform 73 
 FX Channels 
 FX 74 
 FXX 71 
 FXM 46 
 National Geographic Channels 
 National Geographic 73 
 National Geographic Wild 46 
(1) Based on Nielsen Media Research estimates as of September 2022 (except where noted). Estimates
include traditional MVPD and the majority of digital OTT subscriber counts.
(2) Because Nielsen Media Research does not measure this channel, estimated subscribers are according
to SNL Kagan as of December 2021.
Broadcasting
ABC
As of October 1, 2022, ABC had affiliation agreements with approximately 240 local television
stations reaching almost 100% of U.S. television households. ABC broadcasts programs in the
primetime, daytime, late night, news and sports “dayparts”. ABC is also available digitally through
the ABC App and website to authenticated MVPD subscribers. Non-subscribers have more limited access
to on-demand episodes.
ABC also produces a variety of primetime specials, news and daytime programming.
Domestic Television Stations
The Company owns eight television stations, six of which are located in the top ten television
household markets in the U.S. All of our television stations are affiliated with ABC and collectively
reach approximately 20% of the nation’s television households.
 7 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The stations we own are as follows:
 TV Station Market Television Market 
 Ranking(1) 
 WABC New York, NY 1 
 KABC Los Angeles, CA 2 
 WLS Chicago, IL 3 
 WPVI Philadelphia, PA 4 
 KGO San Francisco, CA 8 
 KTRK Houston, TX 9 
 WTVD Raleigh-Durham, NC 24 
 KFSN Fresno, CA 55 
(1) Based on Nielsen Media Research, U.S. Television Household Estimates, January 1, 2022
International Channels
Our International Channels focus on General Entertainment, Sports and/or Family programming and
operate under four significant brands: Disney; ESPN; Fox; and Star. Our international channels use
content from the Company’s various studios, including library titles, as well as content acquired
from third parties.
The Company’s increased focus on DTC distribution in international markets is expected to negatively
impact the International Channels business as we shift the primary means of monetizing our content
from licensing of linear channels to distribution on our DTC platforms.
General Entertainment
The Company operates approximately 220 General Entertainment channels outside the U.S. primarily
under the Fox, National Geographic and Star brands, which are broadcast in approximately 40 languages
and 180 countries/territories.
Fox branded channels air a variety of scripted, reality and documentary programming. Channels are
often thematically branded, focusing on such topics as comedy, cooking, crime and movies, and are
broadcast in most regions internationally.
National Geographic branded channels air scripted and documentary programming on such topics as
natural history, science, exploration and culture, and are broadcast in most regions internationally.
Star branded channels air a variety of scripted, reality and documentary programming primarily in
India. Channels are also broadcast in other countries in Asia Pacific and Latin America.
In addition, the Company operates UTV and Bindass branded channels principally in India. UTV Action
and UTV Movies offer Bollywood movies as well as Hollywood, Asian and Indian regional movies dubbed
in Hindi. Bindass is a youth entertainment channel.
Sports
The Company operates approximately 55 Sports channels outside the U.S. under the ESPN, Fox and Star
brands, which are broadcast in approximately 10 languages and 105 countries/territories.
ESPN branded channels primarily operate in Latin America, Asia Pacific and Europe. In the
Netherlands, the ESPN branded channels are operated by Eredivisie Media & Marketing CV (EMM), which
has the media and sponsorship rights of the Dutch Premier League for soccer. The Company owns 51% of
EMM.
Fox branded sports channels primarily operate in Latin America, Asia Pacific and Europe. Fox Sports
Premium, a pay television service in Argentina, airs the matches of the professional soccer league in
Argentina.
Star branded sports channels primarily operate in India and certain other countries in Asia Pacific.
Star has rights to various sports programming including cricket, soccer, tennis and field hockey.
Family
The Company operates approximately 75 Family channels outside the U.S. primarily under the Disney
brand, which are broadcast in approximately 25 languages and 175 countries/territories.
 8 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
As of September 2022, the estimated number of subscribers (in millions) for the Company’s significant
international channels, based on internal management reports, are as follows:
 Subscribers 
 Disney 
 Disney Channel 151 
 Disney Junior 141 
 ESPN(1) 62 
 Fox(1) 139 
 National Geographic(1) 289 
 Star 
 General Entertainment(1) 180 
 Sports(1) 83 
(1) Reflects our estimate of each unique subscriber that has access to one or more of these branded
channels.
Equity Investments
The Company has investments in media businesses that are accounted for under the equity method, the
most significant of which are A+E and CTV Specialty Television, Inc. (CTV). The Company’s share of
the financial results for these investments is reported as “Equity in the income (loss) of investees,
net” in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations.
A+E
A+E is owned 50% by the Company and 50% by Hearst. A+E operates a variety of cable channels:
• A&E – which offers entertainment programming including original reality and scripted series
• HISTORY – which offers original series and event-driven specials
• Lifetime and Lifetime Movie Network (LMN) – which offer female-focused programming
• FYI – which offers contemporary lifestyle programming
A+E programming is available in approximately 200 countries and territories. A+E’s networks are
distributed internationally under multi-year licensing agreements with MVPDs. A+E programming is also
sold to international television broadcasters and SVOD services.
As of September 2022, the number of domestic subscribers (in millions) for A+E channels are as
follows:
 Subscribers(1) 
 A&E 69 
 HISTORY 70 
 Lifetime 69 
 LMN 52 
 FYI 42 
(1) Based on Nielsen Media Research estimates as of September 2022. Estimates include traditional
MVPD and the majority of digital OTT subscriber counts.
CTV
ESPN holds a 30% equity interest in CTV, which owns television channels in Canada, including The
Sports Networks (TSN) 1-5, Le Réseau des Sports (RDS), RDS2, RDS Info, ESPN Classic Canada, Discovery
Canada and Animal Planet Canada.
 Direct-to-Consumer 
Our DTC businesses are subscription services that provide video streaming of general entertainment,
family and sports programming (services are offered individually or in various bundles) that are
offered to customers directly or through third-party distributors on mobile and internet connected
devices.
Disney+ Services (includes Disney+ Hotstar and Star+)
Disney+ is a subscription-based DTC service with Disney, Pixar, Marvel, Star Wars and National
Geographic branded programming, which are all top level selections or “tiles” within the Disney+
interface. Outside the U.S. and Latin America, Disney+ also includes a Star branded tile, which
features general entertainment programming.
 9 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Disney+ Hotstar is a subscription-based DTC service available in India, Indonesia, Malaysia and
Thailand. Programming includes television shows, movies, sports and original series in approximately
ten languages, in addition to gaming and social features. Disney+ Hotstar has exclusive streaming
rights to cricket from the International Cricket Council (ICC) and the Board of Control for Cricket
in India (BCCI), along with other cricket rights.
Star+ is a standalone DTC service in Latin America with a variety of general entertainment content
and live sports programming.
Disney+ services use content from the Company’s various studios, including library titles, as well as
content acquired from third parties.
The majority of Disney+ revenue is derived from subscription fees. In addition, Disney+ Hotstar
generates advertising revenue and Disney+ generates Premier Access fees. The Company plans to
introduce an ad-supported Disney+ service in the U.S. in December 2022 and internationally starting
in late 2023.
As of October 1, 2022, the estimated number of paid Disney+, Disney+ Hotstar and Star+ subscribers,
based on internal management reports, was approximately 164 million.
ESPN+
ESPN+ is a subscription-based DTC service offering thousands of live sporting events, on-demand
sports content and original programming. ESPN+ revenue is derived from subscription fees, pay-per-
view fees and, to a lesser extent, advertising sales. Live events available through the service
include mixed martial arts, soccer, hockey, boxing, baseball, college sports, golf, tennis and
cricket. ESPN+ is currently the exclusive distributor for Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) pay-
per-view events in the U.S. As of October 1, 2022, the estimated number of paid ESPN+ subscribers,
based on internal management reports, was approximately 24 million.
Hearst has a 20% interest in the Company’s DTC sports business.
Hulu
Hulu is a subscription-based DTC service with general entertainment content from the Company’s
various studios as well as content licensed from third parties. Hulu’s revenue is primarily derived
from subscription fees and advertising sales. Hulu offers SVOD services with or without advertising
in addition to a digital OTT MVPD (Live TV) service that is available with either of Hulu’s SVOD
services and, since December 2021, includes the Disney+ and ESPN+ DTC services. Hulu’s Live TV
service includes live linear streams of cable networks and the major broadcast networks. In addition,
Hulu offers subscriptions to premium services such as HBOMax, Cinemax, Starz and Showtime, which can
be added to the Hulu service. Certain programming from ABC, Freeform and FX Channels is also
available on the Hulu SVOD service one day after airing on these channels. As of October 1, 2022, the
estimated number of paid Hulu subscribers, based on internal management reports, was approximately 47
million.
The Company has a 67% ownership interest in and full operational control of Hulu. NBC Universal
(NBCU) owns the remaining 33% of Hulu. The Company has a put/call agreement with NBCU, which provides
NBCU the option to require the Company to purchase NBCU’s interest in Hulu and the Company the option
to require NBCU to sell its interest in Hulu to the Company, in both cases, beginning in January 2024
(see Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information).
 Content Sales/Licensing and Other 
The majority of Content Sales/Licensing revenue is derived from TV/SVOD, theatrical and home
entertainment distribution. In addition, revenue is generated from music distribution and stage
plays.
The Company also publishes National Geographic magazine and provides post-production services through
Industrial Light & Magic and Skywalker Sound. These activities are reported with Content
Sales/Licensing.
TV/SVOD Distribution
Although we generally intend to use our film and television content on our DTC services and linear
networks in TV/SVOD windows, we also license our content to third-party television networks,
television stations and other video service providers for distribution to viewers on television or a
variety of internet-connected devices, including through other DTC services.
Theatrical Distribution
The Company licenses full-length live-action and animated films from the Company’s Studio production
groups to theaters globally. Cumulatively through October 1, 2022, the Company has released
approximately 1,100 full-length live-action films and 100 full-length animated films. In the domestic
and most major international markets, we generally distribute and market our films directly. In
certain international markets our films are distributed by independent companies. During fiscal
 10 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
2023, we expect to release approximately 20 films, although we may choose to distribute certain films
exclusively on our DTC streaming services in certain territories.
The Company incurs significant marketing and advertising costs before and throughout the theatrical
release of a film in an effort to generate public awareness of the film, to increase the public’s
intent to view the film and to help generate consumer interest in the subsequent home entertainment
and other ancillary markets. These costs are expensed as incurred, which may result in a loss on a
film in the theatrical markets, including in periods prior to the theatrical release of the film.
Home Entertainment Distribution
We distribute the Company’s film and episodic television content in home entertainment markets in
physical (DVD and Blu-ray disc) and electronic formats globally.
Domestically, we distribute directly to retailers and wholesalers. Internationally, we distribute
directly and through independent distribution companies. Physical formats of our film and episodic
television content are generally sold to retailers, such as Walmart and Target, and electronic
formats are sold through e-tailers, such as Apple and Amazon, and MVPDs, such as Comcast and DirecTV.
The Company also operates Disney Movie Club, which sells DVD/Blu-ray discs directly to consumers in
the U.S. and Canada.
Distribution of film content in the home entertainment window generally starts within three months
after the theatrical release. Electronic formats may be released up to two weeks ahead of the
physical release.
Distribution of episodic television content in the home entertainment window includes digital sales
of season passes that can be purchased prior to, during and after the broadcast season with
individual episodes typically available to season pass customers shortly after the initial airing of
the show in each territory. Individual episodes are also available for digital purchase shortly after
their initial airing in each territory.
As of October 1, 2022, we have approximately 2,200 produced and acquired film titles that are
actively distributed in the home entertainment window, including approximately 1,900 live-action
titles and approximately 300 animated titles.
Concurrently with physical home entertainment distribution, we license titles to video-on-demand
services (such as Apple and Amazon) for electronic delivery to consumers for a specified rental
period.
Disney Theatrical Group
Disney Theatrical Group develops, produces and licenses live entertainment events on Broadway and
around the world. Productions include The Lion King , Frozen , Aladdin and Beauty and the Beast .
Disney Theatrical Group also licenses the Company’s IP to Feld Entertainment, the producer of Disney
On Ice and Marvel Universe Live! .
Music Distribution
The Disney Music Group (DMG) commissions new music for the Company’s motion pictures and television
programs and develops, produces, markets and distributes the Company’s music worldwide either
directly or through license agreements. DMG also licenses the songs and recording copyrights to third
parties for printed music, records, audio-visual devices, public performances and digital
distribution and produces live musical concerts. DMG labels include Walt Disney Records and Hollywood
Records.
Equity Investment
The Company has a 30% effective interest in Tata Play Limited, which operates a direct-to-home
satellite distribution platform in India.
 Studios 
The Studios produce motion pictures under the Walt Disney Pictures, Twentieth Century Studios,
Marvel, Lucasfilm, Pixar and Searchlight Pictures banners. Costs to produce the films are generally
capitalized and allocated to the distribution platform utilizing the content.
Marvel licensed rights to produce and distribute Spider-Man films to Sony Pictures Entertainment
(Sony) prior to the Company’s fiscal 2010 acquisition of Marvel. In general, Sony incurs the costs to
produce and distribute Spider-Man films and the Company licenses the merchandise rights to third
parties. The Company pays Sony a licensing fee based on each film’s box office receipts, subject to
specified limits. In general, the Company distributes other Marvel-produced films.
The Studios film library includes content from approximately 100 years of production history, as well
as acquired film libraries and totals approximately 5,100 live-action titles and 400 animation
titles. The library includes approximately 50 movies and approximately 30 series that the Studios
group produced for initial distribution on our DTC platforms.
 11 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
In fiscal 2023, the Studios plan to produce approximately 40 titles, which include films and episodic
television programs, for distribution theatrically and/or on our DTC platforms.
 General Entertainment 
Content produced by General Entertainment primarily consists of original episodic television
programs, network news and daytime/nighttime content. General Entertainment also acquires episodic
television programming rights. Original content is generally produced by the following Company owned
television studios: ABC Signature; 20th Television; Disney Branded Television; FX Productions; and
National Geographic Studios. Original content is also commissioned by General Entertainment and
produced by various other third-party studios. Costs to produce original content are generally
capitalized and allocated to the distribution platform utilizing the content. Program development is
carried out in collaboration with writers, producers and creative teams.
General Entertainments television programming library includes content from approximately 70 years of
production history. Series with four or more seasons include approximately 75 one-hour dramas, 55
half-hour comedies, 5 half-hour non-scripted series, 30 one-hour non-scripted series, 15 half-hour
animated series and 10 half-hour live-action series. The library includes approximately 130 series
that the General Entertainment group produced for initial distribution on our DTC platforms.
In fiscal 2023, General Entertainment plans to produce or commission more than 270 original programs,
most of which will include multiple episodes. Productions generally include comedies, dramas,
animations, documentaries, specials, made for TV movies, shorts and network news content. The vast
majority of programming will be used on our Linear Networks and/or our DTC platforms. Programming is
also produced for third-parties, many of which have domestic linear distribution rights, while the
Company has SVOD and international distribution rights.
 Sports 
The Company has various professional and college sports programming rights, which the Sports group
uses to produce content aired on our Linear Networks and distributed on our DTC platforms, including
live events, sports news and original content. In the U.S., rights include college football
(including bowl games and the College Football Playoff) and basketball, the National Basketball
Association (NBA), the National Football League (NFL), MLB, US Open Tennis, the Professional Golfers’
Association (PGA) Championship, the Women’s National Basketball Association (WNBA), soccer, Top Rank
Boxing, the Wimbledon Championships, the Masters golf tournament, mixed martial arts and the National
Hockey League (NHL). Internationally, rights include various cricket events (for which the Company
has the global distribution rights to certain events) and soccer (including English Premier League,
LaLiga, Bundesliga and multiple UEFA leagues).
 International 
The International group focuses on the development and production of locally created and relevant
entertainment and sports content to support growth across the Company’s portfolio of streaming
services. In addition, this group also oversees international media operations, including
international linear channels, local advertising sales and local content sales and distribution.
International has produced approximately 150 movies and series for initial distribution on the DTC
platforms worldwide.
 Competition and Seasonality 
The Company’s Linear Networks and DTC streaming services compete for viewers primarily with other
television networks, independent television stations and other media, such as other DTC streaming
services and video games. With respect to the sale of advertising time, we compete with other
television networks, independent television stations, MVPDs and other advertising media such as
digital content, newspapers, magazines, radio and billboards. Our television and radio stations
primarily compete for audiences and advertisers in local market areas.
The Company’s Linear Networks compete with other networks for carriage by MVPDs. The Company’s
contractual agreements with MVPDs are renewed or renegotiated from time to time in the ordinary
course of business. Consolidation and other market conditions in the cable, satellite and
telecommunication distribution industry and other factors may adversely affect the Company’s ability
to obtain and maintain contractual terms for the distribution of its various programming services
that are as favorable as those currently in place.
The Content Sales/Licensing businesses compete with all forms of entertainment. A significant number
of companies produce and/or distribute theatrical and television content, distribute products in the
home entertainment market, provide pay television and SVOD services, and produce music and live
theater.
The operating results of Content Sales/Licensing fluctuate due to the timing and performance of
releases in the theatrical, home entertainment and television markets. Release dates are determined
by several factors, including competition and the timing of vacation and holiday periods.
The Company’s websites and digital products compete with other websites and entertainment products.
 12 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
We also compete with other media and entertainment companies, independent production companies and
SVOD services for the acquisition of sports rights, creative and performing talent, story properties,
show concepts, scripted and other programming, advertiser support and exhibition outlets that are
essential to the success of our DMED businesses.
Advertising revenues at Linear Networks and Direct-to-Consumer are subject to seasonal advertising
patterns, changes in viewership levels and the demand for sports programming. In general, domestic
advertising revenues are typically somewhat higher during the fall and somewhat lower during the
summer months. In addition, advertising revenues generated from sports programming are impacted by
the timing of sports seasons and events, which varies throughout the year or may take place
periodically (e.g. biannually, quadrennially). Affiliate revenues vary with the subscriber trends of
MVPDs.
 Federal Regulation 
Television and radio broadcasting are subject to extensive regulation by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) under federal laws and regulations, including the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended. Violation of FCC regulations can result in substantial monetary fines, limited renewals of
licenses and, in egregious cases, denial of license renewal or revocation of a license. FCC
regulations that affect DMED include the following:
• Licensing of television and radio stations . Each of the television and radio stations we own must
be licensed by the FCC. These licenses are granted for periods of up to eight years, and we must
obtain renewal of licenses as they expire in order to continue operating the stations. We (and the
acquiring entity in the case of a divestiture) must also obtain FCC approval whenever we seek to have
a license transferred in connection with the acquisition or divestiture of a station. The FCC may
decline to renew or approve the transfer of a license in certain circumstances and may delay renewals
while permitting a licensee to continue operating. Although we have received such renewals and
approvals in the past or have been permitted to continue operations when renewal is delayed, there
can be no assurance that this will be the case in the future.
• Television and radio station ownership limits . The FCC imposes limitations on the number of
television stations and radio stations we can own in a specific market, on the combined number of
television and radio stations we can own in a single market and on the aggregate percentage of the
national audience that can be reached by television stations we own. Currently:
◦ FCC regulations may restrict our ability to own more than one television station in a market,
depending on the size and nature of the market. We do not own more than one television station in any
market.
◦ Federal statutes permit our television stations in the aggregate to reach a maximum of 39% of the
national audience. Pursuant to the most recent decision by the FCC as to how to calculate compliance
with this limit, our eight stations reach approximately 20% of the national audience.
◦ FCC regulations in some cases impose restrictions on our ability to acquire additional radio or
television stations in the markets in which we own radio stations. We do not believe any such
limitations are material to our current operating plans.
• Dual networks . FCC rules currently prohibit any of the four major broadcast television networks —
ABC, CBS, Fox and NBC — from being under common ownership or control.
• Regulation of programming . The FCC regulates broadcast programming by, among other things, banning
“indecent” programming, regulating political advertising and imposing commercial time limits during
children’s programming. Penalties for broadcasting indecent programming can be over $400,000 per
indecent utterance or image per station.
Federal legislation and FCC rules also limit the amount of commercial matter that may be shown on
broadcast or cable channels during programming designed for children 12 years of age and younger. In
addition, broadcast stations are generally required to provide an average of three hours per week of
programming that has as a “significant purpose” meeting the educational and informational needs of
children 16 years of age and younger. FCC rules also give television station owners the right to
reject or refuse network programming in certain circumstances or to substitute programming that the
licensee reasonably believes to be of greater local or national importance.
• Cable and satellite carriage of broadcast television stations. With respect to MVPDs operating
within a television station’s Designated Market Area, FCC rules require that every three years each
television station elect either “must carry” status, pursuant to which MVPDs generally must carry a
local television station in the station’s market, or “retransmission consent” status, pursuant to
which the MVPDs must negotiate with the television station to obtain the consent of the television
station prior to carrying its signal. The ABC owned television stations have historically elected
retransmission consent.
• Cable and satellite carriage of programming. The Communications Act and FCC rules regulate some
aspects of negotiations between programmers and distributors regarding the carriage of networks by
cable and satellite distribution companies, and some cable and satellite distribution companies have
sought regulation of additional aspects of the carriage of programming on their systems. New
legislation, court action or regulation in this area could have an impact on the Company’s
operations.
 13 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The foregoing is a brief summary of certain provisions of the Communications Act, other legislation
and specific FCC rules and policies. Reference should be made to the Communications Act, other
legislation, FCC rules and public notices and rulings of the FCC for further information concerning
the nature and extent of the FCC’s regulatory authority.
FCC laws and regulations are subject to change, and the Company generally cannot predict whether new
legislation, court action or regulations, or a change in the extent of application or enforcement of
current laws and regulations, would have an adverse impact on our operations.
 DISNEY PARKS, EXPERIENCES AND PRODUCTS 
The operations of DPEP’s significant lines of business are as follows:
• Parks & Experiences:
◦ Theme parks and resorts, which include: Walt Disney World Resort in Florida; Disneyland Resort in
California; Disneyland Paris; Hong Kong Disneyland Resort (48% ownership interest); and Shanghai
Disney Resort (43% ownership interest), all of which are consolidated in our results. Additionally,
the Company licenses our IP to a third party to operate Tokyo Disney Resort.
◦ Disney Cruise Line, Disney Vacation Club, National Geographic Expeditions (73% ownership interest),
Adventures by Disney and Aulani, a Disney Resort & Spa in Hawaii
• Consumer Products:
◦ Licensing of our trade names, characters, visual, literary and other IP to various manufacturers,
game developers, publishers and retailers throughout the world, for use on merchandise, published
materials and games
◦ Sale of branded merchandise through online, retail and wholesale businesses, and development and
publishing of books, comic books and magazines (except National Geographic magazine, which is
reported in DMED)
The significant revenues of DPEP are as follows:
• Theme park admissions - Sales of tickets for admission to our theme parks and for premium access to
certain attractions (e.g. Genie+ and Lightning Lane)
• Parks & Experiences merchandise, food and beverage - Sales of merchandise, food and beverages at
our theme parks and resorts and cruise ships
• Resorts and vacations - Sales of room nights at hotels, sales of cruise and other vacations and
sales and rentals of vacation club properties
• Merchandise licensing and retail:
◦ Merchandise licensing - Royalties from licensing our IP for use on consumer goods
◦ Retail - Sales of merchandise through internet shopping sites generally branded shopDisney and at
The Disney Store, as well as to wholesalers (including books, comic books and magazines)
• Parks licensing and other - Revenues from sponsorships and co-branding opportunities, real estate
rent and sales and royalties earned on Tokyo Disney Resort revenues
The significant expenses of DPEP are as follows:
• Operating expenses consisting primarily of operating labor, costs of goods sold, infrastructure
costs, supplies, commissions and entertainment offerings. Infrastructure costs include technology
support costs, repairs and maintenance, property taxes, utilities and fuel, retail occupancy costs,
insurance and transportation
• Selling, general and administrative costs, including marketing costs
• Depreciation and amortization
Significant capital investments:
• In recent years, the majority of the Company’s capital spend has been at our parks and experiences
business, which is principally for theme park and resort expansion, new attractions, cruise ships,
capital improvements and systems infrastructure. The various investment plans discussed in the “Parks
& Experiences” section are based on management’s current expectations. Actual investment may differ.
 Parks & Experiences 
Walt Disney World Resort
The Walt Disney World Resort is located approximately 20 miles southwest of Orlando, Florida, on
approximately 25,000 acres of land. The resort includes theme parks (the Magic Kingdom, EPCOT,
Disney’s Hollywood Studios and Disney’s Animal Kingdom); hotels; vacation club properties; a retail,
dining and entertainment complex (Disney Springs); a sports
 14 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
complex; conference centers; campgrounds; golf courses; water parks; and other recreational
facilities designed to attract visitors for an extended stay.
The Walt Disney World Resort is marketed through a variety of international, national and local
advertising and promotional activities. A number of attractions and restaurants in each of the theme
parks are sponsored or operated by other companies under multi-year agreements.
Magic Kingdom — The Magic Kingdom consists of six themed areas: Adventureland, Fantasyland,
Frontierland, Liberty Square, Main Street USA and Tomorrowland. Each land provides a unique guest
experience featuring themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and entertainment
experiences. Tomorrowland is currently undergoing an expansion including the Tron Lightcycle/Run,
which is scheduled to open in Spring 2023.
EPCOT — EPCOT consists of four major themed areas: World Showcase, World Celebration, World Nature
and World Discovery. All areas feature themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and
entertainment experiences. Countries represented with pavilions include Canada, China, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Morocco, Norway, the United Kingdom and the U.S. EPCOT is undergoing a
multi-year transformation, which includes the addition of Guardians of the Galaxy: Cosmic Rewind,
which opened in the summer of 2022 and Journey of Water, inspired by Moana, which is scheduled to
open late 2023.
Disney’s Hollywood Studios — Disney’s Hollywood Studios consists of eight themed areas: Animation
Courtyard, Commissary Lane, Echo Lake, Grand Avenue, Hollywood Boulevard, Star Wars : Galaxy’s Edge,
Sunset Boulevard and Toy Story Land. The areas provide behind-the-scenes glimpses of Hollywood-style
action through various shows and attractions and offer themed food service, merchandise shops and
entertainment experiences.
Disney’s Animal Kingdom — Disney’s Animal Kingdom consists of a 145-foot tall Tree of Life
centerpiece surrounded by five themed areas: Africa, Asia, DinoLand USA, Discovery Island and Pandora
- The World of Avatar. Each themed area contains attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and
entertainment experiences. The park features more than 300 species of live mammals, birds, reptiles
and amphibians and 3,000 varieties of vegetation.
Hotels, Vacation Club Properties and Other Resort Facilities — As of October 1, 2022, the Company
owned and operated 19 resort hotels and vacation club facilities at the Walt Disney World Resort,
with approximately 23,000 rooms and 3,600 vacation club units. Resort facilities include 500,000
square feet of conference meeting space and Disney’s Fort Wilderness camping and recreational area,
which offers approximately 800 campsites.
Disney Springs is an approximately 120-acre retail, dining and entertainment complex and consists of
four areas: Marketplace, The Landing, Town Center and West Side. The areas are home to more than 150
venues including the 64,000-square-foot World of Disney retail store. Most of the Disney Springs
facilities are operated by third parties that pay rent to the Company.
Ten independently-operated hotels with approximately 7,000 rooms are situated on property leased from
the Company.
ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex is a 230-acre center that hosts professional caliber training and
competitions, festival and tournament events and interactive sports activities. The complex, which
welcomes both amateur and professional athletes, accommodates multiple sporting events, including
baseball, basketball, football, soccer, softball, tennis and track and field. It also includes a
stadium, as well as two venues designed for cheerleading, dance competitions and other indoor sports.
Other recreational amenities and activities available at the Walt Disney World Resort include three
championship golf courses, miniature golf courses, full-service spas, tennis, sailing, swimming,
horseback riding and a number of other sports and leisure time activities. The resort also includes
two water parks: Disney’s Blizzard Beach and Disney’s Typhoon Lagoon.
Disneyland Resort
The Company owns 489 acres and has rights under a long-term lease for use of an additional 52 acres
of land in Anaheim, California. The Disneyland Resort includes two theme parks (Disneyland and Disney
California Adventure), three resort hotels and a retail, dining and entertainment complex (Downtown
Disney).
The Disneyland Resort is marketed through a variety of international, national and local advertising
and promotional activities. A number of the attractions and restaurants in the theme parks are
sponsored or operated by other companies under multi-year agreements.
Disneyland — Disneyland consists of nine themed areas: Adventureland, Critter Country, Fantasyland,
Frontierland, Main Street USA, Mickey’s Toontown, New Orleans Square, Star Wars : Galaxy’s Edge, and
Tomorrowland. These areas feature themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and
entertainment experiences. Mickey’s Toontown is currently undergoing an expansion and transformation,
including the addition of Mickey and Minnie’s Runaway Railway, which is scheduled to open in early
2023.
 15 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Disney California Adventure — Disney California Adventure is adjacent to Disneyland and includes
eight themed areas: Avengers Campus, Buena Vista Street, Cars Land, Grizzly Peak, Hollywood Land,
Pacific Wharf (which will be transformed into San Fransokyo from Big Hero 6 ), Paradise Gardens Park
and Pixar Pier. These areas include themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and
entertainment experiences.
Hotels, Vacation Club Units and Other Resort Facilities — Disneyland Resort includes three Company
owned and operated hotels and vacation club facilities with approximately 2,400 rooms, 50 vacation
club units and 180,000 square feet of conference meeting space.
Downtown Disney is a themed 15-acre retail, entertainment and dining complex with approximately 30
venues located adjacent to both Disneyland and Disney California Adventure. Most of the Downtown
Disney facilities are operated by third parties that pay rent to the Company.
Aulani, a Disney Resort & Spa
Aulani, a Disney Resort & Spa, is a Company-operated family resort on a 21-acre oceanfront property
on Oahu, Hawaii featuring approximately 350 hotel rooms, an 18,000-square-foot spa and 12,000 square
feet of conference meeting space. The resort also has approximately 480 vacation club units.
Disneyland Paris
Disneyland Paris is located on approximately 5,200-acres in Marne-la-Vallée, approximately 20 miles
east of Paris, France. The land is being developed pursuant to a master agreement with French
governmental authorities. Disneyland Paris includes two theme parks (Disneyland Park and Walt Disney
Studios Park); seven themed resort hotels; two convention centers; a shopping, dining and
entertainment complex (Disney Village); and a 27-hole golf facility. Of the 5,200 acres comprising
the site, approximately half have been developed to date, including a planned community (Val
d’Europe) and an eco-tourism destination (Villages Nature).
Disneyland Park — Disneyland Park consists of five themed areas: Adventureland, Discoveryland,
Fantasyland, Frontierland and Main Street USA. These areas include themed attractions, restaurants,
merchandise shops and entertainment experiences.
Walt Disney Studios Park — Walt Disney Studios Park includes five themed areas: Front Lot, Production
Courtyard, Toon Studio, Worlds of Pixar and Avengers Campus, which opened in the summer of 2022.
These areas each include themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and entertainment
experiences. Walt Disney Studios Park is undergoing a multi-year expansion that will include a new
themed area based on Frozen.
Hotels and Other Facilities — Disneyland Paris operates seven resort hotels, with approximately 5,750
rooms and 250,000 square feet of conference meeting space. In addition, five on-site hotels that are
owned and operated by third parties provide approximately 1,500 rooms.
Disney Village is an approximately 500,000-square-foot retail, dining and entertainment complex
located between the theme parks and the hotels. A number of the Disney Village facilities are
operated by third parties that pay rent to the Company.
Val d’Europe is a planned community near Disneyland Paris that is being developed in phases. Val
d’Europe currently includes a regional train station, hotels and a town center consisting of a
shopping center as well as office, commercial and residential space. Third parties operate these
developments on land leased or purchased from the Company.
Villages Nature is an eco-tourism resort that consists of recreational facilities, restaurants and
900 vacation units. The resort is a 50% joint venture between the Company and Pierre & Vacances-
Center Parcs, which manages the venture.
Hong Kong Disneyland Resort
The Company owns a 48% interest in Hong Kong Disneyland Resort and the Government of the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) owns a 52% interest. The resort is located on 310 acres on
Lantau Island and is in close proximity to the Hong Kong International Airport and the Hong Kong-
Zhuhai-Macau Bridge. Hong Kong Disneyland Resort includes one theme park and three themed resort
hotels. A separate Hong Kong subsidiary of the Company is responsible for managing Hong Kong
Disneyland Resort. The Company is entitled to receive royalties and management fees based on the
operating performance of Hong Kong Disneyland Resort.
Hong Kong Disneyland — Hong Kong Disneyland consists of seven themed areas: Adventureland,
Fantasyland, Grizzly Gulch, Main Street USA, Mystic Point, Tomorrowland and Toy Story Land. These
areas feature themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and entertainment experiences. The
park is in the midst of a multi-year expansion project that includes a Frozen-themed area, expected
to open in 2023.
Hotels — Hong Kong Disneyland Resort includes three themed hotels with a total of 1,750 rooms and
approximately 16,000 square feet of conference meeting space.
 16 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Shanghai Disney Resort
The Company owns a 43% interest in Shanghai Disney Resort and Shanghai Shendi (Group) Co., Ltd
(Shendi) owns a 57% interest. The resort is located in the Pudong district of Shanghai on
approximately 1,000 acres of land, which includes the Shanghai Disneyland theme park; two themed
resort hotels; a retail, dining and entertainment complex (Disneytown); and an outdoor recreation
area. A management company, in which the Company has a 70% interest and Shendi has a 30% interest, is
responsible for operating the resort and receives a management fee based on the operating performance
of Shanghai Disney Resort. The Company is also entitled to royalties based on the resort’s revenues.
Shanghai Disneyland — Shanghai Disneyland consists of seven themed areas: Adventure Isle,
Fantasyland, Gardens of Imagination, Mickey Avenue, Tomorrowland, Toy Story Land and Treasure Cove.
These areas feature themed attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops and entertainment
experiences. The Company is constructing an eighth themed area based on the animated film Zootopia .
Hotels and Other Facilities — Shanghai Disneyland Resort includes two themed hotels with a total of
1,220 rooms. Disneytown is an 11-acre outdoor complex of dining, shopping and entertainment venues
located adjacent to Shanghai Disneyland. Most Disneytown facilities are operated by third parties
that pay rent to Shanghai Disney Resort.
Tokyo Disney Resort
Tokyo Disney Resort is located on 494 acres of land, six miles east of downtown Tokyo, Japan. The
Company earns royalties on revenues generated by the Tokyo Disney Resort, which is owned and operated
by Oriental Land Co., Ltd. (OLC), a third-party Japanese corporation. The resort includes two theme
parks (Tokyo Disneyland and Tokyo DisneySea); five Disney-branded hotels; six other hotels (operated
by third parties other than OLC); a retail, dining and entertainment complex (Ikspiari); and Bon
Voyage, a Disney-themed merchandise location.
Tokyo Disneyland — Tokyo Disneyland consists of seven themed areas: Adventureland, Critter Country,
Fantasyland, Tomorrowland, Toontown, Westernland and World Bazaar.
Tokyo DisneySea — Tokyo DisneySea is divided into seven “ports of call,” including American
Waterfront, Arabian Coast, Lost River Delta, Mediterranean Harbor, Mermaid Lagoon, Mysterious Island
and Port Discovery. OLC is expanding Tokyo DisneySea to include an eighth themed port, Fantasy
Springs expected to open in spring 2024.
Hotels and Other Resort Facilities — Tokyo Disney Resort includes five Disney-branded hotels with a
total of more than 3,000 rooms and a monorail, which links the theme parks and resort hotels with
Ikspiari. OLC is currently constructing a 475-room Disney-branded hotel at Tokyo DisneySea that is
expected to open in spring 2024.
Disney Vacation Club (DVC)
DVC offers ownership interests in 15 resort facilities located at the Walt Disney World Resort;
Disneyland Resort; Aulani; Vero Beach, Florida; and Hilton Head Island, South Carolina. Available
units are offered for sale under a vacation ownership plan and are operated as hotel rooms when not
occupied by vacation club members. The Company’s vacation club units range from deluxe studios to
three-bedroom grand villas. Unit counts in this document are presented in terms of two-bedroom
equivalents. DVC had approximately 4,400 vacation club units as of October 1, 2022 and is scheduled
to open an additional 135 units at The Villas at Disneyland Hotel in 2023. The Company also plans to
open additional units at Disney’s Polynesian Village Resort in late 2024.
Storyliving by Disney
The Company is developing its first Storyliving by Disney residential community, Cotino, in Rancho
Mirage, California.
Disney Cruise Line
Disney Cruise Line is a five-ship vacation cruise line, which operates out of ports in North America
and Europe. The Disney Magic and the Disney Wonder are 85,000-ton 875-stateroom ships; the Disney
Dream and the Disney Fantasy are 130,000-ton 1,250-stateroom ships; and the Disney Wish, launched in
July 2022, is a 140,000-ton 1,250-stateroom ship. The ships cater to families, children, teenagers
and adults, with themed areas and activities for each group. Many cruise vacations include a visit to
Disney’s Castaway Cay, a 1,000-acre private Bahamian island.
Disney Cruise Line is adding the Disney Treasure and a seventh ship, which are to be delivered from
the shipyard in fiscal 2025 and fiscal 2026, respectively. Both of these ships will be approximately
140,000 tons with 1,250 staterooms and will be powered by liquefied natural gas.
In November 2022, the Company purchased a partially completed ship for an amount that is not
material. The ship will be approximately 200,000 tons. Disney Cruise Line will incur the cost to
complete construction with total costs anticipated to be less than our recent fleet additions. This
ship is expected to be delivered in 2025.
 17 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The Company has approximately 550 acres of land at Lighthouse Point on the island of Eleuthera, which
is scheduled to open as a Disney Cruise Line destination in 2024.
Adventures by Disney and National Geographic Expeditions
Adventures by Disney and National Geographic Expeditions offer guided tour packages predominantly at
non-Disney sites around the world.
Walt Disney Imagineering
Walt Disney Imagineering provides master planning, real estate development, attraction, entertainment
and show design, engineering support, production support, project management and research and
development for DPEP.
 Consumer Products 
Licensing
The Company’s merchandise licensing operations cover a diverse range of product categories, the most
significant of which are: toys, apparel, games, home décor and furnishings, accessories, food, books,
health and beauty, stationery, footwear, magazines and consumer electronics. The Company licenses
characters from its film, television and other properties for use on third-party products in these
categories and earns royalties, which are usually based on a fixed percentage of the wholesale or
retail selling price of the products. Some of the major properties licensed by the Company include:
Mickey and Friends, Star Wars, Spider-Man, Disney Princess, Avengers, Frozen, Toy Story, Winnie the
Pooh and Cars.
Retail
The Company sells Disney-, Marvel-, Pixar- and Lucasfilm-branded products through shopDisney branded
internet sites and Disney Store branded retail locations. At October 1, 2022, the Company owns and
operates approximately 40 stores in Japan, 20 stores in North America, three stores in Europe and one
store in China.
The Company creates, distributes and publishes a variety of products in multiple countries and
languages based on the Company’s branded franchises. The products include children’s books and comic
books.
 Competition and Seasonality 
The Company’s theme parks and resorts as well as Disney Cruise Line and Disney Vacation Club compete
with other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism and recreational activities. The profitability of
the leisure-time industry may be influenced by various factors that are not directly controllable,
such as economic conditions including business cycle and exchange rate fluctuations, health concerns,
the political environment, travel industry trends, amount of available leisure time, oil and
transportation prices, weather patterns and natural disasters. The licensing and retail business
competes with other licensors, retailers and publishers of character, brand and celebrity names, as
well as other licensors, publishers and developers of game software, online video content, websites,
other types of home entertainment and retailers of toys and kids merchandise.
All of the theme parks and the associated resort facilities are operated on a year-round basis.
Typically, theme park attendance and resort occupancy fluctuate based on the seasonal nature of
vacation travel and leisure activities, the opening of new guest offerings and pricing and
promotional offers. Peak attendance and resort occupancy generally occur during the summer months
when school vacations occur and during early winter and spring holiday periods. The licensing, retail
and wholesale businesses are influenced by seasonal consumer purchasing behavior, which generally
results in higher revenues during the Company’s first and fourth fiscal quarter, and by the timing
and performance of theatrical and game releases and cable programming broadcasts.
 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY PROTECTION 
The Company’s businesses throughout the world are affected by its ability to exploit and protect
against infringement of its IP, including trademarks, trade names, copyrights, patents and trade
secrets. Important IP includes rights in the content of motion pictures, television programs,
electronic games, sound recordings, character likenesses, theme park attractions, books and
magazines, and merchandise. Risks related to the protection and exploitation of IP rights and
information concerning the expiration of certain of our copyrights are set forth in Item 1A – Risk
Factors.
 AVAILABLE INFORMATION 
Our annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and
amendments to those reports are available without charge on our website, www.disney.com/investors, as
soon as reasonably practicable after they are filed electronically with the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC). We are providing the address to our internet site solely for the
information of investors. We do not intend the address to be an active link or to otherwise
incorporate the contents of the website into this report.
 18 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1A. Risk Factors │
For an enterprise as large and complex as the Company, a wide range of factors could materially
affect future developments and performance. In addition to the factors affecting specific business
operations identified in connection with the description of these operations and the financial
results of these operations elsewhere in our filings with the SEC, the most significant factors
affecting our business include the following:
BUSINESS, ECONOMIC, MARKET and OPERATING CONDITION RISKS
The adverse impact of COVID-19 on our businesses will continue for an unknown length of time and may
continue to impact certain of our key sources of revenue.
Since early 2020, the world has been and continues to be impacted by COVID-19 and its variants.
COVID-19 and measures to prevent its spread have impacted our segments in a number of ways, most
significantly at DPEP where our theme parks and resorts were closed and cruise ship sailings and
guided tours were suspended. In addition, at DMED we delayed, or in some cases, shortened or canceled
theatrical releases and experienced disruptions in the production and availability of content.
Collectively, our impacted businesses have historically been the source of the majority of our
revenue. Operations have resumed at various points since May 2020, with certain theme parks and
resort operations and film and television productions resuming by the end of fiscal 2020 and
throughout 2021. Although operations resumed, many of our businesses continue to experience impacts
from COVID-19, such as incremental health and safety measures and related increased expenses,
capacity restrictions and closures (including at some of our international parks and in theaters in
certain markets), and disruptions of content production activities.
COVID-19 impacts and future health outbreaks and pandemics could hasten the erosion of historical
sources of revenue at our Linear Networks businesses and change consumer preferences. For example,
COVID-19 impacts have changed, and may continue to change, consumer behavior and consumption
patterns, such as theater-going to watch movies. Some industries in which our customers operate, such
as theatrical distribution, retail and travel, have experienced, and could continue to experience,
contraction and financial distress, which could impact the profitability of our businesses going
forward.
Our mitigation efforts in response to the impacts of COVID-19 on our businesses have had, or may
continue to have, negative impacts. For example, in response to COVID-19 impacts, we incurred
significant additional indebtedness and delayed or suspended certain projects in which we have
invested, particularly at our parks and resorts and studio operations. In addition, we may take
mitigation actions in the future to respond to the impacts of COVID-19 or other health outbreaks or
pandemics on our businesses, such as raising additional financing; not declaring future dividends;
further suspending or reducing capital spending; reducing film and television content investments;
implementing furloughs or reductions in force or modifying our operating strategy. These and other of
our mitigating actions may have an adverse impact on our businesses. Additionally, there are
limitations on our ability to mitigate the adverse financial impact of COVID-19 and other health
outbreaks or pandemics, including the fixed costs of our theme park business and the impact such
events may have on capital markets and our cost of borrowing.
Geographic variation in government requirements and ongoing changes to restrictions have disrupted
and could further disrupt our businesses, including our production operations. Our operations could
be suspended, re-suspended or subjected to new or reinstated limitations by government action or
otherwise in the future as a result of developments related to COVID-19, such as the expansion of the
Omicron subvariants or other variants, and other future health outbreaks and pandemics. For example,
our international parks have reopened and closed multiple times since the onset of COVID-19. Some of
our employees who returned to work were later refurloughed. Our operations could be further
negatively impacted and our reputation could be negatively impacted by a significant COVID-19 or
other health outbreak impacting our employees, customers or others interacting with our businesses,
including our supply chain.
The impacts of COVID-19 to our business have generally amplified, or reduced our ability to mitigate,
the other risks discussed in our filings with the SEC and our remediation efforts may not be
successful.
COVID-19 also makes it more challenging for management to estimate future performance of our
businesses. COVID-19 has already adversely impacted our businesses and net cash flow, and we expect
the ultimate magnitude of these disruptions on our financial and operational results will be dictated
by the length of time that such disruptions continue which will, in turn, depend on the currently
unknowable duration and severity of the impacts of COVID-19, and among other things, the impact and
duration of governmental actions imposed in response to COVID-19 and individuals’ and companies’ risk
tolerance regarding health matters going forward.
Changes in U.S., global, and regional economic conditions are expected to have an adverse effect on
the profitability of our businesses.
A decline in economic conditions, such as recession, economic downturn, and/or inflationary
conditions in the U.S. and other regions of the world in which we do business can adversely affect
demand and/or expenses for any of our businesses, thus reducing our revenue and earnings. Past
declines in economic conditions reduced spending at our parks and resorts, purchases
 19 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
of and prices for advertising on our broadcast and cable networks and owned stations, performance of
our home entertainment releases, and purchases of Company-branded consumer products, and similar
impacts can be expected as such conditions recur. The current decline in economic conditions could
also reduce attendance at our parks and resorts, prices that MVPDs pay for our cable programming,
purchases of and prices for advertising on our DTC products or subscription levels for our cable
programming or DTC products, while also increasing the prices we pay for goods, services and labor.
Economic conditions can also impair the ability of those with whom we do business to satisfy their
obligations to us. In addition, an increase in price levels generally, or in price levels in a
particular sector such as current inflation in the domestic and global energy sector and other
pronounced price increases generally and in certain other sectors, could result in a shift in
consumer demand away from the entertainment and consumer products we offer, which could also
adversely affect our revenues and, at the same time, increase our costs. A decline in economic
conditions could impact implementation of our business plans, such as our plans to realign our cost
structure and for the new DTC ad-supported service, pricing structure and price increases. In
addition, actions to reduce inflation, including raising interest rates, increase our cost of
borrowing, which in turn could make it more difficult to obtain financing for our operations or
investments on favorable terms. Further, global economic conditions may impact foreign currency
exchange rates against the U.S. dollar. The current or continued strength in the value of the U.S.
dollar has adversely impacted the U.S. dollar value of revenue we receive and expect to receive from
other markets and may reduce international demand for our products and services. A decrease in the
value of the U.S. dollar may increase our labor, supply or other costs in non-U.S. markets. Although
we hedge exposure to certain foreign currency fluctuations, any such hedging activity may not
substantially offset the negative financial impact of exchange rate fluctuations and is not expected
to offset all such negative financial impact, particularly in periods of sustained U.S. dollar
strength relative to multiple foreign currencies. Further, economic or political conditions in
countries outside the U.S. also have reduced, and could continue to reduce, our ability to hedge
exposure to currency fluctuations in those countries or our ability to repatriate revenue from those
countries. Broader supply chain delays, such as those currently impacting global distribution may
further exacerbate current inflationary pressures and impact our ability to sell and deliver goods or
otherwise disrupt our operations. The adverse impact on our businesses of the decline in economic
conditions will depend, in part, on its severity and duration and our ability to mitigate the impacts
of this decline on our businesses will be limited.
Changes in technology and in consumer consumption patterns may affect demand for our entertainment
products, the revenue we can generate from these products or the cost of producing or distributing
products.
The media entertainment and internet businesses in which we participate increasingly depend on our
ability to successfully adapt to shifting patterns of content consumption through the adoption and
exploitation of new technologies. New technologies affect the demand for our products, the manner in
which our products are distributed to consumers, ways we charge for and receive revenue for our
entertainment products and the stability of those revenue streams, the sources and nature of
competing content offerings, the time and manner in which consumers acquire and view some of our
entertainment products and the options available to advertisers for reaching their desired audiences.
This trend has impacted the business model for certain traditional forms of distribution, as
evidenced by the industry-wide decline in ratings for broadcast television, the reduction in demand
for home entertainment sales of theatrical content, the development of alternative distribution
channels for broadcast and cable programming and declines in subscriber levels for traditional cable
channels, including for a number of our networks. In addition, theater-going to watch movies
currently is, and may continue to be, below pre-COVID-19 levels. Declines in linear viewership have
resulted in decreased advertising revenue. In order to respond to these developments, we regularly
consider, and from time to time implement changes to our business models, most recently by
developing, investing in and acquiring DTC products, initiating plans to again reorganize our media
and entertainment businesses to advance our DTC strategies, and developing next generation
storytelling offerings. There can be no assurance that our DTC offerings, next generation
storytelling offerings and other efforts will successfully respond to these changes. In addition,
declines in certain traditional forms of distribution may increase the cost of content allocable to
our DTC offerings, negatively impacting the profitability of our DTC offerings. We expect to forgo
revenue from traditional sources, particularly as we expand our DTC offerings. To date we have
experienced significant losses in our DTC businesses. There can be no assurance that the DTC model
and other business models we may develop will ultimately be profitable or as profitable as our
existing or historic business models.
Misalignment with public and consumer tastes and preferences for entertainment, travel and consumer
products could negatively impact demand for our entertainment offerings and products and adversely
affect the profitability of any of our businesses.
Our businesses create entertainment, travel and consumer products whose success depends substantially
on consumer tastes and preferences that change in often unpredictable ways. The success of our
businesses depends on our ability to consistently create compelling content, which may be
distributed, among other ways, through broadcast, cable, internet or cellular technology, theme park
attractions, hotels and other resort facilities and travel experiences and consumer products. Such
distribution must meet the changing preferences of the broad consumer market and respond to
competition from an expanding array of choices facilitated by technological developments in the
delivery of content. The success of our theme parks, resorts, cruise ships and experiences, as well
as our theatrical releases, depends on demand for public or out-of-home
 20 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
entertainment experiences. Demand for certain of our out-of-home entertainment experiences, such as
theater-going to watch movies, has not returned to pre-pandemic levels, and COVID-19 may continue to
impact consumer tastes and preferences. In addition, many of our businesses increasingly depend on
acceptance of our offerings and products by consumers outside the U.S. The success of our businesses
therefore depends on our ability to successfully predict and adapt to changing consumer tastes and
preferences outside as well as inside the U.S. Moreover, we must often invest substantial amounts in
content production and acquisition, acquisition of sports rights, theme park attractions, cruise
ships or hotels and other facilities or customer facing platforms before we know the extent to which
these products will earn consumer acceptance, and these products may be introduced into a
significantly different market or economic or social climate from the one we anticipated at the time
of the investment decisions. If our entertainment offerings and products (including our content
offerings, which have been impacted by COVID-19 and may in the future be impacted by COVID-19
developments or other health outbreaks or pandemics) as well as our methods to make our offerings and
products available to consumers, do not achieve sufficient consumer acceptance, our revenue may
decline, decline further or fail to grow to the extent we anticipate when making investment decisions
and thereby further adversely affect the profitability of one or more of our businesses. Further,
consumers’ perceptions of our position on matters of public interest, including our efforts to
achieve certain of our environmental and social goals, often differ widely and present risks to our
reputation and brands. Consumer tastes and preferences impact, among other items, revenue from
advertising sales (which are based in part on ratings for the programs in which advertisements air),
affiliate fees, subscription fees, theatrical film receipts, the license of rights to other
distributors, theme park admissions, hotel room charges and merchandise, food and beverage sales,
sales of licensed consumer products or sales of our other consumer products and services.
The success of our businesses is highly dependent on the existence and maintenance of intellectual
property rights in the entertainment products and services we create.
The value to us of our IP is dependent on the scope and duration of our rights as defined by
applicable laws in the U.S. and abroad and the manner in which those laws are construed. If those
laws are drafted or interpreted in ways that limit the extent or duration of our rights, or if
existing laws are changed, our ability to generate revenue from our IP may decrease, or the cost of
obtaining and maintaining rights may increase. The terms of some copyrights for IP related to some of
our products and services have expired and other copyrights will expire in the future. For example,
in the United States and countries that look to the United States copyright term when shorter than
their own, the copyright term for early works such as the short film Steamboat Willie (1928), and the
specific early versions of characters depicted in those works, expires at the end of the 95th
calendar year after the date the copyright was originally secured in the United States. Revenues
generated from this intellectual property could be negatively impacted.
The unauthorized use of our IP may increase the cost of protecting rights in our IP or reduce our
revenues. The convergence of computing, communication and entertainment devices, increased broadband
internet speed and penetration, increased availability and speed of mobile data transmission and
increasingly sophisticated attempts to obtain unauthorized access to data systems have made the
unauthorized digital copying and distribution of our films, television productions and other creative
works easier and faster and protection and enforcement of IP rights more challenging. The
unauthorized distribution and access to entertainment content generally continues to be a significant
challenge for IP rights holders. Inadequate laws or weak enforcement mechanisms to protect
entertainment industry IP in one country can adversely affect the results of the Company’s operations
worldwide, despite the Company’s efforts to protect its IP rights. COVID-19 and distribution
innovation in response to COVID-19 has increased opportunities to access content in unauthorized
ways. Additionally, negative economic conditions coupled with a shift in government priorities could
lead to less enforcement. These developments require us to devote substantial resources to protecting
our IP against unlicensed use and present the risk of increased losses of revenue as a result of
unlicensed distribution of our content and other commercial misuses of our IP.
With respect to IP developed by the Company and rights acquired by the Company from others, the
Company is subject to the risk of challenges to our copyright, trademark and patent rights by third
parties. Successful challenges to our rights in IP may result in increased costs for obtaining rights
or the loss of the opportunity to earn revenue from or utilize the IP that is the subject of
challenged rights. From time to time, the Company has been notified that it may be infringing certain
IP rights of third parties. Technological changes in industries in which the Company operates and
extensive patent coverage in those areas may increase the risk of such claims being brought and
prevailing.
Protection of electronically stored data and other cybersecurity is costly, and if our data or
systems are materially compromised in spite of this protection, we may incur additional costs, lost
opportunities, damage to our reputation, disruption of service or theft of our assets.
We maintain information necessary to conduct our business, including confidential and proprietary
information as well as personal information regarding our customers and employees, in digital form.
We also use computer systems to deliver our products and services and operate our businesses. Data
maintained in digital form is subject to the risk of unauthorized access, modification, exfiltration,
destruction or denial of access and our computer systems are subject to cyberattacks that may result
in disruptions in service. We use many third-party systems and software, which are also subject to
supply chain and other
 21 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
cyberattacks. We develop and maintain an information security program to identify and mitigate cyber
risks but the development and maintenance of this program is costly and requires ongoing monitoring
and updating as technologies change and efforts to overcome security measures become more
sophisticated. Accordingly, despite our efforts, the risk of unauthorized access, modification,
exfiltration, destruction or denial of access with respect to data or systems and other cybersecurity
attacks cannot be eliminated entirely, and the risks associated with a potentially material incident
remain. In addition, we provide some confidential, proprietary and personal information to third
parties in certain cases, which may also be compromised.
If our information or cyber security systems or data are compromised in a material way, our ability
to conduct our business may be impaired, we may lose profitable opportunities or the value of those
opportunities may be diminished and, as described above, we may lose revenue as a result of
unlicensed use of our intellectual property. If personal information of our customers or employees is
misappropriated, our reputation with our customers and employees may be damaged resulting in loss of
business or morale, and we may incur costs to remediate possible harm to our customers and employees
or damages arising from litigation and/or to pay fines or take other action with respect to judicial
or regulatory actions arising out of the incident. Insurance we obtain may not cover losses or
damages associated with such attacks or events. Our systems and users and those of third parties with
whom we engage are continually attacked, sometimes successfully.
A variety of uncontrollable events may reduce demand for or consumption of our products and services,
impair our ability to provide our products and services or increase the cost or reduce the
profitability of providing our products and services.
Demand for and consumption of our products and services, particularly our theme parks and resorts, is
highly dependent on the general environment for travel and tourism. The environment for travel and
tourism, as well as demand for and consumption of other entertainment products, can be significantly
adversely affected in the U.S., globally or in specific regions as a result of a variety of factors
beyond our control, including: health concerns (including as it has been by COVID-19 and could be by
future health outbreaks and pandemics); adverse weather conditions arising from short-term weather
patterns or long-term climate change, catastrophic events or natural disasters (such as excessive
heat or rain, hurricanes, typhoons, floods, droughts, tsunamis and earthquakes); international,
political or military developments (including social unrest); a decline in economic activity; and
terrorist attacks. These events and others, such as fluctuations in travel and energy costs and
computer virus attacks, intrusions or other widespread computing or telecommunications failures, may
also damage our ability to provide our products and services or to obtain insurance coverage with
respect to some of these events. An incident that affected our property directly would have a direct
impact on our ability to provide goods and services and could have an extended effect of discouraging
consumers from attending our facilities. Moreover, the costs of protecting against such incidents,
including the costs of protecting against the spread of COVID-19, reduces the profitability of our
operations.
For example, hurricanes, including Hurricane Ian in late September 2022, which caused Walt Disney
World Resort parks in Florida to close for two days, have impacted the profitability of Walt Disney
World Resort and may do so in the future. The Company has paused certain operations in certain
regions and the profitability of certain operations has been impacted as a result of events in the
corresponding regions.
In addition, we derive affiliate fees and royalties from the distribution of our programming, sales
of our licensed goods and services by third parties, and the management of businesses operated under
brands licensed from the Company, and we are therefore dependent on the successes of those third
parties for that portion of our revenue. A wide variety of factors could influence the success of
those third parties and if negative factors significantly impacted a sufficient number of those third
parties, the profitability of one or more of our businesses could be adversely affected. In specific
geographic markets, we have experienced delayed and/or partial payments from certain affiliate
partners due to liquidity issues.
We obtain insurance against the risk of losses relating to some of these events, generally including
certain physical damage to our property and resulting business interruption, certain injuries
occurring on our property and some liabilities for alleged breach of legal responsibilities. When
insurance is obtained it is subject to deductibles, exclusions, terms, conditions and limits of
liability. The types and levels of coverage we obtain vary from time to time depending on our view of
the likelihood of specific types and levels of loss in relation to the cost of obtaining coverage for
such types and levels of loss and we may experience material losses not covered by our insurance. For
example, many losses related to impacts of COVID-19 have not been covered by insurance available to
us.
Changes in our business strategy or restructuring of our businesses has increased and may continue to
increase our costs and has otherwise affected and may continue to affect the profitability of our
businesses or the value of our assets.
As changes in our business environment occur we have adjusted, continue to adjust and may further
adjust our business strategies to meet these changes and we may otherwise decide to further
restructure our operations or particular businesses or assets. For example, in November 2022, we
announced plans to reorganize DMED to advance our DTC strategies and rationalize costs; in fiscal
2022, we announced plans to introduce an ad-supported Disney+ service, new pricing model and price
increases and cost realignment; in March 2021, we announced the closure of a substantial number of
our Disney-branded
 22 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
retail stores; and we have announced exploration of a number of new types of businesses. In addition,
with the recent change in leadership, there may be additional adjustments to our business strategies.
Our new organization and strategies are, among other things, subject to execution risk and may not
produce the anticipated benefits, such as supporting our growth strategies and enhancing shareholder
value. For example, notwithstanding our announced plans to rationalize costs, the costs of our DTC
strategy, and associated losses, may continue to grow or be reduced more slowly than anticipated,
which may impact our distribution strategy across businesses/distribution platforms, the types of
content we distribute through various businesses/distribution platforms, and the timing and
sequencing of content windows. Our new organization and strategies could be less successful than our
previous organizational structure and strategies. In addition, external events including changing
technology, changing consumer purchasing patterns, acceptance of content offerings and changes in
macroeconomic conditions may impair the value of our assets. When these changes or events occur, we
have incurred and may continue to incur costs to change our business strategy and have needed and may
in the future need to write-down the value of assets. For example, current conditions, including
COVID-19 and our business decisions, have reduced the value of some of our assets. We have impaired
goodwill and intangible assets at our International Channels businesses and impaired the value of
certain of our retail store assets. We may write-down other assets as our strategy evolves to account
for the current business environment. We also make investments in existing or new businesses,
including investments in international expansion of our business and in new business lines. In recent
years, such investments have included expansion and renovation of certain of our theme parks,
expansion of our fleet of cruise ships, the acquisition of TFCF and investments related to DTC
offerings. Some of these investments have returns that are negative or low, the ultimate business
prospects of the businesses related to these investments are uncertain, these investments may impact
the profitability of our other businesses, and these risks are exacerbated by COVID-19. In any of
these events, our costs may increase, we may have significant charges associated with the write-down
of assets or returns on new investments may be negative or lower than prior to the change in strategy
or restructuring. Even if our strategies are effective in the long term, our new offerings will
generally not be profitable in the short term, growth of our new offerings is unlikely to be even
quarter over quarter and we may not expand into new markets as or when anticipated. Our ability to
forecast for new businesses may be impacted by our lack of experience operating in those new
businesses, speed with which the competitive landscape changes, volatility beyond our control (such
as the events beyond our control noted above) and our ability to obtain or develop the content and
rights on which our projections are based. Accordingly, we may not achieve our forecasted outcomes.
Increased competitive pressures may reduce our revenues or increase our costs.
We face substantial competition in each of our businesses from alternative providers of the products
and services we offer and from other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism and recreational
activities. This includes, among other types, competition for human resources, content and other
resources we require in operating our business. For example:
• Our programming and production operations compete to obtain creative, performing and business
talent, sports and other programming, story properties, advertiser support and market share with
other studio operators, television networks, SVOD providers and other new sources of broadband
delivered content.
• Our television networks and stations and DTC offerings compete for the sale of advertising time
with other television and SVOD services, as well as with newspapers, magazines, billboards and radio
stations. In addition, we increasingly face competition for advertising sales from internet and
mobile delivered content, which offer advertising delivery technologies that are more targeted than
can be achieved through traditional means.
• Our television networks compete for carriage of their programming with other programming providers.
• Our theme parks and resorts compete for guests with all other forms of entertainment, lodging,
tourism and recreation activities.
• Our content sales/licensing operations compete for customers with all other forms of entertainment.
• Our consumer products business competes with other licensors and creators of IP.
• Our DTC businesses compete for customers with an increasing number of competitors’ DTC offerings,
all other forms of media and all other forms of entertainment, as well as for technology, creative,
performing and business talent and for content.
Competition in each of these areas may further increase as a result of technological developments and
changes in market structure, including consolidation of suppliers of resources and distribution
channels. Increased competition may increase the cost of programming and other products and divert
consumers from our creative or other products, or to other products or other forms of entertainment,
which could reduce our revenue or increase our marketing costs.
Competition for the acquisition of resources can further increase the cost of producing our products
and services, deprive us of talent necessary to produce high quality creative material or increase
the cost of compensation for our employees. Such competition may also reduce, or limit growth in,
prices for our products and services, including advertising rates and subscription fees at our media
networks and DTC offerings, parks and resorts admissions and room rates and prices for consumer
products from which we derive license revenues.
 23 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Our results may be adversely affected if long-term programming or carriage contracts are not renewed
on sufficiently favorable terms.
We enter into long-term contracts for both the acquisition and the distribution of media programming
and products, including contracts for the acquisition of programming rights for sporting events and
other programs, and contracts for the distribution of our programming to content distributors. As
these contracts expire, we must renew or renegotiate the contracts, and if we are unable to renew
them on acceptable terms, we may lose programming rights or distribution rights. As a result, our
portfolio of programming rights and the distributors of our programming have changed and may continue
to change over time. Even if these contracts are renewed, the cost of obtaining certain programming
rights has increased and may continue to increase (or increase at faster rates than our historical
experience) and programming distributors, facing pressures resulting from increased subscription fees
and alternative distribution challenges, have demanded and may continue to demand terms (including
pricing and the breadth of distribution) that reduce our revenue from distribution of programs (or
increase revenue at slower rates than our historical experience). Moreover, our ability to renew
these contracts on favorable terms may be affected by a number of factors, such as consolidation in
the market for program distribution, the entrance of new participants in the market for distribution
of content on digital platforms and the impacts of COVID-19. With respect to the acquisition of
programming rights, particularly sports programming rights, the impact of these long-term contracts
on our results over the term of the contracts depends on a number of factors, including the strength
of advertising markets, subscription levels and rates for programming, effectiveness of marketing
efforts and the size of viewer audiences. There can be no assurance that revenues from programming
based on these rights will exceed the cost of the rights plus the other costs of producing and
distributing the programming.
Changes in regulations applicable to our businesses may impair the profitability of our businesses.
Our broadcast networks and television stations are highly regulated, and each of our other businesses
is subject to a variety of U.S. and overseas regulations. Some of these regulations include:
• U.S. FCC regulation of our television and radio networks, our national programming networks and our
owned television stations. See Item 1 — Business — Disney Media and Entertainment Distribution,
Federal Regulation.
• Federal, state and foreign privacy and data protection laws and regulations.
• Regulation of the safety and supply chain of consumer products and theme park operations, including
potential regulation regarding the sourcing, importation and the sale of goods.
• Environmental protection regulations.
• U.S. and international anti-corruption laws, sanction programs and trade restrictions, restrictions
on the manner in which content is currently licensed and distributed, ownership restrictions,
currency exchange controls or film or television content requirements, investment obligations or
quotas.
• Domestic and international labor laws, tax laws or currency controls.
New laws and regulations, as well as changes in any of these current laws and regulations or
regulator activities in any of these areas, or others, may require us to spend additional amounts to
comply with the regulations, or may restrict our ability to offer products and services in ways that
are profitable, and create an increasingly unpredictable regulatory landscape. For example, in 2019
India implemented regulation and tariffs impacting certain bundling of channels; in 2022 the U.S. and
other countries implemented a series of sanctions against Russia in response to events in Russia and
Ukraine; U.S. agencies have enhanced trade restrictions and legislation is currently under
consideration that would prohibit importation of goods from certain regions; U.S. state governments
have become more active in passing legislation targeted at specific sectors and companies; and in
many countries/regions around the world (including but not limited to the EU) regulators are
requiring us to broadcast on our linear (or display on our DTC streaming services) programming
produced in specific countries as well as invest specified amounts of our revenues in local content
productions.
Public health and other regional, national, state and local regulations and policies are impacting
our ability to operate our businesses at all or in accordance with historic practice. In addition to
the government requirements that have impacted most of our businesses as a result of COVID-19,
government requirements may continue to be extended and new government requirements may be imposed to
address COVID-19 or future health outbreaks or pandemics.
Our operations outside the U.S. may be adversely affected by the operation of laws in those
jurisdictions.
Our operations in non-U.S. jurisdictions are in many cases subject to the laws of the jurisdictions
in which they operate rather than, or in addition to, U.S. law. Our risks of operating
internationally have increased following the completion of the TFCF acquisition, which increased the
importance of international operations to our future operations, growth and prospects. Laws in some
jurisdictions differ in significant respects from those in the U.S. These differences can affect our
ability to react to changes in our business, and our rights or ability to enforce rights may be
different than would be expected under U.S. law. Moreover, enforcement of laws in some international
jurisdictions can be inconsistent and unpredictable, which can affect both our ability to enforce our
rights and to undertake activities that we believe are beneficial to our business. In addition, the
business and political climate in some jurisdictions may encourage corruption, which could reduce our
ability to compete
 24 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
successfully in those jurisdictions while remaining in compliance with local laws or U.S. anti-
corruption laws applicable to our businesses. As a result, our ability to generate revenue and our
expenses in non-U.S. jurisdictions may differ from what would be expected if U.S. law alone governed
these operations.
Environmental, social and governance matters and any related reporting obligations may impact our
businesses.
U.S. and international regulators, investors and other stakeholders are increasingly focused on
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) matters. For example, new domestic and international laws
and regulations relating to ESG matters, including human capital, diversity, sustainability, climate
change and cybersecurity, are under consideration or being adopted, which may include specific,
target-driven disclosure requirements or obligations. Our response will require additional
investments and implementation of new practices and reporting processes, all entailing additional
compliance risk. In addition, we have announced a number of ESG initiatives and goals, which will
require ongoing investment, and there is no assurance that we will achieve any of these goals or that
our initiatives will achieve their intended outcomes. Consumers’ perceptions of our efforts to
achieve these goals often differ widely and present risks to our reputation and brands. In addition,
our ability to implement some initiatives or achieve some goals is dependent on external factors. For
example, our ability to meet certain sustainability goals or initiatives may depend in part on third-
party collaboration, mitigation innovations and/or the availability of economically feasible
solutions at scale.
Damage to our reputation or brands may negatively impact our Company across businesses and regions.
Our reputation and globally recognizable brands are integral to the success of our businesses.
Because our brands engage consumers across our businesses, damage to our reputation or brands in one
business may have an impact on our other businesses. Because some of our brands are globally
recognized, brand damage may not be locally contained. Maintenance of the reputation of our Company
and brands depends on many factors including the quality of our offerings, maintenance of trust with
our customers and our ability to successfully innovate. In addition, we may pursue brand or product
integration combining previously separate brands or products targeting different audiences under one
brand or pursue other business initiatives inconsistent with one or more of our brands, and there is
no assurance that these initiatives will be accepted by our customers and not adversely impact one or
more of our brands. Significant negative claims or publicity regarding the Company or its operations,
products, management, employees, practices, business partners, business decisions, social
responsibility and culture may materially damage our brands or reputation, even if such claims are
untrue. Damage to our reputation or brands could impact our sales, business opportunities,
profitability, recruiting and valuation of our securities.
Various risks may impact the success of our DTC business.
We may not successfully execute on our DTC strategy. The success of our DTC strategy and
profitability of our DTC businesses will be impacted by the success of our efforts to reorganize DMED
to advance our DTC strategies, drive subscriber additions and retention based on the attractiveness
of our content, manage churn in reaction to price increases, achieve the desired financial impact of
the Disney+ ad supported service, pricing model and price increases, our ability to execute on cost
realignment and the effects of our determinations with regard to distribution for our creative
content across windows. The initial costs of marketing campaigns are generally recognized in the DMED
business/distribution platform of initial exploitation, and allocation of programming and production
costs is driven by distribution of the relevant content across windows. Accordingly, our distribution
determinations impact the costs of each business/distribution channel, including DTC. An increasing
number of competitors have entered DTC businesses. Consumers may not be willing to pay for an
expanding set of DTC streaming services at increasing prices, potentially exacerbated by an economic
downturn. In addition, economic downturns negatively impact the purchase of and price for advertising
on our DTC streaming services. We face competition for creative talent and may not be successful in
recruiting and retaining talent, or may face increased costs to do so. Our content may not
successfully attract and retain subscribers in the quantities that we expect. Our content is subject
to cost pressures and may cost more than we expect. We may not successfully manage our costs to meet
our profitability goals. Government regulation, including revised foreign content and ownership
regulations, may impact the implementation of our DTC business plans. The highly competitive
environment in which we operate puts pricing pressure on our DTC offerings and may require us to
lower our prices or not take price increases to attract or retain customers or experience higher
churn rates. These and other risks may impact the profitability and success of our DTC businesses.
Potential credit ratings actions, increases in interest rates, or volatility in the U.S. and global
financial markets could impede access to, or increase the cost of, financing our operations and
investments.
Our borrowing costs have been, and can be affected by short- and long-term debt ratings assigned by
independent ratings agencies that are based, in part, on the Company’s performance as measured by
credit metrics such as leverage and interest coverage ratios. As a result of the financial impact of
COVID-19 on our businesses, Standard and Poor’s downgraded our long-term debt ratings by two notches
to BBB+ and downgraded our short-term debt ratings by one notch to A-2. Fitch downgraded our long-
and short-term credit ratings by one notch to A- and F2, respectively. As of October 1, 2022 Moody’s
Investors Service’s long- and short-term debt ratings for the Company were A2 and P-1 (Stable),
respectively, Standard and Poor’s long- and short-term debt ratings for the Company were BBB+ and A-2
(Positive), respectively, and Fitch’s long- and short-term debt ratings for the Company were A- and
F2 (Stable), respectively. These ratings actions have increased, and any potential future
 25 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
downgrades could further increase, our cost of borrowing and/or make it more difficult for us to
obtain financing on acceptable terms.
In addition, increases in interest rates have increased our cost of borrowing and volatility in U.S.
and global financial markets could impact our access to, or further increase the cost of, financing.
Past disruptions in the U.S. and global credit and equity markets made it more difficult for many
businesses to obtain financing on acceptable terms. These conditions tended to increase the cost of
borrowing and if they recur, our cost of borrowing could increase and it may be more difficult to
obtain financing for our operations or investments.
Labor disputes may disrupt our operations and adversely affect the profitability of any of our
businesses.
A significant number of employees in various parts of our businesses, including employees of our
theme parks and writers, directors, actors, and production personnel for our productions are covered
by collective bargaining agreements. In addition, some of our employees outside the U.S. are
represented by works councils, trade unions or other employee associations. Further, the employees of
licensees who manufacture and retailers who sell our consumer products, and employees of providers of
programming content (such as sports leagues) may be covered by labor agreements with their employers.
In general, a labor dispute involving our employees or the employees of our licensees or retailers
who sell our consumer products or providers of programming content may disrupt our operations and
reduce our revenues. Resolution of disputes or negotiation of rate increases may increase our costs.
The seasonality of certain of our businesses and timing of certain of our product offerings could
exacerbate negative impacts on our operations.
Each of our businesses is normally subject to seasonal variations and variations in connection with
the timing of our product offerings, including as follows:
• Revenues at DPEP fluctuate with changes in theme park attendance and resort occupancy resulting
from the seasonal nature of vacation travel and leisure activities and seasonal consumer purchasing
behavior, which generally results in increased revenues during the Company’s first and fourth fiscal
quarters. Peak attendance and resort occupancy generally occur during the summer months when school
vacations occur and during early winter and spring holiday periods. In addition, licensing revenues
fluctuate with the timing and performance of our theatrical releases and cable programming
broadcasts, many of which have been delayed, canceled or modified.
• Revenues from television networks and stations are subject to seasonal advertising patterns and
changes in viewership levels. In general, advertising revenues are somewhat higher during the fall
and somewhat lower during the summer months.
• Revenues from content sales/licensing fluctuate due to the timing of content releases across
various distribution markets. Release dates and methods are determined by a number of factors,
including, among others, competition, the timing of vacation and holiday periods and impacts of
COVID-19 to various distribution markets.
• DTC revenues fluctuate based on changes in the number of subscribers and subscriber fee or revenue
mix; viewership levels on our digital platforms; and the demand for sports and film and television
content. Each of these may depend on the availability of content, which varies from time to time
throughout the year based on, among other things, sports seasons, content production schedules and
league shut downs. Because our DTC business is relatively new, we have limited data on which to base
our understanding of DTC seasonality.
Accordingly, negative impacts on our business occurring during a time of typical high seasonal demand
such as our park closures due to COVID-19 restrictions or hurricane damage during the summer travel
season or other high seasons, could have a disproportionate effect on the results of that business
for the year.
Costs of employee health, welfare and pension benefits, including postretirement medical benefits for
some employees and retirees, may reduce our profitability.
With approximately 220,000 employees, our profitability is substantially affected by costs of our
health, welfare and pension benefits, including the costs of medical benefits for current employees
and the costs of postretirement medical benefits for some current employees and retirees. We may
experience significant increases in these costs as a result of macroeconomic factors, which are
beyond our control, including increases in the cost of health care. Impacts of COVID-19 or future
health outbreaks and pandemics may lead to an increase in the cost of medical insurance and expenses.
In addition, changes in investment returns and discount rates used to calculate pension and
postretirement medical expense and related assets and liabilities can be volatile and may have an
unfavorable impact on our costs in some years. These macroeconomic factors as well as a decline in
the fair value of pension and postretirement medical plan assets may put upward pressure on the cost
of providing pension and postretirement medical benefits and may increase future funding
requirements. There can be no assurance that we will succeed in limiting cost increases, and
continued upward pressure could reduce the profitability of our businesses.
 26 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 ACQUISITION RISKS 
Our consolidated indebtedness increased substantially following completion of the TFCF acquisition
and further increased as a result of the impacts of COVID-19. This increased level of indebtedness
could adversely affect us, including by decreasing our business flexibility.
As a result of the TFCF acquisition in fiscal 2019, the Company’s net indebtedness increased
substantially. The increased indebtedness could have the effect of, among other things, reducing our
financial flexibility and reducing our flexibility to respond to changing business and economic
conditions, such as those presented by COVID-19, among others. Increased levels of indebtedness could
also reduce funds available for investments, capital expenditures, share repurchases and dividends,
and other activities and may create competitive disadvantages for us relative to other companies with
lower debt levels. Our leverage ratios have increased as the result of COVID-19’s impact on financial
performance, which caused certain of the credit ratings agencies to downgrade their assessment of our
credit ratings, and are expected to remain elevated at least in the near term. Our debt ratings may
be further downgraded, which may negatively impact our cost of borrowings.
The TFCF acquisition and integration and Hulu put/call may result in additional costs and expenses.
We have incurred and may continue to incur significant costs, expenses and fees for professional
services and other transaction and financing costs in connection with the TFCF acquisition and
integration and the Hulu put/call agreement with NBCU. We may also incur accounting and other costs
that were not anticipated at the time of the TFCF acquisition, including costs for which we have
established reserves or which may lead to reserves in the future. Such costs, including the Company’s
obligations under the Hulu put/call agreement with NBCU, could negatively impact the Company’s free
cash flow and result in the Company incurring additional indebtedness.
 GENERAL RISKS 
The price of our common stock has been, and may continue to be, volatile.
The price of our common stock has experienced substantial volatility and may continue to be volatile.
Various factors have impacted, and may continue to impact, the price of our common stock, including,
among others, changes in management; variations in our operating results; variations between our
actual results and expectations of securities analysts; changes in our estimates, guidance or
business plans; changes in financial estimates and recommendations by securities analysts; the
activities, operating results or stock price of our competitors or other industry participants in the
industries in which we operate; the announcement or completion of significant transactions by us or a
competitor; events affecting the stock market generally; and the economic and political conditions in
the U.S. and internationally, as well as other factors described in this Item 1A. Some of these
factors may adversely impact the price of our common stock, regardless of our operating performance.
Further, volatility in the price of our common stock may negatively impact one or more of our
businesses, including by increasing cash compensation or stock awards for our employees who
participate in our stock incentive programs or limiting our financing options for acquisitions and
other business expansion.
The Company’s amended and restated bylaws provide to the fullest extent permitted by law that the
Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware will be the exclusive forum for certain legal actions
between the Company and its stockholders, which could increase costs to bring a claim, discourage
claims or limit the ability of the Company’s stockholders to bring a claim in a judicial forum viewed
by the stockholders as more favorable for disputes with the Company or the Company’s directors,
officers or other employees.
The Company’s amended and restated bylaws provide to the fullest extent permitted by law that unless
the Company consents in writing to the selection of an alternative forum, the Court of Chancery of
the State of Delaware will be the sole and exclusive forum for any (i) derivative action or
proceeding brought on behalf of the Company, (ii) any action or proceeding asserting a claim of
breach of a fiduciary duty owed by any current or former director, officer or stockholder of the
Company to the Company or the Company’s stockholders, (iii) any action or proceeding asserting a
claim arising pursuant to, or seeking to enforce any right, obligation or remedy under, any provision
of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware (the “DGCL”), the Certificate of
Incorporation or these Bylaws (as each may be amended from time to time), (iv) any action or
proceeding as to which the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware confers jurisdiction on
the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware, (v) or any action or proceeding asserting a claim
governed by the internal affairs doctrine. The choice of forum provision may increase costs to bring
a claim, discourage claims or limit a stockholder’s ability to bring a claim in a judicial forum that
it finds favorable for disputes with the Company or the Company’s directors, officers or other
employees, which may discourage such lawsuits against the Company or the Company’s directors,
officers and other employees. Alternatively, if a court were to find the choice of forum provision
contained in the Company’s amended and restated bylaws to be inapplicable or unenforceable in an
action, the Company may incur additional costs associated with resolving such action in other
jurisdictions. The exclusive forum provision in the Company’s amended and restated bylaws will not
preclude or contract the scope of exclusive federal or concurrent jurisdiction for actions brought
under the federal securities laws including the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the respective rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
 27 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments │
The Company has received no written comments regarding its periodic or current reports from the staff
of the SEC that were issued 180 days or more preceding the end of fiscal 2022 that remain unresolved.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 2. Properties │
Our parks and resorts locations and other properties of the Company and its subsidiaries are
described in Item 1 under the caption Disney Parks, Experiences and Products . Film and television
library properties and television stations owned by the Company are described in Item 1 under the
caption Disney Media and Entertainment Distribution .
The Company and its subsidiaries own and lease properties throughout the world. In addition to the
properties noted above, the table below provides a brief description of other significant properties
and the related business segment.
 Location Property / Use Business Segment 
 Approximate Size 
 Owned  
 Burbank, CA & Land (201 acres) & Office/Production/Ware… 
 surrounding cities(1) Buildings (4,695,000 (includes 240,000 Corporate/DMED/DPEP 
 ft2) ft2sublet to 
 third-party tenants) 
 Burbank, CA & Buildings (1,821,000 Leased Office/Warehouse Corporate/DMED/DPEP 
 surrounding cities(1) ft2) 
 Land (22 acres) & Owned 
 Los Angeles, CA Buildings (600,000 Office/Production/Tech… Corporate/DMED 
 ft2) Warehouse 
 Los Angeles, CA Buildings (3,051,000 Leased Corporate/DMED/DPEP 
 ft2) Office/Production/Tech… 
 New York, NY Buildings (51,000 ft2) Owned Office Corporate/DMED 
 Leased 
 Land (2 acres) & Office/Production/Thea… 
 New York, NY Buildings (2,186,000 (includes 679,000 Corporate/DMED/DPEP 
 ft2) ft2sublet to 
 third-party tenants) 
 Land (117 acres) & Owned 
 Bristol, CT Buildings (1,174,000 Office/Production/Tech… DMED 
 ft2) 
 Bristol, CT Buildings (512,000 Leased DMED 
 ft2) Office/Warehouse/Techn… 
 Land (20 acres) & Owned 
 Emeryville, CA Buildings (430,000 Office/Production/Tech… DMED 
 ft2) 
 Emeryville, CA Buildings (80,000 ft2) Leased Office/Storage DMED 
 Leased 
 Buildings (638,000 Office/Production/Tech… 
 San Francisco, CA ft2) (includes 47,000 Corporate/DMED 
 ft2sublet to 
 third-party tenants) 
 Land and Buildings Owned and Leased 
 USA & Canada (Multiple sites and Office/ Corporate/DMED/DPEP 
 sizes) Production/Transmitter… 
 Europe, Asia, Buildings (Multiple Leased 
 Australia & Latin sites and sizes) Office/Warehouse/Retai… DMED/DPEP 
 America 
(1) Surrounding cities include Glendale, CA, North Hollywood, CA and Sun Valley, CA
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 3. Legal Proceedings │
As disclosed in Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company is engaged in certain
legal matters, and the disclosure set forth in Note 14 relating to certain legal matters is
incorporated herein by reference.
The Company, together with, in some instances, certain of its directors and officers, is a defendant
in various other legal actions involving copyright, breach of contract and various other claims
incident to the conduct of its businesses. Management does not expect the Company to suffer any
material liability by reason of these actions.
 28 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 4. Mine Safety Disclosures │
Not applicable.
 Information About Our Executive Officers 
The executive officers of the Company are elected each year at the organizational meeting of the
Board of Directors, which follows the annual meeting of the shareholders, and at other Board of
Directors meetings, as appropriate. Each of the executive officers has been employed by the Company
in the position or positions indicated in the list and pertinent notes below.
As of November 20, 2022, the following individuals have served as executive officers since the
beginning of our last fiscal year:
 Name Age Title Executive 
 Officer Since 
 Robert A. Iger 71 Chief Executive Officer(1) 11/20/2022 
 Robert A. Chapek 63 Chief Executive Officer(2) 2020 - 11/20/2022 
 Christine M. McCarthy 67 Senior Executive Vice President and Chief 2005 
 Financial Officer(3) 
 Horacio E. Gutierrez 57 Senior Executive Vice President and General 2022 
 Counsel(4) 
 Paul J. Richardson 57 Senior Executive Vice President and Chief 2021 
 Human Resources Officer(5) 
 Kristina K. Schake 52 Senior Executive Vice President and Chief 2022 
 Communications Officer(6) 
(1) Mr. Iger was appointed Chief Executive Officer effective November 20, 2022. He previously served
as Executive Chairman of the Company from February 2020 through December 2021 and as Chief Executive
Officer of the Company from September 2005 to February 2020.
(2) Mr. Chapek was appointed Chief Executive Officer effective February 24, 2020 and served as Chief
Executive Officer until November 20, 2022. He served as Chairman of Disney Parks, Experiences and
Products since the segment’s creation in 2018, and prior to that was the Chairman of Walt Disney
Parks and Resorts from 2015.
(3) Ms. McCarthy was appointed Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer effective
June 30, 2015. She was previously Executive Vice President, Corporate Real Estate, Alliances and
Treasurer of the Company from 2000 to 2015.
(4) Mr. Gutierrez was appointed Senior Executive Vice President and General Counsel effective
February 1, 2022. Prior to joining the Company, he served as Head of Global Affairs and Chief Legal
Officer for Spotify Technology S.A. (Spotify) from November 2019 to January 2022, where he led a
global, multi-disciplinary team of business, corporate communications and public affairs, government
relations, licensing, operations and legal professionals responsible for the company’s work in areas
including industry relations, content partnerships, public policy, and trust & safety. He was
previously Spotify’s General Counsel - Vice President, Business & Legal Affairs from April 2016 to
November 2019.
(5) Mr. Richardson was appointed Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer
effective July 1, 2021. He was previously Senior Vice President of Human Resources at ESPN from 2007.
(6) Ms. Schake was appointed Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Communications Officer
effective June 29, 2022. Previously, she served as Executive Vice President, Global Communications
from April 2022. Prior to joining the Company, she was appointed by the President of the United
States as Counselor for Strategic Communications to the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, leading a nationwide public education campaign from March 2021 to December 2021.
Prior to that, she served as Global Communications Director for Instagram, a subsidiary of Meta
Platforms, Inc., from March 2017 to March 2019, where she oversaw the communications teams in North
America, Latin America, Europe, and Asia.
 29 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS