╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1. Business │
The Walt Disney Company, together with its subsidiaries, is a diversified worldwide entertainment
company with operations in three segments: Entertainment, Sports and Experiences.
The terms “Company”, “we”, “our” and “us” are used in this report to refer collectively to the parent
company and the subsidiaries through which businesses are conducted.
Human Capital
The Company’s key human capital management objectives are to attract, retain and develop the highest
quality talent. To support these objectives, the Company’s human resources programs are designed to
develop talent to prepare them for critical roles and leadership positions for the future; reward and
support employees through competitive pay, benefit and perquisite programs; enhance the Company’s
culture through efforts aimed at making the workplace more engaging and inclusive; acquire talent and
facilitate internal talent mobility to create a high-performing, diverse workforce; engage employees
as brand ambassadors of the Company’s content, products and experiences; and evolve and invest in
technology, tools and resources to enable employees at work.
The Company employed approximately 225,000 people as of September 30, 2023, of which approximately
167,000 were employed in the U.S. and approximately 58,000 were employed outside the U.S. Our global
workforce is comprised of approximately 77% full time and 16% part time employees, with another 7%
being seasonal employees. A significant number of employees in various parts of our businesses,
including employees of our theme parks, and writers, directors, actors and production personnel for
our productions are covered by collective bargaining agreements. In addition, some of our employees
outside the U.S. are represented by works councils, trade unions or other employee associations.
Some of our key programs and initiatives to attract, develop and retain our diverse workforce
include:
• Health, wellness, family resources and other benefits: Disney’s benefit offerings are designed to
meet the varied and evolving needs of a diverse workforce across businesses and geographies while
helping our employees care for themselves and their families. We provide:
◦ Healthcare options aimed at improving quality of care while limiting out-of-pocket costs
◦ Family care resources, such as childcare and senior care programs for employees, including access
to onsite/community centers, enhanced back-up care choices to include personal caregivers, childcare
referral assistance and center discounts, homework help, college preparation, support for students
with special needs, a variety of parenting educational resources, long-term care coverage and a
family building benefit supporting fertility treatments, adoptions or surrogacy
◦ Free mental health and well-being resources, including onsite and virtual on-demand access to the
Employee Assistance Program for employees and their dependents and access to digital applications to
manage stress and encourage movement
◦ Two Centers for Living Well facilities that offer convenient, on-demand access to board-certified
physicians and counselors
◦ Global Well-Being Week (introduced in 2022), a dedicated week for employees around the world to
celebrate, learn and engage in well-being through in-person and virtual events and activities focused
on physical, emotional, financial and social well-being
◦ Access to a variety of well-being focused apps and platforms including our newest offering, Thrive
Global, which is an innovative app that helps employees create long-term healthy habits and behaviors
while improving their overall well-being and productivity
• Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (DE&I): Our DE&I objectives are to build teams that reflect the
life experiences of our audiences, while employing and supporting a diverse array of voices in our
creative and production teams. Our DE&I initiatives and programs include:
◦ Reimagine Tomorrow, which is the Company’s digital destination for amplifying underrepresented
voices and features some of Disney’s DE&I commitments and actions
◦ Executive Incubator, Creative Talent Development and Inclusion, and the Disney Launchpad: Shorts
Incubator, which are designed to create a pipeline of next-generation creative executives from
underrepresented backgrounds
◦ Employee development programs and fellowships for underrepresented talent
◦ Innovative learning opportunities, which spark dialogue among employees, leaders, Disney talent and
external experts
 2 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
◦ Over 100 employee-led groups, which represent and support the diverse communities that make up our
global workforce
◦ The Disney Look appearance guidelines, which were updated to cultivate a more inclusive environment
that encourages and celebrates authentic expressions of belonging among employees
• Disney Aspire: We support the long-term career aspirations of our hourly employees and further our
commitment to strengthening the communities in which we work through our education investment
program, Disney Aspire. We pay 100% of the tuition costs upfront for eligible participating employees
at a variety of in-network learning providers and universities and reimburse employees for applicable
books and fees. The program helps our employees achieve their goals professionally - whether at
Disney or beyond - by equipping them with the skills they need to succeed in the rapidly changing 21
st century career landscape. More than 15,000 current employees are enrolled and more than 3,800
current employees have graduated since the program launched in 2018. More than 3,100 current students
and graduates have been internally promoted across the Company.
• Talent Development: We prioritize and invest in creating opportunities to help employees grow and
build their careers through a multitude of training and development programs. These include online,
instructor-led and on-the-job learning formats as well as executive talent and succession planning
paired with an individualized development approach.
• Sustainability and Social Impact: The Company’s longstanding commitments to sustainability and
social impact helps differentiate the Company as an employer. Our priorities include operating
responsibly; investing in our people’s development and employee experience; diversity, equity and
inclusion; environmental stewardship and conservation; and supporting our communities, with a focus
on supporting children and families. Our approach seeks to connect these priorities with the
Company’s businesses and employees and is reflected in our philanthropic giving. The Company also
supports employees who give back to our communities with a generous U.S. matching gifts program, as
well as Disney VoluntEARS, which rewards employees for their volunteer hours with the opportunity to
direct not-for-profit donations from the Company to qualified non-profits of their choosing.
Environmental Sustainability
The Company has developed measurable environmental sustainability goals for 2030, based on our
assessment of where the Company’s operations have the most significant environmental impacts and
where we can most effectively mitigate those impacts. The Company’s goals encompass science-based
targets for Scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions, water stewardship, waste reduction, sustainable design in
construction and use of more sustainable materials in our products.
 ENTERTAINMENT 
The Entertainment segment generally encompasses the Company’s non-sports focused global film,
television and direct-to-consumer (DTC) video streaming content production and distribution
activities.
The significant lines of business within Entertainment are as follows:
• Linear Networks
◦ Domestic: ABC Television Network (ABC Network); Disney, Freeform, FX and National Geographic (owned
73% by the Company) branded television channels; and eight owned ABC television stations
◦ International: Disney, Fox (which will be rebranded in fiscal 2024, primarily to FX or Star), FX,
National Geographic (owned 73% by the Company) and Star branded general entertainment television
channels outside of the U.S.
◦ A 50% equity investment in A+E Television Networks (A+E), which operates cable channels including
A&E, HISTORY and Lifetime
• Direct-to-Consumer
◦ Disney+: a global DTC service that primarily offers general entertainment and family programming.
In certain Latin American countries, we offer Disney+ as well as Star+, a general entertainment
service that also has sports programming
◦ Disney+ Hotstar: a DTC service primarily in India that offers general entertainment, family and
sports programming
◦ Hulu (owned 67% by the Company): a U.S. DTC service that offers general entertainment and family
programming and a digital over-the-top (OTT) service that includes live linear streams of cable
networks and the major broadcast networks
 3 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
• Content Sales/Licensing
◦ Sale/licensing of film and episodic content to third-party television and video-on-demand (TV/VOD)
services
◦ Theatrical distribution
◦ Home entertainment distribution: DVD and Blu-ray discs, electronic home video licenses and video-
on-demand (VOD) rentals
◦ Staging and licensing of live entertainment events on Broadway and around the world (Stage Plays)
◦ Intersegment allocation of revenues from the Experiences segment, which is meant to reflect
royalties on consumer products merchandise licensing revenues generated on intellectual property
(“IP”) created by the Entertainment segment
◦ Music distribution
◦ Post-production services by Industrial Light & Magic and Skywalker Sound
Entertainment also includes the following activities that are reported with Content Sales/Licensing:
• National Geographic magazine and online business (owned 73% by the Company)
• A 30% ownership interest in Tata Play Limited, which operates a direct-to-home satellite
distribution platform in India
The significant revenues of Entertainment are as follows:
• Affiliate fees - Fees charged to multi-channel video programming distributors (i.e. cable,
satellite, telecommunications and digital over-the-top (e.g. YouTube TV) service providers) (MVPDs)
for the right to deliver our programming to their customers. Linear Networks also generates revenues
from fees charged to television stations affiliated with ABC Network.
• Subscription fees - Fees charged to customers/subscribers for our DTC streaming services
• Advertising - Sales of advertising time/space
• TV/VOD distribution - Licensing fees for the right to use our film and episodic content
• Theatrical distribution - Rentals from licensing our films to theaters
• Home entertainment distribution - Sales and rentals of our film and episodic content to retailers
and through distributors
• Other revenue - Revenues from licensing our music, ticket sales from stage play performances, fees
from licensing our IP for use in stage plays, sales of post-production services and the allocation of
consumer products merchandise licensing revenues
The significant expenses of Entertainment are as follows:
• Operating expenses, consisting primarily of programming and production costs, technology support
costs, operating labor, distribution costs and costs of sales. Programming and production costs
include the following:
◦ Amortization of capitalized production costs
◦ Amortization of the costs of licensed programming rights
◦ Subscriber-based fees for programming our Hulu Live service, including fees paid by Hulu to the
Sports segment and other Entertainment segment businesses for the right to air their linear networks
on Hulu Live
◦ Production costs related to live programming (primarily news)
◦ Amortization of participations and residual obligations
◦ Fees paid to the Sports segment to program ESPN on ABC and certain sports content on Star+
• Selling, general and administrative costs, including marketing costs
• Depreciation and amortization
 Linear Networks 
The majority of Linear Networks revenue is derived from affiliate fees and advertising. The Company’s
Linear Networks businesses provide programming under multi-year licensing agreements with MVPDs
and/or affiliated television stations that are generally based on contractually specified rates on a
per subscriber basis. The amounts that we can charge for our networks are largely dependent on the
quality and quantity of programming that we can provide and the competitive market for programming
services. The ability to sell advertising time and the rates received are primarily dependent on the
size and nature of the audience that the network can deliver to the advertiser as well as overall
advertiser demand.
 4 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Domestic Linear Networks
ABC Network
ABC Network distributes programming to approximately 240 local affiliated television stations and to
our eight owned television stations, which collectively reach almost 100% of U.S. television
households. ABC Network programming is aired in the primetime, daytime, late night, news and sports
“dayparts”. ESPN programs the sports daypart on the ABC Network, which is branded ESPN on ABC.
ABC Network produces a variety of primetime specials, news and daytime programming.
Disney Channels
Branded television channels include: Disney Channel; Disney Junior; and Disney XD (collectively
Disney Channels).
Disney Channel - the Disney Channel airs original series and movie programming 24 hours a day
targeted to kids ages 2 to 14. The channel features live-action comedy series, animated programming
and preschool series as well as original movies and theatrical films.
Disney Junior - the Disney Junior channel airs programming 24 hours a day targeted to kids ages 2 to
7 and their parents and caregivers. The channel features animated and live-action programming that
blends Disney’s storytelling and characters with learning. Disney Junior also airs as a programming
block on the Disney Channel.
Disney XD - the Disney XD channel airs programming 24 hours a day targeted to kids ages 6 to 11. The
channel features a mix of live-action and animated programming.
Freeform
Freeform is a channel targeted to viewers ages 18 to 34 that airs original, Company owned (“library”)
and licensed television series, films and holiday programming events.
FX Channels
Branded television channels include: FX; FXM; and FXX (collectively FX Channels), which air a mix of
original, library and licensed television series and films.
National Geographic Channels
Branded television channels include: National Geographic; Nat Geo Wild; and Nat Geo Mundo
(collectively National Geographic Channels). National Geographic Channels air scripted and
documentary programming on such topics as natural history, adventure, science, exploration and
culture.
The number of subscribers (in millions) for the significant domestic branded channels are as follows:
 Subscribers(1) 
 Disney 
 Disney Channel 71 
 Disney Junior(2) 52 
 Disney XD(2) 51 
 Freeform(2) 71 
 FX Channels 
 FX 72 
 FXX(2) 68 
 FXM(2) 43 
 National Geographic Channels 
 National Geographic 71 
 National Geographic Wild(2) 42 
(1) Based on Nielsen Media Research estimates as of September 2023. Estimates include traditional
MVPD and the majority of digital OTT subscriber counts.
(2) The Company renewed its MVPD agreement with an affiliate during September 2023, under which the
affiliate will no longer distribute these channels. Nielsen Media Research estimates as of September
2023 do not reflect the impact of this agreement.
 5 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Domestic Television Stations
The Company owns eight television stations, six of which are located in the top ten television
household markets in the U.S. Our television stations collectively reach approximately 20% of U.S.
television households.
The stations we own are as follows:
 TV Station Market Television Market 
 Ranking(1) 
 WABC New York, NY 1 
 KABC Los Angeles, CA 2 
 WLS Chicago, IL 3 
 WPVI Philadelphia, PA 4 
 KTRK Houston, TX 7 
 KGO San Francisco, CA 10 
 WTVD Raleigh-Durham, NC 23 
 KFSN Fresno, CA 53 
(1) Based on Nielsen Media Research, U.S. Television Household Estimates, January 1, 2023
International Linear Networks
International Linear Networks use content from the Company’s various studios, including library
titles, as well as content acquired from third parties. The Company operates approximately 285
general entertainment and family channels outside the U.S. in approximately 40 languages and 190
countries/territories.
General Entertainment
General Entertainment channels include Fox (which will be rebranded in fiscal 2024, primarily to FX
or Star), FX, National Geographic and Star branded channels, which air a variety of scripted, reality
and documentary programming. As of September 2023 and 2022, the estimated number of unique
subscribers for our general entertainment channels, based on internal management reports, are 270
million and 315 million, respectively.
Family
Family channels include Disney Channel and Disney Junior, which air a variety of animated and live
action original series and movies targeted to kids ages 2 to 14 and their parents and caregivers. As
of September 2023 and 2022, the estimated number of unique subscribers for our family channels, based
on internal management reports, are 225 million and 220 million, respectively.
Equity Investments
The most significant equity investment at Linear Networks is A+E. The Company’s share of A+E’s
financial results are reported as “Equity in the income (loss) of investees, net” in the Company’s
Consolidated Statements of Operations.
A+E is owned 50% by the Company and 50% by Hearst. A+E operates a variety of cable channels:
• A&E – which generally offers unscripted entertainment programming
• HISTORY – which offers original unscripted series and event-driven specials
• Lifetime and Lifetime Movie Network (LMN) – which offer female-focused programming
• FYI – which offers contemporary lifestyle programming
A+E programming is available in approximately 200 countries and territories. A+E’s networks are
distributed internationally under multi-year licensing agreements with MVPDs. A+E programming is also
sold to international TV/VOD services.
 6 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The number of domestic subscribers (in millions) for A+E channels are as follows:
 Subscribers(1) 
 A&E 65 
 HISTORY 65 
 Lifetime 65 
 LMN 49 
 FYI 37 
(1) Based on Nielsen Media Research estimates as of September 2023. Estimates include traditional
MVPD and the majority of digital OTT subscriber counts.
 Direct-to-Consumer 
Disney+, Disney+ Hotstar and Hulu are subscription services that provide video streaming of general
entertainment and family programming. Disney+ and Disney+ Hotstar also provide video streaming of
international sports programming. The services are offered individually or in various bundles, which
may include ESPN+ (see Sports segment discussion), to customers directly or through third-party
distributors on mobile and internet connected devices. The majority of Direct-to-Consumer revenue is
derived from subscription fees and advertising.
Disney+ (including Star+ in Latin America)
Disney+ is a subscription-based DTC service with Disney, Pixar, Marvel, Star Wars and National
Geographic branded programming, which are all top-level selections or “tiles” within the Disney+
interface. Outside the U.S. and Latin America, Disney+ also includes a Star branded tile, which
features general entertainment programming.
Star+ is a standalone DTC service in Latin America with a variety of general entertainment and family
content and live sports programming.
Disney+ (including Star+) is also referred to as Disney+ Core.
As of September 30, 2023, the estimated number of paid Disney+ Core subscribers, based on internal
management reports, was approximately 113 million.
Disney+ Hotstar
Disney+ Hotstar is a subscription-based DTC service available in India, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Philippines and Thailand. Programming includes television shows, movies, sports and original series
in approximately ten languages, in addition to gaming and social features. Disney+ Hotstar has
exclusive streaming rights to certain cricket programming.
As of September 30, 2023, the estimated number of paid Disney+ Hotstar subscribers, based on internal
management reports, was approximately 38 million.
Disney+ Core and Disney+ Hotstar offer content from the Company’s various studios, including library
titles, as well as content acquired from third parties.
The majority of Disney+ Core and Disney+ Hotstar revenue is derived from subscription fees and, to a
lesser extent, Advertising. The Company launched an ad-supported Disney+ service in the U.S. in
December 2022 and in select European markets and in Canada in November 2023. The Company plans to
launch an ad-supported Disney+ service in additional international markets in calendar 2024.
Hulu
Hulu is a domestic subscription-based DTC service with general entertainment content from the
Company’s various studios as well as content licensed from third parties. Hulu’s revenue is primarily
derived from subscription fees and Advertising. Hulu offers subscription VOD (SVOD) services with or
without advertising in addition to a digital OTT MVPD (Live TV) service. The Live TV service is
available with either of Hulu’s SVOD services and includes live linear streams of cable networks and
the major broadcast networks. In addition, Hulu offers subscriptions to premium services such as Max,
Cinemax, Starz and Showtime, which can be added to the Hulu service. Certain programming from ABC
Network, Freeform and FX Channels is also available on the Hulu SVOD service one day after the linear
airing on these channels. As of September 30, 2023, the estimated number of paid Hulu subscribers,
based on internal management reports, was approximately 49 million.
The Company has 67% ownership and full operational control of Hulu. NBC Universal (NBCU) owns the
remaining 33% of Hulu. In November 2023, NBCU exercised its put right to require the Company to
purchase NBCU’s interest in Hulu (see Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional
information).
 7 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Content Sales/Licensing and Other 
The majority of Content Sales/Licensing revenue is derived from TV/VOD, theatrical and home
entertainment distribution. In addition, revenue is generated from music distribution, stage plays
and post-production services through Industrial Light & Magic and Skywalker Sound.
The Company also publishes National Geographic magazine, which is reported with Content
Sales/Licensing.
TV/VOD Distribution
We license our content to third-party television networks, television stations and other video
service providers for distribution to viewers on television or a variety of internet-connected
devices, including through other DTC services.
Theatrical Distribution
The Company licenses full-length live-action and animated films to theaters globally. Cumulatively
through September 30, 2023, the Company has released approximately 1,100 full-length live-action
films and 100 full-length animated films. In the domestic and most major international markets, we
generally distribute and market our films directly. In certain international markets our films are
distributed by independent companies. In some territories, certain films may be exclusively
distributed on our DTC streaming services. During fiscal 2024, we expect to release approximately 15
films, although the ultimate number of releases will depend on when productions resume following the
writers/actors’ work stoppages.
The Company incurs significant marketing and advertising costs before and throughout the theatrical
release of a film in an effort to generate public awareness of the film, to increase the public’s
intent to view the film and to help generate consumer interest in the subsequent home entertainment
and other ancillary markets. These costs are expensed as incurred, which may result in a loss on a
film in the theatrical markets, including in periods prior to the theatrical release of the film.
Home Entertainment Distribution
We distribute the Company’s film and episodic content in home entertainment markets on DVD and Blu-
ray disc, through electronic home video licenses and VOD rentals globally.
Domestically and internationally, we distribute directly to retailers and through independent
distribution companies. Electronic formats of our film and episodic content may be purchased through
e-tailers such as Apple and Amazon, and MVPDs, such as Comcast and DirecTV, and physical formats are
generally sold to retailers, such as Walmart and Target. The Company also operates Disney Movie Club,
which sells DVD/Blu-ray discs directly to consumers in the U.S. and Canada.
Distribution of film content in the home entertainment window generally starts within three months
after the theatrical release. Electronic formats are typically available approximately four to eight
weeks ahead of the physical release. We also license titles to VOD e-tailers concurrent with physical
home entertainment distribution.
Distribution of episodic content in the home entertainment window includes electronic sales of season
passes that can be purchased prior to, during and after the broadcast season with individual episodes
typically available to season pass customers shortly after the initial airing of the show in each
territory. Access to individual episodes is also available for electronic purchase shortly after the
initial airing in each territory.
Disney Theatrical Group
Disney Theatrical Group develops, produces and licenses live entertainment events on Broadway and
around the world. Productions include The Lion King , Frozen , Aladdin and Beauty and the Beast .
Disney Theatrical Group also licenses the Company’s IP to Feld Entertainment, the producer of Disney
On Ice and Marvel Universe Live! .
Disney Music Group
The Disney Music Group encompasses all aspects of the Company’s music commercialization and marketing
including: recorded music (Walt Disney Records and Hollywood Records); music publishing; and
concerts. Disney Music Group distributes music both physically and digitally and also licenses music
throughout the world in various forms of media, including: television; print; gaming; and consumer
products.
Equity Investment
The Company has a 30% effective interest in Tata Play Limited, which operates a direct-to-home
satellite distribution platform in India.
 Content Production and Acquisition 
Produced content primarily consists of original films and episodic programs, network news and
daytime/nighttime content and licensed content includes acquired episodic programming rights.
Original content is generally produced under the following banners: ABC Signature; Disney Branded
Television; FX Productions; Lucasfilm; Marvel; National Geographic Studios; Pixar;
 8 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Searchlight Pictures; Twentieth Century Studios; 20th Television; and Walt Disney Pictures. Original
content is also commissioned and produced by various third-party studios. Program development is
carried out in collaboration with writers, producers and creative teams.
Costs to produce content are generally capitalized and allocated across Entertainment’s businesses
based on the estimated relative value of the distribution windows.
Generally, the Company has full production and distribution rights to its IP. However, prior to the
Company’s acquisition of Marvel, Sony Pictures Entertainment licensed from Marvel the rights to
produce and distribute Spider-Man films in all windows except for the merchandise rights, which the
Company retains.
The Company has a significant library of content spanning approximately 100 years of production
history as well as acquired libraries. The library of content includes approximately 5,100 live-
action film titles and 400 animated film titles, as well as episodic series with four or more seasons
(approximately 75 dramas, 55 comedies, 35 non-scripted series, 15 animated series and 10 live-action
series). In addition, the library includes approximately 100 series and 65 films that were produced
for initial distribution on our DTC platforms.
In fiscal 2024, the Company plans to produce or commission approximately 225 episodic and film
titles, although the ultimate number will depend on when productions resume following the
writers/actors’ work stoppages. The vast majority of our productions will be distributed on our
Linear Networks and/or DTC platforms or theatrically. Programming is also produced for third parties,
which typically have domestic linear distribution rights while the Company retains domestic VOD and
international distribution rights. We also license, acquire or produce local content for use in
various countries/territories.
 Competition and Seasonality 
Linear Networks and Direct-to-Consumer compete for viewers’ attention and audience share primarily
with other television networks, independent television stations and other media, such as other DTC
streaming services, social media and video games. With respect to the sale of advertising time, we
compete with other television networks, independent television stations, MVPDs, other DTC streaming
services and other advertising media such as digital content, newspapers, magazines, radio and
billboards. Our television and radio stations primarily compete for audiences and advertisers in
local market areas.
Linear Networks compete with other networks for carriage by MVPDs. The Company’s contractual
agreements with MVPDs are renewed or renegotiated from time to time in the ordinary course of
business. Consolidation and other market conditions in the cable, satellite and telecommunication
distribution industry, including subscriber trends, and other factors may adversely affect the
Company’s ability to obtain and maintain contractual terms for the distribution of its various
programming services that are as favorable as those currently in place.
Content Sales/Licensing businesses compete with all forms of entertainment and a significant number
of companies produce and/or distribute theatrical and episodic content, distribute products in the
home entertainment market, provide pay TV/VOD services, and produce music and live theater.
The operating results of Content Sales/Licensing fluctuate due to the timing and performance of
releases in the theatrical, home entertainment and television markets. Release dates are determined
by several factors, including competition and the timing of vacation and holiday periods.
We also compete with other media and entertainment companies, independent production companies and
VOD services for creative and performing talent, story properties, show concepts, scripted and other
programming, advertiser support, production facilities and exhibition outlets that are essential to
the success of our Entertainment businesses.
Advertising revenues at Linear Networks and Direct-to-Consumer are subject to seasonal advertising
patterns and changes in viewership levels. In general, domestic advertising revenues are typically
somewhat higher during the fall and somewhat lower during the summer months. Affiliate revenues vary
with the subscriber trends of MVPDs.
 Sports 
The Sports segment generally encompasses the Company’s sports-focused global television and DTC video
streaming content production and distribution activities.
The significant lines of business within Sports are as follows:
• ESPN (generally owned 80% by the Company)
◦ Domestic:
▪ Eight ESPN-branded television channels
▪ ESPN on ABC (sports programmed on the ABC Network by ESPN)
▪ ESPN+ DTC video streaming service
 9 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
◦ International: ESPN-branded channels outside of the U.S.
• Star: Star-branded sports channels in India
The significant revenues of Sports are as follows:
• Affiliate fees
• Advertising
• Subscription fees
• Other revenue - Fees from the following activities: pay-per-view events on ESPN+, sub-licensing of
sports rights, programming ESPN on ABC and licensing the ESPN brand
The significant expenses of Sports are as follows:
• Operating expenses, consisting primarily of programming and production costs, technology support
costs, operating labor and distribution costs. Programming and production costs include amortization
of licensed sports rights and production costs related to live sports and other sports-related
programming.
• Selling, general and administrative costs, including marketing costs
• Depreciation and amortization
 Domestic ESPN 
Branded television channels include eight 24-hour domestic television sports channels: ESPN and ESPN2
(both of which are dedicated to professional and college sports as well as sports news and original
programming); ESPNU (which is dedicated to college sports); ESPNEWS (which re-airs select ESPN studio
shows and airs a variety of other programming); SEC Network (which is dedicated to Southeastern
Conference college athletics); ACC Network (which is dedicated to Atlantic Coast Conference college
athletics); ESPN Deportes (which airs professional and college sports as well as studio shows in
Spanish); and Longhorn Network (which is dedicated to The University of Texas athletics). In
addition, ESPN programs ESPN on ABC and recognizes the direct revenues and costs for this programming
and receives a fee from the ABC Network, which is eliminated in consolidation.
The Company has various sports programming rights, which are used to produce content aired on ESPN
television networks and ESPN+, including live events and sports news. Rights include the National
Football League (NFL), college football (including bowl games and the College Football Playoff) and
basketball, the National Basketball Association (NBA), mixed martial arts, Major League Baseball
(MLB), the National Hockey League (NHL), soccer, Top Rank Boxing, US Open Tennis, the Masters golf
tournament, the Wimbledon Championships, the Professional Golfers’ Association (PGA) Championship and
the Women’s National Basketball Association (WNBA).
The number of subscribers (in millions) for the significant domestic branded channels are as follows:
 Subscribers 
 ESPN(1) 71 
 ESPN2(1) 71 
 ESPNU(1) 50 
 ESPNEWS(2) 53 
 SEC Network(2) 48 
 ACC Network(2) 46 
(1) Based on Nielsen Media Research estimates as of September 2023. Estimates include traditional
MVPD and the majority of digital OTT subscriber counts.
(2) Because Nielsen Media Research does not measure this channel, estimated subscribers are according
to SNL Kagan as of December 2022.
ESPN+ is a domestic subscription-based DTC service offering thousands of live sporting events, on-
demand sports content and other original programming. The service is offered individually or in
various bundles with Disney+ and Hulu to customers directly or through third-party distributors on
mobile and internet connected devices. ESPN+ revenue is derived from subscription fees, pay-per-view
fees and, to a lesser extent, advertising. Live events available through the service include mixed
martial arts, soccer, hockey, boxing, baseball, college sports, golf, tennis and cricket. ESPN+ is
currently the exclusive distributor for Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) pay-per-view events in
the U.S. As of September 30, 2023, the estimated number of paid ESPN+ subscribers, based on internal
management reports, was approximately 26 million.
 10 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 International ESPN 
The Company operates approximately 40 ESPN branded sports channels outside the U.S. in 4 languages
and approximately 105 countries/territories. Channels previously branded Fox are now branded ESPN. In
the Netherlands, the ESPN branded channels are operated by Eredivisie Media & Marketing CV (EMM)
(owned 51% by the Company), which has the media and sponsorship rights of the Dutch Premier League
for soccer. Rights include various soccer leagues (including English Premier League, LaLiga,
Bundesliga and multiple UEFA leagues). As of September 2023, the estimated number of subscribers to
ESPN branded channels outside the U.S., based on internal management reports, was approximately 59
million.
 Star 
The Company operates 10 Star branded sports channels in India, in 4 languages. Star has rights to
various sports programming, primarily cricket and soccer. As of September 2023, the estimated number
of subscribers to Star branded channels, based on internal management reports, was 82 million.
 Equity Investments 
The most significant equity investment at Sports is a 30% interest in CTV Specialty Television, Inc.
(CTV). The Company’s share of CTV’s financial results is reported as “Equity in the income (loss) of
investees, net” in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations. CTV operates television
networks in Canada, including The Sports Networks (TSN) 1-5, Le Réseau des Sports (RDS), RDS2, RDS
Info, Discovery Canada, Discovery Science and Animal Planet Canada.
 Investments 
In fiscal 2023, the Company entered into an agreement with PENN Entertainment, Inc. (PENN), under
which the Company will earn advertising and licensing revenues from providing promotional services
and the ESPN BET trademark to PENN in connection with its operation of a sportsbook. In addition, the
Company received warrants to purchase equity in PENN, which vest over the term of the agreement. The
warrants are recorded at fair market value and adjustments to fair market value are reported as
“Interest expense, net” in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations.
 Competition and Seasonality 
Sports competes for viewers’ attention and audience share primarily with other television networks,
independent television stations and other media, such as other DTC streaming services, social media
and video games. With respect to the sale of advertising time, we compete with other television
networks, independent television stations, MVPDs and other advertising media such as digital content,
newspapers, magazines, radio and billboards.
The Sports television networks compete with other networks for carriage by MVPDs. The Company’s
contractual agreements with MVPDs are renewed or renegotiated from time to time in the ordinary
course of business. Consolidation and other market conditions in the cable, satellite and
telecommunication distribution industry and other factors may adversely affect the Company’s ability
to obtain and maintain contractual terms for the distribution of its various programming services
that are as favorable as those currently in place.
We also compete with other media and entertainment companies and VOD services for sports rights,
creative and performing talent and other programming, advertiser support and production facilities
that are essential to the success of our Sports businesses.
Advertising revenues are subject to changes in viewership levels and the demand for sports
programming. Advertising revenues generated from sports programming are also impacted by the timing
of sports seasons and events, which timing may vary throughout the year or may take place
periodically (e.g. biannually, quadrennially). Affiliate revenues vary with the subscriber trends of
MVPDs.
 EXPERIENCES 
The significant lines of business within Experiences are as follows:
• Parks & Experiences:
◦ Domestic:
▪ Theme parks and resorts:
• Walt Disney World Resort in Florida
• Disneyland Resort in California
▪ Experiences:
• Disney Cruise Line
• Disney Vacation Club
• National Geographic Expeditions (owned 73% by the Company) and Adventures by Disney
 11 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
• Aulani, a Disney Resort & Spa in Hawaii
◦ International:
▪ Theme parks and resorts:
• Disneyland Paris
• Hong Kong Disneyland Resort (48% ownership interest and consolidated in our financial results)
• Shanghai Disney Resort (43% ownership interest and consolidated in our financial results)
• In addition, the Company licenses its IP to a third party to operate Tokyo Disney Resort
• Consumer Products:
◦ Licensing of our trade names, characters, visual, literary and other IP to various manufacturers,
game developers, publishers and retailers throughout the world, for use on merchandise, published
materials and games
◦ Sale of branded merchandise through online, retail and wholesale businesses, and development and
publishing of books, comic books and magazines (except National Geographic magazine, which is
reported in Entertainment)
The significant revenues of Experiences are as follows:
• Theme park admissions - Sales of tickets for admission to our theme parks and for premium access to
certain attractions (e.g. Genie+ and Lightning Lane)
• Resorts and vacations - Sales of room nights at hotels, sales of cruise and other vacations and
sales and rentals of vacation club properties
• Parks & Experiences merchandise, food and beverage - Sales of merchandise, food and beverages at
our theme parks and resorts and cruise ships
• Merchandise licensing and retail:
◦ Merchandise licensing - Royalties from licensing our IP for use on consumer goods
◦ Retail - Sales of merchandise through internet shopping sites (generally branded shopDisney) and at
The Disney Store, as well as to wholesalers (including books, comic books and magazines)
• Parks licensing and other - Revenues from sponsorships and co-branding opportunities, real estate
rent and sales and royalties earned on Tokyo Disney Resort revenues
The significant expenses of Experiences are as follows:
• Operating expenses, consisting primarily of operating labor, costs of goods sold, infrastructure
costs, supplies, commissions and entertainment offerings. Infrastructure costs include technology
support costs, repairs and maintenance, property taxes, utilities and fuel, retail occupancy costs,
insurance and transportation
• Selling, general and administrative costs, including marketing costs
• Depreciation and amortization
Significant capital investments:
• In recent years, the majority of the Company’s capital spend has been at our parks and experiences
business, which is principally for theme park and resort expansion, new attractions, cruise ships,
capital improvements and systems infrastructure.
 Parks & Experiences 
Walt Disney World Resort
The Walt Disney World Resort is located approximately 20 miles southwest of Orlando, Florida, on
approximately 25,000 acres of land. The resort includes theme parks (the Magic Kingdom, EPCOT,
Disney’s Hollywood Studios and Disney’s Animal Kingdom); hotels; vacation club properties; a retail,
dining and entertainment complex (Disney Springs); a sports complex; conference centers; campgrounds;
golf courses; water parks; and other recreational facilities designed to attract visitors for an
extended stay.
The Walt Disney World Resort is marketed through a variety of international, national and local
advertising and promotional activities. A number of attractions and restaurants in each of the theme
parks are sponsored or operated by other companies under multi-year agreements.
Magic Kingdom — The Magic Kingdom consists of six themed areas: Adventureland, Fantasyland,
Frontierland, Liberty Square, Main Street USA and Tomorrowland. Each land provides a unique guest
experience featuring themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and entertainment
experiences.
 12 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
EPCOT — EPCOT consists of four major themed areas: World Showcase, World Celebration, World Nature
and World Discovery. All areas feature themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and
entertainment experiences. Countries represented with pavilions include Canada, China, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Morocco, Norway, the United Kingdom and the U.S. The Journey of Water,
inspired by Moana, opened in October 2023 as part of a multi-year transformation at EPCOT.
Disney’s Hollywood Studios — Disney’s Hollywood Studios consists of eight themed areas: Animation
Courtyard, Commissary Lane, Echo Lake, Grand Avenue, Hollywood Boulevard, Star Wars : Galaxy’s Edge,
Sunset Boulevard and Toy Story Land. The areas provide behind-the-scenes glimpses of Hollywood-style
action through various shows and attractions and offer themed food service, merchandise shops and
entertainment experiences.
Disney’s Animal Kingdom — Disney’s Animal Kingdom consists of a 145-foot tall Tree of Life
centerpiece surrounded by five themed areas: Africa, Asia, DinoLand USA, Discovery Island and Pandora
- The World of Avatar. Each themed area contains attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and
entertainment experiences. The park features more than 300 species of live mammals, birds, reptiles
and amphibians and 3,000 varieties of vegetation.
Hotels, Vacation Club Properties and Other Resort Facilities — As of September 30, 2023, the Company
owned and operated 18 resort hotels and vacation club facilities at the Walt Disney World Resort,
with approximately 23,000 rooms and 3,600 vacation club units. Resort facilities include 500,000
square feet of conference meeting space and Disney’s Fort Wilderness camping and recreational area,
which offers approximately 800 campsites.
Disney Springs is an approximately 120-acre retail, dining and entertainment complex and consists of
four areas: Marketplace, The Landing, Town Center and West Side. The areas are home to more than 150
venues including the 64,000-square-foot World of Disney retail store. Most of the Disney Springs
facilities are operated by third parties that pay rent to the Company.
Ten independently-operated hotels with approximately 7,000 rooms are situated on property leased from
the Company.
ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex is a 230-acre center that hosts professional caliber training and
competitions, festival and tournament events and interactive sports activities. The complex, which
welcomes both amateur and professional athletes, accommodates multiple sporting events, including
baseball, basketball, football, soccer, softball, tennis and track and field. It also includes a
stadium, as well as two venues designed for cheerleading, dance competitions and other indoor sports.
Other recreational amenities and activities available at the Walt Disney World Resort include three
championship golf courses, miniature golf courses, full-service spas, tennis, sailing, swimming,
horseback riding and a number of other sports and leisure time activities. The resort also includes
two water parks: Disney’s Blizzard Beach and Disney’s Typhoon Lagoon.
Disneyland Resort
The Company owns 489 acres and has rights under a long-term lease for use of an additional 52 acres
of land in Anaheim, California. The Disneyland Resort includes two theme parks (Disneyland and Disney
California Adventure), three resort hotels and a retail, dining and entertainment complex (Downtown
Disney).
The Disneyland Resort is marketed through a variety of international, national and local advertising
and promotional activities. A number of the attractions and restaurants in the theme parks are
sponsored or operated by other companies under multi-year agreements.
Disneyland — Disneyland consists of nine themed areas: Adventureland, Critter Country, Fantasyland,
Frontierland, Main Street USA, Mickey’s Toontown, New Orleans Square, Star Wars : Galaxy’s Edge and
Tomorrowland. These areas feature themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and
entertainment experiences.
Disney California Adventure — Disney California Adventure is adjacent to Disneyland and includes
eight themed areas: Avengers Campus, Buena Vista Street, Cars Land, Grizzly Peak, Hollywood Land,
Paradise Gardens Park, Pixar Pier and San Fransokyo Square. These areas include themed attractions,
restaurants, merchandise shops and entertainment experiences.
Hotels, Vacation Club Units and Other Resort Facilities — Disneyland Resort includes three Company
owned and operated hotels and vacation club facilities with approximately 2,400 rooms, 180 vacation
club units and 180,000 square feet of conference meeting space.
Downtown Disney is a themed 15-acre retail, entertainment and dining complex with approximately 30
venues located adjacent to both Disneyland and Disney California Adventure. Most of the Downtown
Disney facilities are operated by third parties that pay rent to the Company.
 13 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Aulani, a Disney Resort & Spa
Aulani, a Disney Resort & Spa is a family resort on a 21-acre oceanfront property on Oahu, Hawaii
featuring approximately 350 hotel rooms, an 18,000-square-foot spa and 12,000 square feet of
conference meeting space. The resort also has approximately 480 vacation club units.
Disneyland Paris
Disneyland Paris is located on approximately 5,200-acres in Marne-la-Vallée, approximately 20 miles
east of Paris, France. The land is being developed pursuant to a master agreement with French
governmental authorities. Disneyland Paris includes two theme parks (Disneyland Park and Walt Disney
Studios Park); seven themed resort hotels; two convention centers; a shopping, dining and
entertainment complex (Disney Village); and a 27-hole golf facility. Of the 5,200 acres comprising
the site, approximately half have been developed to date, including a planned community (Val
d’Europe).
Disneyland Park — Disneyland Park consists of five themed areas: Adventureland, Discoveryland,
Fantasyland, Frontierland and Main Street USA. These areas include themed attractions, restaurants,
merchandise shops and entertainment experiences.
Walt Disney Studios Park — Walt Disney Studios Park includes five themed areas: Front Lot, Production
Courtyard, Toon Studio, Worlds of Pixar and Avengers Campus. These areas each include themed
attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and entertainment experiences. Walt Disney Studios Park
is undergoing a multi-year expansion that will include a new themed area based on Frozen.
Hotels and Other Facilities — Disneyland Paris operates seven resort hotels, with approximately 5,750
rooms and 250,000 square feet of conference meeting space. In addition, five on-site hotels that are
owned and operated by third parties provide approximately 1,500 rooms.
Disney Village is an approximately 500,000-square-foot retail, dining and entertainment complex
located between the theme parks and the hotels. A number of the Disney Village facilities are
operated by third parties that pay rent to the Company.
Val d’Europe is a planned community near Disneyland Paris that is being developed in phases. Val
d’Europe currently includes a regional train station, hotels and a town center consisting of a
shopping center as well as office, commercial and residential space. Third parties operate these
developments on land leased or purchased from the Company.
Hong Kong Disneyland Resort
The Company owns a 48% interest in Hong Kong Disneyland Resort and the Government of the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) owns a 52% interest. The resort is located on 310 acres on
Lantau Island and is in close proximity to the Hong Kong International Airport and the Hong Kong-
Zhuhai-Macau Bridge. Hong Kong Disneyland Resort includes one theme park and three themed resort
hotels. A separate Hong Kong subsidiary of the Company is responsible for managing Hong Kong
Disneyland Resort. The Company is entitled to receive royalties and management fees based on the
operating performance of Hong Kong Disneyland Resort.
Hong Kong Disneyland — Hong Kong Disneyland consists of eight themed areas: Adventureland,
Fantasyland, Grizzly Gulch, Main Street USA, Mystic Point, Tomorrowland, Toy Story Land and World of
Frozen, which opened in November 2023. These areas feature themed attractions, restaurants,
merchandise shops and entertainment experiences.
Hotels — Hong Kong Disneyland Resort includes three themed hotels with approximately 1,750 rooms and
16,000 square feet of conference meeting space.
Shanghai Disney Resort
The Company owns a 43% interest in Shanghai Disney Resort and Shanghai Shendi (Group) Co., Ltd
(Shendi) owns a 57% interest. The resort is located in the Pudong district of Shanghai on
approximately 1,000 acres of land, which includes the Shanghai Disneyland theme park; two themed
resort hotels; a retail, dining and entertainment complex (Disneytown); and an outdoor recreation
area. A management company, in which the Company has a 70% interest and Shendi has a 30% interest, is
responsible for operating the resort and receives a management fee based on the operating performance
of Shanghai Disney Resort. The Company is also entitled to royalties based on the resort’s revenues.
Shanghai Disneyland — Shanghai Disneyland consists of seven themed areas: Adventure Isle,
Fantasyland, Gardens of Imagination, Mickey Avenue, Tomorrowland, Toy Story Land and Treasure Cove.
These areas feature themed attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops and entertainment
experiences. The Company is constructing an eighth themed area based on the animated film Zootopia ,
which is scheduled to open in late calendar 2023.
Hotels and Other Facilities — Shanghai Disneyland Resort includes two themed hotels with
approximately 1,200 rooms. Disneytown is an 11-acre outdoor complex of dining, shopping and
entertainment venues located adjacent to Shanghai Disneyland. Most Disneytown facilities are operated
by third parties that pay rent to Shanghai Disney Resort. The Company is currently constructing a
third themed hotel, which will have approximately 400 rooms.
 14 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Tokyo Disney Resort
Tokyo Disney Resort is located on 494 acres of land, six miles east of downtown Tokyo, Japan. The
Company earns royalties on revenues generated by the Tokyo Disney Resort, which is owned and operated
by Oriental Land Co., Ltd. (OLC), a third-party Japanese corporation. The resort includes two theme
parks (Tokyo Disneyland and Tokyo DisneySea); five Disney-branded hotels; six other hotels (operated
by third parties other than OLC); a retail, dining and entertainment complex (Ikspiari); and Bon
Voyage, a Disney-themed merchandise location.
Tokyo Disneyland — Tokyo Disneyland consists of seven themed areas: Adventureland, Critter Country,
Fantasyland, Tomorrowland, Toontown, Westernland and World Bazaar.
Tokyo DisneySea — Tokyo DisneySea is divided into seven “ports of call,” including American
Waterfront, Arabian Coast, Lost River Delta, Mediterranean Harbor, Mermaid Lagoon, Mysterious Island
and Port Discovery. OLC is expanding Tokyo DisneySea to include an eighth themed port, Fantasy
Springs expected to open in spring 2024.
Hotels and Other Resort Facilities — Tokyo Disney Resort includes five Disney-branded hotels with a
total of more than 3,000 rooms and a monorail, which links the theme parks and resort hotels with
Ikspiari. OLC is currently constructing a 475-room Disney-branded hotel at Tokyo DisneySea that is
expected to open in spring 2024.
Disney Vacation Club (DVC)
DVC offers ownership interests in 16 resort facilities located at the Walt Disney World Resort;
Disneyland Resort; Aulani; Vero Beach, Florida; and Hilton Head Island, South Carolina. Available
units are offered for sale under a vacation ownership plan and are operated as hotel rooms when not
occupied by vacation club members. The Company’s vacation club units range from deluxe studios to
three-bedroom grand villas. Unit counts in this document are presented in terms of two-bedroom
equivalents. DVC had approximately 4,500 vacation club units as of September 30, 2023, including The
Villas at Disneyland Hotel, which opened in September 2023. The Company plans to open The Cabins at
Disney’s Fort Wilderness Resort - A Disney Vacation Club Resort and additional units at Disney’s
Polynesian Village Resort in 2024.
Storyliving by Disney
The Company is developing its first Storyliving by Disney residential community, Cotino, in Rancho
Mirage, California.
Disney Cruise Line
Disney Cruise Line is a five-ship vacation cruise line, which operates out of ports in North America,
Europe and the South Pacific. The Disney Magic and the Disney Wonder are 85,000-ton 875-stateroom
ships; the Disney Dream and the Disney Fantasy are 130,000-ton 1,250-stateroom ships; and the Disney
Wish is a 140,000-ton 1,250-stateroom ship. The ships cater to families, children, teenagers and
adults, with themed areas and activities for each group. Many cruise vacations include a visit to
Disney’s Castaway Cay, a 1,000-acre private Bahamian island.
Disney Cruise Line is adding the Disney Treasure , the Disney Adventure and an eighth ship. The
Disney Treasure and the Disney Adventure are scheduled to be delivered from the shipyard in fiscal
2025 and the eighth ship is scheduled to be delivered in fiscal 2026. The Disney Treasure and eighth
ship will be approximately 140,000 tons with 1,250 staterooms. The Disney Adventure will be
approximately 200,000 tons with approximately 2,100 staterooms and will operate in Southeast Asia.
Disney Lookout Cay at Lighthouse Point on the island of Eleuthera is scheduled to open as a Disney
Cruise Line destination in the summer of 2024.
Adventures by Disney and National Geographic Expeditions
Adventures by Disney and National Geographic Expeditions offer guided tour packages predominantly at
non-Disney sites around the world.
Walt Disney Imagineering
Walt Disney Imagineering provides master planning, real estate development, attraction, entertainment
and show design, engineering support, production support, project management and research and
development.
 Consumer Products 
Licensing
The Company’s merchandise licensing operations cover a diverse range of product categories, the most
significant of which are: toys, apparel, games, home décor and furnishings, accessories, health and
beauty, food, books, stationery, footwear, magazines and consumer electronics. The Company licenses
characters from its film, television and other properties for use on third-party products in these
categories and earns royalties, which are usually based on a fixed percentage of the wholesale or
retail selling price of the products. Some of the major properties licensed by the Company include:
Mickey and Friends, Star Wars, Spider-Man, Disney Princess, Avengers, Frozen, Toy Story, Winnie the
Pooh and Lilo & Stitch.
 15 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Retail
The Company sells Disney-, Marvel-, Pixar- and Lucasfilm-branded products through shopDisney branded
internet sites and Disney Store branded retail locations. At September 30, 2023, the Company owns and
operates approximately 40 stores in Japan, 20 stores in North America, two stores in Europe and one
store in China.
The Company creates, distributes and publishes a variety of products in multiple countries and
languages based on the Company’s branded franchises. The products include children’s books and comic
books.
 Competition and Seasonality 
The Company’s theme parks and resorts as well as Disney Cruise Line and Disney Vacation Club compete
with other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism and recreational activities. The profitability of
the leisure-time industry may be influenced by various factors that are not directly controllable,
such as economic conditions including business cycle and exchange rate fluctuations, health concerns,
the political environment, travel industry trends, amount of available leisure time, oil and
transportation prices, weather patterns and natural disasters. The licensing and retail business
competes with other licensors, retailers and publishers of character, brand and celebrity names, as
well as other licensors, publishers and developers of game software, online video content, websites,
other types of home entertainment and retailers of toys and kids merchandise.
All of the theme parks and the associated resort facilities are operated on a year-round basis.
Typically, theme park attendance and resort occupancy fluctuate based on the seasonal nature of
vacation travel and leisure activities, the opening of new guest offerings and pricing and
promotional offers. Peak attendance and resort occupancy generally occur during the summer months
when school vacations occur and during early winter and spring holiday periods. In addition, theme
park and resort revenues may be higher during significant celebrations such as theme park or
character anniversaries and lower in the periods following such celebrations. The licensing, retail
and wholesale businesses are influenced by seasonal consumer purchasing behavior, which generally
results in higher revenues during the Company’s first and fourth fiscal quarter, and by the timing
and performance of theatrical and game releases and cable programming broadcasts.
 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY PROTECTION 
The Company’s businesses throughout the world are affected by its ability to exploit and protect
against infringement of its IP, including trademarks, trade names, copyrights, patents and trade
secrets. Important IP includes rights in the content of motion pictures, television programs,
electronic games, sound recordings, character likenesses, theme park attractions, books and magazines
and merchandise. Risks related to the protection and exploitation of IP rights and information
concerning the expiration of certain of our copyrights are set forth in Item 1A – Risk Factors.
 FEDERAL REGULATION — ENTERTAINMENT AND SPORTS 
Television broadcasting is subject to extensive regulation by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) under federal laws and regulations, including the Communications Act of 1934, as amended.
Violation of FCC regulations can result in substantial monetary fines, limited renewals of licenses
and, in egregious cases, denial of license renewal or revocation of a license. FCC regulations that
affect linear channels include the following:
• Licensing of television stations . Each of the television stations we own must be licensed by the
FCC. These licenses are granted for periods of up to eight years, and we must obtain renewal of
licenses as they expire in order to continue operating the stations. We (and the acquiring entity in
the case of a divestiture) must also obtain FCC approval whenever we seek to have a license
transferred in connection with the acquisition or divestiture of a station. The FCC may decline to
renew or approve the transfer of a license in certain circumstances and may delay renewals while
permitting a licensee to continue operating. Although we have received such renewals and approvals in
the past or have been permitted to continue operations when renewal is delayed, there can be no
assurance that this will be the case in the future.
• Station ownership limits . The FCC imposes limitations on the number of television stations and
radio stations an entity can own in a specific market, on the combined number of television and radio
stations an entity can own in a single market and on the aggregate percentage of the national
audience that can be reached by television stations. Currently:
◦ FCC regulations may restrict our ability to own more than one television station in a market,
depending on the size and nature of the market. We do not own more than one television station in any
market.
◦ Federal statutes permit our television stations in the aggregate to reach a maximum of 39% of the
national audience. Pursuant to the most recent decision by the FCC as to how to calculate compliance
with this limit, our eight stations reach approximately 20% of the national audience.
• Dual networks . FCC rules currently prohibit any of the four major broadcast television networks —
ABC, CBS, Fox and NBC — from being under common ownership or control.
 16 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
• Regulation of programming . The FCC regulates broadcast programming by, among other things, banning
“indecent” programming, regulating political advertising and imposing commercial time limits during
children’s programming. Penalties for broadcasting indecent programming can be over $400,000 per
indecent utterance or image per station.
Federal legislation and FCC rules also limit the amount of commercial matter that may be shown on
broadcast or cable channels during programming designed for children 12 years of age and younger. In
addition, broadcast stations are generally required to provide an average of three hours per week of
programming that has as a “significant purpose” meeting the educational and informational needs of
children 16 years of age and younger. FCC rules also give television station owners the right to
reject or refuse network programming in certain circumstances or to substitute programming that the
licensee reasonably believes to be of greater local or national importance.
• Cable and satellite carriage of broadcast television stations. With respect to MVPDs operating
within a television station’s Designated Market Area, FCC rules require that every three years each
television station elect either “must carry” status, pursuant to which MVPDs generally must carry a
local television station in the station’s market, or “retransmission consent” status, pursuant to
which the MVPDs must negotiate with the television station to obtain the consent of the television
station prior to carrying its signal. The ABC owned television stations have historically elected
retransmission consent.
• Cable and satellite carriage of programming. The Communications Act and FCC rules regulate some
aspects of negotiations between programmers and distributors regarding the carriage of networks by
cable and satellite distribution companies, and some cable and satellite distribution companies have
sought regulation of additional aspects of the carriage of programming on their systems. New
legislation, court action or regulation in this area could have an impact on the Company’s
operations.
The foregoing is a brief summary of certain provisions of the Communications Act, other legislation
and specific FCC rules and policies. Reference should be made to the Communications Act, other
legislation, FCC rules and public notices and rulings of the FCC for further information concerning
the nature and extent of the FCC’s regulatory authority.
FCC laws and regulations are subject to change, and the Company generally cannot predict whether new
legislation, court action or regulations, or a change in the extent of application or enforcement of
current laws and regulations, would have an adverse impact on our operations.
 AVAILABLE INFORMATION 
Our annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and
amendments to those reports are available without charge on our website, www.disney.com/investors, as
soon as reasonably practicable after they are filed electronically with the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC). We are providing the address to our internet site solely for the
information of investors. We do not intend the address to be an active link or to otherwise
incorporate the contents of the website into this report.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1A. Risk Factors │
For an enterprise as large and complex as the Company, a wide range of factors could materially
affect future developments and performance. In addition to the factors affecting specific business
operations identified in connection with the description of these operations and the financial
results of these operations elsewhere in our filings with the SEC, the most significant factors
affecting our business include the following:
BUSINESS, ECONOMIC, MARKET and OPERATING CONDITION RISKS
Declines in U.S., global, and regional economic conditions generally adversely affect the
profitability of our businesses.
Declines in economic conditions, such as recession, economic downturn, and/or inflationary conditions
in the U.S. and other regions of the world in which we do business, or a failure of conditions to
improve as anticipated typically adversely affect demand and/or expenses for one or more of our
businesses, reducing our revenue and earnings. Past declines in economic conditions reduced guest
spending at our parks and resorts, purchases of and prices for advertising on our broadcast and cable
networks and owned stations, performance of our home entertainment releases, and purchases of
Company-branded consumer products, and similar impacts can be expected as such conditions recur.
Recent inflationary conditions increased certain of our costs. The current economic conditions could
also have the effect of reducing attendance at our parks and resorts, prices that MVPDs pay for our
cable programming, purchases of and prices for advertising on our DTC products or subscription levels
for our cable programming or DTC products, while also continuing to increase the prices we pay for
goods, services and labor. Unfavorable economic conditions also impair the ability of those with whom
we do business to satisfy their obligations to us. In addition, an increase in price levels
generally, or in price levels in a particular sector, could result in a shift in consumer demand away
from the entertainment and experiences we offer, which could also adversely affect our revenues and,
at the same time, increase our costs. A decline in economic conditions or a failure of conditions to
improve as anticipated could impact
 17 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
implementation or success of our business plans, such as our plans to increase investment in our
Experiences segment, the realignment of our cost structure and plans for our DTC ad-supported
services, enhancements, pricing structure and price increases. In addition, actions to reduce
inflation, including raising interest rates, increase our cost of borrowing, which in turn make it
more difficult to obtain financing for our operations or investments on favorable terms. Further,
global economic conditions impact foreign currency exchange rates against the U.S. dollar. The
current or continued strength in the value of the U.S. dollar has adversely impacted the U.S. dollar
value of revenue we receive and expect to receive from other markets and may reduce international
demand for our products and services. Although we hedge exposure to certain foreign currency
fluctuations, any such hedging activity may not substantially offset the negative financial impact of
exchange rate fluctuations and is not expected to offset all such negative financial impact,
particularly in periods of sustained U.S. dollar strength relative to multiple foreign currencies.
Further, economic or political conditions in countries outside the U.S. also have reduced, and could
continue to reduce, our ability to hedge exposure to currency fluctuations in those countries or our
ability to repatriate revenue from those countries. Broader or targeted supply chain delays, such as
those that have impacted global distribution from time to time, may further exacerbate inflationary
pressures and impact our ability to sell and deliver goods or otherwise disrupt our operations. The
adverse impact on our businesses of declines in economic conditions or a failure of conditions to
improve as anticipated will depend, in part, on the severity and duration of such economic conditions
and our ability to mitigate the impacts of economic conditions on our businesses may be limited.
Changes in technology, in consumer consumption patterns and in how entertainment products are created
affect demand for our entertainment products, the revenue we can generate from these products and the
cost of producing or distributing these products.
The media entertainment and internet businesses in which we participate increasingly depend on our
ability to successfully adapt to new technologies including shifting patterns of content consumption
and how entertainment products are generated. New technologies affect the demand for our products,
the manner in which our products are distributed to consumers, ways we charge for and receive revenue
for our entertainment products and the stability of those revenue streams, the sources and nature of
competing content offerings, the time and manner in which consumers acquire and view some of our
entertainment products and the options available to advertisers for reaching their desired audiences.
These developments have impacted the business model for certain traditional forms of distribution, as
evidenced by the industry-wide decline in ratings for broadcast and cable television, the reduction
in demand for home entertainment sales of theatrical content, the development of alternative
distribution channels for broadcast and cable programming and declines in subscriber levels for
traditional cable channels. These trends have decreased advertising and affiliate revenue at some of
our linear networks. In addition, theater-going to watch movies currently is, and may continue to be,
below pre-COVID-19 levels.
Rules governing new technological developments, such as developments in generative artificial
intelligence (AI), remain unsettled, and these developments may affect aspects of our existing
business model, including revenue streams for the use of our IP and how we create our entertainment
products. In order to respond to the impact of new technologies on our businesses, we regularly
consider, and from time to time implement changes to our business models, most recently by
developing, investing in and acquiring DTC products, reorganizing our media and entertainment
businesses to advance our DTC strategies, and developing new media offerings. There can be no
assurance that our DTC offerings, new media offerings and other efforts will successfully respond to
technological changes. In addition, declines in certain traditional forms of distribution may
increase the cost of content allocable to our DTC offerings, negatively impacting the profitability
of our DTC offerings. We expect to forgo revenue from traditional sources, particularly as we expand
our DTC offerings. To date our DTC streaming services have experienced significant losses. There can
be no assurance that the DTC model and other business models we may develop will ultimately be
profitable or as profitable as our existing or historic business models.
We face risks relating to misalignment with public and consumer tastes and preferences for
entertainment, travel and consumer products, which impact demand for our entertainment offerings and
products and the profitability of any of our businesses.
Our businesses create entertainment, travel and consumer products whose success depends substantially
on consumer tastes and preferences that change in often unpredictable ways. The success of our
businesses depends on our ability to consistently create compelling content, which may be
distributed, among other ways, through broadcast, cable, theaters, internet or mobile technology, and
used in theme park attractions, hotels and other resort facilities and travel experiences and
consumer products. Such distribution must meet the changing preferences of the broad consumer market
and respond to competition from an expanding array of choices facilitated by technological
developments in the delivery of content. The success of our theme parks, resorts, cruise ships and
experiences, as well as our theatrical releases, depends on demand for public or out-of-home
entertainment experiences. Demand for certain out-of-home entertainment experiences, such as theater-
going to watch movies, has not returned to pre-pandemic levels. In addition, many of our businesses
increasingly depend on acceptance of our offerings and products by consumers outside the U.S. The
success of our businesses therefore depends on our ability to successfully predict and adapt to
changing consumer tastes and preferences outside as well as inside the U.S. Moreover, we must often
invest substantial amounts in content production and acquisition, acquisition of sports rights,
launch of new sports-related studio programming, theme park attractions, cruise ships or hotels and
other facilities or customer facing platforms before we
 18 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
know the extent to which these products will earn consumer acceptance, and these products may be
introduced into a significantly different market or economic or social climate from the one we
anticipated at the time of the investment decisions. Generally, our revenues and profitability are
adversely impacted when our entertainment offerings and products, as well as our methods to make our
offerings and products available to consumers, do not achieve sufficient consumer acceptance.
Further, consumers’ perceptions of our position on matters of public interest, including our efforts
to achieve certain of our environmental and social goals, often differ widely and present risks to
our reputation and brands. Consumer tastes and preferences impact, among other items, revenue from
advertising sales (which are based in part on ratings for the programs in which advertisements air),
affiliate fees, subscription fees, theatrical film receipts, the license of rights to other
distributors, theme park admissions, hotel room charges and merchandise, food and beverage sales,
sales of licensed consumer products or sales of our other consumer products and services.
The success of our businesses is highly dependent on the existence and maintenance of intellectual
property rights in the entertainment products and services we create.
The value to us of our IP is dependent on the scope and duration of our rights as defined by
applicable laws in the U.S. and abroad and the manner in which those laws are construed. If those
laws are drafted or interpreted in ways that limit the extent or duration of our rights, or if
existing laws are changed, our ability to generate revenue from our IP may decrease, or the cost of
obtaining and maintaining rights may increase. The terms of some copyrights for IP related to some of
our products and services have expired and other copyrights will expire in the future. For example,
in the United States and countries that look to the United States copyright term when shorter than
their own, the copyright term for early works such as the short film Steamboat Willie (1928), and the
specific early versions of characters depicted in those works, expires at the end of the 95th
calendar year after the date the copyright was originally secured in the United States. As copyrights
expire, we expect that revenues generated from such IP will be negatively impacted to some extent.
The unauthorized use of our IP may increase the cost of protecting rights in our IP or reduce our
revenues. The convergence of computing, communication and entertainment devices, increased broadband
internet speed and penetration, increased availability and speed of mobile data transmission and
increasingly sophisticated attempts to obtain unauthorized access to data systems have made the
unauthorized digital copying and distribution of our films, television productions and other creative
works easier and faster and protection and enforcement of IP rights more challenging. The
unauthorized distribution and access to entertainment content generally continues to be a significant
challenge for IP rights holders. Inadequate laws or weak enforcement mechanisms to protect
entertainment industry IP in one country can adversely affect the results of the Company’s operations
worldwide, despite the Company’s efforts to protect its IP rights. Distribution innovations,
including in response to COVID-19, have increased opportunities to access content in unauthorized
ways. Additionally, negative economic conditions coupled with a shift in government priorities could
lead to less enforcement. These developments require us to devote substantial resources to protecting
our IP against unlicensed use and present the risk of increased losses of revenue as a result of
unlicensed distribution of our content and other commercial misuses of our IP. The legal landscape
for some new technologies, including some generative AI, remains uncertain, and development of the
law in this area could impact our ability to protect against infringing uses.
With respect to IP developed by the Company and rights acquired by the Company from others, the
Company is subject to the risk of challenges to our copyright, trademark and patent rights by third
parties. In addition, the availability of copyright protection and other legal protections for IP
generated by certain new technologies, such as generative AI, is uncertain. Successful challenges to
our rights in IP may result in increased costs for obtaining rights or the loss of the opportunity to
earn revenue from or utilize the IP that is the subject of challenged rights. From time to time, the
Company has been notified that it may be infringing certain IP rights of third parties. Technological
changes in industries in which the Company operates and extensive patent coverage in those areas may
increase the risk of such claims being brought and prevailing.
Protection of electronically stored data and other cybersecurity is costly, and if our data or
systems are materially compromised in spite of this protection, we may incur additional costs, lost
opportunities, damage to our reputation, disruption of service or theft of our assets.
We maintain information necessary to conduct our business, including confidential and proprietary
information as well as personal information regarding our customers and employees, in digital form.
We also use computer systems to deliver our products and services and operate our businesses. Data
maintained in digital form is subject to the risk of unauthorized access, modification, exfiltration,
destruction or denial of access and our computer systems are subject to cyberattacks that may result
in disruptions in service. We use many third-party systems and software, which are also subject to
supply chain and other cyberattacks. We develop and maintain an information security program to
identify and mitigate cyber risks but the development and maintenance of this program is costly and
requires ongoing monitoring and updating as technologies change and efforts to overcome security
measures become more sophisticated. Accordingly, despite our efforts, the risk of unauthorized
access, modification, exfiltration, destruction or denial of access with respect to data or systems
and other cybersecurity attacks cannot be eliminated entirely, and the risks associated with a
potentially material incident remain. In
 19 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
addition, we provide confidential, proprietary and personal information to third parties in certain
cases, which information is also subject to risk of compromise.
If our information or cyber security systems or data are compromised in a material way, our ability
to conduct our business may be impaired, we may lose profitable opportunities or the value of those
opportunities may be diminished and, as described above, we may lose revenue as a result of
unlicensed use of our intellectual property. If personal information of our customers or employees is
misappropriated, our reputation with our customers and employees may be damaged resulting in loss of
business or morale, and related remediation of harm to our customers and employees or damages arising
from litigation and/or fines or other actions we take with respect to judicial or regulatory actions
arising out of an incident create additional costs. Insurance we obtain does not cover all potential
losses or damages associated with such attacks or events. Our systems and users and those of third
parties with whom we engage are continually attacked, sometimes successfully, and there can be no
assurance that future incidents will not have material adverse effects on our operations or financial
results.
A variety of uncontrollable events may disrupt our businesses, reduce demand for or consumption of
our products and services, impair our ability to provide our products and services or increase the
cost or reduce the profitability of providing our products and services.
The operation and profitability of our businesses and demand for and consumption of our products and
services, particularly our parks and experiences businesses, are highly dependent on the general
environment for travel and tourism, including in the specific regions in which our parks and
experiences businesses operate. In addition, we have extensive international operations, including
our international theme parks and resorts, which are dependent on domestic and international
regulations consistent with trade and investment in those regions. The operation of our businesses
and the environment for travel and tourism, as well as demand for and consumption of our other
entertainment products, can be significantly adversely affected in the U.S., globally or in specific
regions as a result of a variety of factors beyond our control, including: health concerns (including
as it has been by COVID-19 and could be by future health outbreaks and pandemics); adverse weather
conditions arising from short-term weather patterns or long-term climate change, including longer and
more regular excessive heat conditions, catastrophic events or natural disasters (such as excessive
heat or rain, hurricanes, typhoons, floods, droughts, tsunamis and earthquakes); international,
political or military developments, including trade and other international disputes and social
unrest; macroeconomic conditions, including a decline in economic activity, inflation and foreign
exchange rates; and terrorist attacks. These events and others, such as fluctuations in travel and
energy costs and computer virus attacks, intrusions or other widespread computing or
telecommunications failures, may also damage our ability to provide our products and services or to
obtain insurance coverage with respect to some of these events. An incident that affected our
property directly would have a direct impact on our ability to provide goods and services and could
have an extended effect of discouraging consumers from attending our facilities. Moreover, the costs
of protecting against such incidents reduces the profitability of our operations.
For example, COVID-19 and measures to prevent its spread impacted our businesses in a number of ways,
most significantly at the Experiences segment where our theme parks and resorts were closed and
cruise ship sailings and guided tours were suspended. In addition, we delayed, or in some cases,
shortened or canceled theatrical releases and experienced disruptions in the production and
availability of content. Collectively, our impacted businesses historically have been the source of
the majority of our revenue. In addition, hurricanes have impacted the profitability of Walt Disney
World Resort and may do so in the future. The Company has paused certain operations in certain
regions, including in response to sanctions, trade restrictions and related developments and the
profitability of certain operations has been impacted as a result of events in the corresponding
regions.
In addition, we derive affiliate fees and royalties from the distribution of our programming, sales
of our licensed goods and services by third parties, and the management of businesses operated under
brands licensed from the Company, and we are therefore dependent on the successes of those third
parties for that portion of our revenue. The profitability of one or more of our businesses could be
adversely impacted by the significant contraction of distribution channels for our products and
services, including through third-party licensees or sellers of our licensed goods and services. In
addition, third-party suppliers provide products and services essential to the operation of a number
of our businesses. A wide variety of factors could influence the success of those third parties and
if negative factors significantly impacted a sufficient number of those third parties or materially
impacted a supplier of a significant product or service, the profitability of one or more of our
businesses could be adversely affected. In specific geographic markets, we have experienced delayed
and/or partial payments from certain third parties due to liquidity issues.
We obtain insurance against the risk of losses relating to some of these events, generally including
certain physical damage to our property and resulting business interruption, certain injuries
occurring on our property and some liabilities for alleged breach of legal responsibilities. When
insurance is obtained it is subject to deductibles, exclusions, terms, conditions and limits of
liability. The types and levels of coverage we obtain vary from time to time depending on our view of
the likelihood of specific types and levels of loss in relation to the cost of obtaining coverage for
such types and levels of loss and we may experience material losses not covered by our insurance.
 20 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
We face risks related to changes in our business strategy or restructuring of our businesses, which
have affected and may continue to affect our cost structure, the profitability of our businesses or
the value of our assets.
As changes in our business environment occur we have adjusted, continue to adjust and may further
adjust our business strategies to meet these changes and we may otherwise decide to further
restructure our operations or particular businesses or assets. For example, in fiscal 2023, we
reorganized our media and entertainment operations, which had been previously reported in one
segment, into two segments, Entertainment and Sports; in fiscal 2023 we announced that we would
review content, primarily on our DTC services, for alignment with a strategic change in our approach
to content curation, resulting in removal of certain content from our platforms and related
impairment charges; in fiscal 2022, we announced plans to introduce an ad-supported Disney+ service,
new pricing model and price increases and cost realignment; in fiscal 2021, we announced the closure
of a substantial number of our Disney-branded retail stores; and we have announced exploration of a
number of new types of businesses. Changes in strategy, such as was the case with the most recent
reorganization of our media and entertainment operations, can lead to workforce disruptions. Our new
organization and strategies are, among other things, subject to execution risk and may not produce
the anticipated benefits, such as supporting our growth strategies and enhancing shareholder value.
For example, notwithstanding our announced plans to rationalize costs, the costs of our DTC strategy,
and associated losses, may continue to grow or be reduced more slowly than anticipated, which may
impact our distribution strategy across businesses/distribution platforms, the types of content we
distribute through various businesses/distribution platforms, and the timing and sequencing of
content windows. Our new organization and strategies could be less successful than our previous
organizational structure and strategies. In addition, external events including changing technology,
changing consumer purchasing patterns, acceptance of content offerings and changes in macroeconomic
conditions may impair the value of our assets. When these changes or events occur, we have incurred
and may continue to incur costs to change our business strategy and have needed and may in the future
need to write-down the value of assets. In addition to the content impairment noted above, among
other assets, we have impaired goodwill and intangible assets at our linear networks and impaired the
value of certain of our retail store assets. We may write down other assets as our strategy evolves
to account for the current business environment.
We also make investments in existing or new businesses, including investments in international
expansion of our business and in new business lines. For example, in fiscal 2023, we announced that
we are developing plans to accelerate and expand investment in our Experiences segment. In addition,
in recent years, other investments have included expansion and renovation of certain of our theme
parks, expansion of our fleet of cruise ships, the acquisition of TFCF Corporation (TFCF) and
investments related to DTC offerings. Some of these and future investments may ultimately result in
returns that are negative or low, the ultimate business prospects of the businesses related to these
investments are uncertain, and these investments may impact the resources available to, and the
profitability of, our other businesses. In addition, our costs may increase, we may have significant
charges associated with the write-down of assets, as occurred in connection with the closure of Star
Wars: Galactic Starcruiser or returns on new investments may be negative or lower than prior to the
change in strategy or restructuring. Even if our strategies are effective in the long term, our new
offerings will generally not be profitable in the short term, growth of our new offerings is unlikely
to be even quarter over quarter and we may not expand into new markets as or when anticipated. Our
ability to forecast for new businesses may be impacted by our lack of experience operating in those
new businesses, speed with which the competitive landscape changes, volatility beyond our control
(such as the events beyond our control noted above) and our ability to obtain or develop the content
and rights on which our projections are based. Accordingly, we may not achieve our forecasted
outcomes.
Increased competitive pressures impact our revenues and increase our costs.
We face substantial competition in each of our businesses from alternative providers of the products
and services we offer and from other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism and recreational
activities. This includes, among other types, competition for human resources, content and other
resources we require in operating our business. For example:
• Our programming and production operations compete to obtain creative, performing, production and
business talent, sports and other programming, story properties, advertiser support, production
facilities and market share with traditional and new media platforms, including other studio
operators, television networks, VOD providers and other sources of broadband delivered content.
• Our television networks and stations and DTC offerings compete for the sale of advertising time
with traditional and new media platforms, including other television and VOD services, as well as
with newspapers, magazines, billboards and radio stations, and various forms of internet and mobile
delivered content, which offer advertising delivery technologies that are more targeted than can be
achieved through traditional means.
• Our television networks compete for carriage of their programming with other programming providers.
• Our theme parks and resorts compete for guests with all other forms of entertainment, lodging,
tourism and recreation activities and compete for creative, performing and business talent, including
with other theme park and resort operators.
• Our content sales/licensing operations compete for customers with all other forms of entertainment.
 21 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
• Our consumer products business competes with other licensors and creators of IP.
• Our DTC streaming services compete for customers with an increasing number of competitors’ DTC
offerings, all other forms of media and all other forms of entertainment, as well as for technology,
creative, performing and business talent and for content.
Competition in each of these areas may further increase as a result of technological developments and
changes in market structure, including consolidation of suppliers of resources and distribution
channels. Increased competition has increased, and may continue to increase, the cost of programming,
including sports and other products and diverts consumers from, or delays their consumption of, our
creative or other products, or to other products or other forms of entertainment and experiences,
which could reduce our revenue or increase our marketing costs.
Competition for the acquisition of resources can further increase the cost of producing our products
and services; change the composition of our offerings, including sports; deprive us of talent needed
for our entertainment and experiences businesses, including the talent necessary to produce high
quality creative material; increase employee turnover and staffing instability; or increase the cost
of compensation for our employees. Such competition may also reduce, or limit growth in, prices for
our products and services, including advertising rates and subscription fees at our media networks
and DTC offerings, parks and resorts admissions and room rates and prices for consumer products from
which we derive license revenues.
Our results may be adversely affected if long-term programming or distribution contracts are not
renewed on sufficiently favorable terms.
We enter into long-term contracts for both the acquisition and the distribution of media programming
and products, including contracts for the acquisition of programming rights for sporting events and
other programs, and contracts for the distribution of our programming to content distributors. As
these contracts expire, we must renew or renegotiate the contracts, which from time to time has led
to service blackouts when distribution contracts expired before renewal terms were agreed, and if we
are unable to renew these contracts on acceptable terms, we may lose programming rights or
distribution rights. As a result, our portfolio of programming rights we acquire and the distributors
of our programming and the portfolio of programming rights our distributors acquire have changed and
may continue to change over time. Even if these contracts are renewed, the cost of obtaining certain
programming rights has increased and may continue to increase (or increase at faster rates than our
historical experience) and programming distributors, facing pressures resulting from increased
subscription fees and alternative distribution challenges, have demanded and may continue to demand
terms (including with respect to the pricing for, and the nature and amount of, programming
distributed) that reduce our revenue from distribution of programs (or increase revenue at slower
rates than our historical experience). For example, a recent carriage agreement renewal includes
fewer of our linear networks but provides for certain of our DTC streaming services to be made
available to the distributor’s subscribers. Moreover, our ability to renew these contracts on
favorable terms may be affected by a number of factors, such as consolidation in the market for
program distribution and the entrance of new participants in the market for distribution of content
on digital platforms. With respect to the acquisition of programming rights, particularly sports
programming rights, the impact of these long-term contracts on our results over the term of the
contracts depends on a number of factors, including the strength of advertising markets, subscription
levels and programming rights costs increases, effectiveness of marketing efforts and the size of
viewer audiences. There can be no assurance that revenues from programming based on these rights will
exceed the cost of the rights plus the other costs of producing and distributing the programming.
Regulations applicable to our businesses may impair the profitability of our businesses.
Each of our businesses, including our broadcast networks and television stations, is subject to a
variety of U.S. and international regulations, which impact the operations and profitability of our
businesses. Some of these regulations include:
• U.S. FCC regulation of our television and radio networks, our national programming networks and our
owned television stations. See Item 1 — Federal Regulation - Entertainment and Sports.
• Federal, state and foreign privacy and data protection laws and regulations.
• Regulation of the safety and supply chain of consumer products and theme park operations, including
regulation regarding the sourcing, importation and the sale of goods.
• Environmental protection regulations.
• U.S. and international anti-corruption laws, sanction programs, trade restrictions and anti-money
laundering laws.
• Restrictions on the manner in which content is currently licensed and distributed, ownership
restrictions or film or television content requirements, investment obligations or quotas.
• Domestic and international labor laws, tax laws or currency controls.
New laws and regulations, as well as changes in any of these current laws and regulations or
regulator activities in any of these areas, or others, may require us to spend additional amounts to
comply with the regulations, or may restrict our ability to offer products and services in ways that
are profitable, and create an increasingly unpredictable regulatory landscape. In addition, ongoing
and future developments in international political, trade and security policy may lead to new
regulations
 22 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
limiting international trade and investment and disrupting our operations outside the U.S., including
our international theme parks and resorts operations in France, mainland China and Hong Kong. For
example, in 2022 the U.S. and other countries implemented a series of sanctions against Russia in
response to events in Russia and Ukraine; U.S. agencies have enhanced trade restrictions, including
new prohibitions on the importation of goods from certain regions and other jurisdictions are
considering similar measures; U.S. state governments have become more active in passing legislation
targeted at specific sectors and companies and applying existing laws in novel ways to new
technologies, including streaming and online commerce; and in many countries/regions around the world
(including but not limited to the EU) regulators are requiring us to broadcast on our linear (or
display on our DTC streaming services) programming produced in specific countries as well as invest
specified amounts of our revenues in local content productions. In Florida, steps directed at the
Company (including the passage of legislation) have been taken and future actions have been
threatened, which collectively could negatively impact (and may have already impacted) our ability to
execute on our business strategy, our costs and the profitability of our operations in Florida.
Further, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, public health and other regional, national, state and
local regulations and policies impacted most of our businesses. Government requirements could be
reinstated and new government requirements may be imposed to address COVID-19 or future health
outbreaks or pandemics.
Our operations outside the U.S. may be adversely affected by the operation of laws in those
jurisdictions.
Our operations in non-U.S. jurisdictions are in many cases subject to the laws of the jurisdictions
in which they operate rather than, or in addition to, U.S. law. Laws in some jurisdictions differ in
significant respects from those in the U.S. These differences can affect our ability to react to
changes in our business, and our rights or ability to enforce rights may be different than would be
expected under U.S. law. Moreover, enforcement of laws in some international jurisdictions can be
inconsistent and unpredictable, which can affect both our ability to enforce our rights and to
undertake activities that we believe are beneficial to our business. In addition, the business and
political climate in some jurisdictions may encourage corruption, which could reduce our ability to
compete successfully in those jurisdictions while remaining in compliance with local laws or U.S.
anti-corruption laws applicable to our businesses. As a result, our ability to generate revenue and
our expenses in non-U.S. jurisdictions may differ from what would be expected if U.S. law alone
governed these operations.
Environmental, social and governance matters and any related reporting obligations may impact our
businesses.
U.S. and international regulators, investors and other stakeholders are increasingly focused on
environmental, social and governance matters. For example, new domestic and international laws and
regulations relating to environmental, social and governance matters, including environmental
sustainability and climate change, human capital management and cybersecurity, are under
consideration or being adopted, which may include specific, target-driven disclosure requirements or
obligations. Our response will require increased costs to comply, the implementation of new reporting
processes, entailing additional compliance risk, a skilled workforce and other incremental
investments.
In addition, we have undertaken or announced a number of related actions and goals, which will
require changes to operations and ongoing investment. There is no assurance that our initiatives will
achieve their intended outcomes or that we will achieve any of these goals. Consumer, government and
other stakeholder perceptions of our efforts to achieve these objectives often differ widely and
present risks to our reputation and brands. In addition, our ability to implement some initiatives or
achieve some goals is dependent on external factors. For example, our ability to meet certain
environmental sustainability goals or initiatives will depend in part on third-party collaboration,
the availability of suppliers that can satisfy new requirements, mitigation innovations and/or the
availability of economically feasible solutions at scale.
Damage to our reputation or brands may negatively impact our Company across businesses and regions.
Our reputation and globally recognizable brands are integral to the success of our businesses.
Because our brands engage consumers across our businesses, damage to our reputation or brands in one
business may have an impact on our other businesses. Because some of our brands are globally
recognized, brand damage may not be locally contained. Maintenance of the reputation of our Company
and brands depends on many factors including the quality of our offerings, maintenance of trust with
our customers and our ability to successfully innovate. In addition, we may pursue brand or product
integration combining previously separate brands or products targeting different audiences under one
brand or pursue other business initiatives inconsistent with one or more of our brands, and there is
no assurance that these initiatives will be accepted by our customers and not adversely impact one or
more of our brands. Significant negative claims or publicity regarding the Company or its operations,
products, management, employees, practices, business partners, business decisions, social
responsibility and culture, which may be amplified by social media, adversely impact our brands or
reputation, even if such claims are untrue. Damage to our reputation or brands could impact our
sales, business opportunities, profitability, recruiting and valuation of our securities.
Various risks may impact the success of our DTC streaming services.
We may not successfully execute on our DTC strategy. The success of our DTC strategy and
profitability of our DTC streaming services will be impacted by the success of the reorganization of
our media and entertainment business and our ability to advance our DTC strategies, drive subscriber
additions and retention based on the attractiveness of our content,
 23 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
manage churn in reaction to price increases, achieve the desired financial impact of the Disney+ ad
supported service, pricing model and price increases, our ability to execute on cost realignment and
the effects of our determinations with regard to distribution for our creative content across
windows. The initial costs of marketing campaigns are generally recognized in the business of initial
exploitation, and amortization of capitalized production costs and licensed programming rights are
generally allocated across businesses based on the estimated relative value of the distribution
windows. Accordingly, our distribution determinations impact the costs of each business, including
the applicable DTC service. There are a number of competing DTC businesses. Consumers may not be
willing to pay for an expanding set of DTC streaming services at increasing prices, potentially
exacerbated by an economic downturn. In addition, economic downturns negatively impact the purchase
of and price for advertising on our DTC streaming services. We face competition for creative talent
and sports and other programming rights and may not be successful in recruiting and retaining talent
and obtaining desired programming rights or face increased costs to do so. Acquisition of new
subscribers to our DTC streaming services is not linear, and we have experienced net losses of
subscribers in some periods. Our content does not always successfully attract and retain subscribers
in the quantities that we expect. Our content is subject to cost pressures and may cost more than we
expect. We may not successfully manage our costs to meet our profitability goals. Government
regulation, including revised foreign content and ownership regulations as well as government-imposed
content restrictions, impacts the implementation of our DTC business plans. The highly competitive
environment in which we operate puts pricing pressure on our DTC offerings and may require us to
lower our prices or not take price increases to attract or retain customers or lead to higher churn
rates. These and other risks may impact the profitability and success of our DTC streaming services.
Potential credit ratings actions, increases in interest rates, or volatility in the U.S. and global
financial markets could impede access to, or increase the cost of, financing our operations and
investments.
Our borrowing costs have been and can be affected by short- and long-term debt ratings assigned by
independent ratings agencies that are based, in part, on the Company’s performance as measured by
credit metrics such as leverage and interest coverage ratios. As a result of the financial impact of
COVID-19 on our businesses, Standard and Poor’s downgraded our long-term debt ratings by two notches
to BBB+ and downgraded our short-term debt ratings by one notch to A-2. Fitch downgraded our long-
and short-term credit ratings by one notch to A- and F2, respectively. On June 5, 2023, Standard and
Poor’s upgraded our long-term debt ratings by one notch to A-. As of September 30, 2023 Moody’s
Investors Service’s long- and short-term debt ratings for the Company were A2 and P-1 (Stable),
respectively, Standard and Poor’s long- and short-term debt ratings for the Company were A- and A-2
(Positive), respectively, and Fitch’s long- and short-term debt ratings for the Company were A- and
F2 (Stable), respectively. Any future downgrades could increase our cost of borrowing and/or make it
more difficult for us to obtain financing on acceptable terms.
In addition, increases in interest rates have increased our cost of borrowing and volatility in U.S.
and global financial markets could impact our access to, or further increase the cost of, financing.
Past disruptions in the U.S. and global credit and equity markets made it more difficult for many
businesses to obtain financing on acceptable terms. These conditions tended to increase the cost of
borrowing and if they recur, our cost of borrowing could increase and it may be more difficult to
obtain financing for our operations or investments.
Elevated indebtedness or leverage ratios could adversely affect us, including by decreasing our
business flexibility.
Elevated indebtedness could have the effect of, among other things, reducing our financial
flexibility and our ability to respond to changing business and economic conditions and other
uncontrollable events. Debt repayment obligations could also reduce funds available for investments,
capital expenditures, share repurchases and dividends, and other activities and may create
competitive disadvantages for us relative to other companies with lower debt levels. Our leverage
ratios increased as the result of COVID-19’s impact on financial performance, which caused certain of
the credit ratings agencies to downgrade their assessment of our credit ratings. Downgrades to our
debt rating may negatively impact our cost of borrowings and/or make it more difficult for us to
obtain financing on acceptable terms.
Labor disputes disrupt our operations and may adversely affect the profitability of one or more of
our businesses.
A significant number of employees in various parts of our businesses, including employees of our
theme parks, and writers, directors, actors and production personnel for our productions are covered
by collective bargaining agreements. In addition, some of our employees outside the U.S. are
represented by works councils, trade unions or other employee associations. Further, the employees of
licensees who manufacture and retailers who sell our licensed consumer products, and employees of
providers of programming content (such as sports leagues) may be covered by labor agreements with
their employers. From time to time, collective bargaining agreements and other labor agreements
expire, requiring renegotiation of their terms. In general, labor disputes and work stoppages
involving our employees; persons employed on our productions; athletes or others employed by, or
otherwise connected with, sports leagues or organizers; or the employees of our licensees or
retailers who sell our licensed consumer products or providers of programming content may disrupt our
operations and reduce our revenues. For example, on May 2, 2023, members of the Writers Guild of
America (WGA) commenced a work stoppage, which lasted for almost five months. On July 14, 2023,
members of SAG-AFTRA, the union representing television and movie actors, also commenced a work
stoppage, which lasted for almost four months. These work stoppages have impacted our
 24 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
productions and the pipeline for programming and theatrical releases, which could result in reduced
revenue and have an adverse effect on our profitability. The new collective bargaining agreements
with the Directors Guild of America, WGA and SAG-AFTRA will lead to increased costs to create
content, including as a result of increases in rates, residuals and benefits. Generally, resolution
of disputes or negotiation of new agreements, including rate increases and other changes to employee
benefits, has in the past increased our costs and may increase our costs in the future.
The seasonality of certain of our businesses and timing of certain of our product offerings could
exacerbate negative impacts on our operations.
Each of our businesses is normally subject to seasonal variations and variations in connection with
the timing of our product offerings, including as follows:
• Revenues at the Experiences segment fluctuate with changes in theme park attendance and resort
occupancy resulting from the seasonal nature of vacation travel and leisure activities and seasonal
consumer purchasing behavior, which generally results in increased revenues during the Company’s
first and fourth fiscal quarters. Peak attendance and resort occupancy generally occur during the
summer months when school vacations occur and during early winter and spring holiday periods.
Revenues at the Experiences segment also may fluctuate with changes in theme park attendance and
resort occupancy resulting from special celebrations or events that may increase demand in the
applicable periods and decrease demand in prior or later periods as guests time their vacations to
occur during such special celebrations or events. In addition, licensing revenues fluctuate with the
timing and performance of our theatrical releases and cable programming broadcasts.
• Revenues from television networks and stations are subject to seasonal advertising patterns and
changes in viewership levels, including related to certain sporting events. In general, domestic
general entertainment linear networks advertising revenues are typically somewhat higher during the
fall and somewhat lower during the summer months, and sports advertising revenues are impacted by the
timing of sports seasons and events, which varies throughout the year or may take place periodically.
• Revenues from content sales/licensing fluctuate due to the timing of content releases across
various distribution markets. Release dates and methods are determined by a number of factors,
including, among others, competition, and the timing of vacation and holiday periods.
• DTC revenues fluctuate based on: changes in the number of subscribers, mix of subscribers to
different offerings and subscriber fees; viewership levels; and the demand for sports and film and
television content. Each of these may depend on the availability of content, which varies from time
to time throughout the year based on, among other things, sports seasons, content production
schedules and sports league work stoppages.
Accordingly, negative impacts on our business occurring during a time of typical high seasonal demand
such as our park closures due to COVID-19 restrictions or hurricane damage during the summer travel
season or other high seasons, could have a disproportionate effect on the results of that business
for the year.
Our operations are impacted by our ability to attract and retain employees and costs of employee
wages and health, welfare and pension benefits, including postretirement medical benefits for some
employees and retirees, may reduce our profitability.
With approximately 225,000 employees, the success of our businesses is substantially affected by our
ability to attract and retain a workforce with the necessary skills for our varied businesses,
including executing successfully on succession planning for the talent at all levels necessary to
advance the Company’s key objectives and strategies. Further, our profitability is substantially
affected by labor costs, including wages and our health, welfare and pension benefits, including the
costs of medical benefits for current employees and the costs of postretirement medical benefits for
some current employees and retirees. We may experience significant increases in these costs as a
result of macroeconomic, regulatory, competitive and other factors. For example, labor costs in our
parks and resorts have increased, and we expect will continue to increase, as a result of collective
bargaining agreements and wage laws and regulations where we operate. Future health outbreaks and
pandemics may lead to an increase in the cost of medical insurance and expenses. In addition, changes
in investment returns and discount rates used to calculate pension and postretirement medical expense
and related assets and liabilities can be volatile and may have an unfavorable impact on our costs in
some years. These macroeconomic factors as well as a decline in the fair value of pension and
postretirement medical plan assets may put upward pressure on the cost of providing pension and
postretirement medical benefits and may increase future funding requirements. There can be no
assurance that we will succeed in attracting and retaining the human resources necessary for the
success of our businesses or in limiting cost increases from wages and other employee benefits, which
could reduce the profitability of our businesses.
We face risks related to costs and expenses in connection with the acquisition of NBCU’s equity
interest in Hulu and the TFCF acquisition.
On November 1, 2023, NBCU exercised its right to require the Company to purchase NBCU’s equity
interest in Hulu under a put/call arrangement between the parties. The purchase price for NBCU’s
equity interest in Hulu will be determined
 25 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
based on NBCU’s equity ownership percentage of the greater of Hulu’s equity fair value as of
September 30, 2023, and a guaranteed floor value. Further, the Company will share with NBCU 50% of
the Company’s tax benefit from the purchase of NBCU’s interest in Hulu, which payments are expected
to be made primarily over a 15-year period. In addition, we may incur significant costs and expenses
in connection with the TFCF acquisition, including costs for which we have established reserves or
which may lead to reserves in the future. The cost to purchase NBCU’s equity interest in Hulu and
related obligations to NBCU and any such other costs could negatively impact the Company’s cash
position and result in the Company incurring additional indebtedness.
 GENERAL RISKS 
The price of our common stock has been, and may continue to be, volatile.
The price of our common stock has experienced substantial volatility and may continue to be volatile.
Various factors have impacted, and may continue to impact, the price of our common stock, including,
among others, changes in management; variations in our operating results; variations between our
actual results and expectations of securities analysts; changes in our estimates, guidance or
business plans; changes in financial estimates and recommendations by securities analysts; the
activities, operating results or stock price of our competitors or other industry participants in the
industries in which we operate; the announcement or completion of significant transactions by us or a
competitor; events affecting the stock market generally; and the economic and political conditions in
the U.S. and internationally, as well as other factors described in this Item 1A. Some of these
factors may adversely impact the price of our common stock, regardless of our operating performance.
Further, volatility in the price of our common stock may negatively impact one or more of our
businesses, including by increasing cash compensation or stock awards for our employees who
participate in our stock incentive programs or limiting our financing options for acquisitions and
other business expansion.
The Company’s amended and restated bylaws provide to the fullest extent permitted by law that the
Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware will be the exclusive forum for certain legal actions
between the Company and its stockholders, which could increase costs to bring a claim, discourage
claims or limit the ability of the Company’s stockholders to bring a claim in a judicial forum viewed
by the stockholders as more favorable for disputes with the Company or the Company’s directors,
officers or other employees.
The Company’s amended and restated bylaws provide to the fullest extent permitted by law that unless
the Company consents in writing to the selection of an alternative forum, the Court of Chancery of
the State of Delaware will be the sole and exclusive forum for any (i) derivative action or
proceeding brought on behalf of the Company, (ii) any action or proceeding asserting a claim of
breach of a fiduciary duty owed by any current or former director, officer or stockholder of the
Company to the Company or the Company’s stockholders, (iii) any action or proceeding asserting a
claim arising pursuant to, or seeking to enforce any right, obligation or remedy under, any provision
of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware (the “DGCL”), the Certificate of
Incorporation or these Bylaws (as each may be amended from time to time), (iv) any action or
proceeding as to which the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware confers jurisdiction on
the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware, (v) or any action or proceeding asserting a claim
governed by the internal affairs doctrine. The choice of forum provision may increase costs to bring
a claim, discourage claims or limit a stockholder’s ability to bring a claim in a judicial forum that
it finds favorable for disputes with the Company or the Company’s directors, officers or other
employees, which may discourage such lawsuits against the Company or the Company’s directors,
officers and other employees. Alternatively, if a court were to find the choice of forum provision
contained in the Company’s amended and restated bylaws to be inapplicable or unenforceable in an
action, the Company may incur additional costs associated with resolving such action in other
jurisdictions. The exclusive forum provision in the Company’s amended and restated bylaws will not
preclude or contract the scope of exclusive federal or concurrent jurisdiction for actions brought
under the federal securities laws including the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the respective rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments │
The Company has received no written comments regarding its periodic or current reports from the staff
of the SEC that were issued 180 days or more preceding the end of fiscal 2023 that remain unresolved.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 2. Properties │
Our parks and resorts locations and other properties of the Company and its subsidiaries are
described in Item 1 under the caption Experiences . Film and television library properties and
television stations owned by the Company are described in Item 1 under the caption Entertainment .
 26 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The Company and its subsidiaries own and lease properties throughout the world. In addition to the
properties noted above, the table below provides a brief description of other significant properties
and the related business segment.
 Location Property / Use Business Segment 
 Approximate Size 
 Owned  
 Burbank, CA & Land (201 acres) & Office/Production/War… 
 surrounding cities(1) Buildings (4,694,000 (includes 240,000 Corporate/Entertainm… 
 ft2) ft2leased to 
 third-party tenants) 
 Burbank, CA & Buildings (1,834,000 Leased Corporate/Entertainm… 
 surrounding cities(1) ft2) Office/Warehouse 
 Land (22 acres) & Owned 
 Los Angeles, CA Buildings (605,000 Office/Production/Tec… Corporate/Entertainm… 
 ft2) Warehouse 
 Los Angeles, CA Buildings (2,640,000 Leased Corporate/Entertainm… 
 ft2) Office/Production/Tec… 
 New York, NY Buildings (51,000 Owned Office Corporate/Entertainm… 
 ft2) 
 Leased 
 Buildings (2,190,000 Office/Production/The… 
 New York, NY ft2) (includes 679,000 Corporate/Entertainm… 
 ft2leased to 
 third-party tenants) 
 Land (117 acres) & Owned 
 Bristol, CT Buildings (1,174,000 Office/Production/Tec… Sports 
 ft2) 
 Bristol, CT Buildings (273,000 Leased Sports 
 ft2) Office/Warehouse/Tech… 
 Land (20 acres) & Owned 
 Emeryville, CA Buildings (430,000 Office/Production/Tec… Entertainment 
 ft2) 
 Emeryville, CA Buildings (97,000 Leased Office/Storage Entertainment 
 ft2) 
 Leased 
 Buildings (517,000 Office/Production/Tec… 
 San Francisco, CA ft2) (includes 47,000 Corporate/Entertainm… 
 ft2leased to 
 third-party tenants) 
 Land and Buildings Owned and Leased 
 USA & Canada (Multiple sites and Office/ Corporate/Entertainm… 
 sizes) Production/Transmitte… 
 Europe, Asia, Buildings (Multiple Leased 
 Australia & Latin sites and sizes) Office/Warehouse/Reta… Entertainment/Experi… 
 America 
(1) Surrounding cities include Glendale, CA, North Hollywood, CA and Sun Valley, CA
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 3. Legal Proceedings │
As disclosed in Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company is engaged in certain
legal matters, and the disclosure set forth in Note 14 relating to certain legal matters is
incorporated herein by reference.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 4. Mine Safety Disclosures │
Not applicable.
 Information About Our Executive Officers 
The executive officers of the Company are elected each year at the organizational meeting of the
Board of Directors, which follows the annual meeting of the shareholders, and at other Board of
Directors meetings, as appropriate. Each of the executive officers has been employed by the Company
in the position or positions indicated in the list and pertinent notes below.
 27 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The executive officers of the Company are:
 Name Age Title Executive 
 Officer Since 
 Robert A. Iger 72 Chief Executive Officer(1) 2022 
 Kevin A. Lansberry 60 Interim Chief Financial Officer(2) 2023 
 Horacio E. Gutierrez 58 Senior Executive Vice President, General Counsel 2022 
 and Chief Compliance Officer(3) 
 Sonia L. Coleman 51 Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Human 2023 
 Resources Officer(4) 
 Kristina K. Schake 53 Senior Executive Vice President and Chief 2022 
 Communications Officer(5) 
(1) Mr. Iger was appointed Chief Executive Officer effective November 20, 2022. He previously served
as Executive Chairman of the Company from February 2020 through December 2021 and as Chief Executive
Officer of the Company from September 2005 to February 2020.
(2) Mr. Lansberry was appointed Interim Chief Financial Officer effective July 1, 2023. He was
previously Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of the Company’s Parks, Experiences
and Products segment from March 2018 and Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Walt
Disney Parks and Resorts from May 2017. Over his more than 35 years with the Company, Mr. Lansberry
has held a wide range of roles in the Company’s parks and experiences businesses, including in
finance, business development, alliances and operations.
(3) Mr. Gutierrez was appointed Senior Executive Vice President and General Counsel effective
February 1, 2022 and appointed Chief Compliance Officer effective March 27, 2023. Prior to joining
the Company, he served as Head of Global Affairs and Chief Legal Officer for Spotify Technology S.A.
(Spotify) from November 2019 to January 2022, where he led a global, multi-disciplinary team of
business, corporate communications and public affairs, government relations, licensing, operations
and legal professionals responsible for the company’s work in areas including industry relations,
content partnerships, public policy, and trust & safety. He was previously Spotify’s General Counsel
- Vice President, Business & Legal Affairs from April 2016 to November 2019.
(4) Ms. Coleman was appointed Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer
effective April 8, 2023. She was previously Senior Vice President, Human Resources at Disney General
Entertainment and ESPN from August 2021. Ms. Coleman served as Senior Vice President, Human Resources
for Disney General Entertainment from April 2017, Vice President, Human Resources for the Company
from May 2016 and Vice President, Human Resources, Disney Consumer Products from May 2010.
(5) Ms. Schake was appointed Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Communications Officer
effective June 29, 2022. Previously, she served as Executive Vice President, Global Communications
from April 2022. Prior to joining the Company, she was appointed by the President of the United
States as Counselor for Strategic Communications to the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, leading a nationwide public education campaign from March 2021 to December 2021.
Prior to that, she served as Global Communications Director for Instagram, a product of Meta
Platforms, Inc., from March 2017 to March 2019, where she oversaw the communications teams in North
America, Latin America, Europe and Asia.
On November 2, 2023, the Company appointed Hugh F. Johnston, 62, as Senior Executive Vice President
and Chief Financial Officer commencing on December 4, 2023. Mr. Johnston currently serves as
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, from 2010, and Vice Chairman, from 2015, of
PepsiCo, Inc. (“PepsiCo”). In addition to providing strategic financial leadership for PepsiCo in
these roles, Mr. Johnston’s portfolio has included a variety of responsibilities, including
leadership of PepsiCo’s information technology function from 2015, PepsiCo’s global e-commerce
business from 2015 to 2019, and the Quaker Foods North America division from 2014 to 2016. He also
held a number of other leadership roles during his PepsiCo career, having served as Executive Vice
President, Global Operations from 2009 to 2010, President of Pepsi-Cola North America from 2007 to
2009, Executive Vice President, Operations from 2006 to 2007 and Senior Vice President,
Transformation from 2005 to 2006. Prior to that, he served as Senior Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer of PepsiCo Beverages and Foods from 2002 through 2005, and as PepsiCo’s Senior Vice
President of Mergers and Acquisitions in 2002. Mr. Johnston joined PepsiCo in 1987 as a Business
Planner and held various finance positions until 1999 when he left to join Merck & Co., Inc. as Vice
President, Retail, a position which he held until he rejoined PepsiCo in 2002.
 28 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS