╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1. Business │
The Walt Disney Company, together with the subsidiaries through which businesses are conducted (the
Company), is a diversified worldwide entertainment company with operations in three segments:
Entertainment, Sports and Experiences.
The terms “Company”, “we”, “our” and “us” are used in this report to refer collectively to the parent
company and the subsidiaries through which businesses are conducted.
 ENTERTAINMENT 
The Entertainment segment generally encompasses the Company’s non-sports focused global film and
episodic content production and distribution activities.
The lines of business within Entertainment along with their significant business activities include
the following:
• Linear Networks
◦ Domestic: ABC Television Network (ABC Network); Disney, Freeform, FX and National Geographic (owned
73% by the Company) branded television channels; and eight owned ABC television stations
◦ International: Disney, FX, National Geographic (owned 73% by the Company) and Star branded general
entertainment television channels outside of the U.S.
◦ A 50% equity investment in A+E Television Networks (A+E), which operates cable channels including
A&E, HISTORY and Lifetime
• Direct-to-Consumer
◦ Disney+: a global direct-to-consumer (DTC) service that primarily offers general entertainment and
family programming
◦ Disney+ Hotstar: a DTC service primarily in India that offers general entertainment, family and
sports programming.
◦ Hulu: a U.S. DTC service that offers general entertainment and family programming and a digital
over-the-top (OTT) service that includes live linear streams of various cable and broadcast networks.
See Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for information on Hulu ownership.
• Content Sales/Licensing
◦ Theatrical distribution
◦ Sale/licensing of film and episodic content to television and video-on-demand (TV/VOD) services
◦ Home entertainment distribution: electronic home video licenses, video-on-demand rentals and sales
of DVD/Blu-ray discs
◦ Intersegment allocation of revenues from the Experiences segment, which is meant to reflect
royalties on consumer products merchandise licensing revenues generated on intellectual property (IP)
created by the Entertainment segment
◦ Staging and licensing of live entertainment events on Broadway and around the world (Stage Plays)
◦ Music distribution
◦ Post-production services by Industrial Light & Magic and Skywalker Sound
Entertainment also includes the following activities that are reported with Content Sales/Licensing:
• National Geographic magazine and online business (owned 73% by the Company)
• A 30% ownership interest in Tata Play Limited, which operates a direct-to-home satellite
distribution platform in India
The significant revenues of Entertainment are as follows:
• Subscription fees - Fees charged to customers/subscribers for our DTC streaming services
• Advertising - Sales of advertising time/space
• Affiliate fees - Fees charged to multi-channel video programming distributors (i.e. cable,
satellite, telecommunications and digital OTT service providers) (MVPDs) for the right to deliver our
programming to their customers. Linear Networks also generates revenues from fees charged to
television stations affiliated with ABC Network.
• Theatrical distribution - Rentals from licensing our films to theaters
• TV/VOD distribution - Licensing fees for the right to use our film and episodic content
 2 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
• Home entertainment distribution - Electronic sales and rentals of film and episodic content through
distributors and royalties from the licensing of physical distribution rights
• Other revenue - Revenues from licensing our music, ticket sales from stage play performances, fees
from licensing our IP for use in stage plays, sales of post-production services and the allocation of
consumer products merchandise licensing revenues
The significant expenses of Entertainment are as follows:
• Operating expenses, consisting primarily of programming and production costs, technology support
costs, operating labor and distribution costs. Programming and production costs include the
following:
◦ Amortization of capitalized production costs
◦ Amortization of the costs of licensed programming rights
◦ Subscriber-based fees for programming our Hulu Live service, including fees paid by Hulu to the
Sports segment and other Entertainment segment businesses for the right to air their linear networks
on Hulu Live
◦ Production costs related to live programming (primarily news)
◦ Participations and residual expenses
◦ Fees paid to the Sports segment to program ESPN on ABC and certain sports content on Disney+
• Selling, general and administrative costs, including marketing costs
• Depreciation and amortization
 Linear Networks 
The majority of Linear Networks revenue is derived from affiliate fees and advertising. The Company’s
Linear Networks businesses provide programming under multi-year licensing agreements with MVPDs
and/or affiliated television stations that are generally based on contractually specified rates on a
per subscriber basis. The amounts that we can charge for our networks are largely dependent on the
quality and quantity of programming that we can provide and the competitive market for programming
services. The ability to sell advertising time and the rates received are primarily dependent on the
size and nature of the audience that the network can deliver to the advertiser as well as overall
advertiser demand.
Domestic Linear Networks
ABC Network
ABC Network programming is aired in the primetime, daytime, late night, news and sports “dayparts”.
Primetime programming includes scripted series, reality programming and a variety of movies and
specials. ESPN programs the sports daypart on ABC Network, which is branded ESPN on ABC. ABC Network
distributes programming to approximately 245 local affiliated television stations and to our eight
owned television stations, which collectively reach almost 100% of U.S. television households.
ABC Network produces a variety of unscripted series, primetime specials, news and daytime
programming.
Disney Channels
Branded television channels include: Disney Channel; Disney Junior; and Disney XD (collectively
Disney Channels). Disney Channels air programming 24 hours a day targeted to kids ages 2 to 14 and
generally feature live-action comedy series, animated programming and preschool series as well as
original movies and theatrical films.
Freeform
Freeform is a channel targeted to viewers ages 18 to 34 that airs original and licensed television
series, films and holiday programming events.
FX Channels
Branded television channels include: FX; FXM; and FXX (collectively FX Channels), which air a mix of
original and licensed television series and films.
National Geographic Channels
Branded television channels include: National Geographic; Nat Geo Wild; and Nat Geo Mundo
(collectively National Geographic Channels). National Geographic Channels air programming in genres
such as travel, adventure, wildlife, documentary, science and history.
 3 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The number of subscribers (in millions) for the significant domestic branded channels are as follows:
 Subscribers(1) 
 Disney Channel 66 
 Freeform 55 
 FX 67 
 National Geographic 66 
(1) Based on Nielsen Media Research estimates as of September 2024. Estimates include traditional
MVPD and the majority of digital OTT subscriber counts.
Domestic Television Stations
The Company owns eight television stations, six of which are located in the top ten television
household markets in the U.S. Our television stations collectively reach approximately 20% of U.S.
television households.
The stations we own are as follows:
 TV Station Market Television Market 
 Ranking(1) 
 WABC New York, NY 1 
 KABC Los Angeles, CA 2 
 WLS Chicago, IL 3 
 WPVI Philadelphia, PA 4 
 KTRK Houston, TX 6 
 KGO San Francisco, CA 10 
 WTVD Raleigh-Durham, NC 22 
 KFSN Fresno, CA 52 
(1) Based on Nielsen Media Research, U.S. Television Household Estimates, January 1, 2024
International Linear Networks
International Linear Networks use content from the Company’s various studios, including library
titles, as well as content acquired from third parties. The Company operates approximately 265
general entertainment and family channels outside the U.S. in approximately 40 languages and 175
countries/territories.
General Entertainment
General Entertainment channels include FX, National Geographic and Star branded channels, which air a
variety of scripted, reality and documentary programming. As of September 2024, the estimated number
of unique subscribers for our general entertainment channels, based on internal management reports,
was approximately 240 million.
Family
Family channels include Disney Channel and Disney Junior, which air a variety of animated and live
action original series and movies targeted to kids ages 2 to 14. As of September 2024, the estimated
number of unique subscribers for our family channels, based on internal management reports, was
approximately 200 million.
Equity Investments
The most significant equity investment at Linear Networks is A+E. The Company’s share of A+E’s
financial results are reported as “Equity in the income of investees” in the Company’s Consolidated
Statements of Income.
A+E is owned 50% by the Company and 50% by Hearst. A+E operates a variety of cable channels,
including:
• A&E – which offers entertainment programming including original reality and documentary programming
• HISTORY – which offers original unscripted series and event-driven specials
• Lifetime – which offers programming targeted to women
The number of domestic subscribers, based on Nielsen Media Research estimates as of September 2024,
are 58 million for each of A&E, HISTORY and Lifetime and include traditional MVPD and the majority of
digital OTT subscriber counts. A+E programming is available in approximately 200 countries and
territories.
 4 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Direct-to-Consumer 
Disney+, Disney+ Hotstar and Hulu are subscription services that provide video streaming of the
Company’s general entertainment and family programming and similar programming from third parties.
Outside the U.S., Disney+ and Disney+ Hotstar also include international sports programming. The
services are offered individually or in various bundles, which may include ESPN+ (see Sports segment
discussion), to customers directly or through third-party distributors on mobile and internet
connected devices. The majority of Direct-to-Consumer revenue is derived from subscription fees and
advertising.
Disney+ and Disney+ Hotstar
Disney+ is a subscription-based DTC service with Disney, Pixar, Marvel, Star Wars and National
Geographic branded programming, which are all top-level selections or “tiles” within the Disney+
interface. In the U.S., subscribers to both Disney+ and Hulu may access certain Hulu programming
through a tile on Disney+. Outside the U.S., Disney+ includes a Star branded tile, which features
general entertainment programming. In Latin America, Disney+ includes an ESPN branded tile, which
features a variety of sports content including live events. The Company plans to launch an ESPN
branded tile on Disney+ in the U.S. in early fiscal 2025.
In certain Latin American countries prior to July 2024, we offered Disney+ as well as Star+, a
standalone service with a variety of general entertainment and family content and live sports
programming. At the end of June 2024, we merged these services into a single Disney+ product
offering.
As of September 28, 2024, the estimated number of paid Disney+ subscribers, based on internal
management reports, was approximately 123 million.
Disney+ Hotstar is a subscription-based DTC service available in India, Indonesia, Malaysia and
Thailand. Programming includes television shows, movies, sports and original series in approximately
10 languages, in addition to gaming and social features. Disney+ Hotstar has exclusive streaming
rights to certain cricket programming.
As of September 28, 2024, the estimated number of paid Disney+ Hotstar subscribers, based on internal
management reports, was approximately 36 million.
Disney+ and Disney+ Hotstar offer content from the Company’s various studios, including library
titles, as well as content acquired from third parties.
The majority of Disney+ and Disney+ Hotstar revenue is derived from subscription fees and, to a
lesser extent, advertising. The Company offers an ad-supported Disney+ service in the U.S., Canada
and select Latin American and European markets.
Hulu
Hulu is a domestic subscription-based DTC service with general entertainment content from the
Company’s various studios as well as content licensed from third parties. Hulu’s revenue is derived
from subscription fees and advertising. Hulu offers subscription video-on-demand (SVOD) services with
or without advertising in addition to a digital OTT MVPD (Live TV) service. The Live TV service is
available with either of Hulu’s SVOD services and includes live linear streams of various cable and
broadcast networks. In addition, Hulu offers subscriptions to premium services such as Max, Cinemax,
Starz and Paramount+ with Showtime, which can be added to the Hulu service. Certain programming from
ABC Network, Freeform and FX Channels is also available on the Hulu SVOD service one day after the
linear airing on these channels. As of September 28, 2024, the estimated number of paid Hulu
subscribers, based on internal management reports, was approximately 52 million.
 Content Sales/Licensing and Other 
The majority of Content Sales/Licensing revenue is derived from TV/VOD, theatrical and home
entertainment distribution. In addition, revenue is generated from music distribution, stage plays
and post-production services through Industrial Light & Magic and Skywalker Sound.
The Company also publishes National Geographic magazine, which is reported with Content
Sales/Licensing.
TV/VOD Distribution
We license our content to third-party television networks, television stations and other video
service providers for distribution to viewers on television or a variety of internet-connected
devices, including through other DTC services.
Theatrical Distribution
The Company licenses full-length live-action and animated films to theaters globally. Cumulatively
through September 28, 2024, the Company has released approximately 1,100 full-length live-action
films and 100 full-length animated films. In the domestic and most major international markets, we
generally distribute and market our films directly. In certain international markets our films are
distributed by independent companies. In some territories, certain films may be exclusively
distributed on our DTC streaming services. During fiscal 2025, we expect to release approximately 15
films.
 5 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The Company incurs significant marketing and advertising costs before and throughout the theatrical
release of a film in an effort to generate public awareness of the film, to increase the public’s
intent to view the film and to help generate consumer interest in the subsequent home entertainment
and other ancillary markets. These costs are expensed as incurred, which may result in a loss on a
film in the theatrical markets, including in periods prior to the theatrical release of the film.
Home Entertainment Distribution
The Company’s film and episodic content is sold in both electronic (home video license and video-on-
demand rentals) and physical (DVD and Blu-ray disc) formats. We distribute through e-tailers such as
Apple and Amazon, and MVPDs, such as Comcast and DirecTV, for electronic distribution. We have
licensed the rights for physical distribution to third parties who generally sell to retailers, such
as Walmart and Amazon.
Physical distribution of film content in the home entertainment window generally starts within three
months after the theatrical release. Electronic formats are typically available approximately two to
ten weeks ahead of the physical release. We also license titles to video-on-demand e-tailers within
five weeks after physical home entertainment distribution.
Distribution of episodic content in the home entertainment window includes electronic sales of season
passes that can be purchased prior to, during and after the broadcast season with individual episodes
typically available to season pass customers shortly after the initial airing of the show in each
territory. Access to individual episodes is also available for electronic purchase shortly after the
initial airing in each territory.
Disney Theatrical Group
Disney Theatrical Group develops, produces and licenses live entertainment events on Broadway and
around the world. Productions include The Lion King , Aladdin , Frozen and Beauty and the Beast .
Disney Theatrical Group also licenses the Company’s IP to Feld Entertainment, the producer of Disney
On Ice .
Disney Music Group
The Disney Music Group encompasses all aspects of the Company’s music commercialization and marketing
including: recorded music (Walt Disney Records and Hollywood Records); music publishing; and
concerts. Disney Music Group distributes music both physically and digitally and also licenses music
throughout the world in various forms of media, including: television; print; gaming; and consumer
products.
Equity Investment
The Company has a 30% effective interest in Tata Play Limited, which operates a direct-to-home
satellite distribution platform in India.
 Content Production and Acquisition 
Produced content primarily consists of original films and episodic programs and network news and
daytime/late night programming. Licensed content includes acquired episodic programming rights,
movies and specials. Original content is generally produced under the following banners: Disney
Branded Television; FX Productions; Lucasfilm; Marvel; National Geographic Studios; Pixar;
Searchlight Pictures; Twentieth Century Studios; 20th Television; and Walt Disney Pictures. Original
content is also commissioned and produced by various third-party studios. Program development is
carried out in collaboration with writers, producers and creative teams.
Costs to produce content are generally capitalized and allocated across Entertainment’s businesses
based on the estimated relative value of the distribution windows.
Generally, the Company has full production and distribution rights to its IP. However, Sony Pictures
Entertainment has the rights to produce and distribute Spider-Man films as a result of licensing
these rights from Marvel prior to the Company’s acquisition of Marvel.
The Company has a significant library of content spanning approximately 100 years of production
history as well as acquired libraries. The library of content includes approximately 5,200 live-
action film titles, 450 animated film titles and episodic series (series with four or more seasons
include approximately: 75 dramas; 55 comedies; 40 non-scripted series; 15 animated series; and 10
live-action series). In addition, the library includes approximately 130 series and 80 films that
were produced for initial distribution on our DTC platforms.
In fiscal 2025, the Company plans to produce or commission approximately 215 episodic and film
titles. The vast majority of our productions will initially be distributed on our Linear Networks
and/or DTC platforms or theatrically. Programming is also produced for third parties, which typically
have domestic linear distribution rights while the Company retains domestic video-on-demand and
international distribution rights. We also license, acquire or produce local content for use in
various countries/territories.
 6 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Competition and Seasonality 
Linear Networks and Direct-to-Consumer compete for viewers’ attention and audience share primarily
with other television networks, independent television stations and other media, such as other DTC
streaming services, social media and video games. With respect to the sale of advertising time, we
compete with other television networks, independent television stations, MVPDs, other DTC streaming
services and other advertising media such as digital content, newspapers, magazines, radio and
billboards. Our television stations primarily compete for audiences and advertisers in local market
areas.
Linear Networks compete with other networks for carriage by MVPDs. The Company’s contractual
agreements with MVPDs are renewed or renegotiated from time to time in the ordinary course of
business. Consolidation and other market conditions in the cable, satellite and telecommunication
distribution industry, including subscriber levels, and other factors may adversely affect the
Company’s ability to obtain and maintain contractual terms for the distribution of its various
programming services that are as favorable as those currently in place.
Content Sales/Licensing businesses compete with all forms of entertainment and a significant number
of companies that produce and/or distribute film and episodic content, distribute products in the
home entertainment market, provide pay TV/VOD services, and produce music and live theater.
The operating results of Content Sales/Licensing fluctuate due to the timing and performance of
releases in the theatrical, home entertainment and television markets. Release dates are determined
by several factors, including competition and the timing of vacation and holiday periods.
We also compete with other media and entertainment companies, independent production companies and
video-on-demand services for creative and performing talent, story properties, show concepts,
scripted and other programming, advertiser support, production facilities and exhibition outlets that
are essential to the success of our Entertainment businesses.
Advertising revenues at Linear Networks and Direct-to-Consumer are subject to seasonal advertising
patterns and changes in viewership levels. In general, domestic advertising revenues are typically
somewhat higher during the fall and somewhat lower during the summer months. Affiliate revenues vary
with the subscriber levels of MVPDs.
 SPORTS 
The Sports segment generally encompasses the Company’s sports-focused global television and DTC video
streaming content production and distribution activities.
The lines of business within Sports include the following:
• ESPN (generally owned 80% by the Company)
◦ Domestic:
▪ Seven ESPN-branded television channels
▪ ESPN on ABC (sports programmed on the ABC Network by ESPN)
▪ ESPN+ DTC service
◦ International: ESPN-branded channels outside of the U.S.
• Star: Star-branded sports channels in India
In February 2024, the Company, Fox Corporation and Warner Bros. Discovery, Inc. announced plans to
create a joint venture to offer a sports-focused DTC platform (Venu Sports) that will distribute each
party’s domestic sports networks, certain broadcast networks and sports streaming services. In August
2024, a motion for preliminary injunction in a matter before the District Court for the Southern
District of New York was granted, enjoining the launch of Venu Sports. See Note 14 of the
Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding this legal matter. Further,
the formation and launch of Venu Sports are subject to the finalization of definitive agreements
among the parties.
In early fall 2025, the Company plans to launch a new DTC offering, which will include live linear
streams of the domestic ESPN-branded television channels and ESPN+.
The significant revenues of Sports are as follows:
• Affiliate fees
• Advertising
• Subscription fees
• Other revenue - Fees from the following activities: pay-per-view events on ESPN+, sub-licensing of
sports rights, programming ESPN on ABC and licensing the ESPN brand
 7 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The significant expenses of Sports are as follows:
• Operating expenses, consisting primarily of programming and production costs, technology support
costs, operating labor and distribution costs. Programming and production costs include amortization
of licensed sports rights and production costs related to live sports and other sports-related
programming.
• Selling, general and administrative costs, including marketing costs
• Depreciation and amortization
 Domestic ESPN 
Branded television channels include seven 24-hour domestic television sports channels:
• ESPN and ESPN2 - both dedicated to professional and college sports as well as sports news and
original programming
• ESPNU - dedicated to college sports
• ESPNEWS - re-airs select ESPN studio shows and airs a variety of other programming
• SEC Network - dedicated to Southeastern Conference college athletics
• ACC Network - dedicated to Atlantic Coast Conference college athletics
• ESPN Deportes - airs professional and college sports as well as studio shows in Spanish
ESPN programs ESPN on ABC and recognizes the direct revenues and costs for this programming and
receives a fee from the ABC Network, which is eliminated in consolidation. In addition, the Company
earns advertising and licensing revenues from providing promotional services and licensing the ESPN
BET trademark to PENN Entertainment, Inc. in connection with its operation of a sportsbook.
The Company has various sports programming rights, which are used to produce content aired on ESPN
television networks and ESPN+, including live events and sports news. Rights include the National
Football League (NFL), college football (including bowl games and the College Football Playoff) and
basketball, the National Basketball Association (NBA), mixed martial arts, Major League Baseball
(MLB), the National Hockey League (NHL), soccer, Top Rank Boxing, Formula 1, US Open Tennis, the
Wimbledon Championships, the Masters golf tournament, the Professional Golfers’ Association (PGA)
Championship and the Women’s National Basketball Association (WNBA).
The number of subscribers (in millions) for the significant domestic branded channels are as follows:
 Subscribers 
 ESPN(1) 66 
 ESPN2(1) 66 
 ESPNU(1) 47 
 ESPNEWS(2) 40 
 SEC Network(2) 45 
 ACC Network(2) 44 
(1) Based on Nielsen Media Research estimates as of September 2024. Estimates include traditional
MVPD and the majority of digital OTT subscriber counts.
(2) Because Nielsen Media Research does not measure this channel, estimated subscribers are according
to SNL Kagan as of December 2023.
ESPN+ is a domestic subscription-based DTC service offering thousands of live sporting events, on-
demand sports content and other original programming. The service is offered individually or in
various bundles with Disney+ and Hulu to customers directly or through third-party distributors on
mobile and internet connected devices. ESPN+ revenue is derived from subscription fees, pay-per-view
fees and, to a lesser extent, advertising. Live events available through the service include mixed
martial arts, soccer, hockey, boxing, baseball, college sports, golf, tennis and cricket. ESPN+ is
currently the exclusive distributor for Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) pay-per-view events in
the U.S. As of September 28, 2024, the estimated number of paid ESPN+ subscribers, based on internal
management reports, was approximately 26 million.
 International ESPN 
The Company operates approximately 45 ESPN branded sports channels outside the U.S. in 4 languages
and approximately 115 countries/territories. In the Netherlands, the ESPN branded channels are
operated by Eredivisie Media & Marketing CV (EMM) (owned 51% by the Company), which has the media and
sponsorship rights to the Dutch Premier League for soccer. Rights include various soccer leagues
(including English Premier League, LaLiga, Bundesliga and multiple UEFA leagues). As of September
2024, the estimated number of subscribers to ESPN branded channels outside the U.S., based on
internal management reports, was approximately 55 million.
 8 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Star 
The Company operates 10 Star branded sports channels in India, in 4 languages. Star has rights to
various sports programming, primarily cricket and soccer. As of September 2024, the estimated number
of subscribers to Star branded channels, based on internal management reports, was approximately 79
million.
 Equity Investments 
The most significant equity investment at Sports is a 30% interest in CTV Specialty Television, Inc.
(CTV). The Company’s share of CTV’s financial results is reported as “Equity in the income of
investees” in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Income. CTV operates television networks in
Canada, including The Sports Networks (TSN) 1-5, Le Réseau des Sports (RDS), RDS2, RDS Info,
Discovery Canada, Discovery Science and Animal Planet Canada.
 Competition and Seasonality 
Sports competes for viewers’ attention and audience share primarily with other television networks,
independent television stations and other media, such as other DTC streaming services, social media
and video games. With respect to the sale of advertising time, we compete with other television
networks, independent television stations, MVPDs and other advertising media such as digital content,
newspapers, magazines, radio and billboards.
The Sports television networks compete with other networks for carriage by MVPDs. The Company’s
contractual agreements with MVPDs are renewed or renegotiated from time to time in the ordinary
course of business. Consolidation and other market conditions in the cable, satellite and
telecommunication distribution industry and other factors may adversely affect the Company’s ability
to obtain and maintain contractual terms for the distribution of its various programming services
that are as favorable as those currently in place.
We also compete with other media and entertainment companies and video-on-demand services for sports
rights, creative and performing talent and other programming, advertiser support and production
facilities that are essential to the success of our Sports businesses.
Advertising revenues are subject to changes in viewership levels and the demand for sports
programming. Advertising revenues generated from sports programming are also impacted by the timing
of sports seasons and events, which timing may vary throughout the year or may take place
periodically (e.g. biannually, quadrennially). Affiliate revenues vary with the subscriber levels of
MVPDs.
 EXPERIENCES 
The lines of business within Experiences along with their significant business activities include the
following:
• Parks & Experiences:
◦ Domestic:
▪ Theme parks and resorts:
• Walt Disney World Resort in Florida
• Disneyland Resort in California
▪ Experiences:
• Disney Cruise Line
• Disney Vacation Club
• National Geographic Expeditions (owned 73% by the Company) and Adventures by Disney
• Aulani, a Disney Resort & Spa in Hawaii
◦ International:
▪ Theme parks and resorts:
• Disneyland Paris
• Hong Kong Disneyland Resort (48% ownership interest and consolidated in our financial results)
• Shanghai Disney Resort (43% ownership interest and consolidated in our financial results)
• In addition, the Company licenses its IP to a third party that owns and operates Tokyo Disney
Resort
• Consumer Products:
◦ Licensing of our trade names, characters, visual, literary and other IP to various manufacturers,
game developers, publishers and retailers throughout the world, for use on merchandise, published
materials and games
◦ Sale of branded merchandise through online, retail and wholesale businesses, and development and
publishing of books, comic books and magazines (except National Geographic magazine, which is
reported in Entertainment)
 9 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The significant revenues of Experiences are as follows:
• Theme park admissions - Sales of tickets for admission to our theme parks and for premium access to
certain attractions (e.g. Lightning Lane)
• Resorts and vacations - Sales of room nights at hotels, sales of cruise and other vacations and
sales and rentals of vacation club properties
• Parks & Experiences merchandise, food and beverage - Sales of merchandise, food and beverages at
our theme parks and resorts and cruise ships
• Merchandise licensing and retail:
◦ Merchandise licensing - Royalties from licensing our IP for use on consumer goods
◦ Retail - Sales of merchandise through internet shopping sites, at The Disney Store and to
wholesalers
• Parks licensing and other - Revenues from sponsorships and co-branding opportunities, real estate
rent and sales and royalties earned on Tokyo Disney Resort revenues
The significant expenses of Experiences are as follows:
• Operating expenses, consisting primarily of operating labor, infrastructure costs, costs of goods
sold and distribution costs, supplies, commissions and entertainment offerings. Infrastructure costs
include technology support costs, repairs and maintenance, utilities and fuel, property taxes, retail
occupancy costs, insurance and transportation
• Selling, general and administrative costs, including marketing costs
• Depreciation and amortization
Significant capital investments:
• In recent years, the majority of the Company’s capital spend has been at our parks and experiences
business, which is principally for theme park and resort expansion, new attractions, cruise ships,
capital improvements and systems infrastructure.
 Parks & Experiences 
Walt Disney World Resort
The Walt Disney World Resort is located approximately 20 miles southwest of Orlando, Florida, on
approximately 25,000 acres of land. The resort includes theme parks (the Magic Kingdom, EPCOT,
Disney’s Hollywood Studios and Disney’s Animal Kingdom); hotels; vacation club properties; a retail,
dining and entertainment complex (Disney Springs); a sports complex; conference centers; campgrounds;
golf courses; water parks; and other recreational facilities designed to attract visitors for an
extended stay.
The Walt Disney World Resort is marketed through a variety of international, national and local
advertising and promotional activities. A number of attractions and restaurants in each of the theme
parks are sponsored or operated by other companies under multi-year agreements.
Magic Kingdom — The Magic Kingdom consists of six themed areas: Adventureland, Fantasyland,
Frontierland, Liberty Square, Main Street USA and Tomorrowland. Each area provides a unique guest
experience featuring themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and entertainment
experiences.
EPCOT — EPCOT consists of four major themed areas: World Showcase, World Celebration, World Nature
and World Discovery. All areas feature themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and
entertainment experiences. Countries represented with pavilions include Canada, China, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Morocco, Norway, the United Kingdom and the U.S. CommuniCore Hall and
Plaza opened in June 2024, completing a multi-year transformation at EPCOT.
Disney’s Hollywood Studios — Disney’s Hollywood Studios consists of eight themed areas: Animation
Courtyard, Commissary Lane, Echo Lake, Grand Avenue, Hollywood Boulevard, Star Wars : Galaxy’s Edge,
Sunset Boulevard and Toy Story Land. The areas provide behind-the-scenes glimpses of Hollywood-style
action through various shows and attractions and offer themed restaurants, merchandise shops and
entertainment experiences.
Disney’s Animal Kingdom — Disney’s Animal Kingdom consists of a 145-foot tall Tree of Life
centerpiece surrounded by five themed areas: Africa, Asia, DinoLand USA, Discovery Island and Pandora
- The World of Avatar. Each themed area contains attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and
entertainment experiences. The park features more than 300 species of live mammals, birds, reptiles
and amphibians and 3,000 varieties of vegetation. DinoLand USA will be rethemed and in 2027, is
planned to open as Tropical Americas, which will feature themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise
shops and entertainment experiences.
Hotels, Vacation Club Properties and Other Resort Facilities — As of September 28, 2024, the Company
owned and operated 18 resort hotels and vacation club properties at the Walt Disney World Resort,
with approximately 23,000 rooms and
 10 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
3,600 vacation club units. Resort facilities include 500,000 square feet of conference meeting space
and Disney’s Fort Wilderness camping and recreational area, which offers approximately 800 campsites.
Disney Springs is an approximately 120 acre themed retail, dining and entertainment complex and
consists of four areas: Marketplace, The Landing, Town Center and West Side. The areas are home to
approximately 150 venues including the World of Disney retail store, which includes approximately
38,000 square feet of retail space. Most of the Disney Springs facilities are operated by third
parties that pay rent to the Company.
Ten independently-operated hotels with approximately 7,000 rooms are situated on property leased from
the Company.
ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex is a 230 acre center that hosts professional caliber training and
competitions, festival and tournament events and interactive sports activities. The complex, which
welcomes both amateur and professional athletes, accommodates multiple sporting events, including
baseball, basketball, football, soccer, softball, tennis and track and field. It also includes a
stadium, as well as two venues designed for cheerleading, dance competitions and other indoor sports.
Other recreational amenities and activities available at the Walt Disney World Resort include three
championship golf courses, miniature golf courses, full-service spas, tennis, sailing, swimming,
horseback riding and a number of other sports and leisure time activities. The resort also includes
two water parks: Disney’s Blizzard Beach and Disney’s Typhoon Lagoon.
Disneyland Resort
The Disneyland Resort is located in Anaheim, California on approximately 550 acres of land. The
Disneyland Resort includes two theme parks (Disneyland and Disney California Adventure), three resort
hotels and a retail, dining and entertainment complex (Downtown Disney).
The Disneyland Resort is marketed through a variety of international, national and local advertising
and promotional activities. A number of attractions and restaurants in the theme parks are sponsored
or operated by other companies under multi-year agreements.
Disneyland — Disneyland consists of nine themed areas: Adventureland, Bayou Country, Fantasyland,
Frontierland, Main Street USA, Mickey’s Toontown, New Orleans Square, Star Wars : Galaxy’s Edge and
Tomorrowland. These areas feature themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and
entertainment experiences.
Disney California Adventure — Disney California Adventure includes eight themed areas: Avengers
Campus, Buena Vista Street, Cars Land, Grizzly Peak, Hollywood Land, Paradise Gardens Park, Pixar
Pier and San Fransokyo Square. These areas include themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops
and entertainment experiences.
Hotels, Vacation Club Units and Other Resort Facilities — As of September 28, 2024, the Company owned
and operated three resort hotels and vacation club properties at the Disneyland Resort, with
approximately 2,400 rooms and 180 vacation club units. Resort facilities included 180,000 square feet
of conference meeting space.
Downtown Disney is a themed 15-acre retail, dining and entertainment complex with approximately 30
venues. Most of the Downtown Disney facilities are operated by third parties that pay rent to the
Company.
Aulani, a Disney Resort & Spa
Aulani, a Disney Resort & Spa is a family resort on a 21 acre oceanfront property on Oahu, Hawaii
featuring approximately 350 hotel rooms, an 18,000-square-foot spa and 12,000 square feet of
conference meeting space. The resort also has approximately 480 vacation club units.
Disneyland Paris
Disneyland Paris is located approximately 20 miles east of Paris, France in Marne-la-Vallée, on
approximately 5,200 acres. The land is being developed pursuant to a master agreement with French
governmental authorities. Disneyland Paris includes two theme parks (Disneyland Park and Walt Disney
Studios Park); seven themed resort hotels; two convention centers; a retail, dining and entertainment
complex (Disney Village); and a 27-hole golf facility. Of the 5,200 acres comprising the site,
approximately half have been developed to date, including a planned community (Val d’Europe).
Disneyland Park — Disneyland Park consists of five themed areas: Adventureland, Discoveryland,
Fantasyland, Frontierland and Main Street USA. These areas include themed attractions, restaurants,
merchandise shops and entertainment experiences.
Walt Disney Studios Park — Walt Disney Studios Park includes five themed areas: Front Lot, Production
Courtyard, Toon Studio, Worlds of Pixar and Avengers Campus. These areas each include themed
attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and entertainment experiences. Walt Disney Studios Park
is undergoing a multi-year expansion that will include a new themed area based on Frozen , which is
planned to open in 2026 and coincide with the renaming of Walt Disney Studios Park to Disney
Adventure World.
 11 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Hotels and Other Facilities — Disneyland Paris operates seven resort hotels, with approximately 5,750
rooms and 250,000 square feet of conference meeting space. In addition, we have relationships with
seven independently-owned and operated partner hotels, both on- and off-property, that provide
approximately 2,100 rooms.
Disney Village is an approximately 500,000-square-foot themed retail, dining and entertainment
complex. Construction is currently underway on a multi-year transformation of Disney Village. A
number of the Disney Village facilities are operated by third parties that pay rent to the Company.
Val d’Europe is a planned community near Disneyland Paris that is being developed in phases. Val
d’Europe currently includes a regional train station, hotels and a town center consisting of a
shopping center as well as office, commercial and residential space. Third parties operate these
developments on land leased or purchased from the Company.
Hong Kong Disneyland Resort
The Company owns a 48% interest in Hong Kong Disneyland Resort and the Government of the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) owns a 52% interest. The resort is located on Lantau Island on
310 acres and is in close proximity to the Hong Kong International Airport and the Hong Kong-Zhuhai-
Macau Bridge. Hong Kong Disneyland Resort includes one theme park and three themed resort hotels. A
separate Hong Kong subsidiary of the Company is responsible for managing Hong Kong Disneyland Resort.
The Company is entitled to receive royalties and management fees based on the operating performance
of Hong Kong Disneyland Resort.
Hong Kong Disneyland — Hong Kong Disneyland consists of eight themed areas: Adventureland,
Fantasyland, Grizzly Gulch, Main Street USA, Mystic Point, Tomorrowland, Toy Story Land and World of
Frozen. These areas feature themed attractions, restaurants, merchandise shops and entertainment
experiences.
Hotels — Hong Kong Disneyland Resort includes three themed hotels with approximately 1,750 rooms and
16,000 square feet of conference meeting space.
Shanghai Disney Resort
The Company owns a 43% interest in Shanghai Disney Resort and Shanghai Shendi (Group) Co., Ltd
(Shendi) owns a 57% interest. The resort is located in the Pudong district of Shanghai on
approximately 1,000 acres of land, which includes the Shanghai Disneyland theme park; two themed
resort hotels; a retail, dining and entertainment complex (Disneytown); and an outdoor recreation
area. A management company, in which the Company has a 70% interest and Shendi has a 30% interest, is
responsible for operating the resort and receives a management fee based on the operating performance
of Shanghai Disney Resort. The Company is also entitled to royalties based on the resort’s revenues.
Shanghai Disneyland — Shanghai Disneyland consists of eight themed areas: Adventure Isle,
Fantasyland, Gardens of Imagination, Mickey Avenue, Tomorrowland, Toy Story Land, Treasure Cove and
Zootopia, which opened in December 2023. These areas feature themed attractions, shows, restaurants,
merchandise shops and entertainment experiences.
Hotels and Other Facilities — Shanghai Disneyland Resort includes two themed hotels with
approximately 1,200 rooms. Disneytown is an 11-acre outdoor complex of retail, dining, and
entertainment venues located adjacent to Shanghai Disneyland. Most Disneytown facilities are operated
by third parties that pay rent to Shanghai Disney Resort. The Company is currently constructing a
third themed hotel, which will have approximately 400 rooms.
Tokyo Disney Resort
Tokyo Disney Resort is located on 494 acres of land, six miles east of downtown Tokyo, Japan. The
Company earns royalties on revenues generated by the Tokyo Disney Resort, which is owned and operated
by Oriental Land Co., Ltd. (OLC), a third-party Japanese corporation. The resort includes two theme
parks (Tokyo Disneyland and Tokyo DisneySea); six Disney-branded hotels; six other hotels (operated
by third parties other than OLC); a retail, dining and entertainment complex (Ikspiari); and Bon
Voyage, a Disney-themed merchandise location.
Tokyo Disneyland — Tokyo Disneyland consists of seven themed areas: Adventureland, Critter Country,
Fantasyland, Tomorrowland, Toontown, Westernland and World Bazaar.
Tokyo DisneySea — Tokyo DisneySea is divided into eight “ports of call,” including American
Waterfront, Arabian Coast, Lost River Delta, Mediterranean Harbor, Mermaid Lagoon, Mysterious Island,
Port Discovery and Fantasy Springs, which opened in June 2024.
Hotels and Other Resort Facilities — Tokyo Disney Resort includes six Disney-branded hotels with
approximately 3,500 rooms and a monorail, which links the theme parks and resort hotels with
Ikspiari. The sixth Disney-branded hotel, Tokyo DisneySea Fantasy Springs Hotel, opened in June 2024.
 12 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Disney Vacation Club (DVC)
DVC offers ownership interests in 17 resort properties located at the Walt Disney World Resort;
Disneyland Resort; Aulani; Vero Beach, Florida; and Hilton Head Island, South Carolina. Available
units are offered for sale under a vacation ownership plan and are operated as hotel rooms when not
occupied by vacation club members. The Company’s vacation club units range from deluxe studios to
three-bedroom grand villas. Unit counts in this document are presented in terms of two-bedroom
equivalents. DVC had approximately 4,500 vacation club units as of September 28, 2024, including the
first phases of The Cabins at Disney’s Fort Wilderness Resort, which opened in July 2024.
Storyliving by Disney
The Company has partnered with a third-party developer to build two Storyliving by Disney residential
communities: Cotino in Rancho Mirage, California; and Asteria in Pittsboro, North Carolina. The
communities are currently under development, and the Company will earn royalties on revenues
generated by sales of the residential homes.
Disney Cruise Line
Disney Cruise Line is a six-ship vacation cruise line, which operates out of ports in North America,
Europe and the South Pacific. The Disney Magic and the Disney Wonder are 85,000-ton 875-stateroom
ships; the Disney Dream and the Disney Fantasy are 130,000-ton 1,250-stateroom ships; and the Disney
Wish and the Disney Treasure , which was delivered in October 2024, are 140,000-ton 1,250-stateroom
ships. The ships cater to families, children, teenagers and adults, with themed areas and activities
for each group. Many cruise vacations include a visit to Disney’s Castaway Cay, a 1,000-acre private
Bahamian island, or Disney Lookout Cay at Lighthouse Point, which opened in June 2024 on
approximately 600 acres of land on the island of Eleuthera.
Disney Cruise Line will be adding two new ships, the Disney Adventure and the Disney Destiny, which
are scheduled to begin sailings in the first quarter of fiscal 2026. The Disney Destiny will be
approximately 140,000 tons with 1,250 staterooms and will initially operate in North America. The
Disney Adventure will be approximately 200,000 tons with approximately 2,100 staterooms and will
initially operate in Southeast Asia.
Between calendar 2027 and 2031, the Company plans to add four more new cruise ships, all of which are
currently under contract to be built.
In July 2024, the Company entered into a licensing agreement with OLC, under which OLC will own and
operate a Disney-branded cruise ship based in Japan. The ship is currently under contract to be
built, with sailings expected to commence by 2029. The Company will earn royalties on revenues
generated by OLC.
Adventures by Disney and National Geographic Expeditions
Adventures by Disney and National Geographic Expeditions offer guided tour packages predominantly at
non-Disney sites around the world.
Walt Disney Imagineering
Walt Disney Imagineering provides master planning, real estate development, attraction, entertainment
and show design, engineering support, production support, project management and research and
development.
 Consumer Products 
Licensing
The Company’s merchandise licensing operations cover a diverse range of product categories, the most
significant of which are: toys, apparel, games, home décor and furnishings, accessories, health and
beauty, food, footwear, stationery and consumer electronics. The Company licenses characters from its
film, television and other properties for use on third-party products in these categories and earns
royalties, which are usually based on a fixed percentage of the wholesale or retail selling price of
the products and often include minimum guarantee payments from the licensees. Major properties
licensed by the Company include: Mickey and Friends, Star Wars, Spider-Man, Disney Princess, Lilo &
Stitch, Frozen, Avengers, Winnie the Pooh and Toy Story.
Retail
The Company sells Disney-, Marvel-, Pixar- and Lucasfilm-branded products through Disney Store
branded internet sites and Disney Store branded retail locations. At September 28, 2024, the Company
operates approximately 40 stores in Japan, 20 stores in North America, two stores in Europe and one
store in China.
The Company creates, distributes and publishes a variety of products in multiple countries and
languages based on the Company’s branded franchises. The products include children’s books and comic
books.
 13 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Competition and Seasonality 
The Company’s theme parks and resorts as well as Disney Cruise Line and Disney Vacation Club compete
with other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism and recreational activities. The profitability of
the leisure-time industry may be influenced by various factors that are not directly controllable,
such as economic conditions including business cycle and exchange rate fluctuations, health concerns,
the political environment, travel industry trends, amount of available leisure time, oil and
transportation prices, weather patterns and natural disasters. The licensing and retail business
competes with other licensors, retailers and publishers of character, brand and celebrity names, as
well as other licensors, publishers and developers of game software, online video content, websites,
other types of home entertainment and retailers of toys and kids merchandise.
All of the theme parks and the associated resort facilities are operated on a year-round basis.
Typically, theme park attendance and resort occupancy fluctuate based on the seasonal nature of
vacation travel and leisure activities, the opening of new guest offerings and pricing and
promotional offers. Peak attendance and resort occupancy generally occur during the summer months
when school vacations occur and during early winter and spring holiday periods. In addition, theme
park and resort revenues may be higher during significant celebrations such as theme park or
character anniversaries and lower in the periods following such celebrations. The licensing, retail
and wholesale businesses are influenced by seasonal consumer purchasing behavior, which generally
results in higher revenues during the Company’s first and fourth fiscal quarter, and by the timing
and performance of theatrical and game releases and cable programming broadcasts.
 STAR INDIA TRANSACTION 
The Company and Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) plan to close a transaction on or about November
14, 2024, which will form a joint venture that combines our Star-branded and other general
entertainment and sports television channels and direct-to-consumer Disney+ Hotstar service in India
(Star India) and certain media and entertainment businesses controlled by RIL (the Star India
Transaction) (see Note 4 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information).
 HUMAN CAPITAL 
The Company’s key human capital management objectives are to attract, retain and develop the highest
quality talent. To support these objectives, the Company’s human resources programs are designed to
develop talent to prepare them for critical roles and leadership positions for the future; reward and
support employees through competitive pay, benefit and perquisite programs; enhance the Company’s
culture through efforts aimed at making the workplace more engaging and inclusive; acquire talent and
facilitate internal talent mobility to create a high-performing, diverse workforce; engage employees
as brand ambassadors of the Company’s content, products and experiences; and evolve and invest in
technology, tools and resources to enable employees at work.
The Company employed approximately 233,000 people as of September 28, 2024, of which approximately
171,000 were employed in the U.S. and approximately 62,000 were employed outside the U.S. Our global
workforce comprises approximately 76% full time and 16% part time employees, with another 8% being
seasonal employees. A significant number of employees in various parts of our businesses, including
employees of our theme parks, and writers, directors, actors and production personnel for our
productions are covered by collective bargaining agreements. In addition, some of our employees
outside the U.S. are represented by works councils, trade unions or other employee associations.
Some of our key programs and initiatives to attract, develop and retain our diverse workforce
include:
• Health, financial, family resources, well-being and other benefits: Disney’s benefit offerings are
designed to meet the varied and evolving needs of our diverse employees and their families. These
benefit offerings for eligible employees include:
◦ Healthcare options aimed at improving quality of care while limiting out-of-pocket costs
◦ Retirement and savings programs that help employees adapt to changing needs and unexpected events
and drive financial security in the present and the future
◦ Family care resources, such as childcare and senior care programs, long-term care coverage and a
family building benefit
◦ Paid time-off programs, including vacation and sick and family care leave
◦ Free mental health and well-being resources
◦ Global well-being programs, including in-person offerings through campus health clubs and virtual
and onsite events and activities focused on physical, emotional, financial and social well-being
◦ Two Centers for Living Well in the Orlando area that offer convenient, on-demand access to board-
certified physicians and counselors
 14 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
• Diversity, Equity & Inclusion (DEI): Our DEI objectives are to build and sustain teams that reflect
the life experiences of our audiences, while employing and supporting a diverse array of voices in
our creative and production teams. Some of our DEI initiatives and programs are:
◦ Executive incubator program and creative talent development program designed to engage the next
generation of creative executives from underrepresented backgrounds
◦ Heroes Work Here, an initiative to hire, train and support U.S. military veterans
◦ Over 100 employee-led groups, which represent and support the diverse communities that make up our
global workforce
• Talent Development and Education: We invest in creating opportunities to help employees grow and
build their careers through training, professional development and educational programs.
◦ Our training and professional development programs are presented in online, instructor-led and on-
the-job learning formats, including Career@Disney: INTERACTIVE, a new series of immersive virtual and
in-person experiences designed to aid employees in enhancing their careers
◦ Our education investment program, Disney Aspire, offers assistance for tuition, books and fees to
eligible participating employees at a variety of in-network learning providers and universities at
levels ranging from high school completion to undergraduate degrees. At the end of fiscal 2024, more
than 12,000 current employees were enrolled and more than 5,000 current employees had graduated since
the program launched in 2018.
• Social Impact: The Company has a longstanding commitment to social impact by supporting communities
through our philanthropic efforts, including through our support of wish granting and children’s
hospitals and our efforts to support communities in which we operate and the contributions of our
employees. The Company supports employees who make monetary donations to eligible nonprofits with a
generous U.S. matching gifts program. In addition, through the Disney VoluntEARS program, we
encourage employees to donate their time and talents to their local communities and provide grants
that allow eligible employees to direct donations from the Company to nonprofits of their choosing as
a benefit for the time they spend volunteering.
 ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY 
The Company has developed measurable environmental sustainability goals for 2030, based on our
assessment of where the Company’s operations have the most significant environmental impacts and
where we can most effectively mitigate those impacts. The Company’s goals encompass science-based
targets for Scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions, water stewardship, waste reduction, sustainable design in
construction and use of more sustainable materials in our products.
 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY PROTECTION 
The Company’s businesses throughout the world are affected by its ability to exploit and protect
against infringement of its IP, including trademarks, trade names, copyrights, patents and trade
secrets. Important IP includes rights in the content of motion pictures, television programs,
electronic games, sound recordings, character likenesses, theme park attractions, books and magazines
and merchandise. Risks related to the protection and exploitation of IP rights and information
concerning the expiration of certain of our copyrights are set forth in Item 1A – Risk Factors.
 REGULATION 
 Federal Communications Commission Regulation 
Television broadcasting is subject to extensive regulation by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) under federal laws and regulations, including the Communications Act of 1934, as amended.
Violation of FCC regulations can result in substantial monetary fines, limited renewals of licenses
and, in egregious cases, denial of license renewal or revocation of a license. FCC regulations that
affect linear channels include the following:
• Licensing of television stations . Each of the television stations we own must be licensed by the
FCC. These licenses are granted for periods of up to eight years, and we must obtain renewal of
licenses as they expire in order to continue operating the stations. We (and the acquiring entity in
the case of a divestiture) must also obtain FCC approval whenever we seek to have a license
transferred in connection with the acquisition or divestiture of a station. The FCC may decline to
renew or approve the transfer of a license in certain circumstances and may delay renewals while
permitting a licensee to continue operating. Although we have received such renewals and approvals in
the past or have been permitted to continue operations when renewal is delayed, there can be no
assurance that this will be the case in the future.
 15 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
• Station ownership limits . The FCC imposes limitations on the number of television stations and
radio stations an entity can own in a specific market, on the combined number of television and radio
stations an entity can own in a single market and on the aggregate percentage of the national
audience that can be reached by television stations. Currently:
◦ FCC regulations may restrict our ability to own more than one television station in a market,
depending on the size and nature of the market. We do not own more than one television station in any
market.
◦ Federal statutes permit our television stations in the aggregate to reach a maximum of 39% of the
national audience. Pursuant to the most recent decision by the FCC as to how to calculate compliance
with this limit, our eight stations reach approximately 20% of the national audience.
• Dual networks . FCC rules currently prohibit any of the four major broadcast television networks —
ABC, CBS, Fox and NBC — from being under common ownership or control.
• Foreign ownership . The Communications Act generally restricts foreign individuals or entities from
collectively owning more than 25% of the voting or equity interest in a U.S. entity that controls a
broadcast television license. FCC approval is required to exceed the 25% threshold.
• Regulation of programming . The FCC regulates broadcast programming by, among other things, banning
“indecent” programming, regulating political advertising and imposing commercial time limits during
children’s programming. Penalties for broadcasting indecent programming can be over $400,000 per
indecent utterance or image per station.
Federal legislation and FCC rules also limit the amount of commercial matter that may be shown on
broadcast or cable channels during programming designed for children 12 years of age and younger. In
addition, broadcast stations are generally required to provide an average of three hours per week of
programming that has as a “significant purpose” meeting the educational and informational needs of
children 16 years of age and younger. FCC rules also give television station owners the right to
reject or refuse network programming in certain circumstances or to substitute programming that the
licensee reasonably believes to be of greater local or national importance.
• Cable and satellite carriage of broadcast television stations. With respect to MVPDs operating
within a television station’s Designated Market Area, FCC rules require that every three years each
television station elect either “must carry” status, pursuant to which MVPDs generally must carry a
local television station in the station’s market, or “retransmission consent” status, pursuant to
which the MVPDs must negotiate with the television station to obtain the consent of the television
station prior to carrying its signal. The ABC owned television stations have historically elected
retransmission consent.
• Cable and satellite carriage of programming. The Communications Act and FCC rules regulate some
aspects of negotiations between programmers and distributors regarding the carriage of networks by
cable and satellite distribution companies, and some cable and satellite distribution companies have
sought regulation of additional aspects of the carriage of programming on their systems. New
legislation, court action or regulation in this area could have an impact on the Company’s
operations.
The foregoing is a brief summary of certain provisions of the Communications Act, other legislation
and specific FCC rules and policies. Reference should be made to the Communications Act, other
legislation, FCC rules and public notices and rulings of the FCC for further information concerning
the nature and extent of the FCC’s regulatory authority.
FCC laws and regulations are subject to change, and the Company generally cannot predict whether new
legislation, court action or regulations, or a change in the extent of application or enforcement of
current laws and regulations, would have an adverse impact on our operations.
 Privacy and Data Protection Regulation 
Our businesses are subject to various privacy and data protection laws and regulations in most of the
domestic and international jurisdictions in which our businesses operate. Those laws and regulations
govern our use, collection, storage, retention and sharing of personal information and vary from
jurisdiction to jurisdiction, including within the U.S. at the federal level and among the 50 states.
This patchwork of domestic and international laws creates different obligations that are, at times,
inconsistent with one another.
While there is no comprehensive privacy law in the U.S. at the federal level, there are a number of
sector-specific federal privacy laws applicable to our operations, such as the Video Privacy
Protection Act, which restricts the ability to share personal information along with specific viewing
information with third parties. In addition, various U.S. states, including California, have passed
comprehensive data privacy laws that establish various consumer rights with respect to their personal
information, including the right to opt out of the sale or sharing of personal information with third
parties, to gain access to the personal information that companies hold about them, to delete
personal information and to limit the use and disclosure of sensitive information. We are also
subject to privacy legal and regulatory requirements in many jurisdictions outside the United States,
including the General Data Protection Regulation in the European Union and similar comprehensive data
privacy legislation in
 16 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
the UK. These laws require organizations that process the personal data of EU and UK citizens to
comply with certain data protection standards and privacy rights, including requirements to implement
privacy by design; parental consent for processing children’s data; detailed privacy notices and
related consents; breach notifications; and data subject rights to enforce access, rectification,
objection, restriction, portability and deletion.
We also are subject to laws and regulations that are intended to protect the privacy of children
online, including the Children’s Online Protection Privacy Act, a U.S. federal law that requires
websites and online services to obtain parental consent before collecting personal information from
children under 13, as well as codes of conduct relating to the design of digital products and
services likely to be accessed by children, such as the UK’s Age Appropriate Design Code. These laws,
regulations and codes of conduct have an impact on the marketing of our products and services, the
advertising on certain of our and third-party digital platforms that distribute our content and the
design of certain of our new media offerings.
In addition, U.S. state laws and many international data protection laws require notifications to
consumers and regulators in the event of a data breach, mandating that businesses provide consumers
and/or government agencies notice of unauthorized access or disclosure of certain information.
Interpretation of privacy and data protection laws and enforcement priorities continue to evolve and
in some cases, regulators seek to apply novel interpretations of existing laws.
Compliance with privacy and data protection laws and regulations entails significant investments and
is costly and requires us to employ dedicated compliance personnel and processes. In addition, many
of these laws and regulations provide for substantial fines, private rights of action for damages and
other relief.
 International Content Regulation 
The laws and regulations in many international jurisdictions in which we operate, including in the EU
and Canada, require our linear networks or our DTC streaming services to include a certain amount of
programming produced in specific jurisdictions or languages or require us to invest specified amounts
of our revenues in local content or to acquire content produced by local independent production
companies. In addition, some countries regulate the content of films and television programming,
which can impact our ability to distribute certain content in those jurisdictions or can require us
to make adjustments to the films or programming. These laws and regulations increase our costs and
impact our ability to operate our DTC streaming services and linear networks and distribute our films
and programming in these markets.
 AVAILABLE INFORMATION 
Our annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and
amendments to those reports are available without charge on our website, www.disney.com/investors, as
soon as reasonably practicable after they are filed electronically with the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC).
We also use our Investor Relations website as a means of disclosing material non-public information.
We may also use our Investor Relations website for the purpose of complying with our disclosure
obligations under Regulation FD. Therefore, we encourage investors, the media, and others interested
in Disney to review the information we post on our Investor Relations website.
We are providing the address to our website solely for the information of investors. We do not intend
our website address to be an active link or to otherwise incorporate the contents of the website into
this report.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1A. Risk Factors │
For an enterprise as large and complex as the Company, a wide range of factors could materially
affect future developments and performance. In addition to the factors affecting specific business
operations identified in connection with the description of these operations and the financial
results of these operations elsewhere in our filings with the SEC, the most significant factors
affecting our business include the following:
 RISKS RELATED TO OUR BUSINESSES AND INDUSTRY 
Declines in U.S., global and regional economic conditions adversely affect the profitability of our
businesses.
Declines in economic conditions, such as recessions, other less severe slowdowns in economic activity
and/or inflationary conditions in the U.S. and other regions of the world in which we do business
typically adversely affect demand for our products and services and/or costs to operate our
businesses, reducing our revenue and earnings. Past declines in economic conditions reduced or
resulted in slower growth than expected in, among other things, guest spending at our parks and
resorts, purchases of and prices for advertising on our platforms and purchases of Company-branded
consumer products, and we expect similar impacts as such conditions recur. Recent inflationary
conditions increased certain of our costs, including at our parks
 17 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
and resorts. While a number of different factors affect the demand for our products and services,
actual or perceived economic conditions could contribute to lower attendance or spending at our parks
and experiences businesses, prices that MVPDs pay for our cable programming, purchases of and prices
for advertising on our DTC products and linear platforms, subscription levels for our cable
programming or DTC platforms or licensing fees, while also continuing to increase the prices we pay
for goods, services and labor. Even if inflationary pressures moderate, we expect certain costs, such
as for labor, to remain elevated. In addition, an increase in price levels generally, or in price
levels in a particular sector, could result in a shift in consumer demand away from the entertainment
and experiences we offer, which could also adversely affect our revenues and, at the same time,
increase our costs, including borrowing costs as a result of elevated interest rates, making it more
difficult to obtain financing for our operations and investments on favorable terms. A decline in
economic conditions or a failure of conditions to improve as anticipated could impact implementation
or success of our business plans, such as our plans to increase investment in our Experiences
segment, the realignment of our cost structure and plans for our DTC ad-supported services,
enhancements, pricing structure and price increases. Unfavorable economic conditions also impair the
ability of those with whom we do business to satisfy their obligations to us. The adverse impact on
our businesses of actual or perceived declines in economic conditions or a failure of conditions to
improve as anticipated will depend, in part, on their severity and duration and our ability to
mitigate these impacts on our businesses is limited.
Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates impact our revenues and the profitability of our
businesses.
Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates against the U.S. dollar impact our revenues and the
profitability of our businesses, including by impacting the cost in U.S. dollars of providing our
goods and services, our revenues in U.S. dollars generated by our international businesses and the
international demand for our domestic products and services. The current or continued strength in the
value of the U.S. dollar adversely impacts the U.S. dollar value of revenue we receive and expect to
receive from other markets and contributes to reduced international demand for our domestic products
and services, including international travel to our domestic parks and resorts. A decrease in the
value of the U.S. dollar often increases the cost of labor, goods and services in, or originating
from, non-U.S. markets. Although we hedge exposure to fluctuations in certain foreign currencies, any
such hedging activity may not substantially offset the negative financial impact of exchange rate
fluctuations and is not expected to offset all such negative financial impact, particularly in
periods of sustained U.S. dollar strength relative to multiple foreign currencies. Further, economic
or political conditions in certain countries outside the U.S. also have reduced, and could continue
to reduce, our ability to hedge exposure to currency fluctuations in those countries or our ability
to repatriate revenue from those countries.
Changes in technology, in consumer consumption patterns and in how entertainment products are created
affect demand for our entertainment products, the revenue we can generate from these products and the
cost of producing or distributing these products.
The media entertainment and technology businesses in which we participate increasingly depend on our
ability to successfully adapt to new technologies including shifting patterns of content consumption
and how entertainment products are generated. New technologies affect the demand for our products,
the manner in which our products are distributed to consumers, the ways we charge for and receive
revenue for our entertainment products and the stability of those revenue streams, the sources and
nature of competing content offerings, the time and manner in which consumers acquire and view some
of our entertainment products and the options available to advertisers for reaching their desired
audiences. These developments have impacted the business model for certain traditional forms of
distribution, as evidenced by the industry-wide decline in ratings for broadcast and cable
television, the reduction in demand for home entertainment sales of theatrical content, the
development of alternative distribution channels for broadcast and cable programming and declines in
subscriber levels for traditional cable channels. These developments have decreased advertising and
affiliate revenue at some of our linear networks and have led, and may lead in the future, to the
impairment of the value of certain of our assets. In addition, theater-going to watch movies has
remained below pre-pandemic levels.
Rules governing new technological developments, such as developments in artificial intelligence (AI),
including generative AI and large language model tools, remain unsettled, and these developments may
affect aspects of our existing business model, including revenue streams for the use of our IP, how
we create our entertainment products and the competition we face. In order to respond to the impact
of new technologies on our businesses, we regularly consider, and from time to time implement new
initiatives and changes to our business models, including by developing, investing in and acquiring
DTC products, reorganizing our media and entertainment businesses to advance our DTC strategies and
developing new media offerings. There can be no assurance that our DTC offerings, new media offerings
and other efforts will successfully respond to technological changes. In addition, declines in
certain traditional forms of distribution impacts the cost of content allocable to our DTC offerings,
negatively impacting the profitability of our DTC offerings. As part of our DTC strategy, we forgo
certain revenue from certain traditional sources as we invest in our DTC offerings. Since launch, our
DTC streaming services experienced significant losses. There can be no assurance that the DTC model
and other business models we may develop will each be or remain profitable or be as profitable over
the long term as our historic business models.
 18 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
We face risks relating to misalignment with public and consumer tastes and preferences for
entertainment, travel and consumer products, which impact demand for our entertainment offerings and
products and the profitability of our businesses.
Our businesses create entertainment, travel and consumer products, the success of which depends
substantially on consumer tastes and preferences that change in often unpredictable ways. The success
of our businesses depends on our ability to consistently produce compelling creative content, which
may be distributed, among other ways, through DTC platforms, broadcast, cable, theaters and used in
theme park attractions, hotels and other resort facilities and travel experiences and consumer
products. Such distribution must meet the changing preferences of the broad consumer market and
respond to competition from an expanding array of choices facilitated by technological developments
in the delivery of content. The success of our theme parks, resorts, cruise ships and experiences, as
well as our theatrical releases, depends on demand for out-of-home entertainment experiences. Demand
for certain out-of-home entertainment experiences, such as theater-going to watch movies, has not
returned to pre-pandemic levels. In addition, many of our businesses depend on acceptance of our
offerings and products by consumers outside the U.S. The success of our businesses therefore depends
on our ability to successfully predict and adapt to continually evolving consumer tastes and
preferences outside as well as inside the U.S. Moreover, we must often make substantial investments
in content production and acquisition, acquisition of sports and programming rights, theme park
attractions, cruise ships or hotels and other facilities or customer facing platforms before we know
the extent to which these products will earn consumer acceptance, and the market, economic or social
conditions are sometimes significantly different from the ones we anticipated at the time of the
investment decisions. Further, preferences of some consumers are affected by their perceptions of our
position on matters of public interest, including regarding environmental and social issues.
Generally, revenues from, and profitability of, each of our businesses are adversely impacted when
our entertainment offerings and products, as well as our methods to make our offerings and products
available to consumers, do not align with constantly evolving consumer preferences and tastes or
achieve sufficient consumer acceptance.
A variety of uncontrollable events disrupt our businesses, reduce demand for or consumption of our
products and services, impair our ability to provide our products and services or increase the cost
or reduce the profitability of providing our products and services.
The operation and profitability of our businesses and demand for and consumption of our products and
services, particularly our parks and experiences businesses, are highly dependent on the general
environment for travel and tourism, including in the specific regions in which our parks and
experiences businesses operate. In addition, we have extensive international operations, including
our international theme parks and resorts, which are dependent on domestic and international
regulations consistent with trade and investment in those regions. The operation of our businesses
and the environment for travel and tourism, as well as demand for and consumption of our other
entertainment products, is subject to significant adverse impact in the U.S., globally or in specific
regions as a result of a variety of factors beyond our control, including: health concerns; adverse
weather conditions arising from short-term weather patterns or long-term climate change, including
longer and more regular excessive heat conditions, catastrophic events or natural disasters (such as
excessive heat or rain, hurricanes, typhoons, floods, droughts, tsunamis and earthquakes);
international, political or military developments, including trade and other international disputes
and social unrest; macroeconomic conditions, including a decline in economic activity, inflation and
foreign exchange rates; and terrorist attacks. These events and others, such as fluctuations in
travel and energy costs, supply chain disruptions and malware and other cyber-related attacks or
intrusions or other widespread computing, telecommunications or payment processing failures, from
time to time have disrupted, and may in the future disrupt, our ability to provide our products and
services or in certain instances may affect our ability to obtain insurance coverage with respect to
some of these events. An incident or other event that affected our property directly, including a
security incident, earthquake or hurricane, would have a direct impact on our ability to provide
goods and services and could result in closure of impacted operations or have an extended effect of
discouraging consumers from attending our facilities. Moreover, the costs of protecting against such
incidents reduces the profitability of our operations.
For example, COVID-19 and measures to prevent its spread impacted our businesses in a number of ways,
including the closure of our theme parks and resorts, suspension of cruise ship sailings and guided
tours, delayed, or in some cases, shortened or canceled, theatrical releases and disruptions in the
production and availability of content, significantly reducing revenues across all of our segments.
Certain of our business operations have been temporarily disrupted by payment processing outages and
widespread computing failures. Hurricanes, such as Hurricanes Helene and Milton, which in the case of
Hurricane Milton caused Walt Disney World Resort theme parks in Florida to close for one full and
partial day, have impacted the operations and profitability of Walt Disney World Resort and may do so
in the future. The Company has paused certain operations in certain regions, including in response to
sanctions, trade restrictions and related developments and the profitability of certain operations
has been impacted as a result of events in the corresponding regions.
In addition, we derive affiliate fees and royalties from the distribution of our programming, sales
of our licensed goods and services by third parties, and the management of businesses operated under
brands licensed from the Company, and we are therefore dependent on the successes of those third
parties for that portion of our revenue. The profitability of one or more of our businesses could be
adversely impacted by the significant contraction of distribution channels for our products and
services,
 19 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
including through third-party licensees or sellers of our licensed goods and services. In addition,
third-party suppliers provide products and services essential to the operation of a number of our
businesses. A wide variety of factors could influence the success of those third parties and if
negative factors significantly impacted a sufficient number of those third parties or materially
impacted a supplier of a significant product or service, the profitability of one or more of our
businesses could be adversely affected. In specific geographic markets, we have experienced delayed
and/or partial payments from certain third parties due to liquidity issues.
We obtain insurance against the risk of losses relating to some of these events, generally including
certain physical damage to our property and resulting business interruption, certain injuries
occurring on our property and some liabilities for alleged breach of legal responsibilities. When
insurance is obtained it is subject to deductibles, exclusions, terms, conditions and limits of
liability. The types and levels of coverage we obtain vary from time to time depending on our view of
the likelihood of specific types and levels of loss in relation to the cost of obtaining coverage for
such types and levels of loss and we experience losses not covered by our insurance, which could be
material.
We face risks related to changes in our business strategy, which have affected and may continue to
affect our cost structure, the profitability of our businesses and/or the value of our assets.
We adjust our business strategies from time to time in connection with changes in senior management
and in our efforts to respond to changes in technology, consumer purchasing and consumption patterns,
acceptance of our entertainment offerings, the market for advertising, macroeconomic conditions and
other changes in the business environment. For example, in fiscal 2024, we announced entering into a
definitive agreement to transfer Star India into a joint venture and related impairment charges; in
fiscal 2023, we reorganized our media and entertainment operations, which had been previously
reported in one segment, into two segments, Entertainment and Sports; in fiscal 2023 we announced
that we would review content, primarily on our DTC services, for alignment with a strategic change in
our approach to content curation, resulting in removal of certain content from our platforms and
related impairment charges; in fiscal 2022, we announced plans to introduce an ad-supported Disney+
service, new pricing model and price increases and cost realignment; and we have announced
exploration of a number of new types of businesses. Changes in strategy, such as was the case with
the most recent reorganization of our media and entertainment operations, can lead to workforce
disruptions. Our new business strategies are, among other things, subject to execution risk and may
not produce the anticipated benefits, such as supporting our growth strategies and enhancing
shareholder value. For example, notwithstanding our continuing efforts to rationalize costs, the cost
of executing on our DTC strategy may continue to grow or be reduced more slowly than anticipated,
which may impact our distribution strategy across businesses/distribution platforms, the types of
content we distribute through various businesses/distribution platforms, the timing and sequencing of
content windows and ultimately, the profitability of our DTC products and other
businesses/distribution platforms. Over the long term, our new organization and strategies could be
less successful than our previous organizational structure and strategies.
In addition, changing technology, consumer purchasing patterns and acceptance of content offerings
and macroeconomic conditions may impair the value of our assets. We incur costs in connection with
changes to our business strategy and have needed and may in the future need to write-down the value
of our assets. Among other assets, we have impaired the value of our content primarily at our DTC
services and goodwill and intangible assets at our linear networks and impaired the value of certain
of our retail store assets. We may write down other assets as our strategy evolves to account for the
business environment.
We also make investments in existing or new businesses, including investments in international
expansion of our business and in new business lines. For example, in fiscal 2024, we announced plans
for additional expansion of our fleet of cruise ships, and in recent years to expand investment in
our Experiences segment. In addition, in recent years, we have made significant investments in our
businesses, such as expansion and renovation of certain of our theme parks, additional cruise ships,
the acquisition of TFCF Corporation (TFCF) and investments related to DTC offerings. The ultimate
success of these investments is uncertain, some of these and future investments may ultimately result
in returns that are negative or lower than anticipated, and these investments may impact the
resources available to, and the profitability of, our other businesses. In addition, our costs
increase in connection with these investments, such as additional expenses incurred with the launch
on new cruise ships, and we may have significant charges associated with the write-down of assets if
the investments are not as successful as anticipated, as occurred in connection with the closure of
Star Wars: Galactic Starcruiser. Even if our strategies are effective in the long term, our new
offerings will generally not be profitable in the short term, results of our new offerings are
unlikely to be even quarter over quarter and we may not expand into new markets as or when
anticipated. Our ability to forecast for new businesses is impacted by our lack of experience
operating in those new businesses, speed with which the competitive landscape changes, volatility
beyond our control (such as the events beyond our control noted above) and our ability to obtain or
develop the content and rights on which our projections are based. Accordingly, we may not achieve
our forecasted outcomes.
 20 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Increased competitive pressures impact our revenues, increase our costs and impact the profitability
of our businesses.
We face substantial competition in each of our businesses from alternative providers of the products
and services we offer and from other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism and recreational
activities. This includes, among other types, competition for human resources, content and other
resources we require in operating our business. For example:
• Our programming and production operations compete to obtain creative, performing, production and
business talent, sports and other programming, story properties, advertiser support, production
facilities and market share with traditional and new media platforms, including other video-on-demand
services and sources of broadband delivered content, studio operators and television networks.
• Our television networks and stations and DTC offerings compete for the sale of advertising time
with traditional and new media platforms, including other television and video-on-demand services and
various forms of internet and mobile delivered content, which offer advertising delivery technologies
that are more targeted than can be achieved through traditional means, as well as with newspapers,
magazines, billboards and radio stations.
• Our television networks compete for carriage of their programming with other programming providers.
• Our theme parks and resorts and experiences compete for guests with all other forms of
entertainment, lodging, tourism and recreation activities and compete for technology, creative,
performing and business talent, including with other theme park and resort operators.
• Our content sales/licensing operations compete for customers with all other forms of entertainment.
• Our consumer products business competes with other licensors and creators of IP.
• Our DTC streaming services compete for customers with an increasing number of competitors’ DTC
offerings, all other forms of media and all other forms of entertainment, as well as for technology,
creative, performing and business talent and for content.
Technological developments, including developments in generative AI tools that can be used to create
competing low-cost content, and changes in market structure, including consolidation of suppliers of
resources and distribution channels, increase competition in these areas. Increased competition
raises the cost of programming, including for sports and other products, and diverts consumers from
our products and services or to other products and services or other forms of entertainment and
experiences. In addition, given the nature of travel planning, consumers typically delay their
consumption of certain of our products and services, such as our theme parks and resorts, in
connection with planned major product launches of regional travel industry competitors. Each of these
competitive pressures could reduce our revenue and increase our marketing costs.
Competition for the acquisition of resources can further increase the cost of producing our products
and services; change the composition of our offerings, including sports; deprive us of talent needed
for our entertainment and experiences businesses, including the talent necessary to produce high
quality creative material; increase employee turnover and staffing instability; or increase our labor
costs. Competition also reduces, or limits growth in, prices for our products and services, including
advertising rates and subscription fees at our linear networks and DTC offerings, parks and resorts
admissions and room rates and prices for consumer products from which we derive license revenues.
We face risks related to the renewal of long-term programming or distribution contracts on
sufficiently favorable terms.
We enter into long-term contracts for both the acquisition and the distribution of media programming
and products, including contracts for the acquisition of programming rights for sporting events and
other programs, and contracts for the distribution of our programming to content distributors. As
these contracts expire, we renew or renegotiate the contracts, which from time to time has led to
service blackouts when distribution contracts expired before renewal terms were agreed. We may lose
programming rights or distribution rights if we are unable to renew these contracts on acceptable
terms. As a result, our portfolio of acquired programming rights, such as sporting events, and the
distributors of our programming and the portfolio of programming rights our distributors acquire have
changed and will continue to change over time. Even if these contracts are renewed, the cost of
obtaining certain programming rights has increased and may continue to increase (or increase at
faster rates than our historical experience) and programming distributors, facing pressures resulting
from increased subscription fees and alternative distribution channels, demand terms (including with
respect to the pricing for, and the nature and amount of, programming distributed) that reduce our
revenue from distribution of programs or increase revenue at slower rates than our historical
experience. For example, the terms of recent renewals of carriage agreements have included fewer of
our linear networks or the opportunity to offer multiple genre-specific bundle options of fewer than
all our linear networks while providing for certain of our DTC streaming services to be made
available to the distributor’s subscribers. Moreover, our ability to renew these contracts on
favorable terms is affected by a number of factors, such as consolidation in the market for program
distribution and the entrance of new participants in the market for distribution of content on
digital platforms. With respect to the acquisition of programming rights, particularly sports
programming rights, the impact of these long-term contracts on our results over the term of the
contracts depends on a number of factors, including the strength of advertising markets, subscription
levels and programming rights costs increases, effectiveness of marketing efforts and the size of
viewer audiences. There can be
 21 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
no assurance that revenues from programming based on these rights will exceed the cost of the rights
plus the other costs of producing and distributing the programming.
We face risks related to environmental, social and governance matters and any related reporting
obligations.
U.S. and international regulators, investors and other stakeholders are increasingly focused on
environmental, social and governance matters. For example, new domestic and international laws and
regulations relating to environmental, social and governance matters, including environmental
sustainability, climate change, human rights and human capital management, have been adopted or are
under consideration, some of which include specific, target-driven disclosure requirements or
obligations. Our response has increased our compliance costs, including from increased investment in
technology and appropriate expertise and required the implementation of new reporting processes,
entailing additional compliance risk.
In addition, we have undertaken or announced a number of related actions and goals, which will
require changes to operations and ongoing investment. There is no assurance that our initiatives will
achieve their intended outcomes or that we will achieve any of these goals. Consumer, government and
other stakeholder perceptions of our initiatives often differ widely and present risks to our
reputation and brands. In addition, our ability to implement some initiatives or achieve some goals
is dependent on external factors. For example, our ability to meet certain environmental
sustainability goals or initiatives will depend in part on third-party collaboration, the
availability of suppliers that can satisfy new requirements, mitigation innovations and/or the
availability of economically feasible solutions at scale.
We face risks related to damage to our reputation or brands.
Our reputation and globally recognizable brands are integral to the success of our businesses.
Because our brands engage consumers across our businesses, some types of damage to our reputation or
brands have an impact on all of our businesses. Because some of our brands are globally recognized,
some types of brand damage are not locally contained. Maintenance of the reputation of our Company
and brands depends on many factors, including the quality of our offerings, maintenance of trust with
our customers and our ability to successfully innovate. In addition, we may pursue brand or product
integration combining previously separate brands or products targeting different audiences under one
brand or pursue other business initiatives inconsistent with one or more of our brands, and there is
no assurance that these initiatives will be accepted by our customers and not adversely impact one or
more of our brands. Significant negative claims or publicity regarding the Company or its operations,
products, management, employees, practices, business partners, business decisions, social
responsibility and culture, which may be amplified by social media, adversely impact our brands or
reputation, even if such claims are untrue. Damage to our reputation or brands could impact our
sales, business opportunities, profitability, recruiting and valuation of our securities.
Various risks may impact the success of our DTC streaming services.
The success of our DTC strategy and profitability of our DTC streaming services will be impacted by
the success of the reorganization of our media and entertainment business and the strategic change in
our approach to content curation initiated in fiscal 2023; our ability to drive subscriber additions
and retention based on the attractiveness of our content, manage churn, achieve the desired financial
impact of our DTC pricing, bundling and distribution determinations, the Disney+ ad supported
service, monetization and cost containment strategy and the launch of the ESPN flagship DTC service;
and the effects of our determinations with regard to distribution for our creative content across
windows. The initial costs of marketing campaigns are generally recognized in the business of initial
exploitation, and amortization of capitalized production costs and licensed programming rights are
generally allocated across businesses based on the estimated relative value of the distribution
windows. Accordingly, our distribution determinations impact the costs of each business, including
the applicable DTC service. There are a number of competing DTC businesses. Consumers may not be
willing to pay for an expanding set of DTC services at increasing prices, potentially exacerbated by
challenging economic conditions, such as during periods of high inflation or declines in economic
activity. In addition, such economic conditions negatively impact the purchase of and price for
advertising on our DTC streaming services. We face competition for creative talent and sports and
other programming rights and are sometimes not successful in recruiting and retaining talent and
obtaining desired programming rights and face increased costs to do so. We have experienced flat
subscriber growth or net losses of subscribers in periods. Our content does not always successfully
attract and retain subscribers in the quantities that we expect. Our content is subject to cost
pressures and may cost more than we expect. We may not successfully manage our costs to meet our
profitability goals. Government regulation, including revised foreign content and ownership
regulations as well as government-imposed content restrictions, impacts the implementation of our DTC
business plans. The highly competitive environment in which we operate puts pricing pressure on our
DTC offerings and may require us to lower our prices or not take price increases to attract or retain
customers or lead to higher churn rates. These and other risks may impact the profitability and
success of our DTC streaming services.
Potential credit ratings actions, increases in interest rates, or volatility in the U.S. and global
financial markets could impede access to, or increase the cost of, financing our operations and
investments.
Our borrowing costs have been and can be affected by short- and long-term debt ratings assigned by
nationally recognized ratings agencies that are based, in part, on the Company’s performance as
measured by credit metrics such as leverage and interest coverage ratios. Our elevated indebtedness
and leverage ratios in response to the financial impact of COVID-19 on our
 22 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
businesses resulted in S&P Global Ratings and Fitch Ratings downgrading our debt ratings. As of
September 28, 2024, Moody’s Ratings’ long- and short-term debt ratings for the Company were A2 and
P-1 (Stable), respectively; S&P Global Ratings’ long- and short-term debt ratings for the Company
were A- and A-2 (Positive), respectively; and Fitch Ratings’ long- and short-term debt ratings for
the Company were A- and F2 (Stable), respectively. Any future downgrades could increase our cost of
borrowing and/or make it more difficult for us to obtain financing on acceptable terms.
In addition, increases in interest rates have increased our cost of borrowing and volatility in U.S.
and global financial markets could impact our access to, or further increase the cost of, financing.
Past disruptions in the U.S. and global credit and equity markets made it more difficult for many
businesses to obtain financing on acceptable terms. These conditions tended to increase the cost of
borrowing and if they recur, our cost of borrowing could increase and it may be more difficult to
obtain financing for our operations or investments.
Elevated indebtedness or leverage ratios could adversely affect us, including by decreasing our
business flexibility.
Elevated indebtedness could have the effect of, among other things, reducing our financial
flexibility and our ability to respond to changing business and economic conditions and other
uncontrollable events. Debt repayment obligations could also reduce funds available for investments,
capital expenditures, share repurchases and dividends, and other activities and may create
competitive disadvantages for us relative to other companies with lower debt levels. Our leverage
ratios increased as the result of COVID-19’s impact on financial performance, which caused certain of
the credit ratings agencies to downgrade their assessment of our credit ratings. Downgrades to our
credit ratings may negatively impact our cost of borrowings and/or make it more difficult for us to
obtain financing on acceptable terms.
Labor disputes disrupt our operations and adversely affect the profitability of our businesses.
A significant number of employees in various parts of our businesses, including employees of our
theme parks, and writers, directors, actors and production personnel for our productions are covered
by collective bargaining agreements. In addition, some of our employees outside the U.S. are
represented by works councils, trade unions or other employee associations. Further, some employees
of licensees who manufacture and retailers who sell our licensed consumer products, and employees of
providers of programming content (such as sports leagues) are covered by labor agreements with their
employers. From time to time, collective bargaining agreements and other labor agreements expire,
requiring renegotiation of their terms. In general, labor disputes and work stoppages involving our
employees; persons employed on our productions; athletes or others employed by, or otherwise
connected with, sports leagues or organizers; or the employees of our licensees or retailers who sell
our licensed consumer products or providers of programming content may disrupt or lead to closure of
certain operations and reduce our revenues and the profitability of our businesses. For example, in
fiscal 2023, members of the Writers Guild of America (WGA) commenced a work stoppage, which lasted
for almost five months, and members of SAG-AFTRA, the union representing television and movie actors,
also commenced a work stoppage, which lasted for almost four months. These work stoppages affected
our productions and the pipeline for programming and theatrical releases, which resulted in reduced
revenue for the impacted businesses. The new collective bargaining agreements with these and another
entertainment guild and recently with certain labor unions at our domestic parks and resorts will
increase our costs to create our content and to operate our domestic parks and resorts, respectively.
In July 2024, members of SAG-AFTRA commenced a work stoppage against video game employers, which is
ongoing. As a general matter, resolution of labor disputes and negotiation of new collective
bargaining agreements, including as a result of rate increases and other changes to employee
benefits, has in the past increased our costs and may increase our costs in the future.
The seasonality of certain of our businesses and timing of certain of our product offerings could
exacerbate negative impacts on our operations.
Each of our businesses is normally subject to seasonal variations and variations in connection with
the timing of our product offerings, including as follows:
• Revenues at the Experiences segment fluctuate with changes in theme park attendance and resort
occupancy resulting from the seasonal nature of vacation travel and leisure activities and seasonal
consumer purchasing behavior, which generally results in increased revenues during the Company’s
first and fourth fiscal quarters. Peak attendance and resort occupancy generally occur during the
summer months when school vacations occur and during early winter and spring holiday periods.
Revenues at the Experiences segment also sometimes fluctuate with changes in theme park attendance
and resort occupancy resulting from special celebrations or events that increase demand in the
applicable periods and decrease demand in prior or later periods as guests time their vacations to
occur during such special celebrations or events. In addition, licensing revenues fluctuate with the
timing and performance of our theatrical releases and cable programming broadcasts.
• Revenues from television networks and stations are subject to seasonal advertising patterns and
changes in viewership levels, including related to certain sporting events. In general, domestic
general entertainment linear networks advertising revenues are typically somewhat higher during the
fall and somewhat lower during the summer months,
 23 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
and sports advertising revenues are impacted by the timing of sports seasons and events, which varies
throughout the year and/or take place periodically.
• Revenues from content sales/licensing fluctuate due to the timing of content releases across
various distribution markets. Release dates and methods are determined by a number of factors,
including, among others, competition, and the timing of vacation and holiday periods.
• DTC revenues fluctuate based on: changes in the number of subscribers, mix of subscribers to
different offerings and subscriber fees; viewership levels; and the demand for sports and film and
television content. Each of these is sensitive to the availability of content, which varies from time
to time throughout the year based on, among other things, sports seasons, content production
schedules and sports league work stoppages.
Accordingly, negative impacts on our business occurring during a time of typical high seasonal demand
such as our park closures due to hurricane damage during the summer travel season or other high
seasons, could have a disproportionate effect on the results of that business for the year.
Our operations are impacted by our ability to attract and retain employees and costs of employee
wages and health, welfare and retirement benefits, including postretirement medical benefits for some
employees and retirees, may reduce our profitability.
With approximately 233,000 employees, the success of our businesses is substantially affected by our
ability to attract and retain a workforce with the necessary skills for our varied businesses,
including executing successfully on succession planning for the talent at all levels necessary to
advance the Company’s key objectives and strategies. Further, our profitability is substantially
affected by labor costs, including wages and our health, welfare and retirement benefits, including
the costs of medical benefits for current employees and the costs of postretirement medical benefits
for some current employees and retirees. We may experience significant increases in these costs as a
result of macroeconomic, regulatory, competitive and other factors. For example, labor costs in our
parks and resorts have increased, and we expect will continue to increase, as a result of collective
bargaining agreements and wage laws and regulations where we operate. Further, certain conditions in
the healthcare industry, such as prolonged workforce shortages or rising prescription drug prices,
may lead to an increase in the cost of medical insurance and expenses. In addition, for benefits
provided to certain employees, changes in asset values, investment returns and discount rates used to
calculate pension and postretirement medical expense and related assets and liabilities can be
volatile and may have an unfavorable impact on our costs in some years. These factors may also
increase future funding requirements for these benefit plans. There can be no assurance that we will
succeed in attracting and retaining the human resources necessary for the success of our businesses
or in limiting cost increases from wages and other employee benefits, which could reduce the
profitability of our businesses.
We face risks related to costs and expenses in connection with the acquisition of NBC Universal’s
(NBCU) equity interest in Hulu and the TFCF acquisition.
On November 1, 2023, NBCU exercised its right to require the Company to purchase NBCU’s equity
interest in Hulu under a put/call arrangement between the parties. The purchase price for NBCU’s
equity interest in Hulu will be determined based on NBCU’s equity ownership percentage of the greater
of Hulu’s equity fair value as of September 30, 2023 based on a contractual appraisal process, and a
guaranteed floor value. Further, the Company will share with NBCU 50% of the Company’s tax benefit
from the purchase of NBCU’s interest in Hulu, which payments are expected to be made primarily over a
15-year period. In May 2024, the Company and NBCU entered into a confidential arbitration to resolve
a dispute regarding the contractual appraisal process, in which the parties seek declaratory relief,
equitable relief and unspecified damages (see Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for
additional information). In addition, we may incur significant costs and expenses in connection with
the TFCF acquisition, including costs for which we have established reserves or which may lead to
reserves in the future. The cost to purchase NBCU’s equity interest in Hulu and related obligations
to NBCU and any such other costs could negatively impact the Company’s cash position and result in
the Company incurring additional indebtedness.
RISKS RELATED TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, CYBERSECURITY AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
The success of our businesses is highly dependent on the existence and maintenance of intellectual
property rights in the entertainment products and services we create.
The value to us of our IP is dependent on the scope and duration of our rights as defined by
applicable laws in the U.S. and abroad and the manner in which those laws are construed. Where those
laws are drafted or interpreted in ways that limit the extent or duration of our rights, or if
existing laws are changed, our ability to generate revenue from our IP may decrease, or the cost of
obtaining and maintaining rights may increase. The terms of some copyrights for IP related to some of
our products and services have expired, including the copyright term for the short film Steamboat
Willie (1928) and early versions of characters depicted in this film, and other copyrights will
expire in the future. For example, in the United States and countries that look to the United States
copyright term when shorter than their own, the copyright term for early works and the specific early
versions of characters depicted in those works expires at the end of the 95th calendar year after the
date the copyright was originally
 24 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
secured in the United States. As copyrights expire, we expect that revenues generated from such IP
will be negatively impacted to some extent.
The unauthorized use of our IP may increase the cost of protecting rights in our IP or reduce our
revenues. The convergence of computing, communications and entertainment devices, increased broadband
internet speed and penetration, increased availability and speed of mobile data transmission and
increasingly sophisticated attempts to obtain unauthorized access to data systems have made the
unauthorized digital copying and distribution of our films, television productions and other creative
works easier and faster and protection and the enforcement of IP rights more challenging. The
unauthorized distribution and access to entertainment content generally continues to be a significant
challenge for IP rights holders. Further, the availability of certain AI tools has facilitated the
creation of infringing works based on the unauthorized use of our IP. Inadequate laws or weak
enforcement mechanisms to protect entertainment industry IP in one country can adversely affect the
results of the Company’s operations worldwide, despite the Company’s efforts to protect its IP
rights. Distribution innovations have increased opportunities to access content in unauthorized ways.
Additionally, negative economic conditions coupled with a shift in government priorities could lead
to less enforcement. These developments require us to devote substantial resources to protecting our
IP against unlicensed use and present the risk of increased losses of revenue as a result of
unlicensed distribution of our content and other commercial misuses of our IP. The legal landscape
for some new technologies, including some AI tools, remains uncertain, and development of the law in
this area could impact our ability to protect against infringing uses.
With respect to IP developed by the Company and rights acquired by the Company from others, the
Company is subject to the risk of challenges to our copyright, trademark and patent rights by third
parties. In addition, the availability of copyright protection and other legal protections for IP
generated by certain new technologies, such as generative AI, is uncertain. Successful challenges to
our rights in IP typically result in increased costs for obtaining rights or the loss of the
opportunity to earn revenue from or utilize the IP that is the subject of challenged rights. From
time to time, third parties allege that the Company is infringing certain third-party IP rights.
Technological changes in industries in which the Company operates and extensive patent coverage in
those areas increase the risk of such claims being brought and prevailing.
Cybersecurity and other data compromises and/or attempted compromises increase our costs, disrupt our
services and business plans, lead to the disclosure of our confidential information, including
unauthorized use of our intellectual property, and negatively impact our reputation.
We maintain information necessary to conduct our business, including confidential and proprietary
information as well as personal information regarding our customers and employees, in digital form.
We also use computer and cloud-based systems to deliver our products and services and operate our
businesses. Data maintained in digital form is subject to the risk of unauthorized access,
modification, exfiltration, destruction or denial of access and our systems are subject to
cyberattacks that from time to time result in disruptions in service. We also use many third-party
systems and software, which are also subject to supply chain and other cyberattacks.
We have developed and maintain an information security program to assess, identify and manage cyber
risks and the continued development and maintenance of this program is costly and requires ongoing
monitoring and updating as technologies change, including as a result of the proliferation of AI
tools, and efforts to overcome security measures become more sophisticated. We face an increasingly
challenging cybersecurity environment with expanding and evolving threats from a variety of potential
bad actors. While we employ various tools in an effort to protect our data and systems, certain of
our defenses remain subject to human error. Remote work by our employees and contractors and those of
the third parties with whom we engage create additional risks. Despite our efforts, the risk of a
potentially material incident as a result of unauthorized access, modification, exfiltration,
destruction or denial of access with respect to data or systems and other cybersecurity attacks
cannot be eliminated, and from time to time our systems have been compromised and may in the future
be compromised. For example, as previously disclosed in the Company’s Form 10-Q for the third quarter
of fiscal 2024, in fiscal 2024 over a terabyte of data from one of the communications systems used by
the Company was improperly exfiltrated and released. In addition, we provide confidential,
proprietary and personal information to third parties in certain cases, which information and related
systems have been compromised and are also subject to the risk of future material compromise.
If our information or cyber security systems or data are compromised in a material way, our ability
to conduct our business may be impaired, we may lose profitable opportunities or the value of those
opportunities may be diminished and, as described above, we may lose revenue as a result of
unlicensed use of our intellectual property. We have experienced and may in the future experience
cybersecurity attacks that result in the misappropriation of personal information of our customers
and/or employees, which may result in reputational damage, loss of business and/or harm to employee
morale. Related remediation of harm to our customers and employees or damages arising from litigation
and/or fines or other actions we take with respect to judicial or regulatory actions arising out of
an incident create additional costs and/or impacts to our businesses. Insurance does not cover all
potential losses or damages associated with such attacks or events. Our systems and users and those
of third parties with whom we engage are continually attacked, sometimes successfully, and there can
be no assurance that future incidents will not have material adverse effects on our operations or
financial results.
 25 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Regulations applicable to our businesses impact the profitability of our businesses.
Each of our businesses, including our broadcast networks and television stations, is subject to a
variety of U.S. and international regulations, which impact the operations and profitability of our
businesses. Some of these regulations include:
• U.S. FCC regulation of our television and radio networks, our national programming networks and our
owned television stations. See Item 1 — Federal Communications Commission Regulation.
• Federal, state and foreign privacy and data protection laws and regulations, including with respect
to child safety. See Item 1 — Privacy and Data Protection Regulation.
• Regulation of the safety and supply chain of consumer products and theme park operations, including
regulation regarding the sourcing, importation and the sale of goods.
• Land planning, use and development regulations applicable to our theme parks operations.
• Environmental protection regulations.
• U.S. and international anti-corruption laws, sanction programs, trade restrictions, anti-money
laundering laws or currency controls.
• Restrictions on the manner in which content is currently licensed and distributed, ownership
restrictions or film or television content requirements, investment obligations or quotas. See Item 1
— International Content Regulation.
• Domestic and international labor laws, tax laws and antitrust laws.
New laws and regulations, as well as changes in any of these current laws and regulations or
regulator activities (or, if applicable, private litigation to enforce such laws and regulations) in
any of these areas, or others, may require us to incur additional compliance costs, may restrict our
ability to execute on our business strategies as planned or offer products and services in ways that
are profitable, and create an increasingly unpredictable regulatory landscape. In addition, ongoing
and future developments in international political, trade and security policy may lead to new
regulations limiting international trade and investment and disrupting our operations outside the
U.S., including our international theme parks and resorts operations in France, mainland China and
Hong Kong. For example, in 2022 the U.S. and other countries implemented a series of sanctions
against Russia in response to events in Russia and Ukraine; U.S. agencies have enhanced trade
restrictions, including new prohibitions on the importation of goods from certain regions and other
jurisdictions are considering similar measures; and U.S. state governments have become more active in
passing legislation targeted at specific sectors and companies and applying existing laws in novel
ways to new technologies, including streaming and online commerce. Further the legal and regulatory
landscape for certain new technologies, such as AI, is uncertain and evolving and our compliance
obligations could increase our costs or limit how we may use these technologies in one or more of our
businesses.
Our operations outside the U.S. are affected by the operation of laws in those jurisdictions.
Our operations outside the U.S. are in many cases subject to the laws of the jurisdictions in which
they operate rather than, or in addition to, U.S. law. Laws in some international jurisdictions
differ in significant respects from those in the U.S. These differences can affect our ability to
react to changes in our business, and our rights or ability to enforce rights are sometimes different
than would be expected under U.S. law. Moreover, enforcement of laws in some international
jurisdictions can be inconsistent and unpredictable, which can affect both our ability to enforce our
rights and to undertake activities that we believe are beneficial to our business. In addition, the
business and political climate in some jurisdictions may encourage corruption, which could reduce our
ability to compete successfully in those jurisdictions while remaining in compliance with local laws
or U.S. anti-corruption laws applicable to our businesses. As a result, our ability to generate
revenue and our expenses in non-U.S. jurisdictions may differ from what would be expected if U.S. law
alone governed these operations.
 RISKS RELATED TO OWNERSHIP OF OUR STOCK 
The price of our common stock has been, and may continue to be, volatile.
The price of our common stock has experienced substantial volatility and may continue to be volatile.
Various factors have impacted, and may continue to impact, the price of our common stock, including,
among others, changes in management; variations in our operating results; variations between our
actual results and expectations of securities analysts; changes in our estimates, guidance or
business plans; changes in financial estimates and recommendations by securities analysts; the
activities, operating results or stock price of our competitors or other industry participants in the
industries in which we operate; the announcement or completion of significant transactions by us or a
competitor; events affecting the stock market generally; and the economic and political conditions in
the U.S. and internationally, as well as other factors described in this Item 1A. Some of these
factors may adversely impact the price of our common stock, regardless of our operating performance.
Further, volatility in the price of our common stock may negatively impact one or more of our
businesses, including by increasing stock awards for our employees who participate in our stock
incentive programs or limiting our financing options for acquisitions and other business expansion.
 26 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 GENERAL RISKS 
The Company’s amended and restated bylaws provide to the fullest extent permitted by law that the
Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware will be the exclusive forum for certain legal actions
between the Company and its stockholders, which could increase costs to bring a claim, discourage
claims or limit the ability of the Company’s stockholders to bring a claim in a judicial forum viewed
by the stockholders as more favorable for disputes with the Company or the Company’s directors,
officers or other employees.
The Company’s amended and restated bylaws provide to the fullest extent permitted by law that unless
the Company consents in writing to the selection of an alternative forum, the Court of Chancery of
the State of Delaware will be the sole and exclusive forum for any (i) derivative action or
proceeding brought on behalf of the Company, (ii) any action or proceeding asserting a claim of
breach of a fiduciary duty owed by any current or former director, officer or stockholder of the
Company to the Company or the Company’s stockholders, (iii) any action or proceeding asserting a
claim arising pursuant to, or seeking to enforce any right, obligation or remedy under, any provision
of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware (the “DGCL”), the Certificate of
Incorporation or these Bylaws (as each may be amended from time to time), (iv) any action or
proceeding as to which the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware confers jurisdiction on
the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware, (v) or any action or proceeding asserting a claim
governed by the internal affairs doctrine. The choice of forum provision may increase costs to bring
a claim, discourage claims or limit a stockholder’s ability to bring a claim in a judicial forum that
it finds favorable for disputes with the Company or the Company’s directors, officers or other
employees, which may discourage such lawsuits against the Company or the Company’s directors,
officers and other employees. Alternatively, if a court were to find the choice of forum provision
contained in the Company’s amended and restated bylaws to be inapplicable or unenforceable in an
action, the Company may incur additional costs associated with resolving such action in other
jurisdictions. The exclusive forum provision in the Company’s amended and restated bylaws will not
preclude or contract the scope of exclusive federal or concurrent jurisdiction for actions brought
under the federal securities laws including the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the respective rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments │
The Company has received no written comments regarding its periodic or current reports from the staff
of the SEC that were issued 180 days or more preceding the end of fiscal 2024 that remain unresolved.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1C. Cybersecurity │
 Risk Management and Strategy 
We have implemented processes for assessing, identifying and managing material risks from
cybersecurity threats as part of our overall risk management program. Our cybersecurity program is
informed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Framework as well as
other globally recognized standards. We use a layered defense model, incorporating a wide range of
technologies and practices in an effort to prevent, detect and mitigate threats. These measures
include intrusion detection and prevention systems, multi-factor authentication, encryption and
endpoint protection tools. We also implement threat detection and response solutions. To address
emerging threats, we employ automated monitoring, vulnerability scans and patch management processes.
Regular assessments, such as penetration tests, security audits and table-top exercises, are
conducted to identify vulnerabilities and promote incident response and risk mitigation. We also
provide privacy and information security trainings for our employees on a recurring basis. From time
to time, we engage assessors, consultants and other third parties to assist with assessing,
identifying and managing cybersecurity risks, including assisting us to conduct some of the foregoing
assessments. Our cybersecurity risk management processes also are informed by intelligence received
from recognized cybersecurity industry experts and other third-party sources, and as appropriate we
engage outside counsel to advise on regulatory compliance and other cybersecurity risk management
efforts.
In addition, we have processes designed to oversee and identify cybersecurity risks associated with
our use of third-party service providers. Where appropriate based on the data and intellectual
property to which these providers are reasonably expected to have access, we conduct security
assessments and due diligence reviews of third-party systems for compliance with our security
standards, and we include data protection language in our agreements with these third parties.
Further, as part of our cybersecurity risk management processes, we maintain an incident response
plan (IRP) that establishes a set of procedures for reporting and handling cybersecurity events. The
IRP delegates to an internal incident response team the initial assessment, investigation and
remediation of the event and includes, among other procedures, guidelines for escalation to senior
management and engagement with law enforcement. In certain instances, events are escalated to the
Cybersecurity Incident Disclosure Subcommittee, which is a subcommittee of the Company’s Risk
Management Committee (RMC) (discussed further below) and is responsible for, among other things, the
accurate and timely disclosure of
 27 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
material cybersecurity incidents under the federal securities laws, including making the materiality
determination and approving related securities disclosures.
As discussed in further detail in Item 1A – Risk Factors, the Company faces an increasingly
challenging cybersecurity environment, and from time to time the persistent efforts of bad actors to
gain unauthorized access to our and our service providers’ information systems and our confidential
and proprietary information are successful. In fiscal 2024, we did not identify any cybersecurity
threats that have materially affected or are reasonably likely to materially affect our business
strategy, results of operations or financial condition. However, despite our efforts, we cannot
eliminate all risks from cybersecurity threats or provide assurances that we have not experienced
undetected cybersecurity incidents or will not discover additional information about previously
detected events.
 Governance 
The Company’s Board of Directors has delegated to the Audit Committee oversight responsibility for
information technology risks, including cybersecurity and data security risks and mitigation
strategies. The Audit Committee at least annually receives reports from the Senior Vice President,
Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) concerning the Company’s cybersecurity and data security
risks, including ongoing efforts to prevent, detect, monitor, remediate and manage such cybersecurity
threats, the threat environment, incident updates and emerging cybersecurity practices and
technologies. The Chair of the Audit Committee reports on its discussion, including concerning
cybersecurity matters, to the full Board. In addition, from time to time, senior management briefs
the Audit Committee, the Audit Committee Chair and the Board on cybersecurity matters potentially of
interest, including cybersecurity events, regulatory disclosures and regulatory trends.
Day-to-day management of our information security strategy and operations is currently the
responsibility of our CISO, who reports into our Chief Financial Officer. Prior to joining the
Company, our CISO held senior leadership roles in various other organizations, including as CISO for
a publicly traded, global retailer and as a consultant advising organizations on information security
strategy, and as a Special Agent with the U.S. Secret Service focusing on electronic crimes. That
experience is supplemented by the collective experience and expertise of our dedicated internal teams
of cybersecurity personnel.
In addition, the Company’s RMC, a management level committee that includes, among others, the Chief
Financial Officer and Chief Legal and Compliance Officer, oversees and supports the Company’s ongoing
efforts to identify, assess and prioritize, manage and monitor the Company’s enterprise risks,
including risks related to privacy and cybersecurity, and periodically reports certain discussions to
the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Audit Committee. The RMC’s Cybersecurity Incident
Disclosure Subcommittee, whose members include the members of the RMC, the CISO and lead securities
counsel, is tasked with assessing significant events for materiality, related timely and accurate
disclosure under the securities laws and, as appropriate, escalating such events to the Audit
Committee and the Board of Directors.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 2. Properties │
Our parks and resorts locations and other properties of the Company and its subsidiaries are
described in Item 1 under the caption Experiences . Film and television library properties and
television stations owned by the Company are described in Item 1 under the caption Entertainment .
 28 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The Company and its subsidiaries own and lease properties throughout the world. In addition to the
properties noted above, the table below provides a brief description of other significant properties
and the related business segment.
 Location Property / Use Business Segment 
 Approximate Size 
 Owned  
 Burbank, CA & Land (201 acres) & Office/Production/War… 
 surrounding cities(1) Buildings (4,733,000 (includes 240,000 Corporate/Entertainm… 
 ft2) ft2leased to 
 third-party tenants) 
 Burbank, CA & Buildings (1,760,000 Leased Corporate/Entertainm… 
 surrounding cities(1) ft2) Office/Warehouse 
 Land (22 acres) & Owned 
 Los Angeles, CA Buildings (599,000 Office/Production/Tec… Corporate/Entertainm… 
 ft2) Warehouse 
 Los Angeles, CA Buildings (2,434,000 Leased Corporate/Entertainm… 
 ft2) Office/Production/Tec… 
 New York, NY Buildings (1,104,000 Owned Office Corporate/Entertainm… 
 ft2) 
 Leased 
 Buildings (2,202,000 Office/Production/The… 
 New York, NY ft2) (includes 696,000 Corporate/Entertainm… 
 ft2leased to 
 third-party tenants) 
 Land (117 acres) & Owned 
 Bristol, CT Buildings (1,078,000 Office/Production/Tec… Sports 
 ft2) 
 Bristol, CT Buildings (273,000 Leased Sports 
 ft2) Office/Warehouse/Tech… 
 Land (20 acres) & Owned 
 Emeryville, CA Buildings (430,000 Office/Production/Tec… Entertainment 
 ft2) 
 Emeryville, CA Buildings (94,000 Leased Office/Storage Entertainment 
 ft2) 
 Leased 
 Buildings (536,000 Office/Production/Tec… 
 San Francisco, CA ft2) (includes 47,000 Corporate/Entertainm… 
 ft2leased to 
 third-party tenants) 
 Land and Buildings Owned and Leased 
 USA & Canada (Multiple sites and Office/ Corporate/Entertainm… 
 sizes) Production/Transmitte… 
 Europe, Asia, Buildings (Multiple Leased 
 Australia & Latin sites and sizes) Office/Warehouse/Reta… Entertainment/Experi… 
 America 
(1) Surrounding cities include Glendale, CA, North Hollywood, CA and Sun Valley, CA
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 3. Legal Proceedings │
As disclosed in Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company is engaged in certain
legal matters, and the disclosure set forth in Note 14 relating to certain legal matters is
incorporated herein by reference.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 4. Mine Safety Disclosures │
Not applicable.
 Information About Our Executive Officers 
The executive officers of the Company are elected each year at the organizational meeting of the
Board of Directors, which follows the annual meeting of the shareholders, and at other Board of
Directors meetings, as appropriate. Each of the executive officers has been employed by the Company
in the position or positions indicated in the list and pertinent notes below.
 29 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The executive officers of the Company are:
 Name Age Title Executive 
 Officer Since 
 Robert A. Iger 73 Chief Executive Officer(1) 2022 
 Hugh F. Johnston 63 Senior Executive Vice President and Chief 2023 
 Financial Officer(2) 
 Horacio E. Gutierrez 59 Senior Executive Vice President, Chief Legal and 2022 
 Compliance Officer(3) 
 Sonia L. Coleman 52 Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Human 2023 
 Resources Officer(4) 
 Kristina K. Schake 54 Senior Executive Vice President and Chief 2022 
 Communications Officer(5) 
(1) Mr. Iger was appointed Chief Executive Officer effective November 20, 2022. He also serves as a
director on the Board of Directors from November 20, 2022. He previously served as Executive Chairman
of the Company from February 2020 through December 2021 and as Chief Executive Officer of the Company
from September 2005 to February 2020. He served as Chairman of the Board of Directors from 2012 to
2021.
(2) Mr. Johnston was appointed Chief Financial Officer effective December 4, 2023. Prior to joining
the Company, he served as Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, from 2010, and Vice
Chairman, from 2015 to November 2023 of PepsiCo, Inc. (“PepsiCo”). His portfolio included a variety
of responsibilities, including leadership of PepsiCo’s information technology function from 2015,
PepsiCo’s global e-commerce business from 2015 to 2019, and the Quaker Foods North America division
from 2014 to 2016. He also held a number of other leadership roles during his PepsiCo career, having
served as Executive Vice President, Global Operations from 2009 to 2010, President of Pepsi-Cola
North America from 2007 to 2009, Executive Vice President, Operations from 2006 to 2007 and Senior
Vice President, Transformation from 2005 to 2006. Prior to that, he served as Senior Vice President
and Chief Financial Officer of PepsiCo Beverages and Foods from 2002 through 2005, and as PepsiCo’s
Senior Vice President of Mergers and Acquisitions in 2002. He joined PepsiCo in 1987 as a Business
Planner and held various finance positions until 1999 when he left to join Merck & Co., Inc. as Vice
President, Retail, a position which he held until he rejoined PepsiCo in 2002. Mr. Johnston serves on
the board of directors of Microsoft Corporation, which he joined in 2017, and on the board of HCA
Healthcare, Inc., which he joined in 2021.
(3) Mr. Gutierrez was appointed Senior Executive Vice President and General Counsel effective
February 1, 2022, appointed Senior Executive Vice President, General Counsel and Chief Compliance
Officer effective March 27, 2023 and appointed Senior Executive Vice President, Chief Legal and
Compliance Officer effective December 21, 2023. Prior to joining the Company, he served as Head of
Global Affairs and Chief Legal Officer for Spotify Technology S.A. (Spotify) from November 2019 to
January 2022, where he led a global, multi-disciplinary team of business, corporate communications
and public affairs, government relations, licensing, operations and legal professionals responsible
for the company’s work in areas including industry relations, content partnerships, public policy,
and trust & safety. He was previously Spotify’s General Counsel - Vice President, Business & Legal
Affairs from April 2016 to November 2019.
(4) Ms. Coleman was appointed Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer
effective April 8, 2023. She was previously Senior Vice President, Human Resources at Disney General
Entertainment and ESPN from August 2021. Ms. Coleman served as Senior Vice President, Human Resources
for Disney General Entertainment from April 2017, Vice President, Human Resources for the Company
from May 2016 and Vice President, Human Resources, Disney Consumer Products from May 2010.
(5) Ms. Schake was appointed Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Communications Officer
effective June 29, 2022. Previously, she served as Executive Vice President, Global Communications
from April 2022. Prior to joining the Company, she was appointed by the President of the United
States as Counselor for Strategic Communications to the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, leading a nationwide public education campaign from March 2021 to December 2021.
Prior to that, she served as Global Communications Director for Instagram, a product of Meta
Platforms, Inc., from March 2017 to March 2019, where she oversaw the communications teams in North
America, Latin America, Europe and Asia.
 30 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS