╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 1. │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ BUSINESS │
 General 
Johnson & Johnson and its subsidiaries (the Company) have approximately 141,700 employees worldwide
engaged in the research and development, manufacture and sale of a broad range of products in the
healthcare field. Johnson & Johnson is a holding company, with operating companies conducting
business in virtually all countries of the world. The Company’s primary focus is products related to
human health and well-being. Johnson & Johnson was incorporated in the State of New Jersey in 1887.
The Executive Committee of Johnson & Johnson is the principal management group responsible for the
strategic operations and allocation of the resources of the Company. This Committee oversees and
coordinates the activities of the Company's three business segments: Consumer Health, Pharmaceutical
and Medical Devices. Within the strategic parameters provided by the Committee, senior management
groups at U.S. and international operating companies are each responsible for their own strategic
plans and the day-to-day operations of those companies. Each subsidiary within the business segments
is, with limited exceptions, managed by residents of the country where located.
 Segments of Business 
The Company is organized into three business segments: Consumer Health, Pharmaceutical and Medical
Devices. Additional information required by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the
narrative and tabular descriptions of segments and operating results under: “Item 7. Management’s
Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Condition” of this Report; and Note 17
“Segments of Business and Geographic Areas” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
included in Item 8 of this Report.
 Consumer Health 
The Consumer Health segment includes a broad range of products focused on personal healthcare used in
the Skin Health/Beauty, Over-the-Counter medicines, Baby Care, Oral Care, Women’s Health and Wound
Care markets. Major brands in Skin Health/Beauty include the AVEENO ® ; CLEAN & CLEAR ® ; DR. CI:LABO
® ; NEUTROGENA ® and OGX ® product lines. Over-the-Counter (OTC) medicines include the broad family
of TYLENOL ® acetaminophen products; SUDAFED ® cold, flu and allergy products; BENADRYL ® and ZYRTEC
® allergy products; MOTRIN ® IB ibuprofen products; NICORETTE ® smoking cessation products outside
the U.S.; ZARBEE’S ® products, inspired by nature, and the PEPCID ® line of acid reflux products.
Baby Care includes the JOHNSON’S ® and AVEENO Baby ® line of products. Oral Care includes the
LISTERINE ® product line. Major brands in Women’s Health outside of North America are STAYFREE ® and
CAREFREE ® sanitary pads and o.b. ® tampon brands. Wound Care brands include the BAND-AID ® Brand
Adhesive Bandages and NEOSPORIN ® First Aid product lines. These products are marketed to the general
public and sold online (eCommerce) and to retail outlets and distributors throughout the world.
In November 2021, the Company announced its intention to separate the Company’s Consumer Health
business, with the intention to create a new, publicly traded company. The Company is targeting
completion of the planned separation in 18 to 24 months after initial announcement.
 Pharmaceutical 
The Pharmaceutical segment is focused on six therapeutic areas: Immunology (e.g., rheumatoid
arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease and psoriasis), Infectious Diseases (e.g.,
HIV/AIDS and COVID-19), Neuroscience (e.g., mood disorders, neurodegenerative disorders and
schizophrenia), Oncology (e.g., prostate cancer, hematologic malignancies, lung cancer and bladder
cancer), Cardiovascular and Metabolism (e.g., thrombosis, diabetes and macular degeneration) and
Pulmonary Hypertension (e.g., Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension). Medicines in this segment are
distributed directly to retailers, wholesalers, distributors, hospitals and healthcare professionals
for prescription use. Key products in the Pharmaceutical segment include: REMICADE ® (infliximab), a
treatment for a number of immune-mediated inflammatory diseases; SIMPONI ® (golimumab), a
subcutaneous treatment for adults with moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis, active psoriatic
arthritis, active ankylosing spondylitis and moderately active to severely active ulcerative colitis;
SIMPONI ARIA ® (golimumab), an intravenous treatment for adults with moderate to severe rheumatoid
arthritis, active psoriatic arthritis and active ankylosing spondylitis and active polyarticular
juvenile idiopathic arthritis (pJIA) in people 2 years of age and older; STELARA ® (ustekinumab), a
treatment for adults and children with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis, for adults with active
psoriatic arthritis, for adults with moderately to severely active Crohn's disease and treatment of
moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis; TREMFYA ® (guselkumab), a treatment for adults with
moderate to severe plaque psoriasis and active psoriatic arthritis; the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine,
authorized for use under Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) for active immunization to prevent
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-
CoV-2) in individuals 18 years of age and older; EDURANT ® (rilpivirine), PREZISTA ® (darunavir) and
PREZCOBIX ® /REZOLSTA ® (darunavir/cobicistat), antiretroviral medicines for the treatment of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) in combination with other antiretroviral products and SYMTUZA ®
(darunavir/cobicistat/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide), a once-daily single tablet regimen for
the treatment of HIV; CONCERTA ® (methylphenidate HCl) extended-release tablets CII, a treatment
 1 
for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; INVEGA SUSTENNA ® /XEPLION ® (paliperidone palmitate),
for the treatment of schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder in adults; INVEGA TRINZA ® /TREVICTA
® (paliperidone palmitate), for the treatment of schizophrenia in patients after they have been
adequately treated with INVEGA SUSTENNA ® for at least four months; RISPERDAL CONSTA ® (risperidone
long-acting injection), for the treatment of schizophrenia and the maintenance treatment of Bipolar 1
Disorder in adults; ZYTIGA ® (abiraterone acetate), a treatment for patients with prostate cancer;
ERLEADA ® (apalutamide), a next-generation androgen receptor inhibitor for the treatment of patients
with prostate cancer; IMBRUVICA ® (ibrutinib), a treatment for certain B-cell malignancies, or blood
cancers and chronic graft versus host disease; DARZALEX ® (daratumumab), a treatment for multiple
myeloma; DARZALEX FASPRO ® (daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj), a treatment for multiple myeloma and
light chain (AL) Amyloidosis; PROCRIT ® /EPREX ® (epoetin alfa), a treatment for chemotherapy-induced
anemia and patients with chronic kidney disease; XARELTO ® (rivaroxaban), an oral anticoagulant for
the prevention of deep vein thrombosis (DVT), which may lead to pulmonary embolism (PE) in patients
undergoing hip or knee replacement surgery, to reduce the risk of stroke and systemic embolism in
patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation, and for the treatment and reduction of risk of
recurrence of DVT and PE to reduce the risk of major cardiovascular events in patients with coronary
artery disease (CAD) and peripheral artery disease (PAD), for the treatment and secondary prevention
of thromboembolism in pediatric patients, and for thromboprophylaxis in pediatric patients following
the Fontan procedure; INVOKANA ® (canagliflozin), for the treatment of adults with type 2 diabetes;
INVOKAMET ® /VOKANAMET ® (canagliflozin/metformin HCl), a combination therapy of fixed doses of
canagliflozin and metformin hydrochloride for the treatment of adults with type 2 diabetes; and
INVOKAMET ® XR (canagliflozin/metformin hydrochloride extended-release), a once-daily, fixed-dose
combination therapy of canagliflozin and metformin hydrochloride extended-release, for the treatment
of adults with type 2 diabetes; OPSUMIT ® (macitentan) as monotherapy or in combination, indicated
for the long-term treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH); UPTRAVI ® (selexipag), the only
approved oral and intravenous, selective IP receptor agonist targeting a prostacyclin pathway in PAH.
Many of these medicines were developed in collaboration with strategic partners or are licensed from
other companies and maintain active lifecycle development programs.
 Medical Devices 
The Medical Devices segment includes a broad range of products used in the Interventional Solutions,
Orthopaedics, Surgery, and Vision fields. Medical Devices in Interventional Solutions include
Electrophysiology products (Biosense Webster) to treat cardiovascular diseases, Neurovascular care
(Cerenovus) that treats hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke; the Orthopaedics portfolio (DePuy Synthes)
is comprised of products in support of Hips, Knees, Trauma, and Spine, Sports & Other; the Surgery
portfolios include advanced and general surgery offerings (Ethicon), solutions that focus on Breast
Aesthetics (Mentor) and Ear, Nose and Throat (Acclarent) procedures; and Johnson & Johnson Vision
products such as ACUVUE ® Brand disposable contact lenses and ophthalmic products related to cataract
and laser refractive surgery. These products are distributed to wholesalers, hospitals and retailers,
and used predominantly in the professional fields by physicians, nurses, hospitals, eye care
professionals and clinics. Beginning in the fiscal first quarter of 2022, the Medical Devices segment
will be referred to as the MedTech segment.
 Geographic Areas 
Johnson & Johnson and its subsidiaries (the Company) have approximately 141,700 employees worldwide
engaged in the research and development, manufacture and sale of a broad range of products in the
healthcare field. The Company conducts business in virtually all countries of the world with the
primary focus on products related to human health and well-being.
The products made and sold in the international business include many of those described above under
“– Segments of Business – Consumer Health,” “– Pharmaceutical” and “– Medical Devices.” However, the
principal markets, products and methods of distribution in the international business vary with the
country and the culture. The products sold in international business include those developed in the
U.S. and by subsidiaries abroad.
Investments and activities in some countries outside the U.S. are subject to higher risks than
comparable U.S. activities because the investment and commercial climate may be influenced by
financial instability in international economies, restrictive economic policies and political and
legal system uncertainties.
 Raw Materials 
Raw materials essential to the Company's business are generally readily available from multiple
sources. Where there are exceptions, the temporary unavailability of those raw materials would not
likely have a material adverse effect on the financial results of the Company.
 Patents 
The Company's subsidiaries have made a practice of obtaining patent protection on their products and
processes where possible. They own, or are licensed under, a significant number of patents in the
U.S. and other countries relating to their products, product uses, formulations and manufacturing
processes, which in the aggregate are believed to be of material importance to the Company in the
operation of its businesses. The Company’s subsidiaries face patent challenges from third parties,
including challenges seeking to manufacture and market generic and biosimilar versions of the
Company's key pharmaceutical products prior to expiration of the applicable patents covering those
products. Significant legal proceedings and
 2 
claims involving the Company's patent and other intellectual property are described in Note 19,
“Legal Proceedings— Intellectual Property” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included
in Item 8 of this Report.
Sales of the Company’s largest product, STELARA ® (ustekinumab), accounted for approximately 9.7% of
the Company's total revenues for fiscal 2021. Accordingly, the patents related to this product are
believed to be material to the Company. Janssen Biotech, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Johnson &
Johnson, owns patents specifically related to STELARA ® . The latest expiring United States
composition of matter patent expires in 2023. The latest expiring European composition of matter
patent expires in 2024.
Sales of the Company’s second largest product, collectively DARZALEX ® (daratumumab) and DARZALEX
FASPRO ® (daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj), accounted for approximately 6.4% of the Company's
total revenues for fiscal 2021. Accordingly, the patents related to this product are believed to be
material to the Company. Genmab A/S owns two patent families related to DARZALEX ® , and Janssen
Biotech, Inc. has an exclusive license to those patent families. The two patent families both expire
in the United States in 2029. The latest expiring licensed European patent expires in 2032. Janssen
Biotech, Inc. owns a separate patent portfolio related to DARZALEX FASPRO ® .
 Trademarks 
The Company’s subsidiaries have made a practice of selling their products under trademarks and of
obtaining protection for these trademarks by all available means. These trademarks are protected by
registration in the U.S. and other countries where such products are marketed. The Company considers
these trademarks in the aggregate to be of material importance in the operation of its businesses.
 Seasonality 
Worldwide sales do not reflect any significant degree of seasonality; however, spending has been
heavier in the fourth quarter of each year than in other quarters. This reflects increased spending
decisions, principally for advertising and research and development activity.
 Competition 
In all of their product lines, the Company's subsidiaries compete with companies both locally and
globally. Competition exists in all product lines without regard to the number and size of the
competing companies involved. Competition in research, both internally and externally sourced,
involving the development and the improvement of new and existing products and processes, is
particularly significant. The development of new and innovative products, as well as protecting the
underlying intellectual property of the Company’s product portfolio, is important to the Company's
success in all areas of its business. The competitive environment requires substantial investments in
continuing research. In addition, the development and maintenance of customer demand for the
Company’s consumer products involve significant expenditures for advertising and promotion.
 Environment 
The Company is subject to a variety of U.S. and international environmental protection measures. The
Company believes that its operations comply in all material respects with applicable environmental
laws and regulations. The Company’s compliance with these requirements is not expected to have a
material effect upon its capital expenditures, cash flows, earnings or competitive position.
 Regulation 
The Company’s businesses are subject to varying degrees of governmental regulation in the countries
in which operations are conducted, and the general trend is toward increasingly stringent regulation
and enforcement. The Company is subject to costly and complex U.S. and foreign laws and governmental
regulations and any adverse regulatory action may materially adversely affect the Company's financial
condition and business operations. In the U.S., the drug, device and cosmetic industries have long
been subject to regulation by various federal and state agencies, primarily as to product safety,
efficacy, manufacturing, advertising, labeling and safety reporting. The exercise of broad regulatory
powers by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the U.S. FDA) continues to result in increases in
the amounts of testing and documentation required for U.S. FDA approval of new drugs and devices and
a corresponding increase in the expense of product introduction. Similar trends are also evident in
major markets outside of the U.S. The new medical device regulatory framework and the new privacy
regulations in Europe and in other countries are examples of such increased regulation.
The regulatory agencies under whose purview the Company operates have administrative powers that may
subject it to actions such as product withdrawals, recalls, seizure of products and other civil and
criminal sanctions. In some cases, the Company’s subsidiaries may deem it advisable to initiate
product recalls.
The U.S. FDA and regulatory agencies around the globe are also increasing their enforcement
activities. If the U.S. FDA were to conclude that we are not in compliance with applicable laws or
regulations, or that any of our drugs or medical
 3 
devices are ineffective or pose an unreasonable health risk, the U.S. FDA could ban such products,
detain or seize adulterated or misbranded products, order a recall, repair, replacement, or refund of
such products, refuse to grant pending applications for marketing authorization or require
certificates of foreign governments for exports, and/or require us to notify health professionals and
others that the products present unreasonable risks of substantial harm to the public health. The
U.S. FDA may also assess civil or criminal penalties against us, our officers or employees and impose
operating restrictions on a company-wide basis, or enjoin and/or restrain certain conduct resulting
in violations of applicable law. The U.S. FDA may also recommend prosecution to the U.S. Department
of Justice. Any adverse regulatory action, depending on its magnitude, may restrict us from
effectively marketing and selling our products and limit our ability to obtain future clearances or
approvals, and could result in a substantial modification to our business practices and operations.
Equivalent enforcement mechanisms exist in different countries in which we conduct business.
The costs of human healthcare have been and continue to be a subject of study, investigation and
regulation by governmental agencies and legislative bodies around the world. In the U.S., attention
has been focused by states, regulatory agencies and congress on drug prices and profits and programs
that encourage doctors to write prescriptions for particular drugs, or to recommend, use or purchase
particular medical devices. Laws and regulations have been enacted to require adherence to strict
compliance standards and prevent fraud and abuse in the healthcare industry. There is increased focus
on interactions and financial relationships between healthcare companies and healthcare providers.
Various transparency laws and regulations require disclosures of payments and other transfers of
value made to physicians and teaching hospitals and, beginning with disclosures in 2022, to certain
non-physician practitioners. Federal and foreign laws governing international business practices
require strict compliance with anti-bribery standards and certain prohibitions with respect to
payments to any foreign government official. Payers have become a more potent force in the market
place and increased attention is being paid to drug and medical device pricing, appropriate drug and
medical device utilization and the quality and costs of healthcare generally.
U.S. government actors continue efforts to repeal, modify, or invalidate provisions of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (the ACA) which passed in 2010. For example, federal legislation
repealed the ACA’s individual mandate tax penalty as well as the tax on generous employer-sponsored
healthcare plans; the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) began permitting states to impose
work requirements on persons covered by Medicaid expansion plans; certain federal subsidies to
insurers have ended; and certain short-term insurance plans not offering the full array of ACA
benefits have been allowed to extend in duration. Some of these changes are being challenged in U.S.
courts and so their long-term impact remains uncertain. The ACA has also been subject to judicial
challenge. In November 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court heard argument in Texas v. Azar , which
challenges the constitutionality of the ACA. Pending resolution of the litigation, all of the ACA but
the individual mandate to buy health insurance remains in effect. The U.S. government also continues
to propose and implement changes to the Medicare Part D benefit including the size of manufacturer
discounts in the coverage gap and catastrophic phases of the benefit. There are a number of
additional bills pending in Congress and healthcare reform proposals at the state level that would
affect drug pricing in the Medicare and Medicaid programs. This changing federal landscape has both
positive and negative impacts on the U.S. healthcare industry with much remaining uncertain as to how
various provisions of federal law, and potential modification or repeal of these laws, will
ultimately affect the industry.
In addition, business practices in the healthcare industry have come under increased scrutiny,
particularly in the U.S., by government agencies and state attorneys general, and resulting
investigations and prosecutions carry the risk of significant civil and criminal penalties.
Further, the Company relies on global supply chains, and production and distribution processes, that
are complex, are subject to increasing regulatory requirements, and may be faced with unexpected
changes such as those resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and Brexit that may affect sourcing,
supply and pricing of materials used in the Company's products. These processes also are subject to
complex and lengthy regulatory approvals.
The global regulatory landscape is also subject to change as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to
affect the U.S. and global economies. The U.S. FDA and other health authorities have shifted
resources and priorities to meet the many challenges presented by the pandemic. Pandemic-related
disruptions could negatively impact the processing of regulatory submissions and slow agency review
times necessary for the approval or clearance of new drugs and devices. The duration and severity of
the COVID-19 pandemic is unpredictable and difficult to assess.
 4 
 Employees and Human Capital Management 
As of January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021, the number of employees were approximately:
 2021 2020 
 Employees1 144,300 136,400 
 Full-time equivalent (FTE) positions2 141,700 134,500 
1 “Employee” is defined as an individual working full-time or part-time, excluding fixed term
employees, interns and co-op employees. Employee data may not include full population from more
recently acquired companies and individuals on long-term disability are excluded. Contingent workers,
contractors and subcontractors are also excluded.
2 FTE represents the total number of full-time equivalent positions and does not reflect the total
number of individual employees as some work part-time.
 Strategy 
The Company believes that its employees are critical to its continued success and are an essential
element of its long-term strategy. Management is responsible for ensuring that its policies and
processes reflect and reinforce the Company's desired corporate culture, including policies and
processes related to strategy, risk management, and ethics and compliance. The Company’s human
capital management strategy is built on three fundamental focus areas:
• Attracting and recruiting the best talent
• Developing and retaining talent
• Empowering and inspiring talent
Underpinning these focus areas are ongoing efforts to cultivate and foster a culture built on
diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI), innovation, health, well-being and safety, where the Company's
employees are encouraged to succeed both professionally and personally while helping the Company
achieve its business goals.
 Culture and Employee Engagement 
At Johnson & Johnson, employees are guided by Our Credo which sets forth the Company's
responsibilities to patients, consumers, customers, healthcare professionals, employees, communities
and shareholders. Employees worldwide are further guided by the Company’s Code of Business Conduct
which sets basic requirements for business conduct and serves as a foundation for the Company
policies, procedures and guidelines, all of which provide additional guidance on expected employee
behaviors in every market where it operates. The Company conducts global surveys that offer its
employees the ability to provide feedback and valuable insight to help address potential human
resources risks and identify opportunities to improve. In 2021, 91% of global employees across 77
countries participated in Our Voice Survey which was offered in 36 languages.
 Growth and Development 
To continue to lead in the changing healthcare landscape, it is crucial that the Company continue to
attract and retain top talent. The Company believes that its employees must be equipped with the
right knowledge and skills and be provided with opportunities to grow and develop in their careers.
Accordingly, professional development programs and educational resources
 5 
 5 
are available to all employees. The Company's objective is to foster a learning culture that helps
shape each person’s unique career path while creating a robust pipeline of talent to deliver on the
Company’s long-term strategies. In furtherance of this objective, the Company deploys a global
approach to ensure development is for everyone, regardless of where they are on their career journey.
In 2021, 45.8% of employees in Manager and above job categories took advantage of career
opportunities by moving across functions, country or business segment lines (including upward
promotion or lateral transfer and excluding employees in the research and development organizations).
The Company's voluntary turnover rate was 8%.
 Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) 
The Company is committed to workplace diversity and to cultivating, fostering, and advancing a
culture of equity and inclusion. Enabling employees to perform at their best while being themselves
is fundamental to the Company's continued success. The Company’s DEI vision is: Be yourself, change
the world . The Company's DEI strategy focuses on three pillars that reflect the strategic priorities
identified to enable the Company to address the challenges and opportunities presented by this
evolving understanding of diversity:
• Accelerate the Company’s efforts to advance a culture of inclusion and innovation
• Build a diverse workforce for the future
• Enhance business results and reputation
The Company's DEI strategy is guided by internal and external insights, global best practices and
continual employee feedback which remind the Company that while diversity changes by location,
inclusion is the same everywhere.
 Compensation and Benefits 
As part of the Company's total rewards philosophy, the Company offers competitive compensation and
benefits to attract and retain top talent. The Company is committed to fairness and equitable
treatment in its compensation and benefits for employees at all levels. The Company observes legal
minimum wage provisions and exceeds them where possible. The Company's total rewards offerings
include an array of programs to support its employees' financial, physical, and mental well-being,
including annual performance incentive opportunities, pension and retirement savings programs, health
and welfare benefits, paid time off, leave programs, flexible work schedules and employee assistance
programs.
 Health, Wellness and Safety 
The Company’s investment in employee health, well-being and safety is built on its conviction that
advancing health for humanity starts with advancing the health of its employees. With the right
awareness, focus, practices and tools, the Company ensures that all its employees around the world,
as well as temporary contractors and visitors to the Company's sites, can work safely. The Company
has continuously expanded health and well-being programs throughout the Company and across the globe,
incorporating new thinking and technologies to keep its offerings best-in-class and to help employees
achieve their personal health goals. The programs and practices the Company advances for total
health—physical, mental, emotional and financial—help ensure employee health protection from emerging
health risks.
 Safety and COVID-19 Pandemic Response 
Protecting and supporting our employees during the COVID-19 pandemic continues to be a top priority
and our approach includes: keeping employees informed of local COVID-19 transmission rates and
corresponding risk levels; promoting the health and safety of our employees in the workplace through
robust layers of protection; enhanced cleaning and access to cleaning supplies and personal
protective equipment; supporting employees with pay continuity, benefits and well-being tools; and
recognizing extraordinary employee contributions at work and in our communities. In 2021, in
recognition of the new way of working, we initiated J&J Flex, a hybrid model that empowers our
office-based employees to find the right productivity and balance of in-person and remote work. This
model allows for work to happen seamlessly across a variety of workplaces and is enabled by an array
of enhanced collaboration tools and technology to optimize productivity and connection. J&J Flex
rolled out in fourth quarter 2021 globally, and will continue deployment through 2022 as protocol and
requirements related to the COVID-19 pandemic allow. The Company is evaluating flexible work
strategies for its on-site workforce, such as virtual on-boarding and training, to help our employees
balance their personal and professional lives. Also, we continued to enhance our benefits offerings
with access to wellness tools, on-site vaccine clinics, mental health support resources and delivery
of at-home testing kits. In addition, as COVID-19 vaccines were broadly distributed and administered
in 2021, including the one developed by Johnson & Johnson, we adopted policies in the U.S., Puerto
Rico, and certain other countries to require proof of vaccination from Johnson & Johnson employees
and contingent workers, in order to return to our sites, where permitted by local law and regulation.
In the U.S. and Puerto Rico, this requirement took effect on October 4, 2021, with processes
established for granting accommodations to those with medical or religious needs. Select
manufacturing and distribution employees and contractors in the U.S. and Puerto Rico, as well as
certain additional countries, are adopting similar policies through early 2022.
 6 
 Available Information 
The Company’s main corporate website address is www.jnj.com . All of the Company’s SEC filings are
also available on the Company’s website at www.investor.jnj.com/sec.cfm , as soon as reasonably
practicable after having been electronically filed or furnished to the SEC. All SEC filings are also
available at the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov .
Investors and the public should note that the Company also announces information at
www.factsaboutourprescriptionopioids.com, www.factsabouttalc.com and www.LTLManagementInformation.com
.
We use these websites to communicate with investors and the public about our products, litigation and
other matters. It is possible that the information we post to these websites could be deemed to be
material information. Therefore, we encourage investors and others interested in the Company to
review the information posted to these websites in conjunction with www.jnj.com, the Company's SEC
filings, press releases, public conference calls and webcasts.
In addition, the Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, By-Laws, the written charters of
the Audit Committee, the Compensation & Benefits Committee, the Nominating & Corporate Governance
Committee, the Regulatory Compliance Committee, the Science, Technology & Sustainability Committee
and any special committee of the Board of Directors and the Company’s Principles of Corporate
Governance, Code of Business Conduct (for employees), Code of Business Conduct & Ethics for Members
of the Board of Directors and Executive Officers, and other corporate governance materials, are
available at www.investor.jnj.com/gov.cfm on the Company's website and will be provided without
charge to any shareholder submitting a written request, as provided above. The information on
www.jnj.com , www.factsaboutourprescriptionopioids.com, www.factsabouttalc.com and
www.LTLManagementInformation.com is not, and will not be deemed, a part of this Report or
incorporated into any other filings the Company makes with the SEC.
 7 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 1A. RISK FACTORS │
An investment in the Company’s common stock or debt securities involves risks and uncertainties. The
Company seeks to identify, manage and mitigate risks to our business, but uncertainties and risks are
difficult to predict and many are outside of the Company’s control and cannot therefore be
eliminated. In addition to the other information in this report and the Company’s other filings with
the SEC, investors should consider carefully the factors set forth below. Investors should be aware
that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors and that the following is not meant
to be a complete discussion of all potential risks or uncertainties. If known or unknown risks or
uncertainties materialize, the Company’s business, results of operations or financial condition could
be adversely affected, potentially in a material way.
Risks Related to Our Business, Industry and Operations
The Company’s businesses operate in highly competitive product markets and competitive pressures
could adversely affect the Company’s earnings.
The Company faces substantial competition in all three operating segments and in all geographic
markets. The Company’s businesses compete with companies of all sizes on the basis of cost-
effectiveness, technological innovations, intellectual property rights, product performance, real or
perceived product advantages, pricing and availability and rate of reimbursement. The Company also
competes with other market participants in securing rights to acquisitions, collaborations and
licensing agreements with third parties. Competition for rights to product candidates and
technologies may result in significant investment and acquisition costs and onerous agreement terms
for the Company. Competitors’ development of more effective or less costly products, and/or their
ability to secure patent and other intellectual property rights and successfully market products
ahead of the Company, could negatively impact sales of the Company’s existing products as well as its
ability to bring new products to market despite significant prior investment in the related product
development.
For the Company’s Pharmaceutical businesses, loss of patent exclusivity for a product often is
followed by a substantial reduction in sales as competitors gain regulatory approval for generic and
other competing products and enter the market. Similar competition can be triggered by the loss of
exclusivity for a biological product. For the Company’s Medical Devices businesses, technological
innovation, product quality, reputation and customer service are especially important to
competitiveness. Development by other companies of new or improved products, processes and
technologies could threaten to make the Company’s products or technologies less desirable, less
economical or obsolete. The Company’s Consumer Health businesses face intense competition from other
branded products and retailers’ private-label brands. If the Company fails to sufficiently
differentiate and market its brand name consumer products, this could adversely affect revenues and
profitability of those products.
Interruptions and delays in manufacturing operations could adversely affect the Company’s business,
sales and reputation.
The Company’s manufacture of products requires the timely delivery of sufficient amounts of complex,
high-quality components and materials. The Company’s subsidiaries operate 85 manufacturing facilities
as well as sourcing from thousands of suppliers around the world. The Company has in the past, and
may in the future, face unanticipated interruptions and delays in manufacturing through its internal
or external supply chain. Manufacturing disruptions can occur for many reasons including regulatory
action, production quality deviations or safety issues, labor disputes, labor shortages, site-
specific incidents (such as fires), natural disasters such as hurricanes and other severe weather
events, raw material shortages, political unrest, terrorist attacks and epidemics or pandemics. Such
delays and difficulties in manufacturing can result in product shortages, declines in sales and
reputational impact as well as significant remediation and related costs associated with addressing
the shortage.
The Company relies on third parties to manufacture certain of our products. Any failure by or loss of
a third-party manufacturer could result in delays and increased costs, which may adversely affect our
business.
The Company relies on third parties to manufacture certain of our products. We depend on these third-
party manufacturers to allocate to us a portion of their manufacturing capacity sufficient to meet
our needs, to produce products of acceptable quality and at acceptable manufacturing yields and to
deliver those products to us on a timely basis and at acceptable prices. However, we cannot guarantee
that these third-party manufacturers will be able to meet our near-term or long-term manufacturing
requirements, which could result in lost sales and have an adverse effect on our business.
Other risks associated with our reliance on third parties to manufacture these products include
reliance on the third party for regulatory compliance and quality assurance, misappropriation of the
Company’s intellectual property, limited ability to manage our inventory, possible breach of the
manufacturing agreement by the third party and the possible termination or nonrenewal of the
manufacturing agreement by the third party at a time that is costly or inconvenient for us. Moreover,
if any of our third-party manufacturers suffers any damage to facilities, loses benefits under
material agreements, experiences power outages, encounters financial difficulties, is unable to
secure necessary raw materials from its suppliers or suffers any other reduction in efficiency, the
Company may experience significant business disruption. In the event of any such disruption, the
 8 
Company would need to seek and source other qualified third-party manufacturers, likely resulting in
further delays and increased costs which could affect our business adversely.
Counterfeit versions of our products could harm our patients and have a negative impact on our
revenues, earnings, reputation and business.
Our industry continues to be challenged by the vulnerability of distribution channels to illegal
counterfeiting and the presence of counterfeit products in a growing number of markets and over the
Internet. Third parties may illegally distribute and sell counterfeit versions of our products, which
do not meet our rigorous manufacturing and testing standards. To distributors and patients,
counterfeit products may be visually indistinguishable from the authentic version. Counterfeit
medicines pose a risk to patient health and safety because of the conditions under which they are
manufactured – often in unregulated, unlicensed, uninspected and unsanitary sites – as well as the
lack of regulation of their contents.
The industry’s failure to mitigate the threat of counterfeit medicines could adversely impact our
business and reputation by impacting patient confidence in our authentic products, potentially
resulting in lost sales, product recalls, and an increased threat of litigation. In addition,
diversion of our products from their authorized market into other channels may result in reduced
revenues and negatively affect our profitability.
The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted certain aspects of the Company’s business and could
cause disruptions or future impact to the Company’s business, results of operations and financial
condition.
We are subject to risks associated with global health crises, epidemics and pandemics, including the
global outbreak of coronavirus and its variants (COVID-19). The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely
impacted, and is expected to continue to adversely impact, certain aspects of the Company’s business,
results of operations and financial condition, including lower sales and reduced customer demand and
usage of certain of our products. The spread of COVID-19 has caused the Company to modify its
business practices (including instituting remote work for many of the Company’s employees), and the
Company may take further actions as may be required by government authorities or as the Company
determines are in the best interests of our patients, customers, employees and business partners. The
Company continues to monitor the situation and while we have robust business continuity plans in
place across our global supply chain network to help mitigate the impact of COVID-19, these efforts
may not completely prevent our business from being adversely affected and future impacts remain
uncertain.
While the U.S. and other countries have begun or will begin to reopen their economies, the extent to
which COVID-19 will impact the Company’s future operations will depend on many factors which cannot
be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the outbreak and impact of variants. Any
resurgence in COVID-19 could result in the imposition of new mandates and prolonged restrictive
measures implemented in order to control the spread of the disease. The continued global spread of
COVID-19 could adversely impact the Company’s operations, including, among other things, our
manufacturing operations, supply chain, including third-party suppliers, sales and marketing and
clinical trial operations. Any of these factors could adversely affect the Company’s business,
financial results, and global economic conditions generally.
We also face uncertainties related to our COVID-19 vaccine, including uncertainties related to the
risk that our continued development programs may not be successful, commercially viable or receive
approval from regulatory authorities; risks associated with clinical trial and real-world data,
including further analyses of its efficacy, safety and durability; the risk that data are subject to
differing interpretations and assessments, including during the peer review/publication process, in
the scientific community generally, and by national immunization technical advisory groups (NITAGs)
and regulatory authorities; disruptions in the relationships between us, our third-party suppliers
and external manufacturers; the risk that other companies may produce superior or competitive
products; the risk that demand for any products we may develop may no longer exist; risks related to
the availability of raw materials to manufacture any such products; the risk that we may not be able
to recoup costs associated with our R&D and manufacturing efforts and risks associated with any
changes in the way we approach or provide additional research funding for potential drug development
related to COVID-19; the risk that we may not be able to create or scale up manufacturing capacity on
a timely basis, that we may continue to experience manufacturing delays once a manufacturing site is
activated, or have access to logistics or supply channels commensurate with global demand for any
potential approved vaccine or product candidate, which would negatively impact our ability to supply
the estimated numbers of doses of our vaccine within the projected time periods indicated, and other
challenges and risks associated with the pace of our vaccine development program; and pricing and
access challenges for such products, including in the U.S.
In addition, to the extent the COVID-19 pandemic adversely affects our business and financial
results, it may also have the effect of heightening many of the other risks described in this “Risk
Factors” section and those incorporated by reference herein, i ncluding risks relating to the
Company’s effective tax rate as a result of changes in consumption as well as changes in laws
relating to supply of the Company’s products . Given that developments concerning the COVID-19
pandemic have been constantly evolving, additional impacts and risks may arise, including litigation,
that are not presently known to the Company.
 9 
Risks Related to Government Regulation and Legal Proceedings
Global sales in the Company’s Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices segments may be negatively impacted
by healthcare reforms and increasing pricing pressures.
Sales of the Company’s Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices products are significantly affected by
reimbursements by third-party payers such as government healthcare programs, private insurance plans
and managed care organizations. As part of various efforts to contain healthcare costs, these payers
are putting downward pressure on prices at which products will be reimbursed. In the U.S., increased
purchasing power of entities that negotiate on behalf of Medicare, Medicaid, and private sector
beneficiaries, in part due to continued consolidation among healthcare providers, could result in
further pricing pressures. In addition, increased political scrutiny could result in additional
pricing pressures. Outside the U.S., numerous major markets, including the EU, United Kingdom, Japan
and China, have pervasive government involvement in funding healthcare and, in that regard, directly
or indirectly impose price controls, limit access to, or reimbursement for, the Company’s products,
or reduce the value of its intellectual property protection.
The Company is subject to significant legal proceedings that can result in significant expenses,
fines and reputational damage.
In the ordinary course of business, Johnson & Johnson and its subsidiaries are subject to numerous
claims and lawsuits involving various issues such as product liability, patent disputes and claims
that their product sales, marketing and pricing practices violate various antitrust, unfair trade
practices and/or consumer protection laws. The Company’s more significant legal proceedings are
described in Note 19, “Legal Proceedings” under Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
included in Item 8 of this Report. Litigation, in general, and securities, derivative action, class
action and multi-district litigation, in particular, can be expensive and disruptive. Some of these
matters may include thousands of plaintiffs, may involve parties seeking large and/or indeterminate
amounts, including punitive or exemplary damages, and may remain unresolved for several years. For
example, the Company is a defendant in numerous lawsuits arising out of the use of body powders
containing talc, primarily JOHNSON’S ® Baby Powder, and the Company’s sale, manufacturing and
marketing of opioids. While the Company believes it has substantial defenses in these matters, it is
not feasible to predict the ultimate outcome of litigation. The Company could in the future be
required to pay significant amounts as a result of settlements or judgments in these matters,
potentially in excess of accruals, including matters where the Company could be held jointly and
severally liable among other defendants. The resolution of, or increase in accruals for, one or more
of these matters in any reporting period could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s
results of operations and cash flows for that period. The Company does not purchase third-party
product liability insurance; however, the Company utilizes a wholly owned captive insurance company
subject to certain limits.
Product reliability, safety and effectiveness concerns can have significant negative impacts on sales
and results of operations, lead to litigation and cause reputational damage.
Concerns about product safety, whether raised internally or by litigants, regulators or consumer
advocates, and whether or not based on scientific evidence, can result in safety alerts, product
recalls, governmental investigations, regulatory action on the part of the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (or its counterpart in other countries), private claims and lawsuits, payment of fines
and settlements, declining sales and reputational damage. These circumstances can also result in
damage to brand image, brand equity and consumer trust in the Company’s products. Product recalls
have in the past, and could in the future, prompt government investigations and inspections, the
shutdown of manufacturing facilities, continued product shortages and related sales declines,
significant remediation costs, reputational damage, possible civil penalties and criminal
prosecution.
The Company faces significant regulatory scrutiny, which imposes significant compliance costs and
exposes the Company to government investigations, legal actions and penalties.
Like other companies in the healthcare industry, the Company is subject to extensive regulation,
investigations and legal action by national, state and local government agencies in the U.S. and
other countries in which it operates. Regulatory issues regarding compliance with current Good
Manufacturing Practices (cGMP) (and comparable quality regulations in foreign countries) by
manufacturers of drugs, devices and consumer products can lead to fines and penalties, product
recalls, product shortages, interruptions in production, delays in new product approvals and
litigation. In addition, the marketing, pricing and sale of the Company’s products are subject to
regulation, investigations and legal actions including under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act, the Medicaid Rebate Program, federal and state false claims acts, state unfair trade practices
acts and consumer protection laws. Scrutiny of healthcare industry business practices by government
agencies and state attorneys general in the U.S., and any resulting investigations and prosecutions,
carry risk of significant civil and criminal penalties including, but not limited to, debarment from
participation in government healthcare programs. Any such debarment could have a material adverse
effect on the Company’s business and results of operations. The most significant current
investigations and litigation brought by government agencies are described in Note 19, “Legal
Proceedings—Government Proceedings” under Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in
Item 8 of this Report.
 10 
Changes in tax laws or exposures to additional tax liabilities could negatively impact the Company’s
operating results.
Changes in tax laws or regulations around the world, including in the U.S. and as led by the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, could negatively impact the Company’s
effective tax rate and results of operations. A change in statutory tax rate or certain international
tax provisions in any country would result in the revaluation of the Company’s deferred tax assets
and liabilities related to that particular jurisdiction in the period in which the new tax law is
enacted. This change would result in an expense or benefit recorded to the Company’s Consolidated
Statement of Earnings. The Company closely monitors these proposals as they arise in the countries
where it operates. Changes to tax laws or regulations may occur at any time, and any related expense
or benefit recorded may be material to the fiscal quarter and year in which the law change is
enacted.
See Note 8, “Income Taxes” under Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of
this Report for additional information.
The Company conducts business and files tax returns in numerous countries and is addressing tax
audits and disputes with many tax authorities. In connection with various government initiatives,
companies are required to disclose more information to tax authorities on operations around the
world, which may lead to greater audit scrutiny of profits earned in other countries. The Company
regularly assesses the likely outcomes of its tax audits and disputes to determine the
appropriateness of its tax reserves. However, any tax authority could take a position on tax
treatment that is contrary to the Company’s expectations, which could result in tax liabilities in
excess of reserves.
 Risks Related to Our Intellectual Property 
The Company faces increased challenges to intellectual property rights central to its business.
The Company owns or licenses a significant number of patents and other proprietary rights relating to
its products and manufacturing processes. These rights are essential to the Company’s businesses and
materially important to the Company’s results of operations. Public policy, both within and outside
the U.S., has become increasingly unfavorable toward intellectual property rights. The Company cannot
be certain that it will obtain adequate patent protection for new products and technologies in the
United States and other important markets or that such protections, once granted, will last as long
as originally anticipated.
Competitors routinely challenge the validity or extent of the Company’s owned or licensed patents and
proprietary rights through litigation, interferences, oppositions and other proceedings, such as
inter partes review (IPR) proceedings before the United States Patent & Trademark Office (USPTO).
These proceedings absorb resources and can be protracted as well as unpredictable. In addition,
challenges that the Company’s products infringe the patents of third parties could result in an
injunction and/or the need to pay past damages and future royalties and adversely affect the
competitive position and sales of the products in question.
The Company has faced increasing patent challenges from third parties seeking to manufacture and
market generic and biosimilar versions of the Company’s key pharmaceutical products prior to
expiration of the applicable patents covering those products. In the U.S., manufacturers of generic
versions of innovative human pharmaceutical products may challenge the validity, or claim non-
infringement, of innovator products through the Abbreviated New Drug Application, or ANDA, process
with the U.S. FDA and related ANDA litigation. The Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act
(BPCIA), enacted in 2010, which created a new regulatory pathway for the approval by the U.S. FDA of
biosimilar alternatives to innovator-developed biological products, also created mechanisms for
biosimilar applicants to challenge the patents on the innovator biologics. The IPR process with the
USPTO is also being used by competitors to challenge patents asserted in litigation.
In the event the Company is not successful in defending its patents against such challenges, or upon
the “at-risk” launch by the generic or biosimilar firm of its product, the Company can lose a major
portion of revenues for the referenced product in a very short period of time. Current legal
proceedings involving the Company’s patents and other intellectual property rights are described in
Note 19, “Legal Proceedings—Intellectual Property” under Notes to the Consolidated Financial
Statements included in Item 8 of this Report.
Risks Related to Product Development, Regulatory Approval and Commercialization
Significant challenges or delays in the Company’s innovation and development of new products,
technologies and indications could have an adverse impact on the Company’s long-term success.
The Company’s continued growth and success depends on its ability to innovate and develop new and
differentiated products and services that address the evolving healthcare needs of patients,
providers and consumers. Development of successful
 11 
products and technologies is also necessary to offset revenue losses when the Company’s existing
products lose market share due to various factors such as competition and loss of patent exclusivity.
New products introduced within the past five years accounted for approximately 25% of 2021 sales. The
Company cannot be certain when or whether it will be able to develop, license or otherwise acquire
companies, products and technologies, whether particular product candidates will be granted
regulatory approval, and, if approved, whether the products will be commercially successful.
The Company pursues product development through internal research and development as well as through
collaborations, acquisitions, joint ventures and licensing or other arrangements with third parties.
In all of these contexts, developing new products, particularly pharmaceutical and biotechnology
products and medical devices, requires significant investment of resources over many years. Only a
very few biopharmaceutical research and development programs result in commercially viable products.
The process depends on many factors including the ability to: discern patients’ and healthcare
providers’ future needs; develop promising new compounds, strategies and technologies; achieve
successful clinical trial results; secure effective intellectual property protection; obtain
regulatory approvals on a timely basis; and, if and when they reach the market, successfully
differentiate the Company’s products from competing products and approaches to treatment. New
products or enhancements to existing products may not be accepted quickly or significantly in the
marketplace due to product and price competition, changes in customer preferences or healthcare
purchasing patterns, resistance by healthcare providers or uncertainty over third-party
reimbursement. Even following initial regulatory approval, the success of a product can be adversely
impacted by safety and efficacy findings in larger real-world patient populations, as well as market
entry of competitive products.
Risks Related to Financial and Economic Market Conditions
The Company faces a variety of financial, economic, legal, social and political risks associated with
conducting business internationally .
The Company’s extensive operations and business activity throughout the world are accompanied by
certain financial, economic, legal, social and political risks, including those listed below.
Foreign Currency Exchange : In fiscal 2021, approximately 50% of the Company’s sales occurred outside
of the U.S., with approximately 25% in Europe, 6% in the Western Hemisphere, excluding the U.S., and
19% in the Asia-Pacific and Africa region. Changes in non-U.S. currencies relative to the U.S. dollar
impact the Company’s revenues and expenses. While the Company uses financial instruments to mitigate
the impact of fluctuations in currency exchange rates on its cash flows, unhedged exposures continue
to be subject to currency fluctuations. In addition, the weakening or strengthening of the U.S.
dollar may result in significant favorable or unfavorable translation effects when the operating
results of the Company’s non-U.S. business activity are translated into U.S. dollars.
Inflation and Currency Devaluation Risks : The Company faces challenges in maintaining profitability
of operations in economies experiencing high inflation rates. The Company has accounted for
operations in Argentina and Venezuela as highly inflationary, as the prior three-year cumulative
inflation rate surpassed 100%. While the Company strives to maintain profit margins in these areas
through cost reduction programs, productivity improvements and periodic price increases, it might
experience operating losses as a result of continued inflation. In addition, the impact of currency
devaluations in countries experiencing high inflation rates or significant currency exchange
fluctuations could negatively impact the Company’s operating results.
Illegal Importation of Pharmaceutical Products : The illegal importation of pharmaceutical products
from countries where government price controls or other market dynamics result in lower prices may
adversely affect the Company’s sales and profitability in the U.S. and other countries in which the
Company operates. With the exception of limited quantities of prescription drugs for personal use,
foreign imports of pharmaceutical products are illegal under current U.S. law. However, the volume of
illegal imports continues to rise as the ability of patients and other customers to obtain the lower-
priced imports has grown significantly.
Anti-Bribery and Other Regulations: The Company is subject to various federal and foreign laws that
govern its international business practices with respect to payments to government officials. Those
laws include the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA), which prohibits U.S. publicly traded
companies from promising, offering, or giving anything of value to foreign officials with the corrupt
intent of influencing the foreign official for the purpose of helping the Company obtain or retain
business or gain any improper advantage. The Company’s business is heavily regulated and therefore
involves significant interaction with foreign officials. Also, in many countries outside the U.S.,
the healthcare providers who prescribe human pharmaceuticals are employed by the government and the
purchasers of human pharmaceuticals are government entities;
 12 
therefore, the Company’s interactions with these prescribers and purchasers are subject to regulation
under the FCPA. In addition to the U.S. application and enforcement of the FCPA, various
jurisdictions in which the Company operates have laws and regulations, including the U.K. Bribery Act
2010, aimed at preventing and penalizing corrupt and anticompetitive behavior. Enforcement activities
under these laws could subject the Company to additional administrative and legal proceedings and
actions, which could include claims for civil penalties, criminal sanctions, and administrative
remedies, including exclusion from healthcare programs.
Other Financial, Economic, Legal, Social and Political Risks . Other risks inherent in conducting
business globally include:
• local and regional economic environments and policies in the markets that we serve, including
interest rates, monetary policy, inflation, economic growth, recession, commodity prices, and
currency controls or other limitations on the ability to expatriate cash;
• protective economic policies taken by governments, such as trade protection measures and
import/export licensing requirements;
• compliance with local regulations and laws including, in some countries, regulatory requirements
restricting the Company’s ability to manufacture or sell its products in the relevant market;
• diminished protection of intellectual property and contractual rights in certain jurisdictions;
• potential nationalization or expropriation of the Company’s foreign assets;
• political or social upheavals, economic instability, repression, or human rights issues; and
• geopolitical events, including natural disasters, disruptions to markets due to war, armed
conflict, terrorism, epidemics or pandemics.
Failure to maintain a satisfactory credit rating could adversely affect our liquidity, capital
position, borrowing costs and access to capital markets.
We currently maintain investment grade credit ratings with Moody’s Investors Service and Standard &
Poor’s Ratings Services. Rating agencies routinely evaluate us, and their ratings of our long-term
and short-term debt are based on a number of factors. Any downgrade of our credit ratings by a credit
rating agency, whether as a result of our actions or factors which are beyond our control, can
increase the cost of borrowing under any indebtedness we may incur, reduce market capacity for our
commercial paper or require the posting of additional collateral under our derivative contracts.
There can be no assurance that we will be able to maintain our credit ratings, and any additional
actual or anticipated changes or downgrades in our credit ratings, including any announcement that
our ratings are under review for a downgrade, may have a negative impact on our liquidity, capital
position and access to capital markets.
Risks Related to the Planned Separation of our Consumer Health Business
The planned separation of the Company’s Consumer Health business may not be completed on the terms or
timeline currently contemplated, if at all, and may not achieve the expected results.
In November 2021, the Company announced its intention to separate the Company’s Consumer Health
business, with the intention to create a new, publicly traded company. The planned separation is
intended to qualify as a tax-free transaction for U.S. federal income tax purposes. The Company is
targeting completion of the planned separation in 18 to 24 months after initial announcement.
Completion of the planned separation will be subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions,
including, among others, consultations with works councils and other employee representative bodies,
as required, final approval of the Company’s Board of Directors, receipt of a favorable opinion and
Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) ruling with respect to the tax-free nature of the transaction, and
the receipt of other regulatory approvals. There can be no assurance regarding the ultimate timing of
the planned separation or that such separation will be completed. Unanticipated developments could
delay, prevent or otherwise adversely affect the planned separation, including but not limited to
disruptions in general or financial market conditions or potential problems or delays in obtaining
various regulatory and tax approvals or clearances.
The costs to complete the planned separation will be significant. In addition, the Company may be
unable to achieve some or all of the strategic and financial benefits that it expects to achieve from
the planned separation of the Company’s Consumer Health business.
The Company will incur significant expenses in connection with the planned separation. In addition,
the Company may not be able to achieve the full strategic and financial benefits that are expected to
result from the planned separation. The anticipated benefits of the planned separation are based on a
number of assumptions, some of which may prove incorrect.
 13 
Following the planned separation, the price of shares of the Company’s common stock may fluctuate
significantly.
The Company cannot predict the effect of the planned separation on the trading price of shares of its
common stock, and the market value of shares of its common stock may be less than, equal to or
greater than the market value of shares of its common stock prior to the planned separation. In
addition, the price of the Company’s common stock may be more volatile around the time of the planned
separation.
The planned separation could result in substantial tax liability.
The Company intends to obtain an opinion from its U.S. tax advisors and a ruling from the IRS as to
the tax-free nature of the planned separation under the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended. The opinion and ruling will be based on, among other things, various factual assumptions and
representations that the Company and the New Consumer Health Company will make regarding the past and
future conduct of the companies’ respective businesses and other matters. If any of these assumptions
or representations are, or become, inaccurate or incomplete, reliance on the opinion and ruling may
be jeopardized. If subsequent to the planned separation it is determined that the transaction does
not qualify for tax-free treatment for U.S. federal income tax purposes, the resulting tax liability
to the Company and its shareholders could be substantial. The planned separation may also not qualify
for tax-free treatment in other countries around the world, and as a result may trigger substantial
tax liability to the Company.
 Other Risks 
Our business depends on our ability to recruit and retain talented, highly skilled employees and a
diverse workforce.
Our continued growth requires us to recruit and retain talented employees representing diverse
backgrounds, experiences, and skill sets. The market for highly skilled workers and leaders in our
industry is extremely competitive and our ability to compete depends on our ability to hire, develop
and motivate highly skilled personnel in all areas of our organization. Maintaining our brand and
reputation, as well as a diverse, equitable and inclusive work environment enables us to attract top
talent. If we are less successful in our recruiting efforts, or if we cannot retain highly skilled
workers and key leaders, our ability to develop and deliver successful products and services may be
adversely affected. In addition, effective succession planning is important to our long-term success.
Any unsuccessful implementation of our succession plans or failure to ensure effective transfer of
knowledge and smooth transitions involving key employees could adversely affect our business,
financial condition, or results of operations.
Climate change or legal, regulatory or market measures to address climate change may negatively
affect our business and results of operations.
Climate change resulting from increased concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere could present risks to our operations, including an adverse impact on global
temperatures, weather patterns and the frequency and severity of extreme weather and natural
disasters. Natural disasters and extreme weather conditions, such as a hurricane, tornado,
earthquake, wildfire or flooding, may pose physical risks to our facilities and disrupt the operation
of our supply chain. The impacts of the changing climate on water resources may result in water
scarcity, limiting our ability to access sufficient high-quality water in certain locations, which
may increase operational costs.
Concern over climate change may also result in new or additional legal or regulatory requirements
designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and/or mitigate the effects of climate change on the
environment. If such laws or regulations are more stringent than current legal or regulatory
obligations, we may experience disruption in, or an increase in the costs associated with sourcing,
manufacturing and distribution of our products, which may adversely affect our business, results of
operations or financial condition. Further, the impacts of climate change have an influence on
customer preferences, and failure to provide climate-friendly products could potentially result in
loss of market share.
An information security incident, including a cybersecurity breach, could have a negative impact to
the Company’s business or reputation.
To meet business objectives, the Company relies on both internal information technology (IT) systems
and networks, and those of third parties and their vendors, to process and store sensitive data,
including confidential research, business plans, financial information, intellectual property, and
personal data that may be subject to legal protection, and ensure the continuity of the Company’s
supply chain. The extensive information security and cybersecurity threats, which affect companies
globally, pose a risk to the security and availability of these systems and networks, and the
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the Company’s sensitive data. The Company continually
assesses these threats and makes investments to increase internal protection, detection, and response
capabilities, as well as ensure the Company’s third-party providers have required capabilities and
controls, to address this risk . To date, the Company has not experienced any material impact to the
business or operations resulting from information or cybersecurity attacks; however, because of the
frequently changing attack techniques, along with the increased volume and sophistication of the
attacks, there is the potential for the Company to be adversely
 14 
impacted. This impact could result in reputational, competitive, operational or other business harm
as well as financial costs and regulatory action. The Company maintains cybersecurity insurance in
the event of an information security or cyber incident; however, the coverage may not be sufficient
to cover all financial, legal, business or reputational losses.
A breach of privacy laws or unauthorized access, loss or misuse of personal data could have a
negative impact to the Company’s business or reputation.
The Company is subject to privacy and data protection laws across the globe that impose broad
compliance obligations on the collection, use, storage, access, transfer and protection of personal
data. Breach of such requirements could result in substantial fines, penalties, private right of
actions, claims and damage to our reputation and business. New privacy laws are expected in other
territories, together with greater privacy enforcement by governmental authorities globally,
particularly on data localization requirements and international data flows. The Company has
established privacy compliance programs and controls that our businesses worldwide are required to
comply with, but with many technology and data-driven initiatives being prioritized across the
Company and involving multiple vendors and third parties, there are potential risks of controls
imposed on cross border data flows, unauthorized access, and loss of personal data through internal
and external threats that could impact our business operations and research activities.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 1B. │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS │
Not applicable.
 15 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 2. │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ PROPERTIES │
The Company's subsidiaries operate 85 manufacturing facilities occupying approximately 15.0 million
square feet of floor space. The manufacturing facilities are used by the industry segments of the
Company’s business approximately as follows:
 Segment Square Feet 
 (in thousands) 
 Consumer Health 4,562 
 Pharmaceutical 5,517 
 Medical Devices 4,908 
 Worldwide Total 14,987 
Within the U.S., four facilities are used by the Consumer Health segment, five by the Pharmaceutical
segment and 17 by the Medical Devices segment. Outside of the U.S., 23 facilities are used by the
Consumer Health segment, 13 by the Pharmaceutical segment and 23 by the Medical Devices segment.
The locations of the manufacturing facilities by major geographic areas of the world are as follows:
 Geographic Area Number of Facilities Square Feet 
 (in thousands) 
 United States 26 4,233 
 Europe 25 5,991 
 Western Hemisphere, excluding U.S. 9 1,733 
 Africa, Asia and Pacific 25 3,030 
 Worldwide Total 85 14,987 
In addition to the manufacturing facilities discussed above, the Company maintains numerous office
and warehouse facilities throughout the world.
The Company's subsidiaries generally seek to own, rather than lease, their manufacturing facilities,
although some, principally in non-U.S. locations, are leased. Office and warehouse facilities are
often leased. The Company also engages contract manufacturers.
The Company is committed to maintaining all of its properties in good operating condition.
McNEIL-PPC, Inc. (now Johnson & Johnson Consumer Inc.) (McNEIL-PPC) operated under a consent decree,
signed in 2011 with the U.S. FDA, which governed certain McNeil Consumer Healthcare manufacturing
operations, and required McNEIL-PPC to remediate the facilities it operates in Lancaster,
Pennsylvania, Fort Washington, Pennsylvania, and Las Piedras, Puerto Rico (the “Consent Decree”).
Following U.S. FDA inspections McNEIL-PPC received notifications from the U.S FDA that all three
manufacturing facilities were in conformity with applicable laws and regulations, and commercial
production restarted in 2015.
Under the Consent Decree, after receiving notice from the U.S. FDA of being in compliance with
applicable laws and regulations, each of the three facilities was subject to a five-year audit period
by a third-party cGMP expert. A third-party expert continued to reassess the sites at various times
through 2020. U.S. FDA inspections of the facilities which have been delayed due to COVID-19 were
completed and the Consent Decree was vacated in July of 2021.
Segment information on additions to property, plant and equipment is contained in Note 17 “Segments
of Business and Geographic Areas” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item
8 of this Report.
 16 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 3. │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ LEGAL PROCEEDINGS │
The information called for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the information set
forth in Note 19 “Legal Proceedings” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in
Item 8 of this Report.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 4. │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES │
 Not applicable. 
 EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT 
Listed below are the executive officers of the Company. There are no family relationships between any
of the executive officers, and there is no arrangement or understanding between any executive officer
and any other person pursuant to which the executive officer was selected. At the annual meeting of
the Board of Directors, the executive officers are elected by the Board to hold office for one year
and until their respective successors are elected and qualified, or until earlier resignation or
removal.
Information with regard to the directors of the Company is incorporated herein by reference to the
material captioned “Item 1. Election of Directors” in the Proxy Statement.
 Name Age Position 
 Vanessa Broadhurst 53 Member, Executive Committee; Executive Vice President, 
 Global Corporate Affairs(a) 
 Joaquin Duato 59 Chief Executive Officer; Chairman, Executive Committee(b) 
 Peter M. Fasolo, Ph.D. 59 Member, Executive Committee; Executive Vice President, 
 Chief Human Resources Officer(c) 
 Member, Executive Committee; Executive Vice President, 
 William N. Hait, M.D., Ph. D. 72 Chief External Innovation, Medical Safety and Global 
 Public Health Officer(d) 
 Mathai Mammen, Ph. D. 54 Member, Executive Committee; Executive Vice President, 
 Pharmaceuticals, R&D(e) 
 Ashley McEvoy 51 Member, Executive Committee; Executive Vice President, 
 Worldwide Chairman, Medical Devices(f) 
 Thibaut Mongon 52 Member, Executive Committee, Executive Vice President, 
 Worldwide Chairman, Consumer Health(g) 
 James Swanson 56 Member, Executive Committee; Executive Vice President, 
 Chief Information Officer(h) 
 Jennifer L. Taubert 58 Member, Executive Committee; Executive Vice President, 
 Worldwide Chairman, Pharmaceuticals(i) 
 Michael H. Ullmann 63 Member, Executive Committee; Executive Vice President, 
 General Counsel(j) 
 Kathryn E. Wengel 56 Member, Executive Committee; Executive Vice President, 
 Chief Global Supply Chain Officer(k) 
 Joseph J. Wolk 55 Member, Executive Committee; Executive Vice President, 
 Chief Financial Officer(l) 
(a) Ms. V. Broadhurst joined the Company in 2005 as Worldwide Vice President, Anemia & Oncology
Supportive Care. She then went on to become Vice President of the Cardiovascular & Institutional
Franchise in 2008, and President of Janssen Therapeutics in 2011 before becoming U.S. President,
Internal Medicine in 2012. From 2013 to 2017, she held General Manager roles at Amgen in Inflammation
& Cardiovascular, and Cardiovascular & Bone. In 2017, Ms. Broadhurst rejoined Johnson & Johnson as
U.S. President, Cardiovascular & Metabolism and a member of the Janssen Americas Leadership Team. In
this role she also provided operational oversight of the full portfolio of Janssen medicines in
Puerto Rico and Canada. In 2018, she was appointed Company Group Chairman, Global Commercial Strategy
Organization. In 2022, Ms. Broadhurst was named Executive Vice President, Global Corporate Affairs
and a
 17 
member of the Executive Committee, leading the Company's global marketing, communication, design and
philanthropy functions.
(b) Mr. J. Duato became Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Executive Committee and joined
the Board of Directors in January 2022. He joined the Company in 1989 with Janssen-Farmaceutica S.A.
(Spain), a subsidiary of the Company, and held executive positions of increasing responsibility in
all business sectors and across multiple geographies and functions. In 2009, he was named Company
Group Chairman, Pharmaceuticals, and in 2011, he was named Worldwide Chairman, Pharmaceuticals. In
2016, Mr. Duato became a member of the Executive Committee and was named Executive Vice President,
Worldwide Chairman, Pharmaceuticals. In July 2018, Mr. Duato was promoted to Vice Chairman of the
Executive Committee, where he provided strategic direction for the Pharmaceutical and Consumer Health
sectors and oversaw both the Global Supply Chain, Information Technology and Health & Wellness teams.
As a dual citizen of Spain and the United States, Mr. Duato's international perspective and global
lens gives him a deep appreciation of diverse thoughts and opinions.
(c) Dr. P. M. Fasolo joined the Company in 2004 as Worldwide Vice President, Human Resources in the
Medical Devices segment, and subsequently served as the Company’s Chief Talent Officer. He left
Johnson & Johnson in 2007 to join Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. as Chief Talent Officer. Dr. Fasolo
returned to the Company in 2010 as the Vice President, Global Human Resources, and in 2011, he became
a member of the Executive Committee. In April 2016, he was named Executive Vice President, Chief
Human Resources Officer. Dr. Fasolo has responsibility for global talent, recruiting, diversity,
compensation benefits, employee relations and all aspects of the human resources agenda for the
Company. He also serves on the Boards of the Human Resources Policy Association, Tufts University and
Save the Children and was named a Fellow of the National Academy of Human Resources in 2017.
(d) Dr. W. Hait joined the Company in 2007 as Senior Vice President, Worldwide Head of Oncology
Research. He then served as the first Global Therapeutic Area Head for Oncology from 2009 to 2011,
and then as Global Head, Janssen Research & Development from 2011 through 2018. From 2018 to 2022, he
was Global Head, Johnson & Johnson Global External Innovation. In 2022, he became Executive Vice
President, Chief External Innovation, Medical Safety and Global Public Health Officer, and a member
of the Executive Committee. He is responsible for leading external sourcing and creation of
transformational innovation to help Johnson & Johnson achieve its mission to improve human health
utilizing the Company’s excellence in pharmaceuticals, medical devices and consumer products. He also
has oversight over Global Public Health and the Office of the Chief Medical Officer.
(e) Dr. M. Mammen joined the Company in 2017 as Global Head of R&D at the Janssen Pharmaceutical
Companies of Johnson & Johnson. Prior to joining Janssen in June 2017, Dr. Mammen was Senior Vice
President at Merck Research Laboratories, responsible for research in the areas of Cardiovascular,
Metabolic and Renal Diseases, Oncology/lmmuno-Oncology and Immunology. Prior to Merck, he led R&D at
Theravance, a company he co-founded in the San Francisco Bay Area in 1997 based on his work at
Harvard University. In 2022, he was named as Executive Vice President, Pharmaceuticals R&D, and a
member of the Executive Committee. He is responsible for a team whose mission is to make
transformational medicines with unequivocal benefit for patients worldwide, working across a wide
range of therapeutic areas and biological pathways in the areas of: Oncology, Cardiovascular and
Metabolic Disease, Retinal Disease, Pulmonary Hypertension, Immunology, Neuroscience and Infectious
Disease and Vaccines. These Therapeutic Areas are fueled by world-class Global Functions in Discovery
Sciences and Manufacturing, Regulatory Affairs, Development Operations and Data Science.
(f) Ms. A. McEvoy joined the Company in 1996 as Assistant Brand Manager of McNeil Consumer Health, a
subsidiary of the Company, advancing through positions of increasing responsibilities until she was
appointed Company Group Chairman, Vision Care in 2012, followed by Company Group Chairman, Consumer
Medical Devices in 2014. In July 2018, Ms. McEvoy was promoted to Executive Vice President, Worldwide
Chairman, Medical Devices, and became a member of the Executive Committee. Ms. McEvoy has
responsibility for the surgery, orthopaedics, interventional solutions and eye health businesses
across Ethicon, DePuy Synthes, Biosense Webster and Johnson & Johnson Vision.
(g) Mr. T. Mongon joined the Company in 2000 as Director of Marketing for the Vision Care group in
France and subsequently held positions of increasing responsibility until he transitioned to the
Pharmaceutical sector in 2012, as the Global Commercial Strategy Leader for the Neuroscience
therapeutic area. In 2014, he joined the Consumer Health sector as Company Group Chairman Asia-
Pacific. In 2019, he was promoted to Executive Vice President and Worldwide Chairman, Consumer
Health, and became a member of the Executive Committee. Mr. Mongon has responsibility for the global
development of Johnson & Johnson’s health and wellness products and solutions in beauty, OTC, oral
care, baby care, women’s health, and wound care.
(h) Mr. J. Swanson rejoined the Company in 2019 as Chief Information Officer of Johnson & Johnson
from Bayer Crop Science, where he served as a member of the Executive Leadership Team and as CIO and
Head of Digital Transformation. From 1996 to 2005, Mr. Swanson held positions of increasing
responsibility at the Company, including Project Manager, Director IT, Sr. Director IT and Vice
President, Chief Information Officer. Mr. Swanson is
 18 
responsible for enhancing Johnson & Johnson’s business impact and shaping its direction through the
strategic use of technology. Mr. Swanson, Executive Vice President, Chief Information Officer, joined
the Executive Committee effective January 3, 2022.
(i) Ms. J. L. Taubert joined the Company in 2005 as Worldwide Vice President, and she held several
executive positions of increasing responsibility in the Pharmaceutical sector. In 2012, she was
appointed Company Group Chairman, North America Pharmaceuticals, and in 2015 became Company Group
Chairman, The Americas, Pharmaceuticals. In July 2018, Ms. Taubert was promoted to Executive Vice
President, Worldwide Chairman, Pharmaceuticals, and became a member of the Executive Committee. Ms.
Taubert is responsible for the Pharmaceutical sector globally, including shaping the company’s
strategy of transformational medical innovation and for successfully bringing to market critical new
medicines that significantly improve the lives of patients living with cancer, immune-related
diseases, cardiovascular disease, infectious diseases, pulmonary hypertension and serious mental
illness.
(j) Mr. M. H. Ullmann joined the Company in 1989 as a corporate attorney in the Law Department. He
was appointed Corporate Secretary in 1998 and served in that role until 2006. During that time, he
also held various management positions in the Law Department. In 2006, he was named General Counsel,
Medical Devices and Diagnostics and was appointed Vice President, General Counsel and became a member
of the Executive Committee in 2012. In April 2016, Mr. Ullmann was named Executive Vice President,
General Counsel. Mr. Ullmann has worldwide responsibility for legal, government affairs & policy,
global security, aviation, healthcare compliance, global brand protection and privacy.
(k) Ms. K. E. Wengel joined the Company in 1988 as Project Engineer and Engineering Supervisor at
Janssen, a subsidiary of the Company. During her tenure with the Company, she has held a variety of
strategic leadership and executive positions across the global enterprise, in roles within
operations, quality, engineering, new products, information technology, and other technical and
business functions. In 2010, Ms. Wengel became the first Chief Quality Officer of the Company. In
2014, she was promoted to Vice President, Johnson & Johnson Supply Chain. In July 2018, she was
promoted to Executive Vice President, Chief Global Supply Chain Officer, and became a member of the
Executive Committee. Ms. Wengel has enterprise-wide responsibilities for Supply Chain, Quality &
Compliance, Procurement, Engineering & Property Services, Environmental Health & Safety and
Sustainability.
(l) Mr. J. J. Wolk joined the Company in 1998 as Finance Manager, Business Development for Ortho-
McNeil, a subsidiary of the Company, and through the years held a variety of senior leadership roles
in several segments and functions across the Company's subsidiaries, in Pharmaceuticals, Medical
Devices and Supply Chain. From 2014 to 2016, he served as Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial
Officer of the Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson. In 2016, Mr. Wolk became the
Vice President, Investor Relations. In July 2018, he was appointed Executive Vice President, Chief
Financial Officer and became a member of the Executive Committee. Mr. Wolk plays a strategic role in
the overall management of the Company, and leads the development and execution of the Company's
global long-term financial strategy.
 19