UNITED STATES 
 SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549 
 FORM 10-K 
 Annual report pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of 
 the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
 For the fiscal year ended 
 December 31, 2020 Commission file number 1-5805 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. 
 (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) 
 Delaware 13-2624428 
 (State or other jurisdiction of -I.R.S. employer 
 incorporation or organization) identification no. 
 383 Madison Avenue, 
 New York, New York 10179 
 (Address of principal executive offices) -Zip Code 
 Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: ( 212) 270-6000 
 Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act: 
 Title of each class Trading Symbol(s) Name of each exchange on which 
 registered 
 Common stock JPM The New York Stock Exchange 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a 
 one-four hundredth interest in a 
 share JPM PR G The New York Stock Exchange 
 of 6.10% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, 
 Series AA 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a 
 one-four hundredth interest in a 
 share JPM PR H The New York Stock Exchange 
 of 6.15% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, 
 Series BB 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a 
 one-four hundredth interest in a 
 share JPM PR D The New York Stock Exchange 
 of 5.75% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, 
 Series DD 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a 
 one-four hundredth interest in a 
 share JPM PR C The New York Stock Exchange 
 of 6.00% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, 
 Series EE 
 Depositary Shares, each representing 
 a 
 one-four hundredth interest in a 
 share JPM PR J The New York Stock Exchange 
 of4.75% Non-Cumulative Preferred 
 Stock, 
 Series GG 
 Alerian MLP Index ETNs due May 24, AMJ NYSE Arca, Inc. 
 2024 
 Guarantee of Callable Step-Up Fixed 
 Rate JPM/28 The New York Stock Exchange 
 Notes due April 26, 2028 of JPMorgan 
 Chase Financial Company LLC 
 Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of
the Securities Act. ☐ Yes ☒ No
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or
Section 15(d) of the Act. ☐ Yes ☒ No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for
such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject
to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. ☒ Yes ☐ No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data
File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter)
during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit
such files). ☒ Yes ☐ No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the
definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and
“emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
 Large Accelerated Non-accele… Smaller Emerging 
 ☒ accelerated ☐ filer ☐ filer ☐ reporting ☐ growth 
 filer company company 
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the
extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards
provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its
management’s assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting under
Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm
that prepared or issued its audit report. ☒ Yes ☐ No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Exchange Act). ☐ Yes ☒ No
The aggregate market value of JPMorgan Chase & Co. common stock held by non-affiliates as of June 30,
2020: $ 383,953,778,298
 Number of shares of common stock outstanding as of January 31, 2021: 3,051,506,436 
Documents incorporated by reference: Portions of the registrant’s Proxy Statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders to be held on May 18, 2021, are incorporated by reference in this Form 10-K
in response to Items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 of Part III.
 Form 10-K Index 
 Part I Page 
 Item 1. Business. 1 
 Overview 1 
 Business segments 1 
 Competition 1 
 Human capital 2-3 
 Supervision and regulation 3-7 
 Distribution of assets, liabilities and stockholders’ 300-304 
 equity; interest rates and interest differentials 
 Return on equity and assets 44, 299, 300 
 Investment securities portfolio 312 
 Loan portfolio 110-131, 232-247, 313-318 
 Summary of loan and lending-related commitments loss 132-133, 248-252, 319-320 
 experience 
 Deposits 265, 321 
 Short-term and other borrowed funds 322 
 Item 1A. Risk Factors. 8-32 
 Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments. 33 
 Item 2. Properties. 33 
 Item 3. Legal Proceedings. 33 
 Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures. 33 
 Part II 
 Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related 
 Item 5. Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity 34 
 Securities. 
 Item 6. Selected Financial Data. 34 
 Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial 34 
 Condition and Results of Operations. 
 Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market 34 
 Risk. 
 Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. 34-35 
 Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on 35 
 Accounting and Financial Disclosure. 
 Item 9A. Controls and Procedures. 35 
 Item 9B. Other Information. 35 
 Part III 
 Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance. 36 
 Item 11. Executive Compensation. 37 
 Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and 37 
 Management and Related Stockholder Matters. 
 Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and 37 
 Director Independence. 
 Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services. 37 
 Part IV 
 Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules. 38-41 
║ Part I ║
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 1. Business. │
 Overview 
JPMorgan Chase & Co. (“JPMorgan Chase” or the
“Firm”, NYSE: JPM), a financial holding company
incorporated under Delaware law in 1968, is a
leading financial services firm based in the
United States of America (“U.S.”), and has
operations worldwide; JPMorgan Chase had $3.4
trillion in assets and $279.4 billion in
stockholders’ equity as of December 31, 2020.
The Firm is a leader in investment banking,
financial services for consumers and small
businesses, commercial banking, financial
transaction processing and asset management.
Under the J.P. Morgan and Chase brands, the Firm
serves millions of customers in the U.S. and
many of the world’s most prominent corporate,
institutional and government clients.
JPMorgan Chase’s principal bank subsidiary is
JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association
(“JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.”), a national
banking association with U.S. branches in 38
states and Washington, D.C. as of December 31,
2020. JPMorgan Chase’s principal non-bank
subsidiary is J.P. Morgan Securities LLC (“J.P.
Morgan Securities”), a U.S. broker-dealer. The
bank and non-bank subsidiaries of JPMorgan Chase
operate nationally as well as through overseas
branches and subsidiaries, representative
offices and subsidiary foreign banks. The Firm’s
principal operating subsidiary outside the U.S.
is J.P. Morgan Securities plc, a U.K.-based
subsidiary of JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.
The Firm’s website is www.jpmorganchase.com.
JPMorgan Chase makes available on its website,
free of charge, annual reports on Form 10-K,
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and current
reports on Form 8-K pursuant to Section 13(a) or
Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as soon as reasonably practicable after it
electronically files or furnishes such material
to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(the “SEC”) at www.sec.gov. JPMorgan Chase also
makes additional information about the Firm
available on the Investor Relations section of
its website at https://www.jpmorganchase.com/cor
porate/investor-relations/investor-
relations.htm. The Firm has adopted, and posted
on its website, a Code of Conduct for all
employees of the Firm and a Code of Ethics for
its Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Chief
Financial Officer, Principal Accounting Officer
and all other professionals of the Firm
worldwide serving in a finance, accounting,
treasury, tax or investor relations role.
 Business segments 
For management reporting purposes, JPMorgan
Chase’s activities are organized into four major
reportable business segments, as well as a
Corporate segment. The Firm’s consumer business
is the Consumer & Community Banking (“CCB”)
segment. The Firm’s wholesale business segments
are the Corporate & Investment Bank (“CIB”),
Commercial Banking (“CB”), and Asset & Wealth
Management (“AWM”).
A description of the Firm’s business segments
and the products and services they provide to
their respective client bases is provided in the
“Business segment results” section of
Management’s discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
(“Management’s discussion and analysis” or
“MD&A”), beginning on page 46 and in Note 32.
 Competition 
JPMorgan Chase and its subsidiaries and
affiliates operate in highly competitive
environments. Competitors include other banks,
brokerage firms, investment banking companies,
merchant banks, hedge funds, commodity trading
companies, private equity firms, insurance
companies, mutual fund companies, investment
managers, credit card companies, mortgage
banking companies, trust companies, securities
processing companies, automobile financing
companies, leasing companies, e-commerce and
other internet-based companies, financial
technology companies, and other companies
engaged in providing similar products and
services. The Firm’s businesses generally
compete on the basis of the quality and variety
of the Firm’s products and services, transaction
execution, innovation, reputation and price.
Competition also varies based on the types of
clients, customers, industries and geographies
served. With respect to some of its geographies
and products, JPMorgan Chase competes globally;
with respect to others, the Firm competes on a
national or regional basis. New competitors in
the financial services industry continue to
emerge, including firms that offer products and
services solely through the internet and non-
financial companies that offer payment or loan
products.
 1 
║ Part I ║
 Human capital 
JPMorgan Chase believes that its long-term growth and success depend on its ability to attract,
develop and retain a high-performing and diverse workforce, with inclusion and accessibility as key
components of the way the Firm does business. The information provided below relates to JPMorgan
Chase’s full-time and part-time employees and does not include the Firm’s contractors.
Global workforce
JPMorgan Chase had 255,351 employees in 62 countries as of December 31, 2020, with over 60% of those
employees located in the U.S. As of December 31, 2020, of the Firm’s global employees that self-
identified, 49% self-identified as women and of the Firm’s U.S.-based employees that self-identified,
52% self-identified as ethnically diverse (defined as all Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
classifications other than white). In addition, of the Firm’s U.S.-based employees, 3% self-
identified as LGBT+, 3% as military veterans and 4% as people with disabilities. The following table
presents the distribution of the Firm’s global workforce by region and by LOB as of December 31,
2020:
 Employee Breakdown by Region Employee Breakdown by LOB 
 Region Employees LOB Employees 
 North America 162,670 CCB 122,894 
 Europe/Middle East/Africa 22,346 CIB 61,733 
 Latin America/Caribbean 3,691 CB 11,675 
 Asia-Pacific 66,644 AWM 20,683 
 Total Firm 255,351 Corporate 38,366 
 Total Firm 255,351 
Firm culture
The foundations of JPMorgan Chase’s culture are
its core values and How We Do Business
Principles, which are fundamental to the Firm’s
success and are represented by four central
corporate tenets: exceptional client service;
operational excellence; a commitment to
integrity, fairness and responsibility; and
cultivation of a great team and winning culture.
The Firm maintains its focus on its culture of
inclusion and respect, which is reinforced by
increasing employee awareness and education
through engagement, communication and training.
An important part of these efforts includes the
Firm’s Business Resource Groups, which are
groups of employees who support JPMorgan Chase’s
diversity and inclusion strategies by leveraging
the unique perspectives of their members.
Attracting and retaining employees
The goal of JPMorgan Chase’s recruitment efforts
is to attract and hire talented individuals in
all roles and at all career levels. The Firm
strives to provide both external candidates and
internal employees who are seeking a different
role with challenging and stimulating career
opportunities. These opportunities range from
internship training programs for students to
entry-level, management and executive careers.
During 2020, approximately two thirds of the
Firm’s employment opportunities were filled by
external candidates, with the remainder filled
by existing employees.
Diversity is a critical area of focus throughout
the Firm’s hiring process. JPMorgan Chase
engages in efforts aimed at hiring diverse
talent, including initiatives focused on gender,
underrepresented ethnic groups, LGBT+
individuals, people with disabilities, veterans
and others. The Firm’s Advancing Black Pathways
program, which seeks to leverage JPMorgan
Chase’s business and philanthropic
resources to accelerate economic opportunity for
Black Americans by strengthening education and
job training, growing careers, investing in
entrepreneurship, and building wealth, includes
initiatives to increase representation of
talented Black individuals across the Firm.
JPMorgan Chase offers a competitive fellowship
program that seeks to attract accomplished
individuals who have taken a career break and
wish to return to the workforce. In addition,
where appropriate, the Firm’s hiring practices
focus on the skills of a job candidate rather
than degrees held.
Developing employees
JPMorgan Chase is committed to supporting the
professional development and career growth of
its employees. The Firm offers comprehensive
training programs to employees, with over seven
million hours of training delivered globally in
2020. Leadership Edge, the Firm’s global
leadership development program that is offered
to managers, is focused on creating one Firm
leadership culture.
Compensation and benefits
The Firm provides comprehensive and market-
competitive compensation and benefits programs.
JPMorgan Chase’s compensation philosophy
provides the guiding principles that drive
compensation-related decisions across the Firm,
including pay-for-performance, responsiveness
and alignment with shareholder interests,
reinforcement of the Firm’s culture and How We
Do Business Principles, and integration of risk,
controls and conduct considerations. The Firm’s
commitment to diversity and inclusion for all
employees includes compensation review processes
that seek to ensure that the Firm’s employees
are paid equitably for the work they do.
 2 
The Firm is also committed to supporting
employees’ well-being. JPMorgan Chase offers a
comprehensive benefits and wellness package to
employees and their families, including
healthcare coverage, retirement benefits, life
and disability insurance, on-site health and
wellness centers, employee assistance programs,
competitive vacation and leave policies, backup
child care arrangements, tuition reimbursement
programs, mental health counseling and support,
and financial coaching. The Firm has taken
action to protect and support its employees
during the COVID-19 pandemic, including by
implementing health and safety protocols and
providing additional benefits.
 Supervision and regulation 
The Firm is subject to extensive and
comprehensive regulation under U.S. federal and
state laws, as well as the applicable laws of
the jurisdictions outside the U.S. in which the
Firm does business.
Financial holding company:
Consolidated supervision . JPMorgan Chase & Co.
is a bank holding company (“BHC”) and a
financial holding company (“FHC”) under U.S.
federal law, and is subject to comprehensive
consolidated supervision, regulation and
examination by the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System (the “Federal Reserve”).
The Federal Reserve acts as the supervisor of
the consolidated operations of BHCs, and certain
of JPMorgan Chase’s subsidiaries are also
regulated directly by additional authorities
based on the activities or licenses of those
subsidiaries.
JPMorgan Chase’s national bank subsidiary,
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., is supervised and
regulated by the Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency (“OCC”) and, with respect to
certain matters, by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (the “FDIC”).
JPMorgan Chase’s U.S. broker-dealers are
supervised and regulated by the Securities and
Exchange Commission (“SEC”) and the Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”), and
subsidiaries of the Firm that engage in certain
futures-related and swaps-related activities are
supervised and regulated by the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission (“CFTC”). J.P. Morgan
Securities plc is a U.K.-based bank regulated by
the U.K. Prudential Regulation Authority (the
“PRA”) and the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority
(“FCA”).
The Firm’s other non-U.S. subsidiaries are
regulated by the banking, securities, prudential
and conduct regulatory authorities in the
countries in which they operate.
Permissible business activities . The Bank
Holding Company Act restricts BHCs from engaging
in business activities other than the business
of banking and certain closely-related
activities. FHCs can engage in a broader range
of financial activities. The Federal Reserve has
the authority to limit an FHC’s ability to
conduct otherwise permissible activities if the
FHC or any of its depository institution
subsidiaries ceases to meet applicable
eligibility requirements. The
Federal Reserve may also impose corrective
capital and/or managerial requirements on the
FHC, and if deficiencies are persistent, may
require divestiture of the FHC’s depository
institutions. If any depository institution
controlled by an FHC fails to maintain a
satisfactory rating under the Community
Reinvestment Act, the Federal Reserve must
prohibit the FHC and its subsidiaries from
engaging in any activities other than those
permissible for BHCs.
Capital and liquidity requirements . The Federal
Reserve establishes capital, liquidity and
leverage requirements for JPMorgan Chase that
are generally consistent with the international
Basel III capital and liquidity framework and
evaluates the Firm’s compliance with those
requirements. The OCC establishes similar
requirements for JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.
Banking supervisors globally continue to refine
and enhance the Basel III capital framework for
financial institutions. In January 2019, the
Basel Committee issued “Minimum capital
requirements for market risk.” The Basel
Committee expects national regulators to
implement these revised market risk requirements
for banking organizations in their jurisdictions
by January 2023, in line with the other elements
of the Basel III Reforms. U.S. banking
regulators have announced their support for the
issuance of the Basel III Reforms and are
considering how to appropriately apply such
reforms in the U.S. In November 2019, the U.S.
banking regulators adopted a rule implementing
“Standardized Approach for Counterparty Credit
Risk” (“SA-CCR”), which became effective in
April 2020 and which has a mandatory compliance
date of January 1, 2022.
On October 20, 2020, the federal banking
agencies issued a final rule for the net stable
funding ratio (“NSFR”) under which large banking
organizations such as the Firm will be required
to maintain an NSFR of at least 100% on an
ongoing basis. The final NSFR rule will become
effective on July 1, 2021.
Refer to Capital Risk Management on pages 91-101
and Liquidity Risk Management on pages 102–108 .
Stress tests . As a large BHC, JPMorgan Chase is
subject to supervisory stress testing
administered by the Federal Reserve as part of
the Federal Reserve’s annual Comprehensive
Capital Analysis and Review (“CCAR”) framework.
The Firm must conduct annual company-run stress
tests and must also submit an annual capital
plan to the Federal Reserve, taking into account
the results of separate stress tests designed by
the Firm and the Federal Reserve. The Federal
Reserve uses the results under the severely
adverse scenario from its supervisory stress
test to determine the Firm’s “stress capital
buffer” (“SCB”) requirement for the coming year,
which forms part of the Firm’s applicable
capital buffers. The Firm is required to file
its annual CCAR submission on April 5, 2021. The
Federal Reserve will notify the Firm of its
indicative SCB requirement by June 30, 2021 and
final SCB requirement by August 31, 2021. The
Firm’s final SCB requirement will become
effective on October 1, 2021. The OCC requires
 3 
║ Part I ║
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. to perform separate,
similar stress tests annually. The Firm
publishes each year the results of the annual
stress tests for the Firm and JPMorgan Chase
Bank, N.A. under the supervisory “severely
adverse” scenarios provided by the Federal
Reserve and the OCC.
Refer to Capital Risk Management on pages 91-101
for more information concerning the Firm’s CCAR.
Enhanced prudential standards . As part of its
mandate to identify and monitor risks to the
financial stability of the U.S. posed by large
banking organizations, the Financial Stability
Oversight Council (“FSOC”) recommends prudential
standards and reporting requirements to the
Federal Reserve for systemically important
financial institutions (“SIFIs”), such as
JPMorgan Chase. The Federal Reserve has adopted
several rules to implement those heightened
prudential standards, including rules relating
to risk management and corporate governance of
subject BHCs. JPMorgan Chase is required under
these rules to comply with enhanced liquidity
and overall risk management standards, including
oversight by the board of directors of risk
management activities.
Resolution and recovery . The Firm is required
to submit periodically to the Federal Reserve
and the FDIC a plan for resolution under Title I
of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act (“Dodd-Frank Act”) in
the event of material distress or failure (a
“resolution plan”). In 2019, the FDIC and
Federal Reserve revised the regulations
governing resolution plan requirements, and on
the basis of those revisions, the Firm’s
resolution plan submissions will alternate
between “targeted” and “full” plans. The Firm’s
next “targeted” resolution plan is due to be
filed on or before July 1, 2021. The Firm also
has a comprehensive recovery plan, updated
annually, summarizing the actions it would take
to avoid failure by remaining well-capitalized
and well-funded in the case of an adverse event.
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. is also required to
provide a resolution plan to the FDIC. The FDIC
has proposed changes
to its rules relating to the resolution plans of
insured depository institutions (“IDIs”) in a
2019 advanced notice of proposed rulemaking. In
January 2021, the FDIC announced that the
moratorium on the preparation of resolution
plans for the IDIs has ended. Banks will be
given notice of at least 12 months prior to the
required submission date for their IDI
resolution plans. The OCC has published
guidelines establishing standards for recovery
planning by insured national banks, and JPMorgan
Chase Bank, N.A. has submitted its recovery plan
to the OCC.
Certain of the Firm’s non-U.S. subsidiaries are
also subject to local resolution and recovery
planning requirements.
Orderly liquidation authority . Certain
financial companies, including JPMorgan Chase
and certain of its subsidiaries, can also be
subjected to resolution under an “orderly
liquidation authority.” The U.S. Treasury
Secretary, in consultation with the President of
the United States, must first make certain
determinations concerning extraordinary
financial distress and systemic risk, and action
must be recommended by the FDIC and the Federal
Reserve. Absent such actions, the Firm, as a
BHC, would remain subject to resolution under
the Bankruptcy Code. The FDIC has issued a draft
policy statement describing its “single point of
entry” strategy for resolution of SIFIs under
the orderly liquidation authority, which seeks
to keep operating subsidiaries of a BHC open and
impose losses on shareholders and creditors of
the BHC in receivership according to their
statutory order of priority.
Holding company as a source of strength.
JPMorgan Chase & Co. is required to serve as a
source of financial strength for its depository
institution subsidiaries and to commit resources
to support those subsidiaries, including when
directed to do so by the Federal Reserve.
Regulation of acquisitions . Acquisitions by
BHCs and their banks are subject to multiple
requirements established by the Federal Reserve
and the OCC. For example, FHCs and BHCs are
required to obtain the approval of the Federal
Reserve before they may acquire more than 5% of
the voting shares of an unaffiliated bank. In
addition, acquisitions by financial companies
are prohibited if, as a result of the
acquisition, the total liabilities of the
financial company would exceed 10% of the total
liabilities of all financial companies.
Furthermore, for certain acquisitions, the Firm
must provide written notice to the Federal
Reserve prior to acquiring direct or indirect
ownership or control of any voting shares of any
company with over $10 billion in assets that is
engaged in activities that are “financial in
nature.”
Volcker Rule . The Volcker Rule prohibits
banking entities, including the Firm, from
engaging in certain “proprietary trading”
activities, subject to exceptions for
underwriting, market-making, risk-mitigating
hedging and certain other activities. The
Volcker Rule also limits the sponsorship of, and
investment in, “covered funds,” and imposes
limits on certain transactions between the Firm
and covered funds for which a JPMorgan Chase
entity serves as the investment manager,
investment advisor, commodity trading advisor or
sponsor, as well as certain covered funds
controlled by such funds.
Ongoing obligations . The Firm remains subject
to a consent order entered into with the Federal
Reserve concerning foreign exchange trading. The
Firm is also subject to obligations under the
terms of a Deferred Prosecution Agreement
entered into with the Department of Justice on
September 29, 2020 relating to precious metals
and U.S. Treasuries markets investigations as
well as under a related order issued by the
CFTC.
Subsidiary banks:
The activities of JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., the
Firm’s principal subsidiary bank, are limited to
those specifically authorized under the National
Bank Act and related interpretations of the OCC.
The OCC has authority to bring an enforcement
action against JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. for
unsafe or unsound banking practices, which could
 4 
include limiting JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.’s
ability to conduct otherwise permissible
activities, or imposing corrective capital or
managerial requirements on the bank.
FDIC deposit insurance. The FDIC deposit
insurance fund provides insurance coverage for
certain deposits and is funded through
assessments on banks, such as JPMorgan Chase
Bank, N.A.
FDIC powers upon a bank insolvency. Upon the
insolvency of JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., the
FDIC could be appointed as conservator or
receiver under the Federal Deposit Insurance
Act. The FDIC has broad powers to transfer
assets and liabilities without the approval of
the institution’s creditors.
Prompt corrective action. The Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991
requires the relevant federal banking regulator
to take “prompt corrective action” with respect
to a depository institution if that institution
does not meet certain capital adequacy
standards. The Federal Reserve is also
authorized to take appropriate action against
the parent BHC, such as JPMorgan Chase & Co.,
based on the undercapitalized status of any bank
subsidiary. In certain instances, the BHC would
be required to guarantee the performance of the
capital restoration plan for its
undercapitalized subsidiary.
OCC Heightened Standards. The OCC has
established guidelines setting forth heightened
standards for large banks, including minimum
standards for the design and implementation of a
risk governance framework for banks. Under these
standards, a bank’s risk governance framework
must ensure that the bank’s risk profile is
easily distinguished and separate from that of
its parent BHC for risk management purposes. The
bank’s board or risk committee is responsible
for approving the bank’s risk governance
framework, providing active oversight of the
bank’s risk-taking activities, and holding
management accountable for adhering to the risk
governance framework.
Restrictions on transactions with affiliates.
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and its subsidiaries
are subject to restrictions imposed by federal
law on extensions of credit to, investments in
stock or securities of, and derivatives,
securities lending and certain other
transactions with, JPMorgan Chase & Co. and
certain other affiliates. These restrictions
prevent JPMorgan Chase & Co. and other
affiliates from borrowing from such subsidiaries
unless the loans are secured in specified
amounts and comply with certain other
requirements.
Dividend restrictions. Federal law imposes
limitations on the payment of dividends by
national banks, such as JPMorgan Chase Bank,
N.A. Refer to Note 26 for the amount of
dividends that JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. could
pay, at January 1, 2021, to JPMorgan Chase
without the approval of the banking regulators.
The OCC and the Federal Reserve also have
authority to prohibit or limit the payment of
dividends of a bank subsidiary that they
supervise if, in the banking regulator’s
opinion, payment of a dividend would
constitute an unsafe or unsound practice in
light of the financial condition of the bank.
Depositor preference. Under federal law, the
claims of a receiver of an IDI for
administrative expense and the claims of holders
of U.S. deposit liabilities (including the FDIC
and deposits in non-U.S. branches that are
dually payable in the U.S. and in a non-U.S.
branch) have priority over the claims of other
unsecured creditors of the institution,
including depositors in non-U.S. branches and
public noteholders.
Consumer supervision and regulation. JPMorgan
Chase and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. are subject
to supervision and regulation by the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (“CFPB”) with
respect to federal consumer protection laws,
including laws relating to fair lending and the
prohibition of unfair, deceptive or abusive acts
or practices in connection with the offer, sale
or provision of consumer financial products and
services. The CFPB also has jurisdiction over
small business lending activities with respect
to fair lending and the Equal Credit Opportunity
Act. As part of its regulatory oversight, the
CFPB has authority to take enforcement actions
against firms that offer certain products and
services to consumers using practices that are
deemed to be unfair, deceptive or abusive. The
Firm’s consumer activities are also subject to
regulation under state statutes which are
enforced by the Attorney General or empowered
agency of each state.
Securities and broker-dealer regulation:
The Firm conducts securities underwriting,
dealing and brokerage activities in the U.S.
through J.P. Morgan Securities LLC and other
non-bank broker-dealer subsidiaries, all of
which are subject to regulations of the SEC,
FINRA and the New York Stock Exchange, among
others. The Firm conducts similar securities
activities outside the U.S. subject to local
regulatory requirements. In the U.K., those
activities are conducted by J.P. Morgan
Securities plc. Broker-dealers are subject to
laws and regulations covering all aspects of the
securities business, including sales and trading
practices, securities offerings, publication of
research reports, use of customer funds, the
financing of client purchases, capital
structure, record-keeping and retention, and the
conduct of their directors, officers and
employees. Refer to Broker-dealer regulatory
capital on page 101 for information concerning
the capital of J.P. Morgan Securities LLC and
J.P. Morgan Securities plc.
Investment management regulation:
The Firm’s asset and wealth management
businesses are subject to significant regulation
in jurisdictions around the world relating to,
among other things, the safeguarding and
management of client assets, offerings of funds
and marketing activities. Certain of the Firm’s
subsidiaries are registered with, and subject to
oversight by, the SEC as investment advisers and
broker-dealers. The Firm’s registered investment
advisers are subject to the fiduciary and other
obligations imposed under the Investment
Advisers Act of 1940, as well as various state
securities laws. The Firm’s bank fiduciary
activities are subject to supervision by the
OCC.
 5 
║ Part I ║
Derivatives regulation:
The Firm is subject to comprehensive regulation
of its derivatives businesses, including
regulations that impose capital and margin
requirements, require central clearing of
standardized over-the-counter (“OTC”)
derivatives, mandate that certain standardized
OTC swaps be traded on regulated trading venues,
and provide for reporting of certain mandated
information. JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., J.P.
Morgan Securities LLC and J.P. Morgan Securities
plc are registered with the CFTC as “swap
dealers” and may be required to register with
the SEC as “security-based swap dealers.” As a
result, these entities are or will be subject to
a comprehensive regulatory framework applicable
to their swap or security-based swap activities,
including capital requirements, rules requiring
the collateralization of uncleared swaps and
security-based swaps, rules regarding
segregation of counterparty collateral, business
conduct and documentation standards, record-
keeping and reporting obligations, and anti-
fraud and anti-manipulation requirements.
Similar requirements have also been implemented
in the EU under the European Market
Infrastructure Regulation (“EMIR”) and MiFID II.
J.P. Morgan Securities LLC is also registered
with the CFTC as a futures commission merchant
and is a member of the National Futures
Association.
Data, privacy and security regulation:
The Firm and its subsidiaries are subject to
numerous U.S. federal, state and local as well
as international laws and regulations concerning
data that are central to the Firm’s businesses,
functions and operations. These include laws and
regulations relating to data protection,
privacy, data use, confidentiality, secrecy,
cybersecurity, technology, artificial
intelligence, data localization and storage,
data retention and destruction, disclosure,
transfer, availability, integrity and other
similar matters. The application, interpretation
and enforcement of these laws and regulations
are often uncertain, particularly in light of
new and rapidly evolving data-driven
technologies and significant increase in
computing power. These laws and regulations are
evolving at a rapid pace, remain a focus of
regulators globally, may be enforced by private
parties or government bodies, and will continue
to have a significant impact on all of the
Firm’s businesses and operations. For example,
the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation
(“GDPR”) includes a complex range of obligations
and operational requirements for companies that
receive or process personal data of persons in
the EU and provides for significant penalties
for non-compliance. In addition, there are a
number of legislative proposals in the EU, the
U.S. (at both the federal and state level) as
well as other jurisdictions that could impose
new obligations or limitations in these areas
that could affect the Firm’s businesses.
The Bank Secrecy Act and Economic Sanctions:
The Bank Secrecy Act (“BSA”) requires all
financial institutions, including banks and
securities broker-dealers, to establish a risk-
based system of internal controls reasonably
designed to prevent money laundering and the
financing of
terrorism. The BSA includes a variety of record-
keeping and reporting requirements, as well as
due diligence/know-your-customer documentation
requirements. The Firm is also subject to the
regulations and economic sanctions programs
administered by the U.S. Treasury’s Office of
Foreign Assets Control (“OFAC”). In addition,
the EU and the U.K. have adopted various
economic sanctions programs targeted at entities
or individuals that are, or are located in
countries that are, involved in terrorism,
hostilities, embezzlement or human rights
violations.
Anti-Corruption:
The Firm is subject to laws and regulations
relating to corrupt and illegal payments to
government officials and others in the
jurisdictions in which it operates, including
the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and the
U.K. Bribery Act.
Compensation practices:
The Firm’s compensation practices are subject to
oversight by the Federal Reserve, as well as
other agencies. The Federal Reserve has issued
guidance jointly with the FDIC and the OCC that
is designed to ensure that incentive
compensation paid by banking organizations does
not encourage imprudent risk-taking that
threatens the organizations’ safety and
soundness. The Financial Stability Board (“FSB”)
has also established standards covering
compensation principles for banks. The Firm’s
compensation practices are also subject to
regulation and oversight by regulators in other
jurisdictions, notably the EU Fourth Capital
Requirements Directive (“CRD IV”), which
includes compensation-related provisions. The
European Banking Authority has instituted
guidelines on compensation policies which in
certain countries, such as the U.K. and Germany,
are implemented or supplemented by local
regulations or guidelines. The Firm expects that
the implementation of regulatory guidelines
regarding compensation in the U.S. and other
countries will continue to evolve, and may
affect the manner in which the Firm structures
its compensation programs and practices.
Other significant international regulatory
initiatives:
The U.K.’s transition period for its departure
from the EU, which is commonly referred to as
“Brexit,” formally ended on December 31, 2020,
and accordingly, from January 1, 2021, the U.K.
is no longer obligated to implement EU laws.
In preparation for the completion of Brexit,
numerous EU laws and regulations were separately
adopted into U.K. domestic legislation in order
to ensure continuity. However, the U.K. plans to
evaluate the extent to which these EU-legacy
laws and regulations should change going forward
and has already indicated some areas where it
may take a different approach from the EU. For
example, the U.K. announced it will develop a
U.K. settlement discipline regime rather than
adopting the EU’s settlement discipline regime
which will apply in the EU beginning in February
2022. Additionally, the U.K. will not
incorporate into U.K. law the reporting
obligation of the EU’s Securities Financing
Transactions Regulation for non-financial
counterparties, which will apply in the EU
beginning in January 2021. The
 6 
full impact of these differences is not yet
known as further details have not yet been
published.
In the EU, policymakers continue to implement an
extensive and complex program of regulatory
enhancement relating to financial services,
several key elements of which are discussed
below .
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, in July
2020, the European Commission (“EC”) published a
legislative proposal amending the Markets in
Financial Instruments Directive (“MiFID II”) .
MiFID II requires the trading of shares and
certain OTC derivatives to take place on trading
venues, and also significantly enhanced
requirements for pre- and post-trade
transparency, transaction reporting and investor
protection, and introduced a position limits and
reporting regime for commodities. The EC’s
proposal included targeted changes to the MiFID
II framework intended to reduce the compliance
burden on financial services firms as part of
the EC’s broader initiative to assist in the
EU’s economic recovery from the COVID-19
pandemic. The proposed changes include
amendments to the commodity derivatives regime,
investor protection rules and rules relating to
research on small and medium-sized Enterprises.
The proposal is in the final stages of becoming
EU law and is expected to go into effect in
2022.The EC has also begun a review of the
broader MiFID II framework and is expected to
publish a further legislative proposal for
changes to MiFID II in 2021. The U.K. is also
re-evaluating the MiFID II framework and how the
U.K. version of MiFID II will apply going
forward.
The EU capital and liquidity legislation for
banks and investment firms implemented many of
the finalized Basel III capital and liquidity
standards, including in relation to the leverage
ratio, market risk capital, and a net stable
funding ratio. These requirements will begin to
take effect from June 2021. EU legislation also
includes a requirement for certain non-EU banks
operating in the EU to establish an intermediate
parent undertaking (“IPU”) located in the EU.
The IPU rule will allow a second IPU to be
established if a single IPU would conflict with
“home country” bank separation rules or impede
resolvability. The Firm will be required to
establish a legal entity structure that complies
with the EU’s IPU rule. The U.K. Government has
delayed the effective date of the U.K. version
of the EU’s legislation relating to changes in
Basel III requirements until January 1, 2022.
The Basel Committee recently finalized certain
changes to the Basel III framework, including
revisions to the credit risk and operational
risk calculation methods. The Firm’s banking
entities in the U.K. and EU will be required to
comply with these changes when they are
implemented in those jurisdictions.
The Prudential Regulatory Authority (“PRA”) and
European Central Bank (“ECB”) have published
their supervisory expectations applicable to
U.K. and EU banks, respectively, for management
of financial risks arising from climate change.
The supervisory expectations for managing these
risks address bank strategy, risk management,
scenario analysis and disclosure. U.K. banking
entities, including J.P. Morgan Securities plc,
will be expected to align their
practices with PRA expectations by the end of
2021. J.P. Morgan Securities plc is expanding
its risk management framework to comply with PRA
expectations by the end of 2021.
 7 
║ Part I ║
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 1A. Risk Factors.The following discussion sets forth the material risk factors that could │
│ affect JPMorgan Chase’s financial condition and operations. Readers should not consider any │
│ descriptions of these factors to be a complete set of all potential risks that could affect the │
│ Firm. Any of the risk factors discussed below could by itself, or combined with other factors, │
│ materially and adversely affect JPMorgan Chase’s business, results of operations, financial │
│ condition, capital position, liquidity, competitive position or reputation, including by │
│ materially increasing expenses or decreasing revenues, which could result in material losses or │
│ a decrease in earnings.SummaryThe principal risks that could adversely affect JPMorgan Chase’s │
│ business, results of operations, financial condition, capital position, liquidity, competitive │
│ position or reputation include:•Risks related to theCOVID-19 pandemic, including the │
│ significant harm that the pandemic has caused and is causing to the global economy and the │
│ further negative effects that it could have on certain of JPMorgan Chase’s │
│ businesses.•Regulatoryrisks, including the impact that applicable laws, rules and regulations │
│ in the highly-regulated financial services industry, as well as changes to or in the │
│ interpretation of those laws, rules and regulations, can have on JPMorgan Chase’s business and │
│ operations; the ways in which differences in financial services regulation in different │
│ jurisdictions or with respect to certain competitors can disadvantage JPMorgan Chase’s │
│ business; the higher compliance costs and potential for operational restrictions due to │
│ heightened regulatory scrutiny; risks associated with complying with economic sanctions and │
│ anti-corruption and anti-money laundering laws; the ways in which less predictable legal and │
│ regulatory frameworks in certain countries can negatively impact JPMorgan Chase’s operations │
│ and financial results; the losses that security holders will absorb if JPMorgan Chase were to │
│ enter into a resolution; and risks related to the regulatory uncertainties associated with the │
│ U.K.’s departure from the EU.•Politicalrisks, including the potential negative effects on │
│ JPMorgan Chase’s businesses due to economic uncertainty or instability caused by political │
│ developments.•Marketrisks, including the effects that economic and market events and │
│ conditions, governmental policies concerning taxation, regulation and other matters, changes in │
│ interest rates and credit spreads, and market fluctuations can have on JPMorgan Chase’s │
│ consumer and wholesale businesses and its investment and market-making positions.•Creditrisks, │
│ including potential negative effects from adverse changes in the financial condition of │
│ clients, customers, counterparties, custodians and central │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ counterparties; and the potential for credit losses due to declines in the value of collateral │
│ in stressed market conditions or from concentrations of credit and market risk.•Liquidityrisks, │
│ including the risk that JPMorgan Chase’s liquidity could be impaired by market-wide illiquidity │
│ or disruption, unforeseen liquidity or capital requirements, the inability to sell assets, │
│ default by a significant market participant, unanticipated outflows of cash or collateral, or │
│ lack of market or customer confidence in JPMorgan Chase; the dependence of JPMorgan Chase & Co. │
│ on the cash flows of its subsidiaries; the adverse effects that any downgrade in any of │
│ JPMorgan Chase’s credit ratings may have on its liquidity and cost of funding; and potential │
│ negative impacts on JPMorgan Chase’s funding, investments and financial products, as well as │
│ litigation risks, associated with the transition from LIBOR and other benchmark │
│ rates.•Capitalrisks, including the risk that any failure by or inability of JPMorgan Chase to │
│ maintain the required level and composition of capital, or unfavorable changes in the capital │
│ requirements imposed by banking regulators, could limit JPMorgan Chase’s ability to distribute │
│ capital to shareholders or to support its business activities.•Operationalrisks, including │
│ risks associated with JPMorgan Chase’s dependence on its operational systems and the │
│ competence, integrity, health and safety of its employees, as well as the systems and employees │
│ of external parties; the potential negative effects of failing to identify and address │
│ operational risks related to the introduction of or changes to products, services and delivery │
│ platforms; risks from JPMorgan Chase’s exposure to external operational systems; legal and │
│ operational risks related to safeguarding personal information; the harm that could be caused │
│ by a successful cyber attack affecting JPMorgan Chase or by catastrophes or other events; risks │
│ associated with JPMorgan Chase’s risk management framework, its models and estimations and │
│ associated judgments used in its financial statements, and controls over disclosure and │
│ financial reporting or from changes in accounting standards or policies; and potential adverse │
│ effects of failing to comply with heightened regulatory and other standards for the oversight │
│ of vendors and other service providers.•Strategicrisks, including the damage to JPMorgan │
│ Chase’s competitive standing and results that could occur if management fails to develop and │
│ execute effective business strategies; risks associated with the significant and increasing │
│ competition that JPMorgan Chase faces; and the potential adverse impacts of climate change on │
│ JPMorgan Chase’s business operations, clients and customers. │
 8 
• Conduct risks, including the negative impact
that can result from the failure of employees to
conduct themselves in accordance with JPMorgan
Chase’s expectations, policies and practices.
• Reputation risks, including the potential
adverse effects on JPMorgan Chase’s
relationships with its clients, customers,
shareholders, regulators and other stakeholders
that could arise from employee misconduct,
security breaches, inadequate risk management,
compliance or operational failures, litigation
and regulatory investigations, failure to
satisfy expectations concerning social and
environmental concerns or other factors that
could damage JPMorgan Chase’s reputation.
• Country risks, including potential impacts on
JPMorgan Chase’s businesses from an outbreak of
hostilities between countries or within a
country or region; and the potential adverse
effects of local economic, political, regulatory
and social factors on JPMorgan Chase’s business
and revenues in certain countries.
• People risks, including the criticality of
attracting and retaining qualified and diverse
employees; and the potential adverse effects of
unfavorable changes in immigration or travel
policies on JPMorgan Chase’s workforce.
• Legal risks relating to litigation and
regulatory and government investigations.
The above summary is subject in its entirety to
the more complete inventory and discussion of
the risks facing JPMorgan Chase set forth below.
 COVID-19 Pandemic 
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused and is causing
significant harm to the global economy and could
further negatively affect certain of JPMorgan
Chase’s businesses.
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization
declared the outbreak of a strain of novel
coronavirus disease, COVID-19, to be a global
pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic and governmental
responses to the pandemic led to the institution
of social distancing and shelter-in-place
requirements in certain areas of the U.S. and
other countries resulting in ongoing severe
impacts on global economic conditions,
including:
• significant disruption and volatility in the
financial markets
• significant disruption of global supply
chains, and
• closures of many businesses, leading to loss
of revenues and increased unemployment.
A prolongation or worsening of the pandemic, or
the emergence of other diseases that give rise
to similar effects, could deepen the adverse
impact on the global economy.
The adverse economic conditions caused by the
pandemic have had a negative impact on certain
of JPMorgan Chase’s businesses and results of
operations, including:
• reduction in demand for certain products and
services from JPMorgan Chase’s clients and
customers, resulting in lower revenue, and
• increases in the allowance for credit losses.
Certain models used by JPMorgan Chase in
connection with the determination of the
allowance for credit losses have heightened
performance risk in the economic environment
precipitated by the effects of the COVID-19
pandemic and government stimulus. There can be
no assurance that, even after adjustments have
been made to model outputs, JPMorgan Chase will
not recognize unexpected losses arising from the
model uncertainty that has resulted from these
developments.
A prolongation or worsening of the COVID-19
pandemic and the negative economic impacts of
the pandemic could have other significant
adverse effects on JPMorgan Chase’s businesses,
results of operations and financial condition,
including:
• recognition of credit losses and further
increases in the allowance for credit losses,
especially to the extent that businesses remain
closed, unemployment continues at elevated
levels, clients and customers draw on their
lines of credit or significant numbers of people
relocate from metropolitan areas
• material impacts on the value of securities,
derivatives and other financial instruments
which JPMorgan Chase owns or in which it makes
markets
• downgrades in JPMorgan Chase’s credit ratings
• constraints on liquidity or capital due to
elevated levels of deposits, increases in risk-
weighted assets (“RWA”) related to supporting
client activities, downgrades in client credit
ratings, regulatory actions or other factors,
any or all of which could require JPMorgan Chase
to take or refrain from taking actions that it
otherwise would under its liquidity and capital
management strategies, and
• the possibility that significant portions of
JPMorgan Chase’s workforce are unable to work
effectively, including because of illness,
quarantines, shelter-in-place arrangements,
government actions or other restrictions in
connection with the pandemic.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic
negatively affects JPMorgan Chase’s businesses,
results of operations and financial condition,
as well as its regulatory capital and liquidity
ratios, will depend on future developments that
are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted,
including the ultimate scope and duration of the
pandemic, the effectiveness of vaccination
programs and actions taken by governmental
authorities and other third parties in response
to the pandemic. Those negative effects,
including the possible recognition of charge-
offs, may be delayed
 9 
║ Part I ║
because of the impact of prior and potential
future government stimulus actions or payment
assistance provided to clients and customers.
In addition, JPMorgan Chase’s participation
directly or indirectly, including on behalf of
customers and clients or by affiliated entities,
in U.S. government programs designed to support
individuals, households and businesses impacted
by the economic disruptions caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic could be criticized and
subject JPMorgan Chase to:
• increased governmental and regulatory scrutiny
• negative publicity, and
• increased exposure to litigation,
any or all of which could increase JPMorgan
Chase’s operational, legal and compliance costs
and damage its reputation. To the extent that
the COVID-19 pandemic adversely affects JPMorgan
Chase’s business, results of operations and
financial condition, it may also have the effect
of heightening many of the other risks described
below.
 Regulatory 
JPMorgan Chase’s businesses are highly
regulated, and existing, new or changed laws,
rules and regulations that apply to JPMorgan
Chase have a significant impact on its business
and operations.
JPMorgan Chase is a financial services firm with
operations worldwide. JPMorgan Chase must comply
with the laws, rules and regulations that apply
to its operations in all of the jurisdictions
around the world in which it does business.
Regulation of the financial services industry is
extensive.
The regulation and supervision of financial
services firms has expanded significantly over
an extended period of time. The increased
regulation and supervision of JPMorgan Chase has
affected the way that it conducts its business
and structures its operations. JPMorgan Chase
could be required to make further changes to its
business and operations in response to expanded
supervision, new laws, rules and regulations,
and changes to existing laws, rules and
regulations. These changes could result in
JPMorgan Chase incurring additional costs for
complying with laws, rules and regulations and
could reduce its profitability. In response to
new and existing laws, rules and regulations and
expanded supervision, JPMorgan Chase has in the
past been and could in the future be, required
to:
• limit the products and services that it offers
• reduce the liquidity that it can provide
through its market-making activities
• refrain from engaging in business
opportunities that it might otherwise pursue
• pay higher taxes, assessments, levies or other
governmental charges, including in connection
with the resolution of tax examinations
• dispose of certain assets, and do so at times
or prices that are disadvantageous
• impose restrictions on certain business
activities, or
• increase the prices that it charges for
products and services, which could reduce the
demand for them.
In particular, JPMorgan Chase’s businesses and
results of operations could be adversely
impacted by changes in laws, rules and
regulations, or changes in the application,
interpretation or enforcement of laws, rules and
regulations, that:
• proscribe or institute more stringent
restrictions on certain financial services
activities, or
• introduce changes to antitrust or anti-
competition laws, rules and regulations that
adversely affect the business activities of
JPMorgan Chase.
Differences in financial services regulation can
be disadvantageous for JPMorgan Chase’s
business.
The content and application of laws, rules and
regulations affecting financial services firms
sometimes vary according to factors such as the
size of the firm, the jurisdiction in which it
is organized or operates, and other criteria.
For example:
• larger firms such as JPMorgan Chase are often
subject to more stringent supervision and
regulation
• financial technology companies and other non-
traditional competitors may not be subject to
banking regulation, or may be supervised by a
national or state regulatory agency that does
not have the same resources or regulatory
priorities as the regulatory agencies which
supervise more diversified financial services
firms, or
• the financial services regulatory framework in
a particular jurisdiction may favor financial
institutions that are based in that
jurisdiction.
These differences in the regulatory framework
can result in a firm such as JPMorgan Chase
losing market share to competitors that are less
regulated or not subject to regulation,
especially with respect to unregulated financial
products.
There can also be significant differences in the
ways that similar regulatory initiatives
affecting the financial services industry are
implemented in the U.S. and in other countries
and regions in which JPMorgan Chase does
business. For example, when adopting rules that
are intended to implement a global regulatory
standard, a national regulator may introduce
additional or more restrictive requirements,
which can create competitive disadvantages for
financial services firms, such as JPMorgan
Chase, that may be subject to those enhanced
regulations.
Legislative and regulatory initiatives outside
the U.S. could require JPMorgan Chase to make
significant modifications to its operations and
legal entity structure in the relevant
 10 
countries or regions in order to comply with
those requirements. These include laws, rules
and regulations that have been adopted or
proposed relating to:
• the establishment of locally-based
intermediate holding companies or operating
subsidiaries
• requirements to maintain minimum amounts of
capital or liquidity in locally-based
subsidiaries
• the separation (or “ring fencing”) of core
banking products and services from markets
activities
• the resolution of financial institutions
• requirements for executing or settling
transactions on exchanges or through central
counterparties (“CCPs”)
• position limits and reporting rules for
derivatives
• governance and accountability regimes
• conduct of business and control requirements,
and
• restrictions on compensation.
These types of differences in financial services
regulation, or inconsistencies or conflicts
between laws, rules and regulations between
different jurisdictions, have required and could
in the future require JPMorgan Chase to:
• divest assets or restructure its operations
• absorb increased operational, capital and
liquidity costs
• change the prices that it charges for its
products and services
• curtail the products and services that it
offers to its customers and clients, or
• incur higher costs for complying with
different legal and regulatory frameworks.
Any or all of these factors could harm JPMorgan
Chase’s ability to compete against other firms
that are not subject to the same laws, rules and
regulations or supervisory oversight, or harm
JPMorgan Chase’s businesses, results of
operations and profitability.
Heightened regulatory scrutiny of JPMorgan
Chase’s businesses could result in higher
compliance costs and restrictions on its
operations.
JPMorgan Chase’s operations are subject to
heightened oversight and scrutiny from
regulatory authorities in many jurisdictions.
JPMorgan Chase has paid significant fines,
provided other monetary relief, incurred other
penalties and experienced other repercussions in
connection with resolving investigations and
enforcement actions by governmental agencies.
JPMorgan Chase could become subject to similar
regulatory resolutions or other actions in the
future, and addressing the requirements of any
such resolutions or actions could result in
JPMorgan Chase incurring higher operational and
compliance costs or needing to comply with other
restrictions.
In connection with resolving specific regulatory
investigations or enforcement actions, certain
regulators have required JPMorgan Chase and
other financial institutions to admit wrongdoing
with respect to the activities that gave rise to
the resolution. These types of admissions can
lead to:
• greater exposure in litigation
• damage to reputation
• disqualification from doing business with
certain clients or customers, or in specific
jurisdictions, or
• other direct and indirect adverse effects.
Furthermore, U.S. government officials have
demonstrated a willingness to bring criminal
actions against financial institutions and have
required that institutions plead guilty to
criminal offenses or admit other wrongdoing in
connection with resolving regulatory
investigations or enforcement actions.
Resolutions of this type can have significant
collateral consequences for the subject
financial institution, including:
• loss of clients, customers and business
• restrictions on offering certain products or
services, and
• losing permission to operate certain
businesses, either temporarily or permanently.
JPMorgan Chase expects that:
• it and other financial services firms will
continue to be subject to heightened regulatory
scrutiny and governmental investigations and
enforcement actions
• regulators will continue to require that
financial institutions be penalized for actual
or deemed violations of law with formal and
punitive enforcement actions, including the
imposition of significant monetary and other
sanctions, rather than resolving these matters
through informal supervisory actions; and
• regulators will be more likely to pursue
formal enforcement actions and resolutions
against JPMorgan Chase to the extent that it has
previously been subject to other governmental
investigations or enforcement actions.
If JPMorgan Chase fails to meet the requirements
of any resolution of a governmental
investigation or enforcement action, or to
maintain risk and control processes that meet
the heightened standards established by its
regulators, it could be required to:
• enter into further resolutions of
investigations or enforcement actions
• pay additional regulatory fines, penalties or
judgments, or
• accept material regulatory restrictions on, or
changes in the management of, its businesses.
 11 
║ Part I ║
In these circumstances, JPMorgan Chase could
also become subject to other sanctions, or to
prosecution or civil litigation with respect to
the conduct that gave rise to an investigation
or enforcement action.
Complying with economic sanctions and anti-
corruption and anti-money laundering laws, rules
and regulations can increase JPMorgan Chase’s
operational and compliance costs and risks.
JPMorgan Chase must comply with economic
sanctions and embargo programs administered by
the Office of Foreign Assets Control (“OFAC”)
and similar national and multi-national bodies
and governmental agencies outside the U.S., as
well as anti-corruption and anti-money
laundering laws, rules and regulations
throughout the world. JPMorgan Chase can incur
higher costs and face greater compliance risks
in structuring and operating its businesses to
comply with these requirements. Certain
governments have enacted laws, which are
commonly referred to as “blocking laws,” that
are designed to prohibit compliance with some
U.S. sanctions and may raise significant
conflict of laws issues. A violation of a
sanction or embargo program or anti-corruption
or anti-money laundering laws, rules and
regulations, or enforcement of blocking laws,
could subject JPMorgan Chase, and individual
employees, to regulatory enforcement actions as
well as significant civil and criminal
penalties.
JPMorgan Chase’s operations and financial
results can be negatively impacted in countries
with less predictable legal and regulatory
frameworks .
JPMorgan Chase conducts business in certain
countries in which the application of the rule
of law is inconsistent or less predictable,
including with respect to:
• the absence of a statutory or regulatory basis
or guidance for engaging in specific types of
business or transactions
• conflicting or ambiguous laws, rules and
regulations, or the inconsistent application or
interpretation of existing laws, rules and
regulations
• uncertainty concerning the enforceability of
contractual, intellectual property or other
obligations
• difficulty in competing in economies in which
the government controls or protects all or a
portion of the local economy or specific
businesses, or where graft or corruption may be
pervasive, and
• the threat of arbitrary regulatory
investigations, civil litigations or criminal
prosecutions, the termination of licenses
required to operate in the local market or the
suspension of business relationships with
governmental bodies.
If the application of the laws, rules and
regulations in a particular country is
susceptible to producing inconsistent or
unexpected outcomes, this can create a more
difficult environment in which JPMorgan Chase
conducts its business and could negatively
affect JPMorgan Chase’s operations
and reduce its earnings with respect to that
country. For example, conducting business could
require JPMorgan Chase to devote significant
additional resources to understanding, and
monitoring changes in, local laws, rules and
regulations, as well as structuring its
operations to comply with local laws, rules and
regulations and implementing and administering
related internal policies and procedures.
There can be no assurance that JPMorgan Chase
will always be successful in its efforts to
fully understand and to conduct its business in
compliance with the laws, rules and regulations
of all of the jurisdictions in which it
operates, and the risk of non-compliance can be
greater in countries that have less predictable
legal and regulatory systems.
Requirements for the orderly resolution of
JPMorgan Chase could result in JPMorgan Chase
having to restructure or reorganize its
businesses and could increase its funding or
operational costs or curtail its business.
JPMorgan Chase is required under Federal Reserve
and FDIC rules to prepare and submit
periodically to those agencies a detailed plan
for rapid and orderly resolution in bankruptcy,
without extraordinary government support, in the
event of material financial distress or failure.
The agencies’ evaluation of JPMorgan Chase’s
resolution plan may change, and the requirements
for resolution plans may be modified from time
to time. Any such determinations or
modifications could result in JPMorgan Chase
needing to make changes to its legal entity
structure or to certain internal or external
activities, which could increase its funding or
operational costs, or hamper its ability to
serve clients and customers.
If the Federal Reserve and the FDIC were both to
determine that a resolution plan submitted by
JPMorgan Chase has deficiencies, they could
jointly impose more stringent capital, leverage
or liquidity requirements or restrictions on
JPMorgan Chase’s growth, activities or
operations. The agencies could also require that
JPMorgan Chase restructure, reorganize or divest
assets or businesses in ways that could
materially and adversely affect JPMorgan Chase’s
operations and strategy.
Holders of JPMorgan Chase & Co.’s debt and
equity securities will absorb losses if it were
to enter into a resolution.
Federal Reserve rules require that JPMorgan
Chase & Co. (the “Parent Company”) maintain
minimum levels of unsecured external long-term
debt and other loss-absorbing capacity with
specific terms (“eligible LTD”) for purposes of
recapitalizing JPMorgan Chase’s operating
subsidiaries if the Parent Company were to enter
into a resolution either:
• in a bankruptcy proceeding under Chapter 11 of
the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, or
• in a receivership administered by the FDIC
under Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act (“Title
II”).
 12 
If the Parent Company were to enter into a
resolution, holders of eligible LTD and other
debt and equity securities of the Parent Company
will absorb the losses of the Parent Company and
its subsidiaries.
The preferred “single point of entry” strategy
under JPMorgan Chase’s resolution plan
contemplates that only the Parent Company would
enter bankruptcy proceedings. JPMorgan Chase’s
subsidiaries would be recapitalized, as needed,
so that they could continue normal operations or
subsequently be divested or wound down in an
orderly manner. As a result, the Parent
Company’s losses and any losses incurred by its
subsidiaries would be imposed first on holders
of the Parent Company’s equity securities and
thereafter on its unsecured creditors, including
holders of eligible LTD and other debt
securities. Claims of holders of those
securities would have a junior position to the
claims of creditors of JPMorgan Chase’s
subsidiaries and to the claims of priority (as
determined by statute) and secured creditors of
the Parent Company.
Accordingly, in a resolution of the Parent
Company in bankruptcy, holders of eligible LTD
and other debt securities of the Parent Company
would realize value only to the extent available
to the Parent Company as a shareholder of
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and its other
subsidiaries, and only after any claims of
priority and secured creditors of the Parent
Company have been fully repaid.
The FDIC has similarly indicated that a single
point of entry recapitalization model could be a
desirable strategy to resolve a systemically
important financial institution, such as the
Parent Company, under Title II. However, the
FDIC has not formally adopted a single point of
entry resolution strategy.
If the Parent Company were to approach, or enter
into, a resolution, none of the Parent Company,
the Federal Reserve or the FDIC is obligated to
follow JPMorgan Chase’s preferred resolution
strategy, and losses to holders of eligible LTD
and other debt and equity securities of the
Parent Company, under whatever strategy is
ultimately followed, could be greater than they
might have been under JPMorgan Chase’s preferred
strategy.
Regulatory uncertainties associated with the
U.K.’s departure from the EU could negatively
affect JPMorgan Chase’s business, results of
operations and operating model.
The U.K.’s departure from the EU, which is
commonly referred to as “Brexit,” was completed
on December 31, 2020. The Trade and Cooperation
Agreement entered into between the U.K. and the
EU in December 2020 included very limited
provisions relating to the conduct of financial
services activities between the U.K. and the EU.
Accordingly, unless or until the U.K. and the EU
enter into further agreements relating to
financial services, the regulatory environment
for financial services in the aftermath of
Brexit can be expected to:
• significantly limit the ability of U.K.-based
financial services firms to conduct business in
the EU, and vice versa
• prolong uncertainty concerning the levels of
market access for trading venues, which could
result in a reduction or fragmentation of market
liquidity, and
• prolong ongoing uncertainties concerning
optimal business models for firms providing
financial services, especially given that any
changes in the regulation of such services by
the U.K. may not benefit from equivalence
determinations by the EU.
As a result of these limitations and
uncertainties, JPMorgan Chase:
• has made and is continuing to make appropriate
changes to its legal entity structure and
operations in the U.K. and the EU to address the
regulatory environment
• is now maintaining, and expects that it will
be required to sustain, a more fragmented
operating model across its U.K. and EU operating
entities, and
• expects that, due to considerations such as
operating expenses, liquidity, leverage and
capital, this modified European operating
framework will be more complex, less efficient
and more costly than would otherwise have been
the case.
In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic and EU and
U.K. government responses to the pandemic,
including travel restrictions and lock-downs,
have introduced delays and uncertainties into
JPMorgan Chase’s implementation of its plans for
maintaining continuity of service for its
clients.
Any or all of the above factors could have an
adverse effect on the overall operation of the
financial services market across the U.K. and
the EU as well as JPMorgan Chase’s business,
operations and earnings in the U.K., the EU and
globally.
 Political 
Economic uncertainty or instability caused by
political developments can hurt JPMorgan Chase’s
businesses.
The economic environment and market conditions
in which JPMorgan Chase operates continue to be
uncertain due to political developments in the
U.S. and other countries. Certain monetary,
fiscal and other policy initiatives and
proposals could cause a contraction in U.S. and
global economic growth and higher volatility in
the financial markets, including :
• monetary policies and actions taken by the
Federal Reserve and other central banks or
governmental authorities, including any
sustained large-scale asset purchases or any
suspension or reversal of those actions
• fiscal policies, including with respect to
taxation
 13 
║ Part I ║
• actions that governments take or fail to take
in response to the effects of the COVID-19
pandemic, as well as the effectiveness of any
actions taken
• isolationist foreign policies
• the implementation of tariffs and other
protectionist trade policies, or
• political and social pressures with respect to
governmental policies and actions.
These types of political developments, and
uncertainty about the possible outcomes of these
developments, could:
• erode investor confidence in the U.S. economy
and financial markets, which could potentially
undermine the status of the U.S. dollar as a
safe haven currency
• provoke retaliatory countermeasures by other
countries and otherwise heighten tensions in
diplomatic relations
• lead to the withdrawal of government support
for agencies and enterprises such as the U.S.
Federal National Mortgage Association and the
U.S. Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
(together, the “U.S. GSEs”)
• increase concerns about whether the U.S.
government will be funded, and its outstanding
debt serviced, at any particular time
• result in periodic shutdowns of the U.S.
government or governments in other countries,
and
• increase investor reliance on actions by the
Federal Reserve or other central banks, or
investor perceptions concerning government
support of sectors of the economy or the economy
as a whole.
These factors could lead to:
• slower growth rates, rising inflation or
recession
• greater market volatility
• a contraction of available credit and the
widening of credit spreads
• erosion of adequate risk premium on certain
financial assets
• diminished investor and consumer confidence
• lower investment growth
• large-scale sales of government debt and other
debt and equity securities in the U.S. and other
countries
• reduced commercial activity among trading
partners
• the potential for a currency redenomination by
a particular country
• the possible departure of a country from, or
the dissolution of, a political or economic
alliance or treaty
• potential expropriation or nationalization of
assets, or
• other market dislocations, including the
spread of unfavorable economic conditions from a
particular country or region to other countries
or regions.
Any of these potential outcomes could cause
JPMorgan Chase to suffer losses on its market-
making positions or in its investment portfolio,
reduce its liquidity and capital levels, hamper
its ability to deliver products and services to
its clients and customers, and weaken its
results of operations and financial condition.
 Market 
Economic and market events and conditions can
materially affect JPMorgan Chase’s businesses
and investment and market-making positions.
JPMorgan Chase’s results of operations can be
negatively affected by adverse changes in any of
the following:
• investor, consumer and business sentiment
• events that reduce confidence in the financial
markets
• inflation or deflation
• high unemployment or, conversely, a tightening
labor market
• the availability and cost of capital,
liquidity and credit
• levels and volatility of interest rates,
credit spreads and market prices for currencies,
equities and commodities, and the duration of
any changes in levels or volatility
• the economic effects of outbreaks of
hostilities, terrorism or other geopolitical
instabilities, cyber attacks, climate change,
natural disasters, severe weather conditions,
health emergencies, the spread of infectious
diseases or pandemics, and
• the health of the U.S. and global economies.
All of these are affected by global economic,
market and political events and conditions, as
well as regulatory restrictions.
In addition, JPMorgan Chase’s investment
portfolio and market-making businesses can
suffer losses due to unanticipated market
events, including:
• severe declines in asset values
• unexpected credit events
• unforeseen events or conditions that may cause
previously uncorrelated factors to become
correlated (and vice versa)
• the inability to effectively hedge market and
other risks related to market-making and
investment portfolio positions, or
• other market risks that may not have been
appropriately taken into account in the
development, structuring or pricing of a
financial instrument.
 14 
If JPMorgan Chase experiences significant losses
in its investment portfolio or from market-
making activities, this could reduce JPMorgan
Chase’s profitability and its liquidity and
capital levels, and thereby constrain the growth
of its businesses.
JPMorgan Chase’s consumer businesses can be
negatively affected by adverse economic
conditions.
JPMorgan Chase’s consumer businesses are
particularly affected by U.S. and global
economic conditions, including:
• personal and household income distribution
• unemployment or underemployment
• prolonged periods of exceptionally low
interest rates
• housing prices
• consumer and small business confidence levels
• changes in consumer spending or in the level
of consumer debt, and
• the number of personal bankruptcies.
Heightened levels of unemployment or
underemployment that result in reduced personal
and household income could negatively affect
consumer credit performance to the extent that
consumers are less able to service their debts.
In addition, sustained low growth, low or
negative interest rates, inflationary pressures
or recessionary conditions could diminish
customer demand for the products and services
offered by JPMorgan Chase’s consumer businesses.
Adverse economic conditions could also lead to
an increase in delinquencies, additions to the
allowance for credit losses and higher net
charge-offs, which can reduce JPMorgan Chase’s
earnings. These consequences could be
significantly worse in certain geographies and
industry segments where economic restrictions
and shutdowns have occurred related to the
COVID-19 pandemic, declining industrial or
manufacturing activity that has resulted in or
could result in higher levels of unemployment,
or where high levels of consumer debt, such as
outstanding student loans, could impair the
ability of customers to pay their other consumer
loan obligations.
JPMorgan Chase’s earnings from its consumer
businesses could also be adversely affected by
governmental policies and actions that affect
consumers, including:
• policies and initiatives relating to medical
insurance, education, immigration, employment
status and housing, and
• policies aimed at the economy more broadly,
such as higher taxes and increased regulation
which could result in reductions in consumer
disposable income.
In addition, governmental proposals to permit
student loan obligations to be discharged in
bankruptcy proceedings could, if enacted into
law, encourage certain of JPMorgan Chase’s
customers to declare personal bankruptcy and
thereby trigger defaults and charge-offs of
credit card and other consumer loans extended to
those customers.
Unfavorable market and economic conditions can
have an adverse effect on JPMorgan Chase’s
wholesale businesses.
In JPMorgan Chase’s wholesale businesses, market
and economic factors can affect the volume of
transactions that JPMorgan Chase executes for
its clients or for which it advises clients,
and, therefore, the revenue that JPMorgan Chase
receives from those transactions. These factors
can also influence the willingness of other
financial institutions and investors to
participate in capital markets transactions that
JPMorgan Chase manages, such as loan
syndications or securities underwritings.
Furthermore, if a significant and sustained
deterioration in market conditions were to
occur, the profitability of JPMorgan Chase’s
capital markets businesses, including its loan
syndication, securities underwriting and
leveraged lending activities, could be reduced
to the extent that those businesses:
• earn less fee revenue due to lower transaction
volumes, including when clients are unwilling or
unable to refinance their outstanding debt
obligations in unfavorable market conditions, or
• dispose of portions of credit commitments at a
loss, or hold larger residual positions in
credit commitments that cannot be sold at
favorable prices.
An adverse change in market conditions in
particular segments of the economy, such as a
sudden and severe downturn in oil and gas prices
or an increase in commodity prices, could have a
material adverse effect on clients of JPMorgan
Chase whose operations or financial condition
are directly or indirectly dependent on the
health or stability of those market segments, as
well as clients that are engaged in related
businesses. JPMorgan Chase could incur losses on
its loans and other credit commitments to
clients that operate in, or are dependent on,
any sector of the economy that is under stress.
The fees that JPMorgan Chase earns from managing
client assets or holding assets under custody
for clients could be diminished by declining
asset values or other adverse macroeconomic
conditions. For example, higher interest rates
or a downturn in financial markets could affect
the valuations of client assets that JPMorgan
Chase manages or holds under custody, which, in
turn, could affect JPMorgan Chase’s revenue from
fees that are based on the amount of assets
under management or custody. Similarly, adverse
macroeconomic or market conditions could prompt
outflows from JPMorgan Chase funds or accounts,
or cause clients to invest in products that
generate lower revenue. Substantial and
unexpected withdrawals from a JPMorgan Chase
fund can also hamper the investment performance
of the fund, particularly if the outflows create
the need for the fund to dispose of fund assets
at disadvantageous times or prices, and could
lead to further withdrawals based on the weaker
investment performance.
 15 
║ Part I ║
An economic downturn that results in lower
consumer and business spending could also have a
negative impact on certain of JPMorgan Chase’s
wholesale clients, and thereby diminish JPMorgan
Chase’s earnings from its wholesale operations.
For example, the businesses of certain of
JPMorgan Chase’s wholesale clients are dependent
on consistent streams of rental income from
commercial real estate properties which are
owned or being built by those clients. Severe
and sustained adverse economic conditions,
including higher unemployment caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic and governmental actions taken
in response to the pandemic, could result in
reductions in the rental cash flows that owners
or developers receive from their tenants which,
in turn, could depress the values of the
properties and impair the ability of borrowers
to service or refinance their commercial real
estate loans. These consequences could result in
JPMorgan Chase experiencing higher
delinquencies, defaults and write-offs within
its commercial real estate loan portfolio and
incurring higher costs for servicing a larger
volume of delinquent loans in that portfolio,
thereby reducing JPMorgan Chase’s earnings from
its wholesale businesses.
Changes in interest rates and credit spreads can
adversely affect certain of JPMorgan Chase’s
revenue and income streams related to the Firm’s
traditional banking and funding activities.
In general, a low or negative interest rate
environment may cause:
• net interest margins to be compressed, which
could reduce the amounts that JPMorgan Chase
earns on its investment securities portfolio to
the extent that it is unable to reinvest
contemporaneously in higher-yielding instruments
• unanticipated or adverse changes in depositor
behavior, which could negatively affect JPMorgan
Chase’s broader asset and liability management
strategy
• JPMorgan Chase to reduce the amount of
deposits that it accepts from customers and
clients, which could result in lower revenues,
and
• a reduction in the value of JPMorgan Chase’s
mortgage servicing rights (“MSRs”) asset,
thereby decreasing revenues.
When credit spreads widen, it becomes more
expensive for JPMorgan Chase to borrow. JPMorgan
Chase’s credit spreads may widen or narrow not
only in response to events and circumstances
that are specific to JPMorgan Chase but also as
a result of general economic and geopolitical
events and conditions. Changes in JPMorgan
Chase’s credit spreads will affect, positively
or negatively, JPMorgan Chase’s earnings on
certain liabilities, such as derivatives, that
are recorded at fair value.
When interest rates are increasing, JPMorgan
Chase can generally be expected to earn higher
net interest income. However, higher interest
rates can also lead to:
• fewer originations of commercial and
residential real estate loans
• losses on underwriting exposures
• the loss of deposits, including in the event
that JPMorgan Chase makes incorrect assumptions
about depositor behavior
• lower net interest income if central banks
introduce interest rate increases more quickly
than anticipated and this results in a
misalignment in the pricing of short-term and
long-term borrowings
• less liquidity in the financial markets, and
• higher funding costs.
All of these outcomes could adversely affect
JPMorgan Chase’s revenues and its liquidity and
capital levels. Higher interest rates can also
negatively affect the payment performance on
loans within JPMorgan Chase’s consumer and
wholesale loan portfolios that are linked to
variable interest rates. If borrowers of
variable rate loans are unable to afford higher
interest payments, those borrowers may reduce or
stop making payments, thereby causing JPMorgan
Chase to incur losses and increased operational
costs related to servicing a higher volume of
delinquent loans.
JPMorgan Chase’s results may be materially
affected by market fluctuations and significant
changes in the value of financial instruments.
The value of securities, derivatives and other
financial instruments which JPMorgan Chase owns
or in which it makes markets can be materially
affected by market fluctuations. Market
volatility, illiquid market conditions and other
disruptions in the financial markets may make it
extremely difficult to value certain financial
instruments. Subsequent valuations of financial
instruments in future periods, in light of
factors then prevailing, may result in
significant changes in the value of these
instruments. In addition, at the time of any
disposition of these financial instruments, the
price that JPMorgan Chase ultimately realizes
will depend on the demand and liquidity in the
market at that time and may be materially lower
than their current fair value. Any of these
factors could cause a decline in the value of
JPMorgan Chase’s financial instruments which may
have an adverse effect on JPMorgan Chase’s
results of operations.
JPMorgan Chase’s risk management and monitoring
processes, including its stress testing
framework, seek to quantify and control JPMorgan
Chase’s exposure to more extreme market moves.
However, JPMorgan Chase’s hedging and other risk
management strategies may not be effective, and
it could incur significant losses, if extreme
market events were to occur.
 16 
 Credit 
JPMorgan Chase can be negatively affected by
adverse changes in the financial condition of
clients, counterparties, custodians and CCPs.
JPMorgan Chase routinely executes transactions
with clients and counterparties such as
corporations, financial institutions, asset
managers, hedge funds, exchanges and government
entities within and outside the U.S. Many of
these transactions expose JPMorgan Chase to the
credit risk of its clients and counterparties,
and can involve JPMorgan Chase in disputes and
litigation if a client or counterparty defaults.
JPMorgan Chase can also be subject to losses or
liability where a financial institution that it
has appointed to provide custodial services for
client assets or funds becomes insolvent as a
result of fraud or the failure to abide by
existing laws and obligations, including under
the EU Alternative Investment Fund Managers
Directive.
A default by, or the financial or operational
failure of, a CCP through which JPMorgan Chase
executes contracts would require JPMorgan Chase
to replace those contracts, thereby increasing
its operational costs and potentially resulting
in losses. JPMorgan Chase can also be exposed to
losses if a member of a CCP in which JPMorgan
Chase is also a member defaults on its
obligations to the CCP because of requirements
that each member of the CCP absorb a portion of
those losses. As part of its clearing services
activities, JPMorgan Chase is also exposed to
the risk of nonperformance by its clients, which
it seeks to mitigate by requiring clients to
provide adequate collateral. JPMorgan Chase is
also exposed to intra-day credit risk of its
clients in connection with providing cash
management, clearing, custodial and other
transaction services to those clients. If a
client for which JPMorgan Chase provides these
services becomes bankrupt or insolvent, JPMorgan
Chase may incur losses, become involved in
disputes and litigation with one or more CCPs,
the client’s bankruptcy estate and other
creditors, or be subject to regulatory
investigations. All of the foregoing events can
increase JPMorgan Chase’s operational and
litigation costs, and JPMorgan Chase may suffer
losses to the extent that any collateral that it
has received is insufficient to cover those
losses. JPMorgan Chase can also be subject to
bearing its share of non-default losses incurred
by a CCP, including losses from custodial,
settlement or investment activities or due to
cyber or other security breaches.
Transactions with government entities, including
national, state, provincial, municipal and local
authorities, can expose JPMorgan Chase to
enhanced sovereign, credit, operational and
reputation risks. Government entities may, among
other things, claim that actions taken by
government officials were beyond the legal
authority of those officials or repudiate
transactions authorized by a previous incumbent
government. These types of actions have in the
past caused, and could in the future cause,
JPMorgan Chase to suffer losses or hamper its
ability to conduct business in the relevant
jurisdiction.
In addition, local laws, rules and regulations
could limit JPMorgan Chase’s ability to resolve
disputes and litigation in the event of a
counterparty default or unwillingness to make
previously agreed-upon payments, which could
subject JPMorgan Chase to losses.
Disputes may arise with counterparties to
derivatives contracts with regard to the terms,
the settlement procedures or the value of
underlying collateral. The disposition of those
disputes could cause JPMorgan Chase to incur
unexpected transaction, operational and legal
costs, or result in credit losses. These
consequences can also impair JPMorgan Chase’s
ability to effectively manage its credit risk
exposure from its market activities, or cause
harm to JPMorgan Chase’s reputation.
The financial or operational failure of a
significant market participant, such as a major
financial institution or a CCP, or concerns
about the creditworthiness of such a market
participant, can have a cascading effect within
the financial markets. JPMorgan Chase’s
businesses could be significantly disrupted by
such an event, particularly if it leads to other
market participants incurring significant
losses, experiencing liquidity issues or
defaulting, and JPMorgan Chase is likely to have
significant interrelationships with, and credit
exposure to, such a significant market
participant.
JPMorgan Chase may suffer losses if the value of
collateral declines in stressed market
conditions.
During periods of market stress or illiquidity,
JPMorgan Chase’s credit risk may be further
increased when:
• JPMorgan Chase cannot realize the fair value
of the collateral it holds
• collateral is liquidated at prices that are
not sufficient to recover the full amount owed
to it, or
• counterparties are unable to post collateral,
whether for operational or other reasons.
Furthermore, disputes with counterparties
concerning the valuation of collateral may
increase in times of significant market stress,
volatility or illiquidity, and JPMorgan Chase
could suffer losses during these periods if it
is unable to realize the fair value of
collateral or to manage declines in the value of
collateral.
JPMorgan Chase could incur significant losses
arising from concentrations of credit and market
risk.
JPMorgan Chase is exposed to greater credit and
market risk to the extent that groupings of its
clients or counterparties:
• engage in similar or related businesses, or in
businesses in related industries
• do business in the same geographic region, or
• have business profiles, models or strategies
that could cause their ability to meet their
obligations to be similarly affected by changes
in economic conditions.
 17 
║ Part I ║
For example, a significant deterioration in the
credit quality of one of JPMorgan Chase’s
borrowers or counterparties could lead to
concerns about the creditworthiness of other
borrowers or counterparties in similar, related
or dependent industries. This type of
interrelationship could exacerbate JPMorgan
Chase’s credit, liquidity and market risk
exposure and potentially cause it to incur
losses, including fair value losses in its
market-making businesses and investment
portfolios. In addition, JPMorgan Chase may be
required to recognize higher allowances for
credit losses with respect to certain clients or
industries in order to align with directives or
expectations of its banking regulators.
Similarly, challenging economic conditions that
affect a particular industry or geographic area
could lead to concerns about the credit quality
of JPMorgan Chase’s borrowers or counterparties
not only in that particular industry or
geography but in related or dependent
industries, wherever located. These conditions
could also heighten concerns about the ability
of customers of JPMorgan Chase’s consumer
businesses who live in those areas or work in
those affected industries or related or
dependent industries to meet their obligations
to JPMorgan Chase. JPMorgan Chase regularly
monitors various segments of its credit and
market risk exposures to assess the potential
risks of concentration or contagion, but its
efforts to diversify or hedge its exposures
against those risks may not be successful.
JPMorgan Chase’s consumer businesses can also be
harmed by an excessive expansion of consumer
credit by bank or non-bank competitors.
Heightened competition for certain types of
consumer loans could prompt industry-wide
reactions such as significant reductions in the
pricing or margins of those loans or the making
of loans to less-creditworthy borrowers. If
large numbers of consumers subsequently default
on their loans, whether due to weak credit
profiles, an economic downturn or other factors,
this could impair their ability to repay
obligations owed to JPMorgan Chase and result in
higher charge-offs and other credit-related
losses. More broadly, widespread defaults on
consumer debt could lead to recessionary
conditions in the U.S. economy, and JPMorgan
Chase’s consumer businesses may earn lower
revenues in such an environment.
If JPMorgan Chase is unable to reduce positions
effectively during a market dislocation, this
can increase both the market and credit risks
associated with those positions and the level of
RWA that JPMorgan Chase holds on its balance
sheet. These factors could adversely affect
JPMorgan Chase’s capital position, funding costs
and the profitability of its businesses.
 Liquidity 
JPMorgan Chase’s ability to operate its
businesses could be impaired if its liquidity is
constrained.
JPMorgan Chase’s liquidity could be impaired at
any given time by factors such as:
• market-wide illiquidity or disruption
• unforeseen liquidity or capital requirements,
including as a result of changes in laws, rules
and regulations
• inability to sell assets, or to sell assets at
favorable times or prices
• default by a CCP or other significant market
participant
• unanticipated outflows of cash or collateral
• unexpected loss of consumer deposits, and
• lack of market or customer confidence in
JPMorgan Chase or financial institutions in
general.
A reduction in JPMorgan Chase’s liquidity may be
caused by events over which it has little or no
control. For example, during periods of market
stress, low investor confidence and significant
market illiquidity could result in higher
funding costs for JPMorgan Chase and could limit
its access to some of its traditional sources of
liquidity.
JPMorgan Chase may need to raise funding from
alternative sources if its access to stable and
lower-cost sources of funding, such as deposits
and borrowings from Federal Home Loan Banks, is
reduced. Alternative sources of funding could be
more expensive or limited in availability.
JPMorgan Chase’s funding costs could also be
negatively affected by actions that JPMorgan
Chase may take in order to:
• satisfy applicable liquidity coverage ratio
and net stable funding ratio requirements
• address obligations under its resolution plan,
or
• satisfy regulatory requirements in
jurisdictions outside the U.S. relating to the
pre-positioning of liquidity in subsidiaries
that are material legal entities.
More generally, if JPMorgan Chase fails to
effectively manage its liquidity, this could
constrain its ability to fund or invest in its
businesses and subsidiaries (including, in
particular, its broker-dealer subsidiaries), and
thereby adversely affect its results of
operations.
JPMorgan Chase & Co. is a holding company and
depends on the cash flows of its subsidiaries to
make payments on its outstanding securities.
JPMorgan Chase & Co. is a holding company that
holds the stock of JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and
an intermediate holding company, JPMorgan Chase
Holdings LLC (the “IHC”). The IHC in turn holds
the stock of substantially all of JPMorgan
Chase’s subsidiaries other than JPMorgan Chase
Bank, N.A. and its subsidiaries. The IHC also
owns other assets and owes intercompany
indebtedness to the holding company.
The holding company is obligated to contribute
to the IHC substantially all the net proceeds
received from securities issuances (including
issuances of senior and subordinated debt
securities and of preferred and common stock).
The ability of JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and the
IHC to make payments to the holding company is
also limited. JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. is
subject to restrictions
 18 
on its dividend distributions, as well as
capital adequacy requirements, such as the
Supplementary Leverage Ratio (“SLR”), and
liquidity requirements and other regulatory
restrictions on its ability to make payments to
the holding company. The IHC is prohibited from
paying dividends or extending credit to the
holding company if certain capital or liquidity
thresholds are breached or if limits are
otherwise imposed by JPMorgan Chase’s management
or Board of Directors.
As a result of these arrangements, the ability
of the holding company to make various payments
is dependent on its receiving dividends from
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and dividends and
extensions of credit from the IHC. These
limitations could affect the holding company’s
ability to:
• pay interest on its debt securities
• pay dividends on its equity securities
• redeem or repurchase outstanding securities,
and
• fulfill its other payment obligations.
These regulatory restrictions and limitations
could also result in the holding company seeking
protection under bankruptcy laws at a time
earlier than would have been the case absent the
existence of the capital and liquidity
thresholds to which the IHC is subject.
Reductions in JPMorgan Chase’s credit ratings
may adversely affect its liquidity and cost of
funding.
JPMorgan Chase & Co. and certain of its
principal subsidiaries are rated by credit
rating agencies. Rating agencies evaluate both
general and firm-specific and industry-specific
factors when determining credit ratings for a
particular financial institution, including:
• expected future profitability
• risk management practices
• legal expenses
• ratings differentials between bank holding
companies and their bank and non-bank
subsidiaries
• regulatory developments
• assumptions about government support, and
• economic and geopolitical trends.
JPMorgan Chase closely monitors and manages, to
the extent that it is able, factors that could
influence its credit ratings. However, there is
no assurance that JPMorgan Chase’s credit
ratings will not be lowered in the future.
Furthermore, any such downgrade could occur at
times of broader market instability when
JPMorgan Chase’s options for responding to
events may be more limited and general investor
confidence is low.
A reduction in JPMorgan Chase’s credit ratings
could curtail JPMorgan Chase’s business
activities and reduce its profitability in a
number of ways, including:
• reducing its access to capital markets
• materially increasing its cost of issuing and
servicing securities
• triggering additional collateral or funding
requirements, and
• decreasing the number of investors and
counterparties that are willing or permitted to
do business with or lend to JPMorgan Chase.
Any rating reduction could also increase the
credit spreads charged by the market for taking
credit risk on JPMorgan Chase & Co. and its
subsidiaries. This could, in turn, adversely
affect the value of debt and other obligations
of JPMorgan Chase & Co. and its subsidiaries.
The reform and replacement of benchmark rates
could adversely affect JPMorgan Chase’s funding,
investments and financial products, and expose
it to litigation and other disputes.
Interest rate, equity, foreign exchange rate and
other types of indices which are deemed to be
“benchmarks,” including those in widespread and
longstanding use, have been the subject of
ongoing international, national and other
regulatory scrutiny and initiatives and
proposals for reform. Some of these reforms are
already effective while others are still to be
implemented or are under consideration. These
reforms may cause certain benchmarks to perform
differently than in the past, or to disappear
entirely, or have other consequences which
cannot be fully anticipated.
Any of the benchmark reforms which have been
proposed or implemented, or the general
increased regulatory scrutiny of benchmarks,
could also increase the costs and risks of
administering or otherwise participating in the
setting of benchmarks and complying with
regulations or requirements relating to
benchmarks. Such factors may have the effect of
discouraging market participants from continuing
to administer or contribute to certain
benchmarks, trigger changes in the rules or
methodologies used in certain benchmarks or lead
to the disappearance of certain benchmarks.
Any of these developments, and any future
initiatives to regulate, reform or change the
administration of benchmarks, could result in
adverse consequences to the return on, value of
and market for loans, mortgages, securities,
derivatives and other financial instruments
whose returns are linked to any such benchmark,
including those issued, funded, serviced or held
by JPMorgan Chase.
Various regulators, industry bodies and other
market participants in the U.S. and other
countries are engaged in initiatives to develop,
introduce and encourage the use of alternative
rates to replace certain benchmarks. There is no
assurance that these new rates will be accepted
or widely used by market participants, or that
the characteristics of any of these new rates
will be similar to, or produce the economic
equivalent of, the benchmarks that they seek to
replace. If a particular benchmark were to be
discontinued and an alternative rate has not
been successfully introduced to replace that
benchmark, this could result in widespread
 19 
║ Part I ║
dislocation in the financial markets, engender
volatility in the pricing of securities,
derivatives and other instruments, and suppress
capital markets activities, all of which could
have adverse effects on JPMorgan Chase’s results
of operations.
To the extent that any guidance provided by
accounting standard setters concerning the
transition from benchmark rates is not
comprehensive, fails to provide the expected
relief or the ability to elect or implement that
guidance is constrained in any significant
respect, the transition could:
• affect hedge accounting relationships between
financial instruments linked to a particular
benchmark and any related derivatives, which
could adversely affect JPMorgan Chase’s results
of operations, or
• increase JPMorgan Chase’s operational costs
with respect to the determination of whether the
transition has resulted in the modification or
extinguishment of specific contracts for
accounting purposes.
ICE Benchmark Administration, the administrator
of LIBOR, has announced that it will consult on
its intention to:
• cease publication of (i) all tenors of the
euro, sterling, Swiss franc and yen LIBORs and
(ii) the one week and two month tenors of U.S.
dollar LIBOR, in each case, after December 31,
2021, and
• cease publication of all remaining tenors of
U.S. dollar LIBOR after June 30, 2023.
These announcements indicate that it is highly
likely that various tenors of the LIBOR
benchmark will be discontinued on or about the
timeframes mentioned above. Vast amounts of
loans, mortgages, securities, derivatives and
other financial instruments are linked to the
LIBOR benchmark, and any inability of market
participants and regulators to successfully
introduce benchmark rates to replace LIBOR and
implement effective transitional arrangements to
address the discontinuation of LIBOR could
result in disruption in the financial markets
and suppress capital markets activities, all of
which could have a negative impact on JPMorgan
Chase’s results of operations and on LIBOR-
linked securities, credit or other instruments
which are issued, funded, serviced or held by
JPMorgan Chase.
JPMorgan Chase could also become involved in
litigation and other types of disputes with
clients, customers, counterparties and investors
as a consequence of the transition from LIBOR
and other benchmark rates to replacement rates,
including claims that JPMorgan Chase has:
• treated clients, customers, counterparties or
investors unfairly, or caused them to experience
losses, higher financing costs or lower returns
on investments
• failed to appropriately communicate the
effects of the transition from benchmark rates
on the products that JPMorgan Chase has sold to
its clients and customers, or failed to disclose
purported conflicts of interest
• made inappropriate product recommendations to
or investments on behalf of its clients, or sold
products that did not serve their intended
purpose, in connection with the transition from
benchmark rates
• engaged in anti-competitive behavior, or in
the manipulation of markets or specific
benchmarks, in connection with the
discontinuation of or transition from benchmark
rates, or
• disadvantaged clients, customers,
counterparties or investors when interpreting or
making determinations under the terms of
agreements or financial instruments.
These types of claims could subject JPMorgan
Chase to higher legal expenses and operational
costs, require it to pay significant amounts in
connection with resolving litigation and other
disputes, and harm its reputation.
 Capital 
Maintaining the required level and composition
of capital may impact JPMorgan Chase’s ability
to support business activities, meet evolving
regulatory requirements and distribute capital
to shareholders.
JPMorgan Chase is subject to various regulatory
capital requirements, including leverage- and
risk-based capital requirements, that can change
due to actions by banking regulators. JPMorgan
Chase’s adherence to these requirements can also
evolve dynamically in response to changes in the
composition of its balance sheet or other
factors. It is possible that these changing
requirements, including meeting or exceeding
various capital ratio thresholds, could limit
JPMorgan Chase’s ability to support its
businesses and make capital distributions to its
shareholders.
Actions by the Federal Reserve and the U.S.
government in response to the economic effects
of the COVID-19 pandemic have led to an
expansion of the Federal Reserve's balance
sheet, growth in deposit balances held by
JPMorgan Chase and other U.S. financial
institutions and, consequently, an increase in
JPMorgan Chase's leverage exposure. If these
trends were to continue, JPMorgan Chase may be
required to hold more capital or take other
actions in order to satisfy the leverage-based
capital requirements applicable to it.
JPMorgan Chase is required to submit, at least
annually, a capital plan describing proposed
dividend payments to shareholders, redemptions
and repurchases of its outstanding securities
and other capital actions that it intends to
take. JPMorgan Chase considers various factors
in managing capital, including the impact of
stress on its capital levels, as determined by
both internal modeling and the Federal Reserve’s
modeling of JPMorgan Chase’s capital position in
supervisory stress tests. Because the Federal
Reserve and JPMorgan Chase use different
forecasting models and methodologies when
determining stress test results, there can be
significant differences between the estimates of
stress loss as determined by the Federal Reserve
and JPMorgan Chase, respectively. The Federal
 20 
Reserve may require modifications to JPMorgan
Chase’s capital plan, and may change the Stress
Capital Buffer (“SCB”) applicable to JPMorgan
Chase, from time to time.
Any failure by or inability of JPMorgan Chase to
maintain the required level and composition of
capital, or unfavorable changes in the capital
requirements imposed by banking regulators,
could have an adverse impact on JPMorgan Chase’s
shareholders, such as:
• reducing the amount of common stock that
JPMorgan Chase is permitted to repurchase
• requiring the issuance of, or prohibiting the
redemption of, capital instruments in a manner
inconsistent with JPMorgan Chase’s capital
management strategy
• constraining the amount of dividends that may
be paid on common stock, or
• curtailing JPMorgan Chase’s business
activities or operations.
 Operational 
JPMorgan Chase’s businesses are dependent on the
effectiveness of its operational systems and
those of other market participants.
JPMorgan Chase’s businesses rely on the ability
of JPMorgan Chase’s financial, accounting,
transaction execution, data processing and other
operational systems to process, record, monitor
and report a large number of transactions on a
continuous basis, and to do so accurately,
quickly and securely. In addition to proper
design, installation, maintenance and training,
the effective functioning of JPMorgan Chase’s
operational systems depends on:
• the quality of the information contained in
those systems, as inaccurate, outdated or
corrupted data can significantly compromise the
functionality or reliability of a particular
system and other systems to which it transmits
or from which it receives information, and
• JPMorgan Chase’s ability to appropriately
maintain and upgrade its systems on a regular
basis, and to ensure that any changes introduced
to its systems are managed carefully to ensure
security and operational continuity and adhere
to all applicable legal and regulatory
requirements.
JPMorgan Chase also depends on its ability to
access and use the operational systems of its
vendors, custodians and other market
participants, including clearing and payment
systems, CCPs, securities exchanges and data
processing, security and technology companies.
The ineffectiveness, failure or other disruption
of operational systems upon which JPMorgan Chase
depends, including due to a systems malfunction,
cyberbreach or other systems failure, could
result in unfavorable ripple effects in the
financial markets and for JPMorgan Chase and its
clients and customers, including:
• delays or other disruptions in providing
information, services and liquidity to clients
and customers
• the inability to settle transactions or obtain
access to funds and other assets, including
those for which physical settlement and delivery
is required
• failure to timely settle or confirm
transactions
• the possibility that funds transfers, capital
markets trades or other transactions are
executed erroneously, as a result of illegal
conduct or with unintended consequences
• financial losses, including due to loss-
sharing requirements of CCPs, payment systems or
other market infrastructures, or as possible
restitution to clients and customers
• higher operational costs associated with
replacing services provided by a system that is
unavailable
• client or customer dissatisfaction with
JPMorgan Chase’s products and services
• regulatory fines, penalties, or other
sanctions against JPMorgan Chase
• loss of confidence in the ability of JPMorgan
Chase, or financial institutions generally, to
protect against and withstand operational
disruptions, or
• harm to JPMorgan Chase’s reputation.
As the speed, frequency, volume,
interconnectivity and complexity of transactions
continue to increase, it can become more
challenging to effectively maintain and upgrade
JPMorgan Chase’s operational systems and
infrastructure, especially due to the heightened
risks that:
• attempts by third parties to defraud JPMorgan
Chase or its clients and customers may increase,
evolve or become more complex, particularly
during periods of market disruption or economic
uncertainty
• errors made by JPMorgan Chase or another
market participant, whether inadvertent or
malicious, cause widespread system disruption
• isolated or seemingly insignificant errors in
operational systems compound, or migrate to
other systems over time, to become larger issues
• failures in synchronization or encryption
software, or degraded performance of
microprocessors due to design flaws, could cause
disruptions in operational systems, or the
inability of systems to communicate with each
other, and
• third parties may attempt to block the use of
key technology solutions by claiming that the
use infringes on their intellectual property
rights.
If JPMorgan Chase’s operational systems, or
those of external parties on which JPMorgan
Chase’s businesses depend, are unable to meet
the requirements of JPMorgan Chase’s businesses
and operations or bank regulatory
 21 
║ Part I ║
standards, or if they fail or have other
significant shortcomings, JPMorgan Chase could
be materially and adversely affected.
A successful cyber attack affecting JPMorgan
Chase could cause significant harm to JPMorgan
Chase and its clients and customers.
JPMorgan Chase experiences numerous attempted
cyber attacks on its computer systems, software,
networks and other technology assets on a daily
basis from various actors, including groups
acting on behalf of hostile countries, cyber-
criminals, “hacktivists” (i.e., individuals or
groups that use technology to promote a
political agenda or social change) and others.
These cyber attacks can take many forms,
including attempts to introduce computer viruses
or malicious code, which is commonly referred to
as “malware,” into JPMorgan Chase’s systems.
These attacks are typically designed to:
• obtain unauthorized access to confidential
information belonging to JPMorgan Chase or its
clients, customers, counterparties or employees
• manipulate data
• destroy data or systems with the aim of
rendering services unavailable
• disrupt, sabotage or degrade service on
JPMorgan Chase’s systems
• steal money, or
• extort money through the use of so-called
“ransomware.”
JPMorgan Chase has also experienced significant
distributed denial-of-service attacks which are
intended to disrupt online banking services.
JPMorgan Chase has experienced security breaches
due to cyber attacks in the past, and it is
inevitable that additional breaches will occur
in the future. Any such breach could result in
serious and harmful consequences for JPMorgan
Chase or its clients and customers.
A principal reason that JPMorgan Chase cannot
provide absolute security against cyber attacks
is that it may not always be possible to
anticipate, detect or recognize threats to
JPMorgan Chase’s systems, or to implement
effective preventive measures against all
breaches. This is because:
• the techniques used in cyber attacks change
frequently and are increasingly sophisticated,
and therefore may not be recognized until
launched
• cyber attacks can originate from a wide
variety of sources, including JPMorgan Chase’s
own employees, cyber-criminals, hacktivists,
groups linked to terrorist organizations or
hostile countries, or third parties whose
objective is to disrupt the operations of
financial institutions more generally
• JPMorgan Chase does not have control over the
cybersecurity of the systems of the large number
of
clients, customers, counterparties and third-
party service providers with which it does
business, and
• it is possible that a third party, after
establishing a foothold on an internal network
without being detected, might obtain access to
other networks and systems.
The risk of a security breach due to a cyber
attack could increase in the future as JPMorgan
Chase continues to expand its mobile banking and
other internet-based product offerings and its
internal use of internet-based products and
applications. Furthermore, increased use of
remote access and third party video conferencing
solutions during the COVID-19 pandemic, to
facilitate work-from-home arrangements for
employees, could increase JPMorgan Chase’s
exposure to cyber attacks. In addition, a third
party could misappropriate confidential
information obtained by intercepting signals or
communications from mobile devices used by
JPMorgan Chase’s employees.
A successful penetration or circumvention of the
security of JPMorgan Chase’s systems or the
systems of a vendor, governmental body or
another market participant could cause serious
negative consequences, including:
• significant disruption of JPMorgan Chase’s
operations and those of its clients, customers
and counterparties, including losing access to
operational systems
• misappropriation of confidential information
of JPMorgan Chase or that of its clients,
customers, counterparties, employees or
regulators
• disruption of or damage to JPMorgan Chase’s
systems and those of its clients, customers and
counterparties
• the inability, or extended delays in the
ability, to fully recover and restore data that
has been stolen, manipulated or destroyed, or
the inability to prevent systems from processing
fraudulent transactions
• violations by JPMorgan Chase of applicable
privacy and other laws
• financial loss to JPMorgan Chase or to its
clients, customers, counterparties or employees
• loss of confidence in JPMorgan Chase’s
cybersecurity and business resiliency measures
• dissatisfaction among JPMorgan Chase’s
clients, customers or counterparties
• significant exposure to litigation and
regulatory fines, penalties or other sanctions,
and
• harm to JPMorgan Chase’s reputation.
The extent of a particular cyber attack and the
steps that JPMorgan Chase may need to take to
investigate the attack may not be immediately
clear, and it may take a significant amount of
time before such an investigation can be
completed. While such an investigation is
ongoing, JPMorgan Chase may not necessarily know
the full extent of the harm caused by the cyber
attack, and that damage may
 22 
continue to spread. These factors may inhibit
JPMorgan Chase’s ability to provide rapid, full
and reliable information about the cyber attack
to its clients, customers, counterparties and
regulators, as well as the public. Furthermore,
it may not be clear how best to contain and
remediate the harm caused by the cyber attack,
and certain errors or actions could be repeated
or compounded before they are discovered and
remediated. Any or all of these factors could
further increase the costs and consequences of a
cyber attack.
JPMorgan Chase can be negatively affected if it
fails to identify and address operational risks
associated with the introduction of or changes
to products, services and delivery platforms.
When JPMorgan Chase launches a new product or
service, introduces a new platform for the
delivery or distribution of products or services
(including mobile connectivity, electronic
trading and cloud computing), or makes changes
to an existing product, service or delivery
platform, it may not fully appreciate or
identify new operational risks that may arise
from those changes, or may fail to implement
adequate controls to mitigate the risks
associated with those changes. Any significant
failure in this regard could diminish JPMorgan
Chase’s ability to operate one or more of its
businesses or result in:
• potential liability to clients, counterparties
and customers
• increased operating expenses
• higher litigation costs, including regulatory
fines, penalties and other sanctions
• damage to JPMorgan Chase’s reputation
• impairment of JPMorgan Chase’s liquidity
• regulatory intervention, or
• weaker competitive standing.
Any of the foregoing consequences could
materially and adversely affect JPMorgan Chase’s
businesses and results of operations.
JPMorgan Chase’s operational costs and customer
satisfaction could be adversely affected by the
failure of an external operational system.
External operational systems with which JPMorgan
is connected, whether directly or indirectly,
can be sources of operational risk to JPMorgan
Chase. JPMorgan Chase may be exposed not only to
a systems failure or cyber attack that may be
experienced by a vendor or market infrastructure
with which JPMorgan Chase is directly connected,
but also to a systems breakdown or cyber attack
involving another party to which such a vendor
or infrastructure is connected. Similarly,
retailers, data aggregators and other external
parties with which JPMorgan Chase’s customers do
business can increase JPMorgan Chase’s
operational risk. This is particularly the case
where activities of customers or those parties
are
beyond JPMorgan Chase’s security and control
systems, including through the use of the
internet, cloud computing services and personal
smart phones and other mobile devices or
services.
If an external party obtains access to customer
account data on JPMorgan Chase’s systems, and
that party experiences a cyberbreach of its own
systems or misappropriates that data, this could
result in a variety of negative outcomes for
JPMorgan Chase and its clients and customers,
including:
• heightened risk that external parties will be
able to execute fraudulent transactions using
JPMorgan Chase’s systems
• losses from fraudulent transactions, as well
as potential liability for losses that exceed
thresholds established in consumer protection
laws, rules and regulations
• increased operational costs to remediate the
consequences of the external party’s security
breach, and
• harm to reputation arising from the perception
that JPMorgan Chase’s systems may not be secure.
As JPMorgan Chase’s interconnectivity with
clients, customers and other external parties
continues to expand, JPMorgan Chase increasingly
faces the risk of operational failure or cyber
attacks with respect to the systems of those
parties. Security breaches affecting JPMorgan
Chase’s clients or customers, or systems
breakdowns or failures, security breaches or
human error or misconduct affecting other
external parties, may require JPMorgan Chase to
take steps to protect the integrity of its own
operational systems or to safeguard confidential
information, including restricting the access of
customers to their accounts. These actions can
increase JPMorgan Chase’s operational costs and
potentially diminish customer satisfaction and
confidence in JPMorgan Chase.
Furthermore, the widespread and expanding
interconnectivity among financial institutions,
central agents, CCPs, payment processors,
securities exchanges, clearing houses and other
financial market infrastructures increases the
risk that an operational failure or cyber attack
involving one institution or entity may cause
industry-wide operational disruptions that could
materially affect JPMorgan Chase’s ability to
conduct business.
JPMorgan Chase’s operations could be impaired if
its employees, or those of external parties, are
not competent and trustworthy, or if measures to
protect their health and safety are ineffective.
JPMorgan Chase’s ability to operate its
businesses efficiently and profitably, to offer
products and services that meet the expectations
of its clients and customers, and to maintain an
effective risk management framework is highly
dependent on the competence and integrity of its
employees, as well as employees of other parties
on which JPMorgan Chase’s operations rely,
including vendors, custodians and financial
markets infrastructures. JPMorgan
 23 
║ Part I ║
Chase’s businesses could be materially and
adversely affected by:
• the ineffective implementation of business
decisions
• any failure to institute controls that
appropriately address risks associated with
business activities, or to appropriately train
employees with respect to those risks and
controls
• a significant operational breakdown or
failure, theft, fraud or other unlawful conduct,
or
• other negative outcomes caused by human error
or misconduct by an employee of JPMorgan Chase
or of another party on which JPMorgan Chase’s
operations depend.
JPMorgan Chase’s operations could also be
impaired if the measures taken by it or by
governmental authorities to help ensure the
health and safety of its employees are
ineffective, or if any external party on which
JPMorgan Chase relies fails to take appropriate
and effective actions to protect the health and
safety of its employees.
JPMorgan Chase faces substantial legal and
operational risks in safeguarding personal
information.
JPMorgan Chase’s businesses are subject to
complex and evolving laws, rules and
regulations, both within and outside the U.S.,
governing the privacy and protection of personal
information of individuals. The protected
parties can include:
• JPMorgan Chase’s clients and customers, and
prospective clients and customers
• clients and customers of JPMorgan Chase’s
clients and customers
• employees and prospective employees, and
• employees of JPMorgan Chase’s vendors,
counterparties and other external parties.
Ensuring that JPMorgan Chase’s collection, use,
transfer and storage of personal information
comply with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations in all relevant jurisdictions,
including where the laws of different
jurisdictions are in conflict, can:
• increase JPMorgan Chase’s compliance and
operating costs
• hinder the development of new products or
services, curtail the offering of existing
products or services, or affect how products and
services are offered to clients and customers
• demand significant oversight by JPMorgan
Chase’s management, and
• require JPMorgan Chase to structure its
businesses, operations and systems in less
efficient ways.
Not all of JPMorgan Chase’s clients, customers,
vendors, counterparties and other external
parties may have appropriate controls in place
to protect the confidentiality
of the information exchanged between them and
JPMorgan Chase, particularly where information
is transmitted by electronic means. JPMorgan
Chase could be exposed to litigation or
regulatory fines, penalties or other sanctions
if personal, confidential or proprietary
information of clients, customers, employees or
others were to be mishandled or misused, such as
situations where such information is:
• erroneously provided to parties who are not
permitted to have the information, or
• intercepted or otherwise compromised by third
parties.
Concerns regarding the effectiveness of JPMorgan
Chase’s measures to safeguard personal
information, or even the perception that those
measures are inadequate, could cause JPMorgan
Chase to lose existing or potential clients and
customers, and thereby reduce JPMorgan Chase’s
revenues. Furthermore, any failure or perceived
failure by JPMorgan Chase to comply with
applicable privacy or data protection laws,
rules and regulations may subject it to
inquiries, examinations and investigations that
could result in requirements to modify or cease
certain operations or practices, significant
liabilities or regulatory fines, penalties or
other sanctions. Any of these could damage
JPMorgan Chase’s reputation and otherwise
adversely affect its businesses.
In recent years, well-publicized allegations
involving the misuse or inappropriate sharing of
personal information have led to expanded
governmental scrutiny of practices relating to
the safeguarding of personal information and the
use or sharing of personal data by companies in
the U.S. and other countries. That scrutiny has
in some cases resulted in, and could in the
future lead to, the adoption of stricter laws,
rules and regulations relating to the use and
sharing of personal information. These types of
laws and regulations could prohibit or
significantly restrict financial services firms
such as JPMorgan Chase from sharing information
among affiliates or with third parties such as
vendors, and thereby increase compliance costs,
or could restrict JPMorgan Chase’s use of
personal data when developing or offering
products or services to customers. These
restrictions could also inhibit JPMorgan Chase’s
development or marketing of certain products or
services, or increase the costs of offering them
to customers.
JPMorgan Chase’s operations, results and
reputation could be harmed by catastrophes or
other events.
JPMorgan Chase’s business and operational
systems could be seriously disrupted, and its
reputation could be harmed, by events or
contributing factors that are wholly or
partially beyond its control, including:
• cyberbreaches or breaches of physical
premises, including data centers
• power, telecommunications or internet outages
• failures of, or loss of access to, operational
systems, including computer systems, servers,
networks and other technology assets
 24 
• damage to or loss of property or assets of
JPMorgan Chase or third parties, and any
consequent injuries, including in connection
with any construction projects undertaken by
JPMorgan Chase
• effects of climate change
• natural disasters or severe weather conditions
• accidents such as explosions or structural
failures
• health emergencies, the spread of infectious
diseases or pandemics, or
• events arising from local or larger-scale
political events, including outbreaks of
hostilities or terrorist acts.
JPMorgan Chase maintains a Firmwide resiliency
program that is intended to enable it to recover
critical business functions and supporting
assets, including staff, technology and
facilities, in the event of a business
interruption. There can be no assurance that
JPMorgan Chase’s resiliency plans will fully
mitigate all potential business continuity risks
to JPMorgan Chase or its clients and customers
or that its resiliency plans will be adequate to
address the effects of simultaneous occurrences
of multiple catastrophes or other business
interruption events. In addition, JPMorgan
Chase’s ability to respond effectively to a
business interruption could be hampered to the
extent that the members of its workforce,
physical assets or systems and other support
infrastructure needed to address the event are
geographically dispersed, or conversely, if a
catastrophic event occurs in an area in which a
critical segment of JPMorgan Chase’s workforce,
physical assets or systems and other support
infrastructure is concentrated. Further, should
emergency or catastrophic events such as severe
or abnormal weather conditions or health
emergencies, the spread of infectious diseases
or pandemics become more chronic, the disruptive
effects of those events on JPMorgan Chase’s
business and operations, and on its clients,
customers, counterparties and employees, could
become more significant and long-lasting.
Any significant failure or disruption of
JPMorgan Chase’s operations or operational
systems, or any catastrophic event, could:
• hinder JPMorgan Chase’s ability to provide
services to its clients and customers or to
transact with its counterparties
• require it to expend significant resources to
correct the failure or disruption
• cause it to incur losses or liabilities,
including from loss of revenue, damage to or
loss of property, or injuries
• expose it to litigation or regulatory fines,
penalties or other sanctions, and
• harm its reputation.
Furthermore, JPMorgan Chase may incur costs in
connection with disposing of certain excess
properties,
premises and facilities, and those costs may be
material to its results of operations in a given
period.
Enhanced regulatory and other standards for the
oversight of vendors and other service providers
can result in higher costs and other potential
exposures.
JPMorgan Chase must comply with enhanced
regulatory and other standards associated with
doing business with vendors and other service
providers, including standards relating to the
outsourcing of functions as well as the
performance of significant banking and other
functions by subsidiaries. JPMorgan Chase incurs
significant costs and expenses in connection
with its initiatives to address the risks
associated with oversight of its internal and
external service providers. JPMorgan Chase’s
failure to appropriately assess and manage these
relationships, especially those involving
significant banking functions, shared services
or other critical activities, could materially
adversely affect JPMorgan Chase. Specifically,
any such failure could result in:
• potential liability to clients and customers
• regulatory fines, penalties or other sanctions
• lower revenues, and the opportunity cost from
lost revenues
• increased operational costs, or
• harm to JPMorgan Chase’s reputation.
JPMorgan Chase’s risk management framework may
not be effective in identifying and mitigating
every risk to JPMorgan Chase.
Any inadequacy or lapse in JPMorgan Chase’s risk
management framework, governance structure,
practices, models or reporting systems could
expose it to unexpected losses, and its
financial condition or results of operations
could be materially and adversely affected. Any
such inadequacy or lapse could:
• hinder the timely escalation of material risk
issues to JPMorgan Chase’s senior management and
the Board of Directors
• lead to business decisions that have negative
outcomes for JPMorgan Chase
• require significant resources and time to
remediate
• lead to non-compliance with laws, rules and
regulations
• attract heightened regulatory scrutiny
• expose JPMorgan Chase to regulatory
investigations or legal proceedings
• subject it to litigation or regulatory fines,
penalties or other sanctions
• harm its reputation, or
• otherwise diminish confidence in JPMorgan
Chase.
JPMorgan Chase relies on data to assess its
various risk exposures. Any deficiencies in the
quality or effectiveness of
 25 
║ Part I ║
JPMorgan Chase’s data gathering, analysis and
validation processes could result in ineffective
risk management practices. These deficiencies
could also result in inaccurate risk reporting.
Many of JPMorgan Chase’s risk management
strategies and techniques consider historical
market behavior. These strategies and techniques
are based to some degree on management’s
subjective judgment. For example, many models
used by JPMorgan Chase are based on assumptions
regarding historical correlations among prices
of various asset classes or other market
indicators. In times of market stress, including
difficult or less liquid market environments, or
in the event of other unforeseen circumstances,
previously uncorrelated indicators may become
correlated. Conversely, previously-correlated
indicators may make unrelated movements at those
times. Sudden market movements and unanticipated
or unidentified market or economic movements
could, in some circumstances, limit the
effectiveness of JPMorgan Chase’s risk
management strategies, causing it to incur
losses.
JPMorgan Chase could recognize unexpected
losses, its capital levels could be reduced and
it could face greater regulatory scrutiny if its
models, estimations or judgments, including
those used in its financial statements, prove to
be inadequate or incorrect.
JPMorgan Chase has developed and uses a variety
of models and other analytical and judgment-
based estimations to measure, monitor and
implement controls over its market, credit,
capital, liquidity, operational and other risks.
These models and estimations are based on a
variety of assumptions and historical trends,
and are periodically reviewed and modified as
necessary. The models and estimations that
JPMorgan Chase uses may not be effective in all
cases to identify, observe and mitigate risk due
to a variety of factors, such as:
• reliance on historical trends that may not
accurately predict future events, including
assumptions underlying the models and
estimations which predict correlation among
certain market indicators or asset prices
• inherent limitations associated with
forecasting uncertain economic and financial
outcomes
• historical trend information may be
incomplete, or may not anticipate severely
negative market conditions such as extreme
volatility, dislocation or lack of liquidity
• technology that is introduced to run models or
estimations may not perform as expected, or may
not be well understood by the personnel using
the technology
• models and estimations may contain erroneous
data, valuations, formulas or algorithms, and
• review processes may fail to detect flaws in
models and estimations.
Some of the models and other analytical and
judgment-based estimations used by JPMorgan
Chase in managing
risks are subject to review by, and require the
approval of, JPMorgan Chase’s regulators. These
reviews are required before JPMorgan Chase may
use those models and estimations in connection
with calculating market risk RWA, credit risk
RWA and operational risk RWA under Basel III. If
JPMorgan Chase’s models or estimations are not
approved by its regulators, it may be subject to
higher capital charges, which could adversely
affect its financial results or limit the
ability to expand its businesses. JPMorgan Chase
also uses internal models in connection with its
stress testing. JPMorgan Chase’s capital actions
may require regulatory approval and could be
constrained if its banking regulators object to
a capital plan or require the resubmission of a
capital plan due to the perceived inadequacy of
JPMorgan Chase’s models, estimations or other
factors.
Under U.S. generally accepted accounting
principles (“U.S. GAAP”), JPMorgan Chase is
required to use estimates and apply judgments in
preparing its financial statements, including in
determining the allowance for credit losses,
reserves related to litigation and the credit
card rewards liability. Certain financial
instruments require a determination of their
fair value in order to prepare JPMorgan Chase’s
financial statements, including:
• trading assets and liabilities
• instruments in the investment portfolio
• certain loans
• MSRs
• structured notes, and
• certain repurchase and resale agreements.
Where quoted market prices are not available for
these types of financial instruments, JPMorgan
Chase may make fair value determinations based
on internally developed models or other means
which ultimately rely to some degree on
management estimates and judgment, and these
types of estimates and judgments may not prove
to be accurate due to a variety of factors, as
noted above. In addition, sudden illiquidity in
markets or declines in prices of certain loans
and securities may make it more difficult to
value certain financial instruments, which could
lead to valuations being subsequently changed or
adjusted. If estimates or judgments underlying
JPMorgan Chase’s financial statements prove to
have been incorrect, JPMorgan Chase may
experience material losses.
JPMorgan Chase establishes an allowance for
expected credit losses that are inherent in its
credit exposures. It then employs stress testing
and other techniques to determine the amounts of
capital and liquidity that would be needed in
the event of adverse economic or market events.
These processes are critical to JPMorgan Chase’s
results of operations and financial condition.
They require difficult, subjective and complex
judgments, including forecasts of how economic
conditions might impair the ability of JPMorgan
Chase’s borrowers and counterparties to repay
their loans or other obligations. It is possible
that
 26 
JPMorgan Chase will fail to identify the proper
factors or that it will fail to accurately
estimate the impact of factors that it
identifies.
Certain models used by JPMorgan Chase in
connection with the determination of the
allowance for credit losses have heightened
performance risk in the economic environment
precipitated by the effects of the COVID-19
pandemic and government stimulus. For example,
at times certain macroeconomic variables
employed in these models remained well outside
the range of historical data used to train the
models for some stress scenarios. In addition,
the historical relationships between these
macroeconomic variables and consumer and
wholesale credit losses have deteriorated, in
part due to the effects of the CARES Act and
government stimulus actions. As a result, there
continues to be significant uncertainty about
the reliability of the projections produced by
the models. To compensate for this uncertainty,
JPMorgan Chase has made, and may continue to
make, significant adjustments to the
quantitative results of model calculations to
take into consideration model imprecision,
emerging risks, trends and other factors that
are not yet reflected in those calculations.
There can be no assurance that, even after
adjustments have been made to model outputs,
JPMorgan Chase will not recognize unexpected
losses arising from the model uncertainty that
has resulted from these developments.
Lapses in controls over disclosure or financial
reporting could materially affect JPMorgan
Chase’s profitability or reputation.
There can be no assurance that JPMorgan Chase’s
disclosure controls and procedures will be
effective in every circumstance, or that a
material weakness or significant deficiency in
internal control over financial reporting will
not occur. Any such lapses or deficiencies
could:
• materially and adversely affect JPMorgan
Chase’s business and results of operations or
financial condition
• restrict its ability to access the capital
markets
• require it to expend significant resources to
correct the lapses or deficiencies
• expose it to litigation or regulatory fines,
penalties or other sanctions
• harm its reputation, or
• otherwise diminish investor confidence in
JPMorgan Chase.
JPMorgan Chase could be adversely affected by
changes in accounting standards or policies.
The preparation of JPMorgan Chase’s financial
statements is based on accounting standards
established by the Financial Accounting
Standards Board and the Securities and Exchange
Commission, as well as more detailed accounting
policies established by JPMorgan Chase’s
management. From time to time these accounting
standards or
accounting policies may change, and in some
cases these changes could have a significant
effect on JPMorgan Chase’s financial statements
and may adversely affect its financial results
or investor perceptions of those results.
As of January 1, 2020, JPMorgan Chase
implemented a new accounting standard, commonly
referred to as the Current Expected Credit
Losses (“CECL”) framework, which requires
earlier recognition of expected credit losses on
loans and certain other instruments. The
allowance for credit losses related to certain
of JPMorgan Chase’s loans and other lending-
related commitments portfolios increased upon
implementation of CECL, which has had a negative
impact on JPMorgan Chase’s capital levels.
The ongoing impact of the adoption of CECL could
include the following, each of which could
result in diminished investor confidence:
• greater volatility in JPMorgan Chase’s
earnings and capital levels over economic cycles
• potential reductions in its capital
distributions, or
• increases in the allowance for credit losses.
In addition, JPMorgan Chase could be adversely
impacted by associated changes in the
competitive environment in which it operates,
including changes in the availability or pricing
of loan products, particularly during periods of
economic stress, as well as changes related to
non-U.S. financial institutions or other
competitors that are not subject to this
accounting standard.
 Strategic 
If JPMorgan Chase’s management fails to develop
and execute effective business strategies, and
to anticipate changes affecting those
strategies, JPMorgan Chase’s competitive
standing and results could suffer.
JPMorgan Chase’s business strategies
significantly affect its competitive standing
and operations. These strategies relate to:
• the products and services that JPMorgan Chase
offers
• the geographies in which it operates
• the types of clients and customers that it
serves
• the counterparties with which it does
business, and
• the methods and distribution channels by which
it offers products and services.
If management makes choices about these
strategies and goals that prove to be incorrect,
do not accurately assess the competitive
landscape and industry trends, or fail to
address changing regulatory and market
environments or the expectations of clients,
customers, investors, employees and other
stakeholders, then the franchise values and
growth prospects of JPMorgan Chase’s businesses
may suffer and its earnings could decline.
JPMorgan Chase’s growth prospects also depend on
management’s ability to develop and execute
effective
 27 
║ Part I ║
business plans to address these strategic
priorities, both in the near term and over
longer time horizons. Management’s effectiveness
in this regard will affect JPMorgan Chase’s
ability to develop and enhance its resources,
control expenses and return capital to
shareholders. Each of these objectives could be
adversely affected by any failure on the part of
management to:
• devise effective business plans and strategies
• offer products and services that meet changing
expectations of clients and customers
• allocate capital in a manner that promotes
long-term stability to enable JPMorgan Chase to
build and invest in market-leading businesses,
even in a highly stressed environment
• allocate capital appropriately due to
imprecise modeling or subjective judgments made
in connection with those allocations
• appropriately address concerns of clients,
customers, investors, employees and other
stakeholders, including with respect to social
and sustainability matters
• react quickly to changes in market conditions
or market structures, or
• develop and enhance the operational,
technology, risk, financial and managerial
resources necessary to grow and manage JPMorgan
Chase’s businesses.
JPMorgan Chase faces significant and increasing
competition in the rapidly evolving financial
services industry.
JPMorgan Chase operates in a highly competitive
environment in which it must evolve and adapt to
the significant changes as a result of changes
in financial regulation, technological advances,
increased public scrutiny and changes in
economic conditions. JPMorgan Chase expects that
competition in the U.S. and global financial
services industry will continue to be intense.
Competitors include:
• other banks and financial institutions
• trading, advisory and investment management
firms
• finance companies
• technology companies, and
• other nonbank firms that are engaged in
providing similar products and services.
JPMorgan Chase cannot provide assurance that the
significant competition in the financial
services industry will not materially and
adversely affect its future results of
operations.
New competitors in the financial services
industry continue to emerge. For example,
technological advances and the growth of
e-commerce have made it possible for non-
depository institutions to offer products and
services that traditionally were banking
products. These advances have
also allowed financial institutions and other
companies to provide electronic and internet-
based financial solutions, including electronic
securities trading, payments processing and
online automated algorithmic-based investment
advice. Furthermore, both financial institutions
and their non-banking competitors face the risk
that payments processing and other services
could be significantly disrupted by
technologies, such as cryptocurrencies, that
require no intermediation. New technologies have
required and could require JPMorgan Chase to
spend more to modify or adapt its products to
attract and retain clients and customers or to
match products and services offered by its
competitors, including technology companies. In
addition, new technologies may be used by
customers, or breached or infiltrated by third
parties, in unexpected ways, which can increase
JPMorgan Chase’s costs for complying with laws,
rules and regulations that apply to the offering
of products and services through those
technologies and reduce the income that JPMorgan
Chase earns from providing products and services
through those new technologies.
Ongoing or increased competition may put
pressure on the pricing for JPMorgan Chase’s
products and services or may cause JPMorgan
Chase to lose market share, particularly with
respect to traditional banking products such as
deposits and bank accounts. This competition may
be on the basis of quality and variety of
products and services offered, transaction
execution, innovation, reputation and price. The
failure of any of JPMorgan Chase’s businesses to
meet the expectations of clients and customers,
whether due to general market conditions, under-
performance, a decision not to offer a
particular product or service, changes in client
and customer expectations or other factors,
could affect JPMorgan Chase’s ability to attract
or retain clients and customers. Any such impact
could, in turn, reduce JPMorgan Chase’s
revenues. Increased competition also may require
JPMorgan Chase to make additional capital
investments in its businesses, or to extend more
of its capital on behalf of its clients in order
to remain competitive.
Climate change manifesting as physical or
transition risks could have a material adverse
impact on JPMorgan Chase’s business operations,
clients and customers.
JPMorgan Chase operates in many regions,
countries and communities around the world where
its businesses, and the activities of its
clients and customers, could be impacted by
climate change. Climate change could manifest as
a financial risk to JPMorgan Chase either
through changes in the physical climate or from
the process of transitioning to a low-carbon
economy, including changes in climate policy or
in the regulation of financial institutions with
respect to risks posed by climate change.
Climate-related physical risks include both
acute weather events and chronic shifts in the
climate. Potential physical risks from climate
change may include altered distribution and
intensity of rainfall, prolonged droughts or
flooding, increased frequency of wildfires,
rising sea levels, or a rising heat index.
 28 
Transition risks arise from the process of
adjusting to a low-carbon economy. In addition
to possible changes in climate policy and
financial regulation, potential transition risks
may include economic and other changes
engendered by the development of low-carbon
technological advances (e.g., electric vehicles
and renewable energy) and/or changes in consumer
preferences towards low-carbon goods and
services. Transition risks could be further
accelerated by the occurrence of changes in the
physical climate.
These climate-related physical risks and
transition risks could have a financial impact
on JPMorgan Chase both directly on its business
and operations and as a result of material
adverse impacts to its clients and customers,
including:
• declines in asset values
• reduced availability of insurance
• significant interruptions to business
operations, and
• negative consequences to business models, and
the need to make changes in response to those
consequences.
 Conduct 
Conduct failure by JPMorgan Chase employees can
harm clients and customers, impact market
integrity, damage JPMorgan Chase’s reputation
and trigger litigation and regulatory action.
JPMorgan Chase’s employees interact with
clients, customers and counterparties, and with
each other, every day. All employees are
expected to demonstrate values and exhibit the
behaviors that are an integral part of JPMorgan
Chase’s How We Do Business Principles, including
JPMorgan Chase’s commitment to “do first class
business in a first class way.” JPMorgan Chase
endeavors to embed conduct risk management
throughout an employee’s life cycle, including
recruiting, onboarding, training and
development, and performance management. Conduct
risk management is also an integral component of
JPMorgan Chase’s promotion and compensation
processes.
Notwithstanding these expectations, policies and
practices, certain employees have in the past
engaged in improper or illegal conduct, and
these instances of misconduct have resulted in
litigation as well as resolutions of
governmental investigations or enforcement
actions involving consent orders, deferred
prosecution agreements, non-prosecution
agreements and other civil or criminal
sanctions. There is no assurance that further
inappropriate or unlawful actions by employees
will not occur, lead to a violation of the terms
of these resolutions (and associated
consequences), or that any such actions will
always be detected, deterred or prevented.
JPMorgan Chase’s reputation could be harmed, and
collateral consequences could result, from a
failure by one or more employees to act
consistently with JPMorgan Chase’s expectations,
policies and practices, including by acting in
ways that harm clients, customers, other market
participants or other employees. Some examples
of this include:
• improperly selling and marketing JPMorgan
Chase’s products or services
• engaging in insider trading, market
manipulation or unauthorized trading
• engaging in improper or fraudulent behavior in
connection with government relief programs
• facilitating a transaction where a material
objective is to achieve a particular tax,
accounting or financial disclosure treatment
that may be subject to scrutiny by governmental
or regulatory authorities, or where the proposed
treatment is unclear or may not reflect the
economic substance of the transaction
• failing to fulfill fiduciary obligations or
other duties owed to clients or customers
• violating antitrust or anti-competition laws
by colluding with other market participants to
manipulate markets, prices or indices
• engaging in discriminatory behavior or
harassment with respect to clients, customers or
employees, or acting contrary to JPMorgan
Chase’s goal of fostering a diverse and
inclusive workplace
• managing or reporting risks in ways that
subordinate JPMorgan Chase’s risk appetite to
business performance goals or employee
compensation objectives, and
• misappropriating property, confidential or
proprietary information, or technology assets
belonging to JPMorgan Chase, its clients and
customers or third parties.
The consequences of any failure by employees to
act consistently with JPMorgan Chase’s
expectations, policies or practices could
include litigation, or regulatory or other
governmental investigations or enforcement
actions. Any of these proceedings or actions
could result in judgments, settlements, fines,
penalties or other sanctions, or lead to:
• financial losses
• increased operational and compliance costs
• greater scrutiny by regulators and other
parties
• regulatory actions that require JPMorgan Chase
to restructure, curtail or cease certain of its
activities
• the need for significant oversight by JPMorgan
Chase’s management
• loss of clients or customers, and
• harm to JPMorgan Chase’s reputation.
 29 
║ Part I ║
 Reputation 
Damage to JPMorgan Chase’s reputation could harm
its businesses.
Maintaining trust in JPMorgan Chase is critical
to its ability to attract and retain clients,
customers, investors and employees. Damage to
JPMorgan Chase’s reputation can therefore cause
significant harm to JPMorgan Chase’s business
and prospects, and can arise from numerous
sources, including:
• employee misconduct, including discriminatory
behavior or harassment with respect to clients,
customers or employees, or actions that are
contrary to JPMorgan Chase’s goal of fostering a
diverse and inclusive workplace
• security breaches, including as a result of
cyber attacks
• failure to safeguard client, customer or
employee information
• failure to manage risk issues associated with
its business activities or those of its clients,
including failure to fully discharge publicly-
announced commitments to support social and
sustainability initiatives
• compliance or operational failures
• litigation or regulatory fines, penalties or
other sanctions
• regulatory investigations or enforcement
actions, or resolutions of these matters, and
• failure or perceived failure of clients,
customers, counterparties or other parties to
comply with laws, rules or regulations,
including companies in which JPMorgan Chase has
made principal investments, parties to joint
ventures with JPMorgan Chase, and vendors with
which JPMorgan Chase does business.
JPMorgan Chase’s reputation may be significantly
damaged by adverse publicity or negative
information regarding JPMorgan Chase, whether or
not true, that may be published or broadcast by
the media or posted on social media, non-
mainstream news services or other parts of the
internet. This latter risk can be magnified by
the speed and pervasiveness with which
information is disseminated through those
channels.
Social and environmental activists are
increasingly targeting financial services firms
such as JPMorgan Chase with public criticism for
their relationships with clients that are
engaged in certain sensitive industries,
including businesses whose products are or are
perceived to be harmful to human health, or
whose activities negatively affect or are
perceived to negatively affect the environment,
workers’ rights or communities. Activists have
also engaged in public protests at JPMorgan
Chase’s headquarters and other properties.
Activist criticism of JPMorgan Chase’s
relationships with clients in sensitive
industries could potentially engender
dissatisfaction among
clients, customers, investors and employees with
how JPMorgan Chase addresses social and
sustainability concerns in its business
activities. Alternatively, yielding to activism
targeted at certain sensitive industries could
damage JPMorgan Chase’s relationships with
clients and customers, and with governmental or
regulatory bodies in jurisdictions in which
JPMorgan Chase does business, whose views are
not aligned with those of social and
environmental activists. In either case, the
resulting harm to JPMorgan Chase’s reputation
could:
• cause certain clients and customers to cease
doing business with JPMorgan Chase
• impair JPMorgan Chase’s ability to attract new
clients and customers, or to expand its
relationships with existing clients and
customers
• diminish JPMorgan Chase’s ability to hire or
retain employees
• prompt JPMorgan Chase to cease doing business
with certain clients or customers.
• cause certain investors to divest from
investments in securities of JPMorgan Chase, or
• attract scrutiny from governmental or
regulatory bodies.
Actions by the financial services industry
generally or individuals in the industry can
also affect JPMorgan Chase’s reputation. For
example, the reputation of the industry as a
whole can be damaged by concerns that:
• consumers have been treated unfairly by a
financial institution,
• a financial institution has acted
inappropriately with respect to the methods used
to offer products to customers
If JPMorgan Chase is perceived to have engaged
in these types of behaviors, this could weaken
its reputation among clients or customers.
Failure to effectively manage potential
conflicts of interest can result in litigation
and enforcement actions, as well as damage
JPMorgan Chase’s reputation.
JPMorgan Chase’s ability to manage potential
conflicts of interest is highly complex due to
the broad range of its business activities which
encompass a variety of transactions, obligations
and interests with and among JPMorgan Chase’s
clients and customers. JPMorgan Chase can become
subject to litigation and enforcement actions,
and its reputation can be damaged, by the
failure or perceived failure to:
• adequately address or appropriately disclose
conflicts of interest, including potential
conflicts of interest that may arise in
connection with providing multiple products and
services in, or having one or more investments
related to, the same transaction
• deliver appropriate standards of service and
quality
 30 
• treat clients and customers with the
appropriate standard of care
• use client and customer data responsibly and
in a manner that meets legal requirements and
regulatory expectations
• provide fiduciary products or services in
accordance with the applicable legal and
regulatory standards, or
• handle or use confidential information of
customers or clients appropriately or in
compliance with applicable data protection and
privacy laws, rules and regulations.
A failure or perceived failure to appropriately
address conflicts of interest or fiduciary
obligations could result in customer
dissatisfaction, litigation and regulatory
fines, penalties or other sanctions, and
heightened regulatory scrutiny and enforcement
actions, all of which can lead to lost revenue
and higher operating costs and cause serious
harm to JPMorgan Chase’s reputation.
 Country 
An outbreak of hostilities between countries or
within a country or region could have a material
adverse effect on the global economy and on
JPMorgan Chase’s businesses within the affected
region or globally.
Aggressive actions by hostile governments or
groups, including armed conflict or intensified
cyber attacks, could expand in unpredictable
ways by drawing in other countries or escalating
into full-scale war with potentially
catastrophic consequences, particularly if one
or more of the combatants possess nuclear
weapons. Depending on the scope of the conflict,
the hostilities could result in:
• worldwide economic disruption
• heightened volatility in financial markets
• severe declines in asset values, accompanied
by widespread sell-offs of investments
• substantial depreciation of local currencies,
potentially leading to defaults by borrowers and
counterparties in the affected region
• disruption of global trade, and
• diminished consumer, business and investor
confidence.
Any of the above consequences could have
significant negative effects on JPMorgan Chase’s
operations and earnings, both in the countries
or regions directly affected by the hostilities
or globally. Further, if the U.S. were to become
directly involved in such a conflict, this could
lead to a curtailment of any operations that
JPMorgan Chase may have in the affected
countries or region, as well as in any nation
that is aligned against the U.S. in the
hostilities. JPMorgan Chase could also
experience more numerous and aggressive cyber
attacks launched by or under the sponsorship of
one or more of the adversaries in such a
conflict.
JPMorgan Chase’s business and operations in
certain countries can be adversely affected by
local economic, political, regulatory and social
factors.
Some of the countries in which JPMorgan Chase
conducts business have economies or markets that
are less developed and more volatile or may have
political, legal and regulatory regimes that are
less established or predictable than other
countries in which JPMorgan Chase operates. In
addition, in some jurisdictions in which
JPMorgan Chase conducts business, the local
economy and business activity are subject to
substantial government influence or control.
Some of these countries have in the past
experienced economic disruptions, including:
• extreme currency fluctuations
• high inflation
• low or negative growth, and
• defaults or reduced ability to service
sovereign debt.
The governments in these countries have
sometimes reacted to these developments by
imposing restrictive policies that adversely
affect the local and regional business
environment, including:
• price, capital or exchange controls, including
imposition of punitive transfer and
convertibility restrictions or forced currency
exchange
• expropriation or nationalization of assets or
confiscation of property, including intellectual
property, and
• changes in laws, rules and regulations.
The impact of these actions could be accentuated
in trading markets that are smaller, less liquid
and more volatile than more-developed markets.
These types of government actions can negatively
affect JPMorgan Chase’s operations in the
relevant country, either directly or by
suppressing the business activities of local
clients or multi-national clients that conduct
business in the jurisdiction.
In addition, emerging markets countries, as well
as certain more developed countries, have been
susceptible to unfavorable social developments
arising from poor economic conditions or
governmental actions, including:
• widespread demonstrations or civil unrest
• general strikes and demonstrations
• crime and corruption
• security and personal safety issues
• outbreaks of hostilities
• overthrow of incumbent governments
• terrorist attacks, and
• other forms of internal discord.
These economic, political, regulatory and social
developments have in the past resulted in, and
in the future
 31 
║ Part I ║
could lead to, conditions that can adversely
affect JPMorgan Chase’s operations in those
countries and impair the revenues, growth and
profitability of those operations. In addition,
any of these events or circumstances in one
country can affect JPMorgan Chase’s operations
and investments in another country or countries,
including in the U.S.
 People 
JPMorgan Chase’s ability to attract and retain
qualified and diverse employees is critical to
its success.
JPMorgan Chase’s employees are its most
important resource, and in many areas of the
financial services industry, competition for
qualified personnel is intense. JPMorgan Chase
endeavors to attract talented and diverse new
employees and retain, develop and motivate its
existing employees. If JPMorgan Chase were
unable to continue to attract or retain
qualified and diverse employees, including
successors to the Chief Executive Officer or
members of the Operating Committee, JPMorgan
Chase’s performance, including its competitive
position, could be materially and adversely
affected.
Unfavorable changes in immigration or travel
policies could adversely affect JPMorgan Chase’s
businesses and operations.
JPMorgan Chase relies on the skills, knowledge
and expertise of employees located throughout
the world. Changes in immigration or travel
policies in the U.S. and other countries that
unduly restrict or otherwise make it more
difficult for employees or their family members
to work in, or travel to or transfer between,
jurisdictions in which JPMorgan Chase has
operations or conducts its business could
inhibit JPMorgan Chase’s ability to attract and
retain qualified employees, and thereby dilute
the quality of its workforce, or could prompt
JPMorgan Chase to make structural changes to its
worldwide or regional operating models that
cause its operations to be less efficient or
more costly.
 Legal 
JPMorgan Chase faces significant legal risks
from litigation and formal and informal
regulatory and government investigations.
JPMorgan Chase is named as a defendant or is
otherwise involved in many legal proceedings,
including class actions and other litigation or
disputes with third parties. Actions currently
pending against JPMorgan Chase may result in
judgments, settlements, fines, penalties or
other sanctions adverse to JPMorgan Chase. Any
of these matters could materially and adversely
affect JPMorgan Chase’s business, financial
condition or results of operations, or cause
serious reputational harm. As a participant in
the financial services industry, it is likely
that JPMorgan Chase will continue to experience
a high level of litigation and regulatory and
government investigations related to its
businesses and operations.
Regulators and other government agencies conduct
examinations of JPMorgan Chase and its
subsidiaries both on a routine basis and in
targeted exams, and JPMorgan Chase’s businesses
and operations are subject to heightened
regulatory oversight. This heightened regulatory
scrutiny, or the results of such an
investigation or examination, may lead to
additional regulatory investigations or
enforcement actions. There is no assurance that
those actions will not result in resolutions or
other enforcement actions against JPMorgan
Chase. Furthermore, a single event involving a
potential violation of law or regulation may
give rise to numerous and overlapping
investigations and proceedings, either by
multiple federal, state or local agencies and
officials in the U.S. or, in some instances,
regulators and other governmental officials in
non-U.S. jurisdictions.
If another financial institution violates a law
or regulation relating to a particular business
activity or practice, this will often give rise
to an investigation by regulators and other
governmental agencies of the same or similar
activity or practice by JPMorgan Chase.
These and other initiatives by U.S. and non-U.S.
governmental authorities may subject JPMorgan
Chase to judgments, settlements, fines,
penalties or other sanctions, and may require
JPMorgan Chase to restructure its operations and
activities or to cease offering certain products
or services. All of these potential outcomes
could harm JPMorgan Chase’s reputation or lead
to higher operational costs, thereby reducing
JPMorgan Chase’s profitability, or result in
collateral consequences. In addition, the extent
of JPMorgan Chase’s exposure to legal and
regulatory matters can be unpredictable and
could, in some cases, exceed the amount of
reserves that JPMorgan Chase has established for
those matters.
 32 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments.None.Item 2. Properties.JPMorgan Chase’s headquarters is │
│ located in New York City at 383 Madison Avenue, a 47-story office building that it owns. The │
│ Firm is demolishing its former headquarters at 270 Park Avenue in New York City and is building │
│ a new headquarters on the same site. Demolition is targeted to be completed in 2021 and │
│ construction of the new building has commenced.The Firm owned or leased facilities in the │
│ following locations at December 31, 2020.December 31, 2020(in millions)Approximate square │
│ footageUnited States(a)New York City, New York383 Madison Avenue, New York, New York1.1All │
│ other New York City locations8.0Total New York City, New York9.1Other U.S. │
│ locationsColumbus/Westerville, Ohio3.8Chicago, Illinois2.7Phoenix/Tempe, │
│ Arizona2.4Wilmington/Newark, Delaware2.2Houston, Texas1.9Jersey City, New │
│ Jersey1.7Dallas/Plano, Texas1.6All other U.S. locations34.8Total United States60.2Europe, the │
│ Middle East and Africa (“EMEA”)25 Bank Street, London, U.K.1.4All other U.K. locations2.9All │
│ other EMEA locations1.4Total EMEA5.7Asia-Pacific, Latin America and CanadaIndia4.7All other │
│ locations3.8Total Asia-Pacific, Latin America and Canada8.5Total74.4(a)At December 31, 2020, │
│ the Firm owned or leased 4,908 retail branches in 38 states and Washington D.C.The premises and │
│ facilities occupied by JPMorgan Chase are used across all of the Firm’s business segments and │
│ for corporate purposes. JPMorgan Chase continues to evaluate its current and projected space │
│ requirements and may determine from time to time that certain of its properties (including the │
│ premises and facilities noted above) are no longer necessary for its operations. There is no │
│ assurance that the Firm will be able to dispose of any such excess properties, premises, or │
│ facilities or that it will not incur costs in connection with such dispositions. Such │
│ disposition costs may be material to the Firm’s results of operations in a given period. Refer │
│ to the Consolidated Results of │
Operations on pages 54-56 for information on occupancy expense. Item 3. Legal Proceedings. Refer to
Note 30 for a description of the Firm’s material legal proceedings. Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures.
Not applicable.
 33 
║ Part II ║
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases │
│ of Equity Securities.Market for registrant’s common equityJPMorgan Chase’s common stock is │
│ listed and traded on the New York Stock Exchange. Refer to “Five-year stock performance,” on │
│ page 45 for a comparison of the cumulative total return for JPMorgan Chase common stock with │
│ the comparable total return of the S&P 500 Index, the KBW Bank Index and the S&P Financial │
│ Index over the five-year period ended December 31, 2020. │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Refer to Capital actions in the Capital Risk Management section of Management’s discussion and │
│ analysis on page 99 for information on the common dividend payout ratio. Refer to Note 21 for a │
│ discussion of restrictions on dividend payments. On January 31, 2021, there were 199,515 │
│ holders of record of JPMorgan Chase common stock. Refer to Part III, Item 12 on page 37 for │
│ information regarding securities authorized for issuance under the Firm’s employee share-based │
│ incentive plans.Repurchases under the common share repurchase programRefer to Capital actions │
│ in the Capital Risk Management section of Management’s discussion and analysis on page 99 for │
│ information regarding repurchases under the Firm’s common share repurchase program. │
On March 15, 2020, in response to the economic disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Firm
temporarily suspended repurchases of its common stock. Subsequently, the Federal Reserve directed all
large banks, including the Firm, to discontinue net share repurchases through the end of 2020. On
December 18, 2020, the Federal Reserve announced that all large banks, including the Firm, could
resume share repurchases commencing in the first quarter of 2021, subject to certain restrictions.
The Firm's Board of Directors has authorized a new common share repurchase program for up to $30
billion.
Shares repurchased pursuant to the prior common share repurchase program during 2020 were as follows.
 Aggregate 
 purchase price Dollar value 
 Total number Average price of common of remaining 
 of shares of paid per stock authorized 
 Year ended common share repurchases repurchase 
 December 31, stock of common (in (in 
 2020 repurchased stock(a) millions)(a) millions)(a) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 First 50,003,062 $ 127.92 $ 6,397 $ 9,183 -b 
 quarter 
 Second — — — 9,183 -b 
 quarter 
 Third — — — — 
 quarter 
 October — — — — 
 November — — — — 
 December — — — — 
 Fourth — — — — 
 quarter 
 Year-to-date 50,003,062 $ 127.92 $ 6,397 $ — 
(a) Excludes commissions cost.
(b) The remaining $9.2 billion unused portion under the prior $29.4 billion repurchase program
expired on June 30, 2020.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 6. Selected Financial Data. │
Refer to “Five-year summary of consolidated
financial highlights (unaudited)” on page 44 for
five-year selected financial data.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. │
Management’s discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations,
entitled “Management’s discussion and analysis,”
appears on pages 46-157. Such information should
be read in conjunction with the Consolidated
Financial Statements and Notes thereto, which
appear on pages 162-298.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk. │
Refer to the Market Risk Management section of
Management’s discussion and analysis on pages
135–142 for a discussion of quantitative and
qualitative disclosures about market risk.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. │
The Consolidated Financial Statements, together
with the Notes thereto and the report thereon
dated February 23, 2021, of
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, the Firm’s
independent registered public accounting firm,
appear on pages 159-298.
Supplementary financial data for each quarter
within the two years ended December 31, 2020,
are included on page 299 in the table entitled
“Selected quarterly financial data
 34 
(unaudited).” Also included is a “Glossary of
Terms and Acronyms’’ on pages 305-311.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure. │
None.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 9A. Controls and Procedures. │
The internal control framework promulgated by
the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
Treadway Commission (“COSO”), “Internal Control
— Integrated Framework” (“COSO 2013”), provides
guidance for designing, implementing and
conducting internal control and assessing its
effectiveness. The Firm used the COSO 2013
framework to assess the effectiveness of the
Firm’s internal control over financial reporting
as of December 31, 2020. Refer to “Management’s
report on internal control over financial
reporting” on page 158.
As of the end of the period covered by this
report, an evaluation was carried out under the
supervision and with the participation of the
Firm’s management, including its Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer and its Chief Financial
Officer, of the effectiveness of its disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in Rule
13a-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of
1934). Based on that evaluation, the Chairman
and Chief Executive Officer and the Chief
Financial Officer concluded that these
disclosure controls and procedures were
effective. Refer to Exhibits 31.1 and 31.2 for
the Certifications furnished by the Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial
Officer, respectively.
The Firm is committed to maintaining high
standards of internal control over financial
reporting. Nevertheless, because of its inherent
limitations, internal control over financial
reporting may not prevent or detect all
misstatements. Deficiencies or lapses in
internal controls may occur from time to time,
and there can be no assurance that any such
deficiencies will not result in significant
deficiencies or material weaknesses in internal
control in the future and collateral
consequences therefrom. Refer to “Management’s
report on internal control over financial
reporting” on page 158 for further information.
There was no change in the Firm’s internal
control over financial reporting (as defined in
Rule 13a-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934) that occurred during the three months
ended December 31, 2020, that has materially
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially
affect, the Firm’s internal control over
financial reporting.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 9B. Other Information. │
None.
 35 
║ Part III ║
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance. │
 Executive officers of the registrant 
 Positions and offices 
 Age Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive 
 Name (at December 31, 2020) Officer; he had been President from July 2004 
 James Dimon 64 until January 2018. 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Ashley Bacon 51 Chief Risk Officer since June 2013. 
 Chief Information Officer since September 2017, 
 prior to which she had been Chief Information 
 Lori A. Beer 53 Officer of the Corporate & Investment Bank 
 since June 2016. She was Global Head of Banking 
 Technology from January 2014 until May 2016. 
 Mary Callahan Erdoes 53 Chief Executive Officer of Asset & Wealth 
 Management since September 2009. 
 General Counsel since January 2016, prior to 
 Stacey Friedman 52 which she was Deputy General Counsel since July 
 2015 and General Counsel for the Corporate & 
 Investment Bank since August 2012. 
 Chief Executive Officer of Consumer Lending and 
 Marianne Lake 51 Card Services since May 2019, prior to which 
 she had been Chief Financial Officer since 
 2013. 
 Head of Human Resources since January 2018, 
 Robin Leopold 56 prior to which she had been Head of Human 
 Resources for the Corporate & Investment Bank 
 since August 2012. 
 Douglas B. Petno 55 Chief Executive Officer of Commercial Banking 
 since January 2012. 
 Chief Financial Officer since May 2019, prior 
 to which she had been the Chief Executive 
 Jennifer Piepszak 50 Officer for Card Services since 2017. She was 
 Chief Executive Officer of Business Banking 
 from 2015 to 2017. 
 Co-President and Co-Chief Operating Officer 
 since January 2018, Chief Executive Officer of 
 Daniel E. Pinto 58 the Corporate & Investment Bank since March 
 2014, and Chief Executive Officer of Europe, 
 the Middle East and Africa since June 2011. 
 Peter Scher 59 Head of Corporate Responsibility since 2011 and 
 Chairman of the Mid-Atlantic Region since 2015. 
 Co-President and Co-Chief Operating Officer 
 Gordon A. Smith 62 since January 2018, and Chief Executive Officer 
 of Consumer & Community Banking since December 
 2012. 
Unless otherwise noted, during the five fiscal years ended December 31, 2020, all of JPMorgan Chase’s
above-named executive officers have continuously held senior-level positions with JPMorgan Chase.
There are no family relationships among the foregoing executive officers. Information to be provided
in Items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 of the Form 10-K and not otherwise included herein is incorporated by
reference to the Firm’s Definitive Proxy Statement for its 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be
held on May 18, 2021, which will be filed with the SEC within 120 days of the end of the Firm’s
fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
 36 
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 11. Executive Compensation. │
Refer to Item 10.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder │
│ Matters. │
Refer to Item 10 for security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management.
The following table sets forth the total number of shares available for issuance under JPMorgan
Chase’s employee share-based incentive plans (including shares available for issuance to non-employee
directors). The Firm is not authorized to grant share-based incentive awards to non-employees, other
than to non-employee directors.
 Number of shares Weighted-avera… 
 to be issued exercise price Number of shares 
 upon exercise of of remaining 
 outstanding outstanding available for 
 options/stock options/stock future issuance 
 December 31, appreciation appreciation under stock 
 2020 rights rights incentive plans 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Plan category 
 Employee 
 share-based 
 incentive 3,124,739 -a $ 41.25 66,621,995 -b 
 plans 
 approved by 
 shareholders 
 Total 3,124,739 $ 41.25 66,621,995 
(a) Does not include restricted stock units or performance stock units granted under the shareholder-
approved Long-Term Incentive Plan (“LTIP”), as amended and restated effective May 15, 2018. Refer to
Note 9 for further discussion.
(b) Represents shares available for future issuance under the shareholder-approved LTIP.
All shares available for future issuance will be issued under the shareholder-approved LTIP. Refer to
Note 9 for further discussion.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence. │
Refer to Item 10.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services. │
Refer to Item 10.
 37 
║ Part IV ║
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement
Schedules.
 1 Financial statements 
 The Consolidated Financial Statements, the Notes thereto and the report of the Independent 
 Registered Public Accounting Firm thereon listed in Item 8 are set forth commencing on 
 page 159. 
 2 Financial statement schedules 
 3 Exhibits 
 Restated Certificate of Incorporation of JPMorgan Chase & Co., effective April 5, 2006 
 3.1 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of JPMorgan 
 Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed April 7, 2006). 
 Amendment to the Restated Certificate of Incorporation of JPMorgan Chase & Co., effective 
 3.2 June 7, 2013 (incorporated by reference to Appendix F to the Proxy Statement on Schedule 
 14A of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed April 10, 2013). 
 Certificate of Designations for Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 3.3 Series I (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed April 24, 2008). 
 Certificate of Designations for Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 3.4 Series Q (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed April 23, 2013). 
 Certificate of Designations for Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 3.5 Series R (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed July 29, 2013). 
 Certificate of Designations for Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 3.6 Series S (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed January 22, 2014). 
 Certificate of Designations for Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 3.7 Series U (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed on March 10, 2014). 
 Certificate of Designations for Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 3.8 Series V (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed on June 9, 2014). 
 Certificate of Designations for Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 3.9 Series X (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed on September 23, 2014). 
 Certificate of Designations for Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 3.10 Series Z (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed April 21, 2015). 
 Certificate of Designations for 6.10% Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series AA 
 3.11 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of JPMorgan 
 Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed June 4, 2015). 
 Certificate of Designations for 6.15% Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series BB 
 3.12 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of JPMorgan 
 Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed July 29, 2015). 
 Certificate of Designations for Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 3.13 Series CC (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed October 20, 2017). 
 Certificate of Designations for 5.75% Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series DD 
 3.14 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of JPMorgan 
 Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed September 21, 2018). 
 Certificate of Designations for 6.00% Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series EE 
 3.15 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of JPMorgan 
 Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed January 24, 2019). 
 Certificate of Designations for Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 3.16 Series FF (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed July 31, 2019). 
 Certificate of Designations for 4.75% Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series GG 
 3.17 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of JPMorgan 
 Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed November 7, 2019). 
 38 
 Certificate of Designations for Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 3.18 Series HH (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K 
 of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed January 23, 2020). 
 Certificate of Designations for Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, 
 3.19 Series II (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K 
 of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed February 24, 2020). 
 By-laws of JPMorgan Chase & Co., as amended, effective January 30, 2018 (incorporated 
 3.20 by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. 
 (File No. 1-5805) filed January 30, 2018). 
 Indenture, dated as of October 21, 2010, between JPMorgan Chase & Co. and Deutsche Bank 
 4.1(a) Trust Company Americas, as Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the 
 Current Report on Form 8-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No.1-5805) filed October 21, 
 2010). 
 First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of January 13, 2017, between JPMorgan Chase & 
 4.1(b) Co. and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, as Trustee, to the Indenture, dated as of 
 October 21, 2010 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Current Report on 
 Form 8-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed January 13, 2017). 
 Subordinated Indenture, dated as of March 14, 2014, between JPMorgan Chase & Co. and 
 4.2(a) U.S. Bank Trust National Association, as Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit  
 4.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No.1-5805) filed 
 March 14, 2014). 
 First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of January 13, 2017, between JPMorgan Chase & 
 Co. and U.S. Bank Trust National Association, as Trustee, to the Subordinated 
 4.2(b) Indenture, dated as of March 14, 2014 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the 
 Current Report on Form 8-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed January 13, 
 2017). 
 Indenture, dated as of May 25, 2001, between JPMorgan Chase & Co. and Bankers Trust 
 4.3(a) Company (succeeded by Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas), as Trustee (incorporated 
 by reference to Exhibit 4(a)(1) to the Registration Statement on Form S-3 of JPMorgan 
 Chase & Co. (File No. 333-52826) filed June 13, 2001). 
 Sixth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of January 13, 
 2017, between JPMorgan Chase & Co. and Bankers Trust 
 Company (succeeded by Deutsche Bank Trust Company 
 4.3(b) Americas), as Trustee, to the Indenture, dated as of 
 May 25, 2001 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 
 4.3 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of JPMorgan 
 Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed January 13, 
 2017). 
 Indenture, dated as of February 19, 2016, among 
 JPMorgan Chase Financial Company LLC, JPMorgan Chase 
 & Co. and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, as 
 4.4 Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4(a)(7) 
 to the Registration Statement on Form S-3 of JPMorgan 
 Chase & Co. and JPMorgan Chase Financial Company LLC 
 (File No. 333-209682) filed February 24, 2016). 
 Form of Deposit Agreement (incorporated by reference 
 4.5 to Exhibit 4.3 to the Registration Statement on Form 
 S-3 of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 333-191692) 
 filed October 11, 2013). 
 Description of Securities of JPMorgan Chase & Co. 
 4.6 registered pursuant to Section 12 of the Securities 
 Exchange Act of 1934.(b) 
 Other instruments defining the rights of 
 holders of long-term debt securities of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. and its 
 subsidiaries are omitted pursuant to 
 Section (b)(4)(iii)(A) of Item 601 of 
 Regulation S-K. JPMorgan Chase & Co. 
 agrees to furnish copies of these 
 instruments to the SEC upon request. 
 Deferred Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors 
 of JPMorgan Chase & Co., as amended and restated July 
 10.1 2001 and as of December 31, 2004 (incorporated by 
 reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Annual Report on 
 Form 10-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) 
 for the year ended December 31, 2007).(a) 
 2005 Deferred Compensation Plan for Non-Employee 
 Directors of JPMorgan Chase & Co., effective as of 
 10.2 January 1, 2005 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 
 10.2 to the Annual Report on Form 10-K of JPMorgan 
 Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) for the year ended 
 December 31, 2007).(a) 
 2005 Deferred Compensation Program of JPMorgan Chase 
 & Co., restated effective as of December 31, 2008 
 10.3 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the 
 Annual Report on Form 10-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. 
 (File No. 1-5805) for the year ended December 31, 
 2008).(a) 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. Amended and Restated Long-Term 
 Incentive Plan, effective May 15, 2018 (incorporated 
 10.4 by reference to Appendix B of the Schedule 14A of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed April 5, 
 2018).(a) 
 39 
║ Part IV ║
 Key Executive Performance Plan of JPMorgan Chase & Co., as amended and restated 
 10.5 effective January 1, 2014 (incorporated by reference to Appendix G of the Schedule 14A 
 of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) filed April 10, 2013).(a) 
 Excess Retirement Plan of JPMorgan Chase & Co., restated and amended as of December 31, 
 10.6 2008, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to the Annual Report on Form 
 10-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) for the year ended December 31, 2009).(a) 
 Executive Retirement Plan of JPMorgan Chase & Co., as amended and restated December 31, 
 10.7 2008 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to the Annual Report on Form 10-K of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) for the year ended December 31, 2008).(a) 
 Bank One Corporation Supplemental Savings and Investment Plan, as amended and restated 
 10.8 effective December 31, 2008 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.13 to the Annual 
 Report on Form 10-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) for the year ended 
 December 31, 2008).(a) 
 Forms of JPMorgan Chase & Co. Long-Term Incentive Plan Terms and Conditions for stock 
 10.9 appreciation rights and restricted stock units, dated as of January 18, 2012 
 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.25 to the Annual Report on Form 10-K of 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) for the year ended December 31, 2011).(a) 
 Forms of JPMorgan Chase & Co. Long-Term Incentive Plan Terms and Conditions for stock 
 appreciation rights and restricted stock units for Operating Committee members, dated as 
 10.10 of January 17, 2013 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.23 to the Annual Report on 
 Form 10-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) for the year ended December 31, 
 2012).(a) 
 Forms of JPMorgan Chase & Co. Long-Term Incentive Plan Terms and Conditions for 
 performance share units and restricted stock units for Operating Committee members (U.S. 
 10.11 and U.K.), dated as of January 17, 2017 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.23 to 
 the Annual Report on Form 10-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) for the year 
 ended December 31, 2016).(a) 
 Forms of JPMorgan Chase & Co. Long-Term Incentive Plan Terms and Conditions for 
 10.12 performance share units and restricted stock units for Operating Committee members (U.S. 
 and U.K.), dated as of January 16, 2018.(a) 
 Forms of JPMorgan Chase & Co. Long-Term Incentive Plan Terms and Conditions for 
 restricted stock units for Operating Committee members (U.S. and U.K.), dated as of 
 January 15, 2019.(a) 
 Form of JPMorgan Chase & Co. Long-Term Incentive Plan Terms and Conditions of 
 Performance Share Unit Award Operating Committee (U.S.) (incorporated by reference to 
 10.13 Exhibit 10.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) 
 10.14 filed March 15, 2019).(a) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Form of JPMorgan Chase & Co. Long-Term Incentive Plan Terms and Conditions of 
 10.15 Performance Share Unit Award Operating Committee (U.K.) (incorporated by reference to 
 Exhibit 10.2 to the Current Report on Form 8-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) 
 filed March 15, 2019).(a) 
 Forms of JPMorgan Chase & Co. Long-Term Incentive Plan Terms and Conditions for 
 10.16 restricted stock units and performance share unit awards for Operating Committee members 
 (U.S. and U.K.), dated as of January 21, 2020.(a) 
 Forms of JPMorgan Chase & Co. Long-Term Incentive Plan Terms and Conditions for 
 10.17 restricted stock units and performance share unit awards 
 forOperatingCommitteemembers(U.S. and U.K.), dated as of January19,2021.(a)(b) 
 Form of JPMorgan Chase & Co. Terms and Conditions of Fixed Allowance (UK) (incorporated 
 10.18 by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q of JPMorgan Chase & 
 Co. (File No. 1-5805) for the quarter ended June 30, 2014).(a) 
 Form of JPMorgan Chase & Co. Performance-Based Incentive Compensation Plan, effective as 
 10.19 of January 1, 2006, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.27 to the Annual 
 Report on Form 10-K of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) for the year ended 
 December 31, 2009).(a) 
 Employee Stock Purchase Plan of JPMorgan Chase & Co., as amended and restated effective 
 10.20 as of January 1, 2019 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Quarterly Report 
 on Form 10-Q of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (File No. 1-5805) for the quarter ended September 
 30, 2019). 
 21 List of subsidiaries of JPMorgan Chase & Co.(b) 
 Annual Report on Form 11-K of The JPMorgan Chase 401(k) Savings Plan for the year ended 
 22.1 December 31, 2019 (to be filed pursuant to Rule 15d-21 under the Securities Exchange Act 
 of 1934). 
 22.2 Subsidiary Guarantors and Issuers of Guaranteed Securities.(b) 
 40 
 23 Consent of independent registered public accounting firm.(b) 
 31.1 Certification.(b) 
 31.2 Certification.(b) 
 32 Certification pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.(c) 
 101.INS The instance document does not appear in the interactive data file because its XBRL 
 tags are embedded within the Inline XBRL document.(d) 
 101.SCH XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema 
 Document.(b) 
 101.CAL XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document.(b) 
 101.DEF XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document.(b) 
 101.LAB XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document.(b) 
 101.PRE XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document.(b) 
 104 Cover Page Interactive Data File (embedded within the Inline XBRL document and 
 included in Exhibit 101). 
(a) This exhibit is a management contract or
compensatory plan or arrangement. (b) Filed
herewith. (c) Furnished herewith. This exhibit
shall not be deemed “filed” for purposes of
Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, or otherwise subject to the liability of
that Section. Such exhibit shall not be deemed
incorporated into any filing under the
Securities Act of 1933 or the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934. (d) Pursuant to Rule 405
of Regulation S-T, includes the following
financial information included in the Firm’s
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020,
formatted in XBRL (eXtensible Business Reporting
Language) interactive data files: (i) the
Consolidated statements of income for the years
ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, (ii) the
Consolidated statements of comprehensive income
for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and
2018, (iii) the Consolidated balance sheets as
of December 31, 2020 and 2019, (iv) the
Consolidated statements of changes in
stockholders’ equity for the years ended
December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, (v) the
Consolidated statements of cash flows for the
years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018,
and (vi) the Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements.
 41 
║ Part IV ║
 page 42 not used 
 42 
 Table of contents 
 Financial: 
 Five-Year Summary 
 44 of Consolidated Audited financial 
 Financial statements: 
 Highlights 
 Management’s Report 
 45 Five-Year Stock 158 on Internal Control 
 Performance Over Financial 
 Reporting 
 Management’s Report of 
 discussion and 159 Independent 
 analysis: Registered Public 
 Accounting Firm 
 Consolidated 
 46 Introduction 162 Financial 
 Statements 
 Notes to 
 47 Executive Overview 167 Consolidated 
 Financial 
 Statements 
 Consolidated 
 54 Results of 
 Operations 
 Consolidated 
 57 Balance Sheets and 
 Cash Flows Analysis 
 Off–Balance Sheet 
 60 Arrangements and 
 Contractual Cash 
 Obligations 
 Explanation and 
 Reconciliation of Supplementary 
 62 the Firm’s Use of information: 
 Non-GAAP Financial 
 Measures 
 Business Segment Selected quarterly 
 65 Results 299 financial data 
 (unaudited) 
 Distribution of 
 assets, liabilities 
 85 Firmwide Risk 300 and stockholders’ 
 Management equity; interest 
 rates and interest 
 differentials 
 90 Strategic Risk 305 Glossary of Terms 
 Management and Acronyms 
 91 Capital Risk 
 Management 
 102 Liquidity Risk 
 Management 
 Credit and 
 110 Investment Risk 
 Management 
 135 Market Risk 
 Management 
 143 Country Risk 
 Management 
 145 Operational Risk 
 Management 
 Critical Accounting 
 152 Estimates Used by 
 the Firm 
 Accounting and 
 156 Reporting 
 Developments 
 157 Forward-Looking 
 Statements 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 43 
 Financial 
FIVE-YEAR SUMMARY OF CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS (unaudited)
 As of 
 or 
 for 
 the 
 year 
 ended 
 Dece… 
 31, 
 (in 
 mill… 
 exce… 
 per 
 shar… 
 rati… 
 head… 
 data 
 and 
 where 
 othe… 
 note… 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Sele… 
 inco… 
 stat… 
 data 
 Total 
 net $ 119,5… $ 115,3… $ 108,7… $ 100,460 $ 96,275 
 reve… 
 Total 
 noni… 66,656 65,269 63,148 59,270 56,378 
 expe… 
 Pre-… 52,887 50,130 45,635 41,190 39,897 
 prof… 
 Prov… 
 for 17,480 5,585 4,871 5,290 5,361 
 cred… 
 loss… 
 Inco… 
 befo… 
 inco… 35,407 44,545 40,764 35,900 34,536 
 tax 
 expe… 
 Inco… 
 tax 6,276 8,114 8,290 11,459 9,803 
 expe… 
 Net $ 29,131 $ 36,431 $ 32,474 $ 24,441 -h $ 24,733 
 inco… 
 Earn… 
 per 
 share 
 data 
 Net 
 inco… $ 8.89 $ 10.75 $ 9.04 $ 6.35 $ 6.24 
 Basic 
 Dilu… 8.88 10.72 9.00 6.31 6.19 
 Aver… 
 shar… 3,082… 3,221… 3,396… 3,551.6 3,658… 
 Basic 
 Dilu… 3,087… 3,230… 3,414… 3,576.8 3,690… 
 Mark… 
 and 
 per 
 comm… 
 share 
 data 
 Mark… $ 387,4… $ 429,9… $ 319,7… $ 366,301 $ 307,2… 
 capi… 
 Comm… 
 shar… 3,049… 3,084… 3,275… 3,425.3 3,561… 
 at 
 peri… 
 Book 
 value 81.75 75.98 70.35 67.04 64.06 
 per 
 share 
 Tang… 
 book 
 value 66.11 60.98 56.33 53.56 51.44 
 per 
 share 
 (“TB… 
 Cash 
 divi… 
 decl… 3.60 3.40 2.72 2.12 1.88 
 per 
 share 
 Sele… 
 rati… 
 and 
 metr… 
 Retu… 
 on 
 comm… 12 % 15 % 13 % 10 % 10 % 
 equi… 
 (“RO… 
 Retu… 
 on 
 tang… 14 19 17 12 13 
 comm… 
 equi… 
 (“RO… 
 Retu… 
 on 0.91 1.33 1.24 0.96 1.00 
 asse… 
 (“RO… 
 Over… 56 57 58 59 59 
 ratio 
 Loan… 47 64 69 66 67 
 rati… 
 Firm 
 Liqu… 
 cove… 110 116 113 119 NA 
 ratio 
 (“LC… 
 (ave… 
 JPMo… 
 Chase 
 Bank, 160 116 111 108 NA 
 N.A. 
 LCR 
 (ave… 
 Comm… 
 equi… 
 tier 
 1 13.1 12.4 12.0 12.2 12.3 
 (“CE… 
 capi… 
 rati… 
 Tier 
 1 15.0 14.1 13.7 13.9 14.0 
 capi… 
 rati… 
 Total 
 capi… 17.3 16.0 15.5 15.9 15.5 
 rati… 
 Tier 
 1 7.0 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.4 
 leve… 
 rati… 
 Supp… 
 leve… 6.9 % 6.3 % 6.4 % 6.5 % 6.5 % 
 ratio 
 (“SL… 
 Sele… 
 bala… 
 sheet 
 data 
 (per… 
 Trad… $ 503,1… $ 369,6… $ 378,5… $ 349,053 $ 342,4… 
 asse… 
 Inve… 
 secu… 
 net 
 of 589,9… 398,2… 261,8… 249,958 289,0… 
 allo… 
 for 
 cred… 
 loss… 
 Loan… 1,012… 997,6… 1,015… 959,429 922,8… 
 Total 3,386… 2,687… 2,622… 2,533,… 2,490… 
 asse… 
 Depo… 2,144… 1,562… 1,470… 1,443,… 1,375… 
 Long… 281,6… 291,4… 282,0… 284,080 295,2… 
 debt 
 Comm… 
 stoc… 249,2… 234,3… 230,4… 229,625 228,1… 
 equi… 
 Total 
 stoc… 279,3… 261,3… 256,5… 255,693 254,1… 
 equi… 
 Head… 255,3… 256,9… 256,1… 252,539 243,3… 
 Cred… 
 qual… 
 metr… 
 Allo… 
 for 
 loan 
 loss… $ 30,737 $ 14,314 $ 14,500 $ 14,672 $ 14,854 
 and 
 lend… 
 comm… 
 Allo… 
 for 
 loan 
 loss… 2.95 % 1.39 % 1.39 % 1.47 % 1.55 % 
 to 
 total 
 reta… 
 loans 
 Nonp… $ 10,906 $ 5,054 $ 5,901 $ 7,119 $ 7,754 
 asse… 
 Net 5,259 5,629 4,856 5,387 4,692 
 char… 
 Net 
 char… 0.55 % 0.60 % 0.52 % 0.60 % -i 0.54 % 
 rate 
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the Financial Instruments – Credit Losses (“CECL”)
accounting guidance. Refer to Note 1 for further information.
(a) In the second quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain spend-based credit card reward costs
from marketing expense to be a reduction of card income, with no effect on net income. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
(b) Pre-provision profit, TBVPS and ROTCE are each non-GAAP financial measures. Tangible common
equity (“TCE”) is also a non-GAAP financial measure. Refer to Explanation and Reconciliation of the
Firm’s Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures on pages 62–64 for a further discussion of these measures.
(c) Quarterly ratios are based upon annualized amounts.
(d) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
(e) For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018 and 2017, the percentage represents average LCR
for the three months ended December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018 and 2017. The U.S. LCR public disclosure
requirements for the Firm became effective in 2017. Refer to Liquidity Risk Management on pages
102–108 for additional information on the LCR results.
(f) As of December 31, 2020, the capital metrics reflect the relief provided by the Federal Reserve
Board in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the CECL capital transition provisions that
became effective in the first quarter of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the SLR reflects the
temporary exclusions of U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at Federal Reserve Banks that became
effective in the second quarter of 2020. Refer to Regulatory Developments Relating to the COVID-19
Pandemic on pages 52-53 and Capital Risk Management on pages 91-101 for additional information.
(g) The Basel III capital rules became fully phased-in effective January 1, 2019, and for the SLR
became fully phased-in effective January 1, 2018. Prior to these dates, the required capital metrics
were subject to the transitional rules. As of December 31, 2018, the risk-based capital metrics were
the same on a fully phased-in and transitional basis. Refer to Capital Risk Management on pages
91-101 for additional information on these capital metrics.
(h) In December 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“TCJA”) was signed into law. The Firm’s results for
the year ended December 31, 2017 included a $2.4 billion decrease to net income as a result of the
enactment of the TCJA.
(i) Excluding net charge-offs of $467 million related to the student loan portfolio sale, the net
charge-off rate for the year ended December 31, 2017 would have been 0.55%.
 44 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 FIVE-YEAR STOCK PERFORMANCE 
The following table and graph compare the five-year cumulative total return for JPMorgan Chase & Co.
(“JPMorgan Chase” or the “Firm”) common stock with the cumulative return of the S&P 500 Index, the
KBW Bank Index and the S&P Financials Index. The S&P 500 Index is a commonly referenced equity
benchmark in the United States of America (“U.S.”), consisting of leading companies from different
economic sectors. The KBW Bank Index seeks to reflect the performance of banks and thrifts that are
publicly traded in the U.S. and is composed of leading national money center and regional banks and
thrifts. The S&P Financials Index is an index of financial companies, all of which are components of
the S&P 500. The Firm is a component of all three industry indices.
The following table and graph assume simultaneous investments of $100 on December 31, 2015, in
JPMorgan Chase common stock and in each of the above indices. The comparison assumes that all
dividends were reinvested.
 D… 
 3… 
 (… 
 d… 20… 20… 20… 20… 20… 20… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 J… $ 10… $ 134… $ 170… $ 159… $ 234… $ 221… 
 C… 
 K… 
 B… 10… 128… 152… 125… 170… 153… 
 I… 
 S… 
 F… 10… 122… 149… 130… 172… 169… 
 I… 
 S… 
 5… 10… 111… 136… 130… 171… 202… 
 I… 
December 31,
(in dollars)
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 45 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
The following is Management’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of
operations (“MD&A”) of JPMorgan Chase for the year ended December 31, 2020. The MD&A is included in
both JPMorgan Chase’s Annual Report for the year ended December 31, 2020 (“Annual Report”) and its
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 (“2020 Form 10-K”) filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). Refer to the Glossary of terms and acronyms on pages
305-311 for definitions of terms and acronyms used throughout the Annual Report and the 2020 Form
10-K.
The MD&A contains statements that are forward-looking within the meaning of the Private Securities
Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements are based on the current beliefs and expectations of
JPMorgan Chase’s management and are subject to significant risks and uncertainties. Refer to Forward-
looking Statements on page 157) and Part 1, Item 1A: Risk factors in the 2020 Form 10-K on pages 8-32
for a discussion of certain of those risks and uncertainties and the factors that could cause
JPMorgan Chase’s actual results to differ materially because of those risks and uncertainties.
 INTRODUCTION 
JPMorgan Chase & Co. (NYSE: JPM), a financial
holding company incorporated under Delaware law
in 1968, is a leading financial services firm
based in the United States of America (“U.S.”),
and has operations worldwide; JPMorgan Chase had
$3.4 trillion in assets and $279.4 billion in
stockholders’ equity as of December 31, 2020.
The Firm is a leader in investment banking,
financial services for consumers and small
businesses, commercial banking, financial
transaction processing and asset management.
Under the J.P. Morgan and Chase brands, the Firm
serves millions of customers in the U.S. and
globally many of the world’s most prominent
corporate, institutional and government clients.
JPMorgan Chase’s principal bank subsidiary is
JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association
(“JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.”), a national
banking association with U.S. branches in 38
states and Washington, D.C. as of December 31,
2020. JPMorgan Chase’s principal nonbank
subsidiary is J.P. Morgan Securities LLC (“J.P.
Morgan Securities”), a U.S. broker-dealer. The
bank and non-bank subsidiaries of JPMorgan Chase
operate nationally as well as through overseas
branches and subsidiaries, representative
offices and subsidiary foreign banks. The Firm’s
principal operating subsidiary outside the U.S .
is J.P. Morgan Securities plc, a U.K.-based
subsidiary of JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.
For management reporting purposes, the Firm’s
activities are organized into four major
reportable business segments, as well as a
Corporate segment. The Firm’s consumer business
is the Consumer & Community Banking (“CCB”)
segment. The Firm’s wholesale business segments
are the Corporate & Investment Bank (“CIB”),
Commercial Banking (“CB”), and Asset & Wealth
Management (“AWM”). Refer to Business Segment
Results on pages 65–84, and Note 32 for a
description of the Firm’s business segments, and
the products and services they provide to their
respective client bases.
 46 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW 
This executive overview of the MD&A highlights
selected information and does not contain all of
the information that is important to readers of
this 2020 Form 10-K. For a complete description
of the trends and uncertainties, as well as the
risks and critical accounting estimates,
affecting the Firm and its various LOBs, this
2020 Form 10-K should be read in its entirety.
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the
CECL accounting guidance. Refer to Note 1 for
further information.
 Financial performance of JPMorgan Chase 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except per share data and 
 ratios) 
 2020 2019 Change 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Selected income statement data 
 Total net revenue(a) $ 119,543 $ 115,399 4 % 
 Total noninterest expense(a) 66,656 65,269 2 
 Pre-provision profit 52,887 50,130 5 
 Provision for credit losses 17,480 5,585 213 
 Net income 29,131 36,431 -20 
 Diluted earnings per share 8.88 10.72 -17 
 Selected ratios and metrics 
 Return on common equity 12 % 15 % 
 Return on tangible common equity 14 19 
 Book value per share $ 81.75 $ 75.98 8 
 Tangible book value per share 66.11 60.98 8 
 Capital ratios(b) 
 CET1 13.1 % 12.4 % 
 Tier 1 capital 15.0 14.1 
 Total capital 17.3 16.0 
(a) In the second quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain spend-based credit card reward costs
from marketing expense to be a reduction of card income, with no effect on net income. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation. (b) As of December 31, 2020, the
capital metrics reflect the relief provided by the Federal Reserve Board in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, including the CECL capital transition provisions that became effective in the first quarter
of 2020. Refer to Regulatory Developments relating to the COVID-19 Pandemic on pages 52-53 and
Capital Risk Management on pages 91-101 for additional information. Comparisons noted in the sections
below are for the full year of 2020 versus the full year of 2019, unless otherwise specified.
Firmwide overview JPMorgan Chase reported net income of $29.1 billion for 2020, or $8.88 per share,
on net revenue of $119.5 billion. The Firm reported ROE of 12% and ROTCE of 14%. The Firm's results
for 2020 included net additions to the allowance for credit losses of $12.2 billion and Firmwide
legal expense of $1.1 billion. • The Firm had net income of $29.1 billion, down 20%. • Total net
revenue was up 4%. Noninterest revenue was $65.0 billion, up 12%, driven by higher CIB Markets
revenue, Investment Banking fees and net production revenue in Home Lending. Net interest income was
$54.6 billion, down 5%, driven by the impact of lower rates,
predominantly offset by higher net interest income in CIB Markets as well as balance sheet growth. •
Noninterest expense was $66.7 billion, up 2%, driven by higher volume- and revenue-related expense,
legal expense and continued investments in the businesses, partially offset by lower structural
expense. • The provision for credit losses was $17.5 billion, up $11.9 billion from the prior year,
driven by net additions to the allowance for credit losses of $12.2 billion due to the deterioration
and increased uncertainty in the macroeconomic environment as a result of the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic. • The total allowance for credit losses was $30.8 billion at December 31, 2020. The Firm
had an allowance for loan losses to retained loans coverage ratio of 2.95%, compared with 1.39% in
the prior year; the increase from the prior year was driven by the additions to the allowance for
credit losses and the adoption of CECL. • The Firm’s nonperforming assets totaled $10.9 billion at
December 31, 2020, an increase of $5.9 billion from the prior year, primarily reflecting client
credit deterioration across multiple industries in the wholesale portfolio; and in the consumer
portfolio, loans placed on nonaccrual status related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well
as the adoption of CECL, as the purchased credit deteriorated loans in the mortgage portfolio became
subject to nonaccrual loan treatment. In the fourth quarter of 2020, nonperforming assets decreased
$556 million from the prior quarter, reflecting some credit improvement in the wholesale portfolio.
The consumer portfolio remained relatively flat, as the increase in loans placed on nonaccrual status
in Home Lending related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic was predominantly offset by lower
loans at fair value in CIB, largely due to sales. • Firmwide average loans of $1.0 trillion were up
1%, driven by higher loan balances in AWM and CIB, as well as loans originated under the Small
Business Administration’s (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), predominantly offset by lower
loan balances in Home Lending and Card. • Firmwide average deposits of $1.9 trillion were up 25%,
reflecting significant inflows across the Firm, primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic and the related effect of certain government actions. • As of December 31, 2020, the Firm
had average eligible High Quality Liquid Assets (“HQLA”) of approximately $697 billion and
unencumbered marketable securities with a fair value of approximately $740 billion, resulting in
approximately $1.4 trillion of liquidity sources. Refer to Liquidity Risk Management on pages 102–108
for additional information.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 47 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
Selected capital-related metrics • The Firm’s
CET1 capital was $205 billion, and the
Standardized and Advanced CET1 ratios were 13.1%
and 13.8%, respectively. • The Firm’s SLR was
6.9%. The SLR reflects the temporary exclusions
of U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at
Federal Reserve Banks, as required by the
Federal Reserve’s interim final rule issued on
April 1, 2020. The Firm’s SLR excluding the
temporary relief was 5.8%. • The Firm grew
TBVPS, ending 2020 at $66.11, up 8% versus the
prior year. Pre-provision profit, ROTCE and
TBVPS are non-GAAP financial measures. Refer to
Explanation and Reconciliation of the Firm’s Use
of Non-GAAP Financial Measures on pages 62–64,
and Capital Risk Management on pages 91-101 for
a further discussion of each of these measures.
Business segment highlights Selected business
metrics for each of the Firm’s four LOBs are
presented below for the full year of 2020.
 CCB •Average deposits up 22%; client investment assets up 17% 
 ROE •Average loans down 6%; debit and credit card sales volume down 3% 
 15% •Active mobile customers up 10% 
 CIB •$9.5 billion of Global Investment Banking fees, up 25% 
 ROE •#1 ranking for Global Investment Banking fees with 9.2% wallet share for the year 
 20% •Total Markets revenue of $29.5 billion, up 41%, with Fixed Income Markets up 45% and 
 Equity Markets up 33% 
 CB •Gross Investment Banking revenue of $3.3 billion, up 22% 
 ROE •Average deposits up 38%; average loans up 5% 
 11% 
 AWM •Assets under management (AUM) of $2.7 trillion, up 17% 
 ROE •Average deposits up 20%; average loans up 13% 
 28% 
Refer to the Business Segment Results on pages
65–66 for a detailed discussion of results by
business segment.
Credit provided and capital raised JPMorgan
Chase continues to support consumers, businesses
and communities around the globe. The Firm
provided new and renewed credit and raised
capital for wholesale and consumer clients
during 2020, consisting of:
 $2.3 trillion Total credit provided and capital raised (including loans and 
 commitments)(a) 
 $226 Credit for consumers 
 billion 
 $18 Credit for U.S. small businesses 
 billion 
 $865 billion Credit for corporations 
 $1.1 trillion Capital raised for corporate clients and non-U.S. government 
 entities 
 $103 Credit and capital raised for nonprofit and U.S. government 
 billion entities(b) 
 Loans under the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck 
 $28 billion Protection 
 Program 
(a) Excludes loans under the SBA’s PPP. (b)
Includes states, municipalities, hospitals and
universities.
 48 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Recent events 
• On January 27, 2021, JPMorgan Chase announced
that it will launch a digital retail bank in the
U.K. this year, and on February 23, 2021,
JPMorgan Chase announced that it will appoint
Sanoke Viswanathan, head of International
Consumer, to the Operating Committee.
• On December 31, 2020, JPMorgan Chase acquired
the Global Loyalty business (“cxLoyalty”) of
cxLoyalty Group Holdings, Inc. This includes
cxLoyalty’s technology platforms, full-service
travel agency, and gift card and merchandise
services.
• On December 31, 2020, JPMorgan Chase acquired
55ip, a financial technology company and leading
provider of automated tax-smart investment
strategies.
• On December 18, 2020, JPMorgan Chase received
the results of the 2020 Comprehensive Capital
Analysis and Review (“CCAR”) Round 2 stress test
from the Federal Reserve. The Firm’s Stress
Capital Buffer (“SCB”) requirement remained at
3.3%. The Federal Reserve also announced that
all large banks, including the Firm, could
resume share repurchases commencing in the first
quarter of 2021, subject to certain
restrictions. The Firm's Board of Directors has
authorized a new common share repurchase program
for up to $30 billion. The Firm expects to
repurchase up to $4.5 billion of common stock in
the first quarter of 2021 and, subject to
approval by the Board of Directors, maintain the
quarterly common stock dividend of $0.90 per
share.
• On December 18, 2020, JPMorgan Chase announced
the retirement of Lee Raymond, the Firm’s Lead
Independent Director. Stephen B. Burke has
succeeded Mr. Raymond as Lead Independent
Director effective January 1, 2021.
• On December 7, 2020, Phebe N. Novakovic became
a member of the Firm's Board of Directors. Ms.
Novakovic is Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer of General Dynamics Corporation.
 2021 outlook 
These current expectations are forward-looking
statements within the meaning of the Private
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such
forward-looking statements are based on the
current beliefs and expectations of JPMorgan
Chase’s management and are subject to
significant risks and uncertainties. Refer to
Forward-Looking Statements on page 157, and the
Risk Factors section on pages 8-32 of the Firm’s
2020 Form 10-K, for a further discussion of
certain of those risks and uncertainties and the
other factors that could cause JPMorgan Chase’s
actual results to differ materially because of
those risks and uncertainties. There is no
assurance that actual results in 2021 will be in
line with the outlook set forth below, and the
Firm does not undertake to update any forward-
looking statements.
JPMorgan Chase’s current outlook for 2021 should
be viewed against the backdrop of the global and
U.S. economies, the COVID-19 pandemic, financial
markets activity, the geopolitical environment,
the competitive environment, client and customer
activity levels, and regulatory and legislative
developments in the U.S. and other countries
where the Firm does business. Each of these
factors will affect the performance of the Firm
and its LOBs. The Firm will continue to make
appropriate adjustments to its businesses and
operations in response to ongoing developments
in the business, economic, regulatory and legal
environments in which it operates. The outlook
information contained in this Form 10-K
supersedes all outlook information included in
the Firm’s periodic reports furnished or filed
with the SEC prior to the date of this Form
10-K.
 Full-year 2021 
• Management expects net interest income, on a
managed basis, to be approximately $55 billion,
market dependent.
• Management expects adjusted expense to be
approximately $69 billion, which includes
accelerated contributions to the Firm’s
Foundation in the form of equity investments, as
well as higher revenue-related expense.
 First-quarter 2021 
• Management expects net interest income, on a
managed basis, to be approximately $13 billion,
market dependent.
• Investment banking fees are expected to be
flat when compared with the fourth quarter of
2020, depending on market conditions.
 Fourth-quarter 2021 
• Management expects net interest income, on a
managed basis, to be in excess of $14 billion,
market dependent.
Net interest income, on a managed basis, and
adjusted expense are non-GAAP financial
measures. Refer to Explanation and
Reconciliation of the Firm’s Use of Non-GAAP
Financial Measures on pages 62-64.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 49 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 Business Developments 
 COVID-19 Pandemic 
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic the Firm
invoked resiliency plans to allow its businesses
to remain operational, utilizing disaster
recovery sites and implementing alternative work
arrangements globally.
Additionally, the Firm implemented strategies
and procedures designed to help it respond to
increased market volatility, client demand for
credit and liquidity, distress in certain
industries and the ongoing impacts to consumers
and businesses.
Throughout 2020, the Firm remained focused on
serving its clients, customers and communities,
as well as the well-being of its employees,
during the pandemic. The Firm continues to
actively monitor the health and safety
situations at local and regional levels, and
will continue to adapt as these situations
evolve.
Supporting clients and customers
The Firm has supported its clients and customers
during the challenging conditions caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic by providing assistance,
primarily in the form of payment deferrals on
loans and extending credit, including through
its participation in the Small Business
Association’s (“SBA”) PPP.
Refer to Credit Portfolio on page 112 for
information on assistance granted to customers
and clients. Refer to Consumer Credit portfolio
on page 116 and Wholesale Credit Portfolio on
page 122 for information on retained loans under
payment deferral.
The Firm has gradually re-opened its branches
since April 2020, with nearly 90% of its
branches returning to full service as of
December 31, 2020. Additionally, the Firm
continues to provide a wide range of banking
services that are accessible to clients and
customers through mobile and other digital
channels.
Protecting and supporting employees
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Firm
implemented alternative work arrangements, with
the vast majority of its global workforce
working from home since the onset of the
pandemic and continuing into the first quarter
of 2021. The Firm also provided additional
benefits to employees during the COVID-19
pandemic.
Supporting communities
Since March, the Firm has committed $250 million
to help address humanitarian needs and long-term
economic challenges posed by the COVID-19
pandemic on the communities in which the Firm
operates. As of December 31, 2020, over 75% of
this commitment has been funded.
 Departure of the U.K. from the EU 
The U.K.’s departure from the EU, which is
commonly referred to as “Brexit,” was completed
on December 31, 2020. The U.K. and the EU have
entered into a Trade and Cooperation Agreement
which delineates many significant aspects of the
future relationship between the U.K. and the EU.
However, the agreement contained very limited
provisions relating to cross-border financial
services, and the U.K. and the EU are expected
to engage in further negotiations concerning
financial services.
The Firm has executed and continues to execute
on its Firmwide Brexit Implementation program,
which encompasses a strategic implementation
plan across all impacted businesses and
functions, including an ongoing assessment of
political, legal and regulatory and other
implementation risks. A key focus of the program
has been to ensure continuity of service to the
Firm’s EU clients in the following areas:
regulatory and legal entities; clients; and
business and operations.
Regulatory and legal entities
The Firm’s legal entities in Germany, Luxembourg
and Ireland are now licensed to provide and are
providing services to the Firm’s EU clients,
including through a branch network covering
locations such as Paris, Madrid and Milan.
Subject to limited exceptions, the Firm’s
U.K.-based legal entities are no longer
permitted to transact business from the U.K.
with EU clients.
Clients
Agreements covering substantially all of the
Firm’s EU client activity have been re-
documented to EU legal entities to facilitate
continuation of service. The Firm continues to
actively engage with those clients that have not
completed re-documentation or required
operational changes.
Business and operations
The COVID-19 pandemic introduced additional risk
to the Firm’s Brexit Implementation program,
particularly in relation to staff relocations.
As a result, the Firm has worked closely with
regulators and employees to ensure that critical
staff are relocated in a safe and timely manner
so that the Firm can meet its regulatory
commitments and continue serving its clients.
Further relocations are planned for 2021, and
the Firm’s longer-term EU staffing strategy will
be developed over time in cooperation with its
regulators and as the post-Brexit market
landscape evolves in order to ensure that the
Firm maintains operational resilience and
effective client coverage.
 50 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Interbank Offered Rate (“IBOR”) transition 
JPMorgan Chase and other market participants
continue to make progress in preparing for the
discontinuation of the London Interbank Offered
Rate (“LIBOR”) and other IBORs to comply with
the International Organization of Securities
Commission’s standards for transaction-based
benchmark rates.
On November 30, 2020, ICE Benchmark
Administration, the administrator of LIBOR,
announced a public consultation on its proposal
to cease the publication of the principal tenors
of U.S. dollar LIBOR (i.e., overnight, one-
month, three-month, six-month and 12-month
LIBOR) immediately following a final publication
on June 30, 2023. The Federal Reserve, the OCC
and the FDIC also released guidance encouraging
market participants to cease dealing in new U.S.
dollar LIBOR contracts from the end of 2021.
There has been no change in the scheduled
cessation of U.K. sterling, Japanese yen, Swiss
franc and Euro LIBOR, or the remaining tenors of
U.S. dollar LIBOR, from December 31, 2021.
The Firm continues to work towards reducing its
exposure to IBOR-referencing contracts,
including derivatives, bilateral and syndicated
loans, securities, and debt and preferred stock
issuances, to meet the industry milestones and
recommendations published by National Working
Groups (“NWG”), including the Alternative
Reference Rates Committee (the “ARRC”) in the
U.S.
On October 23, 2020, the International Swaps and
Derivatives Association, Inc. (“ISDA”) published
a new supplement to the ISDA 2006 definitions
and the related 2020 IBOR Fallbacks Protocol
(the “Protocol”). These publications are
intended to facilitate the incorporation of
robust rate fallback provisions into both legacy
and new derivative contracts with effect from
January 25, 2021. The Firm’s client-facing legal
entities have agreed to adhere to the Protocol,
in accordance with recommendations from multiple
industry working groups, including the ARRC.
ISDA further announced that bilateral templates
have been made available for use with
counterparties who choose not to adhere to the
Protocol.
As a key objective of the ARRC’s transition plan
to encourage adoption of the Secured Overnight
Financing Rate (“SOFR”), counterparty clearing
houses, clearing house members and other
impacted market participants successfully
executed the discounting and price alignment
interest (“PAI”) switch from federal funds to
SOFR on October 16, 2020. The industry completed
a similar switch from EONIA to €STR on July 27,
2020.
On March 12, 2020 and January 7, 2021, the
Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”)
issued accounting standards updates providing
optional expedients and exceptions for applying
generally accepted accounting principles to
contracts and hedge accounting relationships
affected by reference rate reform. These
optional expedients are intended to simplify the
operational impact of applying U.S. GAAP to
transactions impacted by reference rate reform.
The Firm elected to apply certain of these
expedients beginning in the third quarter of
2020. On
August 27, 2020, the International Accounting
Standards Board (“IASB”) issued guidance that
provides similar relief for entities reporting
under International Financial Reporting
Standards ("IFRS"). Refer to Accounting and
Reporting Developments on page 156 for
additional information. The Firm continues to
monitor the transition relief being considered
by the U.S. Treasury Department regarding the
tax implications of reference rate reform.
The Firm’s initiatives in connection with LIBOR
transition include:
• continuing to reduce its overall exposure to
LIBOR
• implementing rate fallback provisions
developed by NWGs in new LIBOR contracts, where
appropriate
• continuing to educate and inform clients on
LIBOR transition and the necessity to prepare
for the cessation of LIBOR
• assisting clients with discontinuing their
issuance or use of LIBOR-linked products within
the timelines specified by NWGs
• supporting clients in their efforts to
remediate contracts linked to LIBOR, including
contracts to which the Firm is a party, which it
manages or for which it acts as agent
• offering products linked to alternative
reference rates (“ARRs”) across its businesses,
and
• planning for the implementation of rate
fallback mechanisms across products based on the
conventions recommended by NWGs to prepare for
transition to ARRs upon the cessation of various
IBORs.
The Firm is on schedule to implement necessary
changes to operational and risk management
systems in order to transition away from IBORs,
including by aiming to meet proposed deadlines
set by NWGs for the cessation of new contracts
referencing these benchmarks. The Firm continues
to engage with and remains committed to NWGs in
devising solutions to unresolved issues relating
to IBOR transition.
The Firm continues to engage with market
participants, NWGs and regulators to address
market-wide challenges associated with LIBOR
transition, including efforts to:
• improve liquidity in ARRs
• develop and introduce forward-looking term
rates linked to ARRs, and
• support legislative proposals in the U.S., the
U.K. and the EU that aim to resolve concerns
involving “tough legacy” contracts (i.e.
contracts that do not provide for automatic
conversion to another rate or that are difficult
to amend in order to add rate fallback
provisions).
Resolution of these challenges should provide
more certainty and help to provide a framework
for market participants in transitioning away
from IBORs.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 51 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
Regulatory Developments Relating to the COVID-19
Pandemic
Since March 2020, the U.S. government as well as
central banks and banking authorities around the
world have taken and continue to take actions to
help individuals, households and businesses that
have been adversely affected by the economic
disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The
CARES Act and the Consolidated Appropriations
Act, which were signed into law on March 27,
2020 and December 27, 2020, respectively,
provide, among other things, funding to support
loan facilities to assist consumers and
businesses. Set forth below is a summary as of
the date of this Form 10-K of U.S. government
actions currently impacting the Firm and U.S.
government programs in which the Firm is
participating. The Firm will continue to assess
ongoing developments in government actions in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
 U.S. government actions 
Eligible retained income definition. On March
17, 2020, the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency (“OCC”), the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System (“Federal Reserve”), and
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
(“FDIC”), collectively the “federal banking
agencies,” issued an interim final rule (issued
as final on August 26, 2020) that revised the
definition of “eligible retained income” in the
regulatory capital rules that apply to all U.S.
banking organizations. On March 23, 2020, the
Federal Reserve issued an interim final rule
(issued as final on August 26, 2020) that
revised the definition of “eligible retained
income” for purposes of the total loss-absorbing
capacity (“TLAC”) buffer requirements that apply
to global systemically important banking
organizations. The revised definition of
eligible retained income makes any automatic
limitations on payout distributions that could
apply under the agencies’ capital rules or TLAC
rule take effect on a more graduated basis in
the event that a banking organization’s capital,
leverage and TLAC ratios were to decline below
regulatory requirements (including buffers). The
March 17, 2020 interim final rule was issued, in
conjunction with an interagency statement
encouraging banking organizations to use their
capital and liquidity buffers, to further
support banking organizations’ abilities to lend
to households and businesses affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Reserve requirements . On March 24, 2020, the
Federal Reserve issued an interim final rule
(issued as final on December 22, 2020) reducing
reserve requirement ratios for all depository
institutions to zero percent, effective March
26, 2020, an action intended to free up
liquidity in the banking system to support
lending to households and businesses.
Refer to Note 26 for additional information on
the reduction to the reserve requirement.
Regulatory Capital - Current Expected Credit
Losses (“CECL”) transition delay . On March 31,
2020, the federal banking agencies issued an
interim final rule (issued as final on August
26, 2020) that provided banking organizations
with the option to delay the effects of CECL on
regulatory capital for two years, followed by a
three-year transition period (“CECL capital
transition provisions”). The Firm elected to
apply the CECL capital transition provisions.
Supplementary leverage ratio (“SLR”) temporary
revision . On April 1, 2020, the Federal Reserve
issued an interim final rule that requires, on a
temporary basis, the calculation of total
leverage exposure for purposes of calculating
the SLR for bank holding companies (“BHC”), to
exclude the on-balance sheet amounts of U.S.
Treasury securities and deposits at Federal
Reserve Banks. These exclusions became effective
April 1, 2020, and will remain in effect through
March 31, 2021.
Refer to Capital Risk Management on pages 91-101
and Note 27 for additional information on the
CECL capital transition provisions, the impact
to the Firm’s capital metrics and the Firm’s
SLR.
Loan modifications. On April 7, 2020, the
federal banking agencies along with the National
Credit Union Administration, and the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, in consultation
with the state financial regulators, issued an
interagency statement revising a March 22, 2020
interagency statement on loan modifications and
the reporting for financial institutions working
with customers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic
(the “IA Statement”). The IA Statement
reconfirmed that efforts to work with borrowers
where the loans are prudently underwritten, and
not considered past due or carried on nonaccrual
status, should not result in the loans
automatically being considered modified in a
troubled debt restructuring (“TDR”) for
accounting and financial reporting purposes, or
for purposes of their respective risk-based
capital rules, which would otherwise require
financial institutions subject to the capital
rules to hold more capital. The IA Statement
also clarified the interaction between its
previous guidance and Section 4013 of the CARES
Act, as extended by Section 541 of the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, which provides
certain financial institutions with the option
to suspend the application of accounting
guidance for TDRs for a limited period of time
for loan modifications made to address the
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Firm has granted various forms of assistance
to customers and clients impacted by the
COVID-19 pandemic, including payment deferrals
and covenant modifications. The majority of the
Firm’s COVID-19 related loan modifications have
not been considered TDRs because:
• they represent short-term or other
insignificant modifications, whether under the
Firm’s regular loan modification assessments or
the IA Statement guidance, or
• the Firm has elected to apply the option to
suspend the application of accounting guidance
for TDRs as provided by
 52 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
the CARES Act and extended by the Consolidated
Appropriations Act.
To the extent that certain modifications do not
meet any of the above criteria, the Firm
accounts for them as TDRs. Refer to Credit
Portfolio on pages 112-113 and Note 12 for
additional information on the Firm’s loan
modification activities.
PPP . Beginning April 3, 2020, the PPP,
established by the CARES Act and administered by
the SBA, authorized eligible lenders to provide
nonrecourse loans to eligible borrowers until
August 8, 2020 to provide an incentive for these
businesses to keep their workers on their
payroll. As part of the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, additional funding was
provided for new PPP loans beginning in early
January 2021. This program was designed to
target smaller businesses as well as to simplify
the loan forgiveness process for loans under
$150,000. As of February 19, 2021, the Firm has
funded approximately $5 billion under this
extension of the program.
U.S. government facilities . Beginning in March
2020, the Federal Reserve announced a suite of
facilities using its emergency lending powers
under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act
to support the flow of credit to individuals,
households and businesses adversely affected by
the COVID-19 pandemic and to support the broader
economy.
The Firm has participated and is participating
in the PPP and certain of the other government
facilities and programs, as needed, to assist
its clients and customers or to support the
broader economy. Refer to Capital Risk
Management on pages 91-101, Liquidity Risk
Management on pages 102–108, Credit Portfolio on
pages 112-113, Note 12 and Note 27 for
additional information on the Firm’s
participation in the PPP and other government
facilities and programs.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 53 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS 
This section provides a comparative discussion
of JPMorgan Chase’s Consolidated Results of
Operations on a reported basis for the two-year
period ended December 31, 2020, unless otherwise
specified. Refer to Consolidated Results of
Operations on pages 48-51 of the Firm’s Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
31, 2019 (the “2019 Form 10-K”) for a discussion
of the 2019 versus 2018 results. Factors that
relate primarily to a single business segment
are discussed in more detail within that
business segment’s results. Refer to pages
152-155 for a discussion of the Critical
Accounting Estimates Used by the Firm that
affect the Consolidated Results of Operations.
 Revenue 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investment banking fees $ 9,486 $ 7,501 $ 7,550 
 Principal transactions 18,021 14,018 12,059 
 Lending- and deposit-related fees(a) 6,511 6,626 6,377 
 Asset management, administration and 18,177 16,908 16,793 
 commissions(a) 
 Investment securities gains/(losses) 802 258 -395 
 Mortgage fees and related income 3,091 2,036 1,254 
 Card income(b) 4,435 5,076 4,743 
 Other income(c) 4,457 5,731 5,343 
 Noninterest revenue 64,980 58,154 53,724 
 Net interest income 54,563 57,245 55,059 
 Total net revenue $ 119,543 $ 115,399 $ 108,783 
(a) In the first quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fees from asset management,
administration and commissions to lending- and deposit-related fees. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation. (b) In the second quarter of 2020, the Firm
reclassified certain spend-based credit card reward costs from marketing expense to be a reduction of
card income, with no effect on net income. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation. (c) Included operating lease income of $5.5 billion for each of the years ended
December 31, 2020 and 2019, and $4.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2018. 2020 compared with
2019 Investment banking fees increased, driven by CIB, reflecting: • higher equity underwriting fees
predominantly in follow-on offerings and convertible securities markets due to increased industry-
wide fees • higher debt underwriting fees in investment-grade and high-yield bonds d riven by
increased industry-wide fees and wallet share gains. The increased activity resulted in part from
clients seeking liquidity in the first half of the year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Refer
to CIB segment results on pages 71–76 and Note 6 for additional information.
Principal transactions revenue increased, predominantly in CIB, reflecting higher revenue in Fixed
Income Markets, driven by strong performance in Currencies & Emerging Markets, Rates, and Credit. The
increase in principal transactions revenue also reflected higher net valuations on several legacy
equity investments in Corporate, compared with net losses in the prior year. Principal transactions
revenue in CIB may in certain cases have offsets across other revenue lines, including net interest
income. The Firm assesses the performance of its CIB Markets business on a total revenue basis. Refer
to CIB and Corporate segment results on pages 71–76 and pages 83–84, respectively, and Note 6 for
additional information. Lending- and deposit-related fees decreased as a result of lower deposit-
related fees in CCB, reflecting lower transaction activity and the impact of fee refunds related to
the COVID-19 pandemic , predominantly offset by higher cash management fees in CIB and CB, as well as
higher lending-related fees, particularly loan commitment fees in CIB. Refer to CCB, CIB and CB
segment results on pages 67–70, pages 71–76 and pages 77–79, respectively, and Note 6 for additional
information. Asset management, administration and commissions revenue increased driven by: • higher
asset management fees in AWM as a result of net inflows into liquidity and long term products, and
higher performance fees; and in CCB related to a higher level of investment assets • higher brokerage
commissions in CIB and AWM on higher client-driven volume, partially offset by • lower volume of
annuity sales in CCB. Refer to CCB, CIB and AWM segment results on pages 67–70, pages 71–76 and pages
80–82, respectively, and Note 6 for additional information. Investment securities gains/(losses)
increased due to the repositioning of the investment securities portfolio, including sales of U.S.
GSE and government agency mortgage-backed securities, particularly in the first and third quarters of
2020 . Refer to Corporate segment results on pages 83–84 and Note 10 for additional information.
Mortgage fees and related income increased due to higher net mortgage production revenue reflecting
higher mortgage production volumes and margins; the prior year included gains on sales of certain
loans. Refer to CCB segment results on pages 67–70, Note 6 and 15 for further information.
 54 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Card income decreased due to: • lower net interchange income reflecting lower credit card sales
volumes and debit card transactions as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, largely
offset by lower acquisition costs and higher annual fees in CCB, and • lower merchant processing fees
in CIB predominantly driven by a reporting reclassification of certain expenses to be a reduction of
revenue in Merchant Services. Refer to CCB and CIB seg ment results on pages 67–70 and pages 71–76,
respectively, and Note 6 for further information. Other income decreased reflecting: • Increased
amortization on higher levels of alternative energy investments in CIB. The increased amortization
was more than offset by lower income tax expense from the associated tax credits • lower net
valuation gains on certain investments in AWM • net losses on certain equity investments in CIB,
compared with net gains in the prior year • higher costs associated with using forward contracts to
hedge certain non-U.S. dollar-denominated net investment exposures, and • higher losses related to
the early termination of certain of the Firm's long-term debt in Treasury and CIO, partially offset
by • a net increase from a gain on an equity investment. Net interest income decreased due to the
impact of lower rates, predominantly offset by higher net interest income in CIB Markets, as well as
balance sheet growth. The Firm’s average interest-earning assets were $2.8 trillion, up $434 billion,
and the yield was 2.34%, down 127 basis points (“bps”), primarily due to lower rates. The net yield
on these assets, on an FTE basis, was 1.98%, a decrease of 48 bps. The net yield excluding CIB
Markets was 2.30%, down 97 bps. Net yield excluding CIB Markets is a non-GAAP financial measure.
Refer to the Consolidated average balance sheets, interest and rates schedule on pages 300–304 for
further details; and the Explanation and Reconciliation of the Firm’s Use of Non-GAAP Financial
Measures on pages 62–64 for a further discussion of Net interest yield excluding CIB Markets.
 Provision for credit losses 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer, excluding credit card $ 1,016 $ -378 $ -119 
 Credit card 10,886 5,348 4,818 
 Total consumer 11,902 4,970 4,699 
 Wholesale 5,510 615 172 
 Investment securities 68 NA NA 
 Total provision for credit losses $ 17,480 $ 5,585 $ 4,871 
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the
CECL accounting guidance. In conjunction with
the adoption of CECL, the Firm reclassified
risk-rated loans and lending-related commitments
from the consumer, excluding credit card
portfolio segment to the wholesale portfolio
segment, to align with the methodology applied
when determining the allowance. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation. Refer to Note 1 for
further information. 2020 compared with 2019 The
provision for credit losses increased in
consumer and wholesale primarily driven by the
deterioration and uncertainty in the
macroeconomic environment, in particular in the
first half of 2020, as a result of the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in consumer
reflected: • net additions of $7.4 billion to
the allowance for credit losses, consisting of
$6.6 billion for Card, $520 million for Auto,
$252 million for Business Banking, partially
offset by • lower net charge-offs largely in
Card, reflecting lower charge-offs and higher
recoveries, primarily benefiting from payment
assistance and government stimulus. The prior
year included a $244 million net reduction in
the allowance for credit losses. The increase in
wholesale reflected a net addition of $4.7
billion to the allowance for credit losses
across the LOBs, impacting multiple industries.
The investment securities provision for credit
losses relates to the HTM portfolio, which
became subject to the CECL accounting guidance
beginning on January 1, 2020. Refer to the
segment discussions of CCB on pages 67–70, CIB
on pages 71–76, CB on pages 77–79, AWM on pages
80–82, the Allowance for Credit Losses on pages
132-133, and Notes 1, 10 and 13 for further
discussion of the credit portfolio and the
allowance for credit losses.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 55 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 Noninterest expense 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Compensation expense $ 34,988 $ 34,155 $ 33,117 
 Noncompensation expense: 
 Occupancy 4,449 4,322 3,952 
 Technology, communications and equipment 10,338 9,821 8,802 
 Professional and outside services 8,464 8,533 8,502 
 Marketing(a) 2,476 3,351 3,044 
 Other(b)(c) 5,941 5,087 5,731 
 Total noncompensation expense 31,668 31,114 30,031 
 Total noninterest expense $ 66,656 $ 65,269 $ 63,148 
(a) In the second quarter of 2020, the Firm
reclassified certain spend-based credit card
reward costs from marketing expense to be a
reduction of card income, with no effect on net
income. Prior-period amounts have been revised
to conform with the current presentation. (b)
Included Firmwide legal expense of $1.1 billion,
$239 million and $72 million for the years ended
December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(c) Included FDIC-related expense of $717
million, $457 million and $1.2 billion for the
years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018,
respectively. 2020 compared with 2019
Compensation expense increased driven by higher
volume-and revenue-related expense,
predominantly in CIB and CCB, as well as the
impact of investments in the businesses.
Noncompensation expense increased as a result
of: • higher legal expense predominantly in CIB
and AWM • higher volume-related expense, in
particular brokerage expense in CIB and
depreciation from growth in auto lease assets in
CCB • higher investments in the businesses,
including technology and real estate, • an
impairment on a legacy investment in Corporate,
and • higher FDIC-related expense, partially
offset by • lower marketing expense as a result
of lower investments in marketing campaigns and
lower travel-related benefits in CCB, and •
lower structural expense, including lower travel
and entertainment across the businesses, and
payment processing costs, partially offset by
higher contributions to the Firm’s Foundation.
 Income tax expense 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except rate) 
 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Income before income tax expense $ 35,407 $ 44,545 $ 40,764 
 Income tax expense 6,276 8,114 8,290 
 Effective tax rate 17.7 % 18.2 % 20.3 % 
2020 compared with 2019 The effective tax rate
decreased , with the current year rate
reflecting the impact of a lower level of pre-
tax income and changes in the mix of income and
expenses subject to U.S. federal, and state and
local taxes, as well as other tax adjustments.
The prior year included the effect of $1.1
billion of tax benefits related to the
resolution of certain tax audits. Refer to Note
25 for further information.
 56 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS AND CASH FLOWS 
 ANALYSIS 
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the CECL accounting guidance. Refer to Note 1 for further
information.
 Consolidated balance sheets analysis 
The following is a discussion of the significant changes between December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 Selected Consolidated balance sheets data 
 December 31, (in millions) 
 Assets 2020 2019 Change 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and due from banks $ 24,874 $ 21,704 15 % 
 Deposits with banks 502,735 241,927 108 
 Federal funds sold and securities 296,284 249,157 19 
 purchased under resale agreements 
 Securities borrowed 160,635 139,758 15 
 Trading assets(a) 503,126 369,687 36 
 Available-for-sale securities 388,178 350,699 11 
 Held-to-maturity securities, net of 201,821 47,540 325 
 allowance for credit losses 
 Investment securities, net of allowance 589,999 398,239 48 
 for credit losses 
 Loans(a) 1,012,853 997,620 2 
 Allowance for loan losses -28,328 -13,123 116 
 Loans, net of allowance for loan losses 984,525 984,497 — 
 Accrued interest and accounts receivable 90,503 72,861 24 
 Premises and equipment 27,109 25,813 5 
 Goodwill, MSRs and other intangible 53,428 53,341 — 
 assets 
 Other assets(a) 152,853 130,395 17 
 Total assets $ 3,386,071 $ 2,687,379 26 % 
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm
reclassified certain fair value option elected
lending-related positions from trading assets to
loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts
have been revised to conform with the current
presentation.
Cash and due from banks and deposits with banks
increased primarily as a result of significant
deposit inflows, which also funded asset growth
across the Firm, including investment securities
and securities purchased under resale
agreements. Deposits with banks reflect the
Firm’s placements of its excess cash with
various central banks, including the Federal
Reserve Banks.
Federal funds sold and securities purchased
under resale agreements increased as a result of
higher deployment of cash in Treasury and CIO,
as well as the impact of client activity and
higher demand for securities to cover short
positions in CIB. Refer to Liquidity Risk
Management on pages 102–108 and Note 11 for
additional information.
Securities borrowed increased driven by client-
driven activities in CIB. Refer to Liquidity
Risk Management on pages 102–108 and Note 11 for
additional information.
Trading assets remained elevated at the end of
2020, due to stronger client-driven market-
making activities in debt and equity instruments
and higher derivative receivables as a result of
market movements in CIB Markets. Refer to Notes
2 and 5 for additional information.
Investment securities increased, reflecting net
purchases of U.S. Treasuries and U.S. GSE and
government agency MBS in the available-for-sale
(“AFS”) portfolio, driven by interest rate risk
management activities and cash deployment. AFS
securities of $164 billion were transferred to
the held-to-maturity (“HTM”) portfolio,
resulting in a decrease in AFS and a comparable
increase in HTM securities. The transfers were
executed for capital management purposes. Refer
to
Corporate segment results on pages 83–84,
Investment Portfolio Risk Management on page 134
and Notes 2 and 10 for additional information on
investment securities.
Loans increased, reflecting:
• growth in wholesale loans and mortgages in AWM
and the impact of PPP loans in CBB and CB, as
well as higher wholesale loans related to
client-driven activities in CIB Markets
largely offset by
• lower loans in Home Lending primarily due to
net paydowns; and lower loans in Card due to the
decline in sales volumes that began in March as
a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The allowance for loan losses increased
primarily reflecting the deterioration and
uncertainty in the macroeconomic environment, in
particular in the first half of 2020, as a
result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic,
consisting of :
• a net $7.4 billion addition in consumer,
predominantly in the credit card portfolio, and
• a net $3.6 billion addition in wholesale,
across the LOBs, impacting multiple industries.
The adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020,
resulted in a $4.2 billion addition to the
allowance for loan losses.
There were also additions to the allowance for
lending-related commitments, which is included
in other liabilities on the consolidated balance
sheets, of $1.1 billion related to the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic, and $98 million related
to the adoption of CECL. Total additions to the
allowance for
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 57 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
credit losses were $12.1 billion related to
COVID-19, and $4.3 billion related to CECL, as
of December 31, 2020.
Refer to Credit and Investment Risk Management
on pages 110–134, and Notes 1, 2, 3, 12 and 13
for further discussion of loans and the
allowance for loan losses.
Accrued interest and accounts receivable
increased driven by higher client receivables
related to client-driven activities in CIB prime
brokerage.
Refer to Note 16 and 18 for additional
information on Premises and equipment .
Goodwill, MSRs and other intangibles was flat as
the increase in goodwill related to the
acquisitions of cxLoyalty and 55ip was offset by
lower MSRs as a result of faster prepayment
speeds on lower rates, and the realization of
expected cash flows, partially offset by net
additions to the MSRs . Refer to Note 15 for
additional information.
Other assets increased reflecting higher cash
collateral placed with central counterparties in
CIB.
 Selected Consolidated balance sheets data 
 December 31, (in millions) 
 Liabilities 2020 2019 Change 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Deposits $ 2,144,257 $ 1,562,431 37 
 Federal funds purchased and securities 
 loaned or sold under repurchase 215,209 183,675 17 
 agreements 
 Short-term borrowings 45,208 40,920 10 
 Trading liabilities 170,181 119,277 43 
 Accounts payable and other liabilities 232,599 210,407 11 
 Beneficial interests issued by 
 consolidated variable interest entities 17,578 17,841 -1 
 (“VIEs”) 
 Long-term debt 281,685 291,498 -3 
 Total liabilities 3,106,717 2,426,049 28 
 Stockholders’ equity 279,354 261,330 7 
 Total liabilities and stockholders’ $ 3,386,071 $ 2,687,379 26 % 
 equity 
Deposits increased reflecting significant
inflows across the LOBs primarily driven by the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related
effect of certain government actions;
• in the wholesale businesses, while the inflows
principally occurred in March as clients sought
to remain liquid as a result of market
conditions, balances continued to increase
through the end of 2020, and
• in CCB, the increase was driven by lower
spending and higher cash balances across both
consumer and small business customers, as well
as growth from existing and new accounts.
Refer to the Liquidity Risk Management
discussion on pages 102–108; and Notes 2 and 17
for more information.
Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or
sold under repurchase agreements increased
reflecting:
• higher secured financing of AFS investment
securities in Treasury and CIO, as well as
trading assets in CIB,
partially offset by
• a decline in client-driven market-making
activities in CIB, including the Firm's non-
participation in the Federal Reserve's open
market operations. Refer to the Liquidity Risk
Management discussion on pages 102–108 and Note
11 for additional information.
Short-term borrowings increased reflecting
higher financing of CIB prime brokerage
activities. Refer to pages 102–108 for
information on changes in Liquidity Risk
Management.
Trading liabilities increased reflecting client-
driven market-making activities, which resulted
in higher levels of short positions in debt and
equity instruments and higher derivative
payables as a result of market movements in CIB
Markets. Refer to Notes 2 and 5 for additional
information.
Accounts payable and other liabilities increased
reflecting higher client payables related to
client-driven activities in CIB Markets. Refer
to Note 19 for additional information.
Refer to Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements on pages
60-61 and Note 14 and 28 for information on
Beneficial interests issued by consolidated VIEs
.
Long-term debt decreased as a result of
maturities of FHLB advances; net maturities of
senior debt, which included the early
termination of certain of the Firm's debt;
partially offset by an issuance of subordinated
debt, and higher fair value hedge accounting
adjustments related to lower interest rates.
Refe r to Liquidity Risk Management on pages
102–108 and Note 20 for additional information.
Stockholders’ equity increased reflecting the
combined impact of net income, capital actions,
the adoption of CECL and an increase in
accumulated other comprehensive income (“AOCI”).
The increase in AOCI was driven by net
unrealized gains on AFS securities, and higher
valuation of interest rate cash flow hedges.
Refer to page 165 for information on changes in
stockholders’ equity, and Capital actions on
page 99, Note 24 for additional information on
AOCI.
 58 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Consolidated cash flows analysis The following
is a discussion of cash flow activities during
the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Refer to Consolidated cash flows analysis on
page 54 of the Firm’s 2019 Form 10-K for a
discussion of the 2018 activities.
 (in Year ended 
 millions) December 31, 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net cash 
 provided 
 by/(used in) 
 Operating $ -79,910 $ 4,092 $ 15,614 
 activities(… 
 Investing -261,912 -52,059 -199,420 
 activities(… 
 Financing 596,645 32,987 34,158 
 activities 
 Effect of 
 exchange 9,155 -182 -2,863 
 rate changes 
 on cash 
 Net 
 increase/(d… 
 in cash and 
 due $ 263,978 $ -15,162 $ -152,511 
 from banks 
 and deposits 
 with banks 
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation. Operating activities JPMorgan Chase’s operating
assets and liabilities primarily support the Firm’s lending and capital markets activities. These
assets and liabilities can vary significantly in the normal course of business due to the amount and
timing of cash flows, which are affected by client-driven and risk management activities and market
conditions. The Firm believes that cash flows from operations, available cash and other liquidity
sources, and its capacity to generate cash through secured and unsecured sources, are sufficient to
meet its operating liquidity needs. • In 2020, cash used primarily reflected higher trading assets,
other assets, and securities borrowed, partially offset by higher trading liabilities and net income
excluding noncash adjustments. • In 2019, cash provided primarily reflected net income excluding
noncash adjustments, lower trading assets, and net proceeds of sales, securitizations, and paydowns
of loans held-for-sale, partially offset by higher securities borrowed, an increase in other assets
and a decrease in trading liabilities.
Investing activities The Firm’s investing activities predominantly include originating held-for-
investment loans and investing in the investment securities portfolio, and other short-term
instruments. • In 2020, cash used primarily reflected net purchases of investment securities, higher
net originations of loans, and higher securities purchased under resale agreements. • In 2019, cash
used reflected net purchases of investment securities, partially offset by lower securities purchased
under resale agreements, and net proceeds from sales and securitizations of loans held-for-
investment. Financing activities The Firm’s financing activities include acquiring customer deposits
and issuing long-term debt, as well as preferred stock. • In 2020, cash provided reflected higher
deposits and an increase in securities loaned or sold under repurchase agreements, partially offset
by net payments of long-term borrowings. • In 2019, cash provided reflected higher deposits,
partially offset by a decrease in short-term borrowings and net payments of long-term borrowings. •
For both periods, cash was used for repurchases of common stock and cash dividends on common and
preferred stock. On March 15, 2020, in response to the economic disruptions caused by the COVID-19
pandemic, the Firm temporarily suspended repurchases of its common stock. Subsequently, the Federal
Reserve directed all large banks, including the Firm, to discontinue net share repurchases through
the end of 2020. * * * Refer to Consolidated Balance Sheets Analysis on pages 57-58, Capital Risk
Management on pages 91-101, and Liquidity Risk Management on pages 102–108 for a further discussion
of the activities affecting the Firm’s cash flows.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 59 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS AND CONTRACTUAL 
 CASH OBLIGATIONS 
In the normal course of business, the Firm
enters into various off-balance sheet
arrangements and contractual obligations that
may require future cash payments. Certain
obligations are recognized on-balance sheet,
while others are disclosed as off-balance sheet
under accounting principles generally accepted
in the U.S. (“U.S. GAAP”).
 Special-purpose entities 
The Firm has several types of off–balance sheet
arrangements, including through nonconsolidated
special-purpose entities (“SPEs”), which are a
type of VIE, and through lending-related
financial instruments (e.g., commitments and
guarantees).
The Firm holds capital, as appropriate, against
all SPE-related transactions and related
exposures, such as derivative contracts and
lending-related commitments and guarantees.
The Firm has no commitments to issue its own
stock to support any SPE transaction, and its
policies require that transactions with SPEs be
conducted at arm’s length and reflect market
pricing. Consistent with this policy, no
JPMorgan Chase employee is permitted to invest
in SPEs with which the Firm is involved where
such investment would violate the Firm’s Code of
Conduct.
The table below provides an index of where in
this 2020 Form 10-K discussions of the Firm’s
various off-balance sheet arrangements can be
found. Refer to Note 1 for additional
information about the Firm’s consolidation
policies.
 Type of off-balance sheet arrangement Location of disclosure Page references 
 Special-purpose entities: 
 variable interests and other 
 obligations, including contingent Refer to Note 14 253-260 
 obligations, arising from variable 
 interests in nonconsolidated VIEs 
 Off-balance sheet lending-related 
 financial instruments, guarantees, and Refer to Note 28 283-288 
 other commitments 
 60 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Contractual cash obligations 
The accompanying table summarizes, by remaining
maturity, JPMorgan Chase’s significant
contractual cash obligations at December 31,
2020. The contractual cash obligations included
in the table below reflect the minimum
contractual obligation under legally enforceable
contracts with terms that are both fixed and
determinable. Excluded from the table are
certain liabilities with variable cash flows
and/or no obligation to return a stated amount
of principal at maturity.
The carrying amount of on-balance sheet
obligations on the Consolidated balance sheets
may differ from the minimum contractual amount
of the obligations reported below. Refer to Note
28 for a discussion of mortgage repurchase
liabilities and other obligations.
 Contra… 
 cash 
 obliga… 
 By 
 remain… 
 maturi… 
 at 
 Decemb… 
 31, 
 (in 
 millio… 
 2021 
 On-bal… 
 sheet 2020 After 
 obliga… 2022-20… 2024-20… 2025 Total Total 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Deposi… $ 2,134,2… $ 4,321 $ 2,931 $ 1,637 $ 2,143,145 $ 1,558,0… 
 Federal 
 funds 
 purcha… 
 and 
 securi… 214,881 118 9 189 215,197 183,675 
 loaned 
 or sold 
 under 
 repurc… 
 agreem… 
 Short-… 28,514 — — — 28,514 35,107 
 borrow… 
 Benefi… 
 intere… 
 issued 14,976 2,400 — 223 17,599 17,874 
 by 
 consol… 
 VIEs 
 Long-t… 22,461 42,084 42,180 123,477 230,202 250,415 
 debt(a) 
 Operat… 1,606 2,705 2,070 3,602 9,983 10,090 
 leases… 
 Other(… 8,694 2,237 2,008 2,592 15,531 15,568 
 Total 
 on-bal… 2,425,3… 53,865 49,198 131,720 2,660,171 2,070,7… 
 sheet 
 obliga… 
 Off-ba… 
 sheet 
 obliga… 
 Unsett… 
 resale 
 and 95,084 1,764 — — 96,848 117,951 
 securi… 
 borrow… 
 agreem… 
 Contra… 
 intere… 6,071 10,450 8,128 29,719 54,368 54,681 
 paymen… 
 Equity 
 invest… 286 — — — 286 539 
 commit… 
 Contra… 
 purcha… 
 and 1,968 942 225 198 3,333 2,929 
 capital 
 expend… 
 Obliga… 
 under 333 530 240 79 1,182 1,548 
 co-bra… 
 progra… 
 Total 
 off-ba… 103,742 13,686 8,593 29,996 156,017 177,648 
 sheet 
 obliga… 
 Total 
 contra… $ 2,529,1… $ 67,551 $ 57,791 $ 161,716 $ 2,816,188 $ 2,248,4… 
 cash 
 obliga… 
(a) Excludes structured notes on which the Firm is not obligated to return a stated amount of
principal at the maturity of the notes, but is obligated to return an amount based on the performance
of the structured notes.
(b) Includes noncancelable operating leases for premises and equipment used primarily for business
purposes. Excludes the benefit of noncancelable sublease rentals of $593 million and $846 million at
December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Refer to Note 18 for further information on operating
leases.
(c) Primarily includes dividends declared on preferred and common stock, deferred annuity contracts,
pension and other postretirement employee benefit obligations, insurance liabilities and income taxes
payable associated with the deemed repatriation under the TCJA.
(d) Refer to unsettled resale and securities borrowed agreements in Note 28 for further information.
(e) Includes accrued interest and future contractual interest obligations. Excludes interest related
to structured notes for which the Firm’s payment obligation is based on the performance of certain
benchmarks.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 61 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 EXPLANATION AND RECONCILIATION OF THE FIRM’S USE 
 OF NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES 
 Non-GAAP financial measures 
The Firm prepares its Consolidated Financial
Statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP; these
financial statements appear on pages 162-166.
That presentation, which is referred to as
“reported” basis, provides the reader with an
understanding of the Firm’s results that can be
tracked consistently from year-to-year and
enables a comparison of the Firm’s performance
with the U.S. GAAP financial statements of other
companies.
In addition to analyzing the Firm’s results on a
reported basis, management reviews Firmwide
results, including the overhead ratio, on a
“managed” basis; these Firmwide managed basis
results are non-GAAP financial measures. The
Firm also reviews the results of the LOBs on a
managed basis. The Firm’s definition of managed
basis starts, in each case, with the reported
U.S. GAAP results and includes certain
reclassifications to present total net revenue
for the Firm (and each of the reportable
business segments) on an FTE basis. Accordingly,
revenue from investments that receive tax
credits and tax-exempt securities is presented
in the managed results on a basis comparable to
taxable investments and securities. These
financial measures allow
management to assess the comparability of
revenue from year-to-year arising from both
taxable and tax-exempt sources. The
corresponding income tax impact related to tax-
exempt items is recorded within income tax
expense. These adjustments have no impact on net
income as reported by the Firm as a whole or by
the LOBs.
Management also uses certain non-GAAP financial
measures at the Firm and business-segment level,
because these other non-GAAP financial measures
provide information to investors about the
underlying operational performance and trends of
the Firm or of the particular business segment,
as the case may be, and, therefore, facilitate a
comparison of the Firm or the business segment
with the performance of its relevant
competitors. Refer to Business Segment Results
on pages 65–84 for additional information on
these non-GAAP measures. Non-GAAP financial
measures used by the Firm may not be comparable
to similarly named non-GAAP financial measures
used by other companies.
The following summary table provides a
reconciliation from the Firm’s reported U.S.
GAAP results to managed basis.
 … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 $ … … $ … $ … … $ … $ … … … 
 … % … … % … % … … % … % … … 
(a) In the second quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain spend-based credit card reward costs
from marketing expense to be a reduction of card income, with no effect on net income. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
(b) Predominantly recognized in CIB, CB and Corporate.
 62 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Net interest income and net yield excluding CIB
Markets In addition to reviewing net interest
income and the net yield on a managed basis,
management also reviews these metrics excluding
CIB Markets, as shown below; these metrics,
which exclude CIB Markets, are non-GAAP
financial measures. Management reviews these
metrics to assess the performance of the Firm’s
lending, investing (including asset-liability
management) and deposit-raising activities. The
resulting metrics that exclude CIB Markets are
referred to as non-markets-related net interest
income and net yield. CIB Markets consists of
Fixed Income Markets and Equity Markets.
Management believes that disclosure of non-
markets-related net interest income and net
yield provides investors and analysts with other
measures by which to analyze the non-markets-
related business trends of the Firm and provides
a comparable measure to other financial
institutions that are primarily focused on
lending, investing and deposit-raising
activities.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except rates) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net interest income – reported $ 54,563 $ 57,245 $ 55,059 
 Fully taxable-equivalent adjustments 418 531 628 
 Net interest income – managed basis(a) $ 54,981 $ 57,776 $ 55,687 
 Less: CIB Markets net interest income(b) 8,374 3,120 3,087 
 Net interest income excluding CIB $ 46,607 $ 54,656 $ 52,600 
 Markets(a) 
 Average interest-earning assets(c) $ 2,779,710 $ 2,345,279 $ 2,212,657 
 Less: Average CIB Markets 751,131 672,417 593,104 
 interest-earning assets(b)(c) 
 Average interest-earning assets $ 2,028,579 $ 1,672,862 $ 1,619,553 
 excluding CIB Markets 
 Net yield on average interest-earning 1.98 % 2.46 % 2.52 % 
 assets – managed basis 
 Net yield on average CIB Markets 1.11 0.46 0.52 
 interest-earning assets(b) 
 Net yield on average interest-earning 2.30 % 3.27 % 3.25 % 
 assets excluding CIB Markets 
(a) Interest includes the effect of related
hedges. Taxable-equivalent amounts are used
where applicable. (b) Refer to pages 74-75 for
further information on CIB Markets. (c) In the
third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified
certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans.
Prior-period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current presentation.
 Calculation of certain U.S. GAAP and non-GAAP 
 financial measures 
 Certain U.S. GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures 
 are calculated as follows: 
 Book value per share (“BVPS”) 
 Common stockholders’ equity at period-end / 
 Common shares at period-end 
 Overhead ratio 
 Total noninterest expense / Total net revenue 
 Pre-provision profit 
 Total net revenue – Total noninterest expense 
 Return on assets (“ROA”) 
 Reported net income / Total average assets 
 Return on common equity (“ROE”) 
 Net income* / Average common stockholders’ equity 
 Return on tangible common equity (“ROTCE”) 
 Net income* / Average tangible common equity 
 Tangible book value per share (“TBVPS”) 
 Tangible common equity at period-end / Common shares at period-end 
 * Represents net income applicable to common 
 equity 
In addition, the Firm reviews other non-GAAP
financial measures which include: • Adjusted
expense, which is noninterest expense excluding
Firmwide legal expense • Allowance for loan
losses to period-end loans retained excluding
trade finance and conduits • Pre-provision
profit, which represents total net revenue less
total noninterest expense. Management believes
that these measures help investors understand
the effect of these items on reported results
and provide an alternate presentation of the
Firm’s performance.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 63 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 Tangible common equity, ROTCE and TBVPS 
Tangible common equity (“TCE”), ROTCE and TBVPS are each non-GAAP financial measures. TCE represents
the Firm’s common stockholders’ equity (i.e., total stockholders’ equity less preferred stock) less
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets (other than MSRs), net of related deferred tax
liabilities. ROTCE measures the Firm’s net income applicable to common equity as a percentage of
average TCE. TBVPS represents the Firm’s TCE at period-end divided by common shares at period-end.
TCE, ROTCE and TBVPS are utilized by the Firm, as well as investors and analysts, in assessing the
Firm’s use of equity.
The following summary table provides a reconciliation from the Firm’s common stockholders’ equity to
TCE.
 (in 
 milli… 
 except Average 
 per Year 
 share ended 
 and Period… Dec 31, Decemb… 
 ratio Dec 31, 2019 31, 
 data) 2020 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Common 
 stock… $ 249,291 $ 234,337 $ 236,865 $ 232,907 $ 229,2… 
 equity 
 Less: 49,248 47,823 47,820 47,620 47,491 
 Goodw… 
 Less: 
 Other 904 819 781 789 807 
 intan… 
 assets 
 Add: 
 Certa… 
 defer… 2,453 2,381 2,399 2,328 2,231 
 tax 
 liabi… 
 Tangi… 
 common $ 201,592 $ 188,076 $ 190,663 $ 186,826 $ 183,1… 
 equity 
 Return 
 on 
 tangi… NA NA 14 % 19 % 17 % 
 common 
 equity 
 Tangi… 
 book 
 value $ 66.11 $ 60.98 NA NA NA 
 per 
 share 
(a) Represents deferred tax liabilities related to tax-deductible goodwill and to identifiable
intangibles created in nontaxable transactions, which are netted against goodwill and other
intangibles when calculating TCE.
 64 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 BUSINESS SEGMENT RESULTS 
The Firm is managed on an LOB basis. There are
four major reportable business segments –
Consumer & Community Banking, Corporate &
Investment Bank, Commercial Banking and Asset &
Wealth Management. In addition, there is a
Corporate segment.
The business segments are determined based on
the products and services provided, or the type
of customer served, and they reflect the manner
in which financial information is currently
evaluated by the Firm’s Operating Committee.
Segment results are presented on a managed
basis. Refer to Explanation and Reconciliation
of the Firm’s use of Non-GAAP Financial
Measures, on pages 62–64 for a definition of
managed basis.
 JPMo… 
 Chase 
 Cons… Wholes… 
 Busi… Busine… 
 Cons… Corpor… Asset 
 & & Commer… & 
 Comm… Invest… Banking Wealth 
 Bank… Bank Manag… 
 Cons… Marke… • • 
 & Home Card & Banking & Middle Asset 
 Busi… Lendi… Auto Secur… Market Manag… 
 Bank… Servi… Banking 
 • • 
 Cons… Home 
 Bank… Lendi… • 
 • Produ… Inves… 
 J.P. • • Banki… • • • 
 Morg… Home Credit • Fixed Corpo… Wealth 
 Weal… Lendi… Card Whole… Income Client Manage… 
 Mana… Servi… • Auto Payme… Marke… Banki… 
 • • • 
 Busi… Real Lendi… 
 Bank… Estate 
 Portf… 
 • 
 Equi… 
 Mark… 
 • • 
 Secu… Comme… 
 Serv… Real 
 • Estate 
 Cred… Banki… 
 Adju… 
 & 
 Other 
Business segment changes
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Firm
transferred certain assets, liabilities,
revenue, expense and headcount associated with
certain wealth management clients from AWM to
the J.P. Morgan Wealth Management business unit
within CCB. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current
presentation, including the transfer of
approximately 1,650 technology and support staff
during the second and third quarters of 2020.
Ultra-high-net-worth and certain high-net-worth
client relationships remained in AWM.
In the first quarter of 2020, the Firm began
reporting a Wholesale Payments business unit
within CIB following a realignment of the Firm’s
wholesale payments businesses. The Wholesale
Payments business comprises:
• Merchant Services, which was realigned from
CCB to CIB
• Treasury Services and Trade Finance in CIB.
Trade Finance was previously reported in Lending
in CIB.
In connection with the alignment of Wholesale
Payments, the assets, liabilities and headcount
associated with the Merchant Services business
were realigned to CIB from CCB, and the revenue
and expenses of the Merchant Services business
are reported across CCB, CIB and CB based
primarily on client relationships. In the fourth
quarter of 2020, payment processing-only clients
along with the associated revenue and expenses
were realigned to CIB’s Wholesale Payments
business from CCB and CB. Payment processing-
only clients are those that only use payment
services offered by Merchant Services, and in
general do not currently utilize other services
offered by the Firm. Prior-period amounts have
been revised
to reflect this realignment and revised
allocation methodology.
Description of business segment reporting
methodology
Results of the business segments are intended to
present each segment as if it were a stand-alone
business. The management reporting process that
derives business segment results includes the
allocation of certain income and expense items.
The Firm also assesses the level of capital
required for each LOB on at least an annual
basis. The Firm periodically assesses the
assumptions, methodologies and reporting
classifications used for segment reporting, and
further refinements may be implemented in future
periods.
Revenue sharing
When business segments join efforts to sell
products and services to the Firm’s clients, the
participating business segments may agree to
share revenue from those transactions. Revenue
is generally recognized in the segment
responsible for the related product or service,
with allocations to the other segment(s)
involved in the transaction. The segment results
reflect these revenue-sharing agreements.
Expense Allocation
Where business segments use services provided by
corporate support units, or another business
segment, the costs of those services are
allocated to the respective business segments.
The expense is generally allocated based on the
actual cost and use of services provided. In
contrast, certain costs and investments related
to corporate support units, technology and
operations not currently utilized by any LOB,
are not
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 65 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
allocated to the business segments and are
retained in Corporate. Expense retained in
Corporate generally includes parent company
costs that would not be incurred if the segments
were stand-alone businesses; and other items not
aligned with a particular business segment.
Funds transfer pricing
Funds transfer pricing is the process by which
the Firm allocates interest income and expense
to each business segment and transfers the
primary interest rate risk and liquidity risk
exposures to Treasury and CIO within Corporate.
The funds transfer pricing process considers the
interest rate risk, liquidity risk and
regulatory requirements on a product-by-product
basis within each business segment.
Debt expense and preferred stock dividend
allocation
As part of the funds transfer pricing process,
almost all of the cost of the credit spread
component of outstanding unsecured long-term
debt and preferred stock dividends is allocated
to the reportable business segments, while the
balance of the cost is retained in Corporate.
The methodology to allocate the
cost of unsecured long-term debt and preferred
stock dividends to the business segments is
aligned with the Firm’s process to allocate
capital. The allocated cost of unsecured long-
term debt is included in a business segment’s
net interest income, and net income is reduced
by preferred stock dividends to arrive at a
business segment’s net income applicable to
common equity.
Business segment capital allocation
The amount of capital assigned to each business
is referred to as equity. As of January 1, 2021,
the Firm has changed its line of business
capital allocations primarily as a result of
changes in exposures for each LOB and an
increase in the relative risk weighting toward
Standardized RWA. The assumptions and
methodologies used to allocate capital are
periodically assessed and as a result, the
capital allocated to the LOBs may change from
time to time.
Refer to Line of business equity on page 98 for
additional information on business segment
capital allocation.
 Segment Results – Managed Basis 
The following tables summarize the Firm’s results by segment for the periods indicated.
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … C… C… 
 … & & C… 
 … C… I… B… 
 … B… 2… 2… 2… B… 2… 2… 2… 2… 2… 2… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … $ 5… $ 5… $ 5… $ 4… $ 3… $ 3… $ 9… $ 9… $ 9… 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… 2… 2… 2… 2… 2… 3… 3… 3… 
 … 
 … 2… 2… 2… 2… 1… 1… 5… 5… 5… 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… 4… 4… 2… 2… -… 2… 2… 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 8… 1… 1… 1… 1… 1… 2… 3… 4… 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… 3… 2… 20 % 1… 1… 11 % 1… 2… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … A… 
 … & 
 … W… 
 … M… 2… 2… 2… C… 2… 2… 20… T… 20… 2… 20… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … $ 1… $ 1… $ 1… $ -… $ 1… $ -1… $ 12… $ 1… $ 11… 
 … 
 … 
 … 9… 9… 9… 1… 1… 902 66… 6… 63… 
 … 
 … 4… 3… 3… -… 1… -1… 56… 5… 48… 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… 59 52 66 -1 -4 17… 5… 4,… 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… 2… 2… -… 1… -1… 29… 3… 32… 
 … 
 … 
 … 28 % 2… 3… NM NM NM 12% 1… 13% 
 … 
 … 
(a) In the second quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain spend-based credit card reward costs
from marketing expense to be a reduction of card income, with no effect on net income. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
The following sections provide a comparative discussion of the Firm’s results by segment as of or for
the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 66 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 CONSUMER & COMMUNITY BANKING 
 Consumer & Community Banking offers services to 
 consumers and businesses through bank branches, 
 ATMs, digital (including mobile and online) and 
 telephone banking. CCB is organized into Consumer 
 & Business Banking (including Consumer Banking, 
 J.P. Morgan Wealth Management and Business 
 Banking), Home Lending (including Home Lending 
 Production, Home Lending Servicing and Real Estate 
 Portfolios) and Card & Auto. Consumer & Business 
 Banking offers deposit and investment products, 
 payments and services to consumers, and lending, 
 deposit, and cash management and payment solutions 
 to small businesses. Home Lending includes 
 mortgage origination and servicing activities, as 
 well as portfolios consisting of residential 
 mortgages and home equity loans. Card & Auto 
 issues credit cards to consumers and small 
 businesses and originates and services auto loans 
 and leases. 
 Selected income statement data 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except ratios) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Revenue 
 Lending- and deposit-related fees(a) $ 3,166 $ 3,938 $ 3,787 
 Asset management, administration and 2,780 2,808 2,592 
 commissions(a) 
 Mortgage fees and related income 3,079 2,035 1,252 
 Card income(b) 3,068 3,412 3,108 
 All other income 5,647 5,603 4,599 
 Noninterest revenue 17,740 17,796 15,338 
 Net interest income 33,528 37,337 35,933 
 Total net revenue 51,268 55,133 51,271 
 Provision for credit losses 12,312 4,954 4,754 
 Noninterest expense 
 Compensation expense 11,014 10,815 10,580 
 Noncompensation expense(b)(c) 16,976 17,461 16,588 
 Total noninterest expense 27,990 28,276 27,168 
 Income before income tax expense 10,966 21,903 19,349 
 Income tax expense 2,749 5,362 4,642 
 Net income $ 8,217 $ 16,541 $ 14,707 
 Revenue by line of business 
 Consumer & Business Banking $ 22,955 $ 27,376 $ 25,607 
 Home Lending 6,018 5,179 5,484 
 Card & Auto(b) 22,295 22,578 20,180 
 Mortgage fees and related income 
 details: 
 Net production revenue 2,629 1,618 268 
 Net mortgage servicing 450 417 984 
 revenue(d) 
 Mortgage fees and related income $ 3,079 $ 2,035 $ 1,252 
 Financial ratios 
 Return on equity 15 % 31 % 28 % 
 Overhead ratio 55 51 53 
In the first quarter of 2020, the Merchant
Services business was realigned from CCB to CIB
as part of the Firm’s Wholesale Payments
business. In the fourth quarter of 2020, payment
processing-only clients along with the
associated revenue and expenses were realigned
to CIB’s Wholesale Payments business from CCB
and CB. Prior-period amounts have been revised
to conform with the current presentation. In the
fourth quarter of 2020, the Firm realigned
certain wealth management clients from AWM to
CCB. Prior-period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current presentation, including
an increase to net revenue of $725 million and
$649 million for the years ended December 31,
2019 and 2018, respectively. Ultra-high-net-
worth and certain high-net-worth client
relationships remained in AWM. (a) In the first
quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain
fees from asset management, administration and
commissions to lending- and deposit-related
fees. Prior-period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current presentation. (b) In
the second quarter of 2020, the Firm
reclassified certain spend-based credit card
reward costs from marketing expense to be a
reduction of card income, with no effect on net
income. Prior-period amounts have been revised
to conform with the current presentation. (c)
Included depreciation expense on leased assets
of $4.2 billion, $4.0 billion and $3.4 billion
for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and
2018, respectively. (d) Included MSR risk
management results of $(18) million, $(165)
million and $(111) million for the years ended
December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 67 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 2020 compared with 2019 
Net income was $8.2 billion, a decrease of 50%,
largely driven by an increase in the provision
for credit losses.
Net revenue was $51.3 billion, a decrease of 7%.
Net interest income was $33.5 billion, down 10%,
driven by:
• the impact of deposit margin compression in
CBB, spread compression and lower loans in Home
Lending, predominantly due to paydowns and prior
year loan sales, and lower loans in Card due to
the decline in sales volume as a result of the
COVID-19 pandemic,
partially offset by
• growth in deposits in CBB, and loan margin
expansion in Card, the prior year included
charges for the unwind of the internal funding
from Treasury and CIO associated with the sales
of certain mortgage loans.
Noninterest revenue was $17.7 billion, flat,
reflecting:
• lower deposit-related fees due to lower
transaction activity and the impact of fee
refunds related to the COVID-19 pandemic,
• lower card income due to lower net interchange
income reflecting lower credit card sales
volumes and debit card transactions as a result
of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, largely
offset by lower acquisition costs and higher
annual fees, and
• lower asset management, administration and
commissions due to a lower volume of annuity
sales offset by a higher level of investment
assets,
offset by
• higher net mortgage production revenue
reflecting higher mortgage production volumes
and margins; the prior year included gains on
the sales of certain mortgage loans.
Refer to Note 15 for further information
regarding changes in the value of the MSR asset
and related hedges, and mortgage fees and
related income.
Noninterest expense was $28.0 billion,
relatively flat, reflecting:
• lower marketing expense as a result of lower
investments in marketing campaigns and lower
travel-related benefits, and
• lower structural expenses,
offset by
• investments in the business, higher volume-
related compensation, and higher depreciation on
auto lease assets.
The provision for credit losses was $12.3
billion, an increase of $7.4 billion from the
prior year, driven by:
• additions to the allowance for credit losses
as a result of the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic, consisting of: $6.6 billion for Card,
$649 million for CBB, and $560 million for Auto,
partially offset by
• lower net charge-offs largely in Card,
reflecting lower charge-offs and higher
recoveries primarily benefiting from payment
assistance and government stimulus.
The prior year included a $300 million net
reduction in the
allowance for credit losses.
Refer to Credit and Investment Risk Management
on pages 110–134 and Allowance for Credit Losses
on pages 132-133 for further discussions of the
credit portfolios and the allowance for credit
losses.
 68 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Selected metrics 
 As of or for the year ended 
 December 31, 
 (in millions, except headcount) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Selected balance sheet data 
 (period-end) 
 Total assets $ 496,705 $ 541,367 $ 560,177 
 Loans: 
 Consumer & Business Banking 48,810 -d 29,585 28,450 
 Home Lending(a)(b) 182,121 213,445 247,721 
 Card 144,216 168,924 156,632 
 Auto 66,432 61,522 63,573 
 Total loans 441,579 473,476 496,376 
 Deposits 958,706 723,418 684,124 
 Equity 52,000 52,000 51,000 
 Selected balance sheet data 
 (average) 
 Total assets $ 501,584 $ 543,127 $ 548,637 
 Loans: 
 Consumer & Business Banking 43,064 28,859 27,890 
 Home Lending(a)(c) 197,148 230,662 250,373 
 Card 146,633 156,325 145,652 
 Auto 61,476 61,862 64,675 
 Total loans 448,321 477,708 488,590 
 Deposits 851,390 698,378 675,537 
 Equity 52,000 52,000 51,000 
 Headcount 122,894 125,756 127,826 
In the first quarter of 2020, the Merchant
Services business was realigned from CCB to CIB
as part of the Firm’s Wholesale Payments
business. In the fourth quarter of 2020, payment
processing-only clients along with the
associated revenue and expenses were realigned
to CIB’s Wholesale Payments business from CCB
and CB. Prior-period amounts have been revised
to conform with the current presentation,
including a decrease to period-end assets of
$6.6 billion and $6.2 billion and headcount of
4,022 and 4,092, as of December 31, 2019 and
2018, respectively. In the fourth quarter of
2020, the Firm realigned certain wealth
management clients from AWM to CCB. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation, including an increase to
headcount of 2,641 and 2,400 as of December 31,
2019 and 2018, respectively. (a) In the third
quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain
fair value option elected lending-related
positions from trading assets to loans. Prior-
period amounts have been revised to conform with
the current presentation. (b) At December 31,
2020, 2019 and 2018, Home Lending loans held-
for-sale and loans at fair value were $9.7
billion, $16.6 billion and $7.9 billion,
respectively. (c) Average Home Lending loans
held-for sale and loans at fair value were $11.1
billion, $14.1 billion and $9.0 billion,
respectively, for the years ended December 31,
2020, 2019 and 2018. (d) At December 31, 2020
included $19.2 billion of loans in Business
Banking under the PPP. Refer to Credit Portfolio
on pages 112-113 for a further discussion of the
PPP.
 Selected metrics 
 As of or for the year ended 
 December 31, 
 (in millions, except ratio data) 2020 2019 2018 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Credit data and quality statistics 
 Nonaccrual loans(a)(b)(c) $ 5,675 -f $ 3,027 $ 3,349 
 Net charge-offs/(recoveries) 
 Consumer & Business Banking 263 298 246 
 Home Lending -169 -98 -294 
 Card 4,286 4,848 4,518 
 Auto 123 206 243 
 Total net charge-offs/(recoveries) $ 4,503 $ 5,254 $ 4,713 
 Net charge-off/(recovery) rate 
 Consumer & Business Banking 0.61 % -g 1.03 % 0.88 % 
 Home Lending -0.09 -0.05 -0.12 
 Card 2.93 3.10 3.10 
 Auto 0.20 0.33 0.38 
 Total net charge-off/(recovery) rate 1.03 % 1.13 % 0.98 % 
 30+ day delinquency rate 
 Home Lending(d)(e) 1.15 % -h 1.58 % 1.63 % 
 Card 1.68 -h 1.87 1.83 
 Auto 0.69 -h 0.94 0.93 
 90+ day delinquency rate - Card 0.92 % -h 0.95 % 0.92 % 
 Allowance for loan losses 
 Consumer & Business Banking $ 1,372 $ 750 $ 796 
 Home Lending 1,813 1,890 2,791 
 Card 17,800 5,683 5,184 
 Auto 1,042 465 464 
 Total allowance for loan losses $ 22,027 $ 8,788 $ 9,235 
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the
CECL accounting guidance. The adoption resulted
in a change in the accounting for PCI loans,
which are considered purchased credit
deteriorated (“PCD”) loans under CECL. Refer to
Note 1 for further information. In the fourth
quarter of 2020, the Firm realigned certain
wealth management clients from AWM to CCB.
Prior-period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current presentation. (a) At
December 31, 2020, nonaccrual loans included
$1.6 billion of PCD loans. Prior to the adoption
of CECL, nonaccrual loans excluded PCI loans as
the Firm recognized interest income on each pool
of PCI loans as each of the pools was
performing. (b) At December 31, 2020, 2019 and
2018, nonaccrual loans excluded mortgage loans
90 or more days past due and insured by U.S.
government agencies of $558 million, $963
million and $2.6 billion, respectively. These
amounts have been excluded based upon the
government guarantee. Prior-period amounts of
mortgage loans 90 or more days past due and
insured by U.S. government agencies excluded
from nonaccrual loans have been revised to
conform with the current presentation; refer to
footnote (c) for additional information. (c) In
the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified
certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans.
Prior-period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current presentation. (d) At
December 31, 2020, the 30+ day delinquency rates
included PCD loans. The rates prior to January
1, 2020 were revised to include the impact of
PCI loans. (e) At December 31, 2020, 2019 and
2018, excluded mortgage loans insured by U.S.
government agencies of $744 million, $1.7
billion and $4.1 billion, respectively, that are
30 or more days past due. These amounts have
been excluded based upon the government
guarantee. Prior-period amounts of mortgage
loans 30 or more days past due and insured by
U.S. government agencies excluded from 30+ day
delinquency rate have been revised to conform
with the current presentation; refer to footnote
(c) for additional information.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 69 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
(f) Generally excludes loans under payment deferral programs offered in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. Refer to Consumer Credit Portfolio on pages 114-116 for further information on consumer
payment assistance activity. Includes loans to customers that have exited COVID-19 payment deferral
programs and are 90 or more days past due, predominantly all of which were also at least 150 days
past due and therefore considered collateral-dependent. Collateral-dependent loans are charged down
to the lower of amortized cost or fair value of the underlying collateral less costs to sell. (g) At
December 31, 2020, included $19.2 billion of loans in Business Banking under the PPP. Given that PPP
loans are guaranteed by the SBA, the Firm does not expect to realize material credit losses on these
loans. Refer to Credit Portfolio on pages 112-113 for a further discussion of the PPP. (h) At
December 31, 2020, the principal balance of loans in Home Lending, Card and Auto under payment
deferral programs offered in response to the COVID-19 pandemic were $9.1 billion, $264 million and
$376 million, respectively. Loans that are performing according to their modified terms are generally
not considered delinquent. Refer to Consumer Credit Portfolio on pages 114-116 for further
information on consumer payment assistance activity.
 Selected metrics 
 As of or for the year ended December 
 31, 
 (in billions, except ratios and where 
 otherwise noted) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Business Metrics 
 CCB households (in millions) 63.4 62.6 61.7 
 Number of branches 4,908 4,976 5,036 
 Active digital customers 55,274 52,453 49,254 
 (in thousands)(a) 
 Active mobile customers 40,899 37,315 33,260 
 (in thousands)(b) 
 Debit and credit card $ 1,081.2 $ 1,114.4 $ 1,016.9 
 sales volume 
 Consumer & Business Banking 
 Average deposits $ 832.5 $ 683.7 $ 661.7 
 Deposit margin 1.58 % 2.48 % 2.38 % 
 Business banking $ 26.6 -f $ 6.6 $ 6.7 
 origination volume 
 Client investment assets 590.2 501.4 399.7 
 Number of client advisors 4,417 4,196 3,929 
 Home Lending 
 Mortgage origination volume 
 by channel 
 Retail $ 72.9 $ 51.0 $ 38.3 
 Correspondent 40.9 54.2 41.1 
 Total mortgage origination volume(c) $ 113.8 $ 105.2 $ 79.4 
 Total loans serviced $ 626.3 $ 761.4 $ 789.8 
 (period-end) 
 Third-party mortgage loans serviced 447.3 520.8 519.6 
 (period-end) 
 MSR carrying value 3.3 4.7 6.1 
 (period-end) 
 Ratio of MSR carrying value 
 (period-end) 0.74 % 0.90 % 1.17 % 
 to third-party mortgage loans serviced 
 (period-end) 
 MSR revenue multiple(d) 2.55 x 2.65 x 3.34x 
 Credit Card 
 Credit card sales volume, excluding $ 702.7 $ 762.8 $ 692.4 
 commercial card 
 New accounts opened 5.4 $ 7.8 7.8 
 (in millions) 
 Net revenue rate(e) 10.92 % 10.48 % 10.17 % 
 Auto 
 Loan and lease $ 38.4 $ 34.0 $ 31.8 
 origination volume 
 Average auto 22.0 21.6 18.8 
 operating lease assets 
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Firm
realigned certain wealth management clients from
AWM to CCB. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current
presentation, including an increase to client
investment assets of $143.3 billion and $117.3
billion as of December 31, 2019 and 2018,
respectively. (a) Users of all web and/or mobile
platforms who have logged in within the past 90
days. (b) Users of all mobile platforms who have
logged in within the past 90 days. (c) Firmwide
mortgage origination volume was $133.4 billion,
$115.9 billion and $86.9 billion for the years
ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018,
respectively. (d) Represents the ratio of MSR
carrying value (period-end) to third-party
mortgage loans serviced (period-end) divided by
the ratio of loan servicing-related revenue to
third-party mortgage loans serviced (average).
(e) In the second quarter of 2020, the Firm
reclassified certain spend-based credit card
reward costs from marketing expense to be a
reduction of card income, with no effect on net
income. Prior-period amounts have been revised
to conform with the current presentation. (f)
Included $21.9 billion of origination volume
under the PPP for the year ended December 31,
2020. Refer to Credit Portfolio on pages 112-113
for a further discussion of the PPP.
 70 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 CORPORATE & INVESTMENT BANK 
 The Corporate & Investment Bank, which consists of 
 Banking and Markets & Securities Services, offers 
 a broad suite of investment banking, 
 market-making, prime brokerage, and treasury and 
 securities products and services to a global 
 client base of corporations, investors, financial 
 institutions, merchants, government and municipal 
 entities. Banking offers a full range of 
 investment banking products and services in all 
 major capital markets, including advising on 
 corporate strategy and structure, capital-raising 
 in equity and debt markets, as well as loan 
 origination and syndication. Banking also includes 
 Wholesale Payments, which provides payments 
 services enabling clients to manage payments and 
 receipts globally, and cross-border financing. 
 Markets & Securities Services includes Markets, a 
 global market-maker across products, including 
 cash and derivative instruments, which also offers 
 sophisticated risk management solutions, prime 
 brokerage, and research. Markets & Securities 
 Services also includes Securities Services, a 
 leading global custodian which provides custody, 
 fund accounting and administration, and securities 
 lending products principally for asset managers, 
 insurance companies and public and private 
 investment funds. 
 Selected income statement data 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Revenue 
 Investment banking fees $ 9,477 $ 7,575 $ 7,473 
 Principal transactions 17,560 14,399 12,262 
 Lending- and deposit-related fees(a) 2,070 1,668 1,633 
 Asset management, administration and 4,721 4,400 4,361 
 commissions(a) 
 All other income 1,292 2,018 2,125 
 Noninterest revenue 35,120 30,060 27,854 
 Net interest income 14,164 9,205 9,528 
 Total net revenue(b) 49,284 39,265 37,382 
 Provision for credit losses 2,726 277 -60 
 Noninterest expense 
 Compensation expense 11,612 11,180 10,776 
 Noncompensation expense 11,926 11,264 11,100 
 Total noninterest expense 23,538 22,444 21,876 
 Income before income tax expense 23,020 16,544 15,566 
 Income tax expense 5,926 4,590 3,767 
 Net income $ 17,094 $ 11,954 $ 11,799 
In the first quarter of 2020, the Merchant
Services business was realigned from CCB to CIB
as part of the Firm’s Wholesale Payments
business. In the fourth quarter of 2020, payment
processing-only clients along with the
associated revenue and expenses were realigned
to CIB’s Wholesale Payments business from CCB
and CB. Prior-period amounts have been revised
to conform with the current presentation. (a) In
the first quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified
certain fees from asset management,
administration and commissions to lending- and
deposit-related fees. Prior-period amounts have
been revised to conform with the current
presentation.
(b) Includes tax-equivalent adjustments,
predominantly due to income tax credits related
to alternative energy investments; income tax
credits and amortization of the cost of
investments in affordable housing projects; and
tax-exempt income from municipal bonds of $2.8
billion, $2.3 billion and $1.7 billion for the
years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018,
respectively.
 Selected income statement data 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except ratios) 2020 2019 2018 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Financial ratios 
 Return on equity 20 % 14 % 16 % 
 Overhead ratio 48 57 59 
 Compensation expense as 
 percentage of total net 24 28 29 
 revenue 
 Revenue by business 
 Investment Banking $ 8,871 $ 7,215 $ 6,987 
 Wholesale Payments 5,560 5,842 5,930 
 Lending 1,146 1,021 999 
 Total Banking 15,577 14,078 13,916 
 Fixed Income Markets 20,878 14,418 12,706 
 Equity Markets 8,605 6,494 6,888 
 Securities Services 4,253 4,154 4,245 
 Credit Adjustments & Other(a) -29 121 -373 
 Total Markets & Securities 33,707 25,187 23,466 
 Services 
 Total net revenue $ 49,284 $ 39,265 $ 37,382 
In the first quarter of 2020, the Merchant
Services business was realigned from CCB to CIB
as part of the Firm’s Wholesale Payments
business. In the fourth quarter of 2020, payment
processing-only clients along with the
associated revenue and expenses were realigned
to CIB’s Wholesale Payments business from CCB
and CB. Prior-period amounts have been revised
to conform with the current presentation. (a)
Includes credit valuation adjustments (“CVA”)
managed centrally within CIB and funding
valuation adjustments (“FVA”) on derivatives and
certain components of fair value option elected
liabilities, which are primarily reported in
principal transactions revenue. Results are
presented net of associated hedging activities
and net of CVA and FVA amounts allocated to
Fixed Income Markets and Equity Markets. Refer
to Notes 2, 3 and 24 for additional information.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 71 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 2020 compared with 2019 
Net income was $17.1 billion, up 43%.
Net revenue was $49.3 billion, up 26%.
Banking revenue was $15.6 billion, up 11%.
• Investment Banking revenue was $8.9 billion,
up 23%, driven by higher Investment Banking
fees, up 25%, reflecting higher equity and debt
underwriting fees. The Firm maintained its #1
ranking for Global Investment Banking fees with
overall share gains, according to Dealogic.
– Equity underwriting fees were $2.8 billion, up
66%, predominantly in follow-on offerings and
convertible securities markets due to increased
industry-wide fees.
– Debt underwriting fees were $4.4 billion, up
23%, driven by increased industry-wide fees and
wallet share gains in investment grade and high
yield bonds. The increased activity resulted in
part from clients seeking liquidity in the first
half of the year as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic.
– Advisory fees of $2.4 billion were flat,
reflecting an increase in wallet share, despite
a decrease in industry-wide fees.
• Wholesale Payments revenue was $5.6 billion,
down 5%, driven by deposit margin compression
and a reporting reclassification for certain
expenses which are now reported as a reduction
of revenue in Merchant Services, largely offset
by higher deposit balances.
• Lending revenue was $1.1 billion, up 12%,
predominantly driven by higher net interest
income reflecting higher yields on new loans and
higher loan balances, as well as higher loan
commitment fees, largely offset by fair value
losses on hedges of accrual loans.
Markets & Securities Services revenue was $33.7
billion, up 34%. Markets revenue was $29.5
billion, up 41%.
• Fixed Income Markets revenue was $20.9
billion, up 45%, driven by strong client
activity across products primarily in Rates,
Credit, Currencies & Emerging Markets, and
Securitized Products.
• Equity Markets revenue was $8.6 billion, up
33%, driven by strong client activity across
products.
• Securities Services revenue was $4.3 billion,
up 2%, driven by deposit balance and fee growth
largely offset by deposit margin compression.
The provision for credit losses was $2.7
billion, compared with $277 million in the prior
year. The increase was driven by net additions
to the allowance for credit losses as a result
of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic across
multiple industries.
Noninterest expense was $23.5 billion, up 5%,
driven by higher volume- and revenue-related
expense and legal expense.
 72 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Selected metrics 
 As of or for the year ended 
 December 31, 
 (in millions, except headcount) 
 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Selected balance sheet data 
 (period-end) 
 Assets $ 1,097,219 $ 914,705 $ 909,292 
 Loans: 
 Loans retained(a) 133,296 121,733 129,389 
 Loans held-for-sale and loans at fair 39,588 34,317 36,407 
 value(b)(c) 
 Total loans 172,884 156,050 165,796 
 Equity 80,000 80,000 70,000 
 Selected balance sheet data (average) 
 Assets $ 1,122,939 $ 993,508 $ 930,126 
 Trading assets-debt and equity 422,237 376,182 321,280 
 instruments(c) 
 Trading assets-derivative receivables 72,065 48,196 60,552 
 Loans: 
 Loans retained(a) 135,676 122,371 114,417 
 Loans held-for-sale and loans at fair 33,792 32,884 30,317 
 value(b)(c) 
 Total loans 169,468 155,255 144,734 
 Equity 80,000 80,000 70,000 
 Headcount 61,733 60,013 58,572 
In the first quarter of 2020, the Merchant
Services business was realigned from CCB to CIB
as part of the Firm’s Wholesale Payments
business. In the fourth quarter of 2020, payment
processing-only clients along with the
associated revenue and expenses were realigned
to CIB’s Wholesale Payments business from CCB
and CB. Prior-period amounts have been revised
to conform with the current presentation,
including an increase to period-end assets of
$6.6 billion and $6.2 billion and headcount of
4,022 and 4,092, as of December 31, 2019 and
2018, respectively. (a) Loans retained includes
credit portfolio loans, loans held by
consolidated Firm-administered multi-seller
conduits, trade finance loans, mortgage-related
secured lending, other held-for-investment loans
and overdrafts (b) Loans held-for-sale and loans
at fair value primarily reflect lending-related
positions originated and purchased in CIB
Markets, including loans held for
securitization. (c) In the third quarter of
2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value
option elected lending-related positions from
trading assets to loans and other assets. Prior-
period amounts have been revised to conform with
the current presentation.
 Selected metrics 
 As of or for the year ended 
 December 31, 
 (in millions, except ratios) 
 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Credit data and quality statistics 
 Net charge-offs/(recoveries) $ 370 $ 183 $ 93 
 Nonperforming assets: 
 Nonaccrual loans: 
 Nonaccrual loans retained(a) 1,008 308 443 
 Nonaccrual loansheld-for-sale and 
 loans 1,662 644 921 
 at fair value(b)(c) 
 Total nonaccrual loans 2,670 952 1,364 
 Derivative receivables 56 30 60 
 Assets acquired in loan 85 70 57 
 satisfactions 
 Total nonperforming assets 2,811 1,052 1,481 
 Allowance for credit losses: 
 Allowance for loan losses 2,366 1,202 1,199 
 Allowance for lending-related 1,534 848 754 
 commitments 
 Total allowance for credit losses 3,900 2,050 1,953 
 Net charge-off/(recovery) rate(d) 0.27 % 0.15 % 0.08 % 
 Allowance for loan losses to 
 period-end loans 1.77 0.99 0.93 
 retained 
 Allowance for loan losses to 
 period-end 
 loans retained, excluding trade 2.54 1.31 1.24 
 finance 
 and conduits(e) 
 Allowance for loan losses to 
 nonaccrual loans 235 390 271 
 retained(a) 
 Nonaccrual loans to total period-end 1.54 0.61 0.82 
 loans(b) 
(a) Allowance for loan losses of $278 million,
$110 million and $174 million were held against
these nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2020,
2019 and 2018, respectively. (b) In the third
quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain
fair value option elected lending-related
positions from trading assets to loans. Prior-
period amounts have been revised to conform with
the current presentation. (c) At December 31,
2020, 2019 and 2018, nonaccrual loans excluded
mortgage loans 90 or more days past due and
insured by U.S. government agencies of $316
million, $127 million and $155 million,
respectively. These amounts have been excluded
based upon the government guarantee. (d) Loans
held-for-sale and loans at fair value were
excluded when calculating the net charge-
off/(recovery) rate. (e) Management uses
allowance for loan losses to period-end loans
retained, excluding trade finance and conduits,
a non-GAAP financial measure, to provide a more
meaningful assessment of CIB’s allowance
coverage ratio.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 73 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 Investment banking fees Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Advisory $ 2,368 $ 2,377 $ 2,509 
 Equity underwriting 2,758 1,666 1,684 
 Debt underwriting(a) 4,351 3,532 3,280 
 Total investment banking fees $ 9,477 $ 7,575 $ 7,473 
(a) Represents long-term debt and loan syndications.
 League table results – 
 wallet share 2020 2019 2018 
 Year ended December 31, Rank Share Rank Share Rank Share 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Based on fees(a) 
 M&A(b) 
 Global # 2 9.3 % # 2 8.9 % # 2 8.6 % 
 U.S. 2 9.7 2 9.2 2 8.8 
 Equity and equity-related(c) 
 Global 2 8.6 1 9.3 1 9.0 
 U.S. 2 11.1 2 13.2 1 12.3 
 Long-term debt(d) 
 Global 1 8.9 1 7.8 1 7.2 
 U.S. 1 12.8 1 12.0 1 11.4 
 Loan syndications 
 Global 1 11.1 1 10.1 1 10.1 
 U.S. 1 11.5 1 12.5 1 12.3 
 Global investment banking # 1 9.2 % # 1 8.9 % # 1 8.6 % 
 fees(e) 
(a) Source: Dealogic as of January 4, 2021. Reflects the ranking of revenue wallet and market share.
(b) Global M&A excludes any withdrawn transactions. U.S. M&A revenue wallet represents wallet from
client parents based in the U.S.
(c) Global equity and equity-related ranking includes rights offerings and Chinese A-Shares.
(d) Long-term debt rankings include investment-grade, high-yield, supranationals, sovereigns,
agencies, covered bonds, asset-backed securities (“ABS”) and mortgage-backed securities (“MBS”); and
exclude money market, short-term debt, and U.S. municipal securities.
(e) Global investment banking fees exclude money market, short-term debt and shelf securities.
 Markets revenue 
The following table summarizes select income
statement data for the Markets businesses.
Markets consists of Fixed Income Markets and
Equity Markets. Markets revenue comprises
principal transactions, fees, commissions and
other income, as well as net interest income.
The Firm assesses its Markets business
performance on a total revenue basis, as offsets
may occur across revenue line items. For
example, securities that generate net interest
income may be risk-managed by derivatives that
are recorded in principal transactions revenue.
Refer to Notes 6 and 7 for a description of the
composition of these income statement line
items.
Principal transactions reflects revenue on
financial instruments and commodities
transactions that arise from client-driven
market-making activity. Principal transactions
revenue includes amounts recognized upon
executing new transactions with market
participants, as well as “inventory-related
revenue”, which is revenue recognized from gains
and losses on derivatives and other instruments
that the Firm has been holding in anticipation
of, or in response to, client demand, and
changes in the fair value of instruments used by
the Firm to actively manage the risk exposure
arising from such inventory. Principal
transactions revenue recognized upon executing
new transactions with market participants is
driven by many factors including the level of
client activity, the bid-offer spread (which is
the difference
between the price at which a market participant
is willing and able to sell an instrument to the
Firm and the price at which another market
participant is willing and able to buy it from
the Firm, and vice versa), market liquidity and
volatility. These factors are interrelated and
sensitive to the same factors that drive
inventory-related revenue, which include general
market conditions, such as interest rates,
foreign exchange rates, credit spreads, and
equity and commodity prices, as well as other
macroeconomic conditions.
 74 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
For the periods presented below, the predominant source of principal transactions revenue was the
amount recognized upon executing new transactions.
 Y… 
 e… 
 D… 
 3… 
 (… 
 m… 
 e… 20… 20… 2… 
 w… Fi… Fi… F… 
 o… In… Eq… T… In… E… To… I… Eq… T… 
 n… Ma… Ma… M… Ma… M… Ma… M… Ma… M… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 P… $ 11… $ 6,… $ 1… $ 8,… $ 5… $ 14… $ 7… $ 5,… $ 1… 
 t… 
 L… 
 a… 226 10 2… 198 7 205 1… 6 2… 
 d… 
 f… 
 A… 
 m… 
 a… 411 2,… 2… 407 1… 2,… 4… 1,… 2… 
 a… 
 c… 
 A… 
 o… 493 -62 4… 872 8 880 9… 22 9… 
 i… 
 N… 12… 8,… 2… 10… 7… 17… 9… 7,… 1… 
 r… 
 N… 
 i… 7,… 483 8… 4,… -… 3,… 3… -5… 3… 
 i… 
 T… 
 n… $ 20… $ 8,… $ 2… $ 14… $ 6… $ 20… $ 1… $ 6,… $ 1… 
 r… 
 L… 4 1 5 
 d… 
(a) Loss days represent the number of days for which CIB Markets, which consists of Fixed Income
Markets and Equity Markets, posted losses to total net revenue. The loss days determined under this
measure differ from the measure used to determine backtesting gains and losses. Daily backtesting
gains and losses include positions in the Firm’s Risk Management value-at-risk (“VaR”) measure and
exclude select components of total net revenue, which may more than offset backtesting gains or
losses on a particular day. For more information on daily backtesting gains and losses, refer to the
VaR discussion on pages 137–139.
 Selected metrics 
 As of or for the year ended 
 December 31, 
 (in millions, except where otherwise noted) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Assets under custody (“AUC”) by asset 
 class (period-end) (in billions): 
 Fixed Income $ 15,840 $ 13,498 $ 12,440 
 Equity 11,489 10,100 8,078 
 Other(a) 3,651 3,233 2,699 
 Total AUC $ 30,980 $ 26,831 $ 23,217 
 Merchant processing volume (in $ 1,597.3 $ 1,511.5 $ 1,366.1 
 billions)(b) 
 Client deposits and other third party $ 610,555 $ 464,795 $ 434,422 
 liabilities (average)(c) 
In the first quarter of 2020, the Merchant Services business was realigned from CCB to CIB as part of
the Firm’s Wholesale Payments business. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation.
(a) Consists of mutual funds, unit investment trusts, currencies, annuities, insurance contracts,
options and other contracts.
(b) Represents total merchant processing volume across CIB, CCB and CB.
(c) Client deposits and other third-party liabilities pertain to the Wholesale Payments and
Securities Services businesses.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 75 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 International metrics 
 As of or for the year ended 
 December 31, 
 (in millions, except where otherwise noted) 2020 2019(c) 2018(c) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total net revenue(a) 
 Europe/Middle East/Africa $ 13,872 $ 11,905 $ 12,422 
 Asia-Pacific 7,524 5,319 5,077 
 Latin America/Caribbean 1,931 1,543 1,473 
 Total international net revenue 23,327 18,767 18,972 
 North America 25,957 20,498 18,410 
 Total net revenue $ 49,284 $ 39,265 $ 37,382 
 Loans retained (period-end)(a) 
 Europe/Middle East/Africa $ 27,659 $ 26,067 $ 23,648 
 Asia-Pacific 12,802 14,759 17,101 
 Latin America/Caribbean 5,425 6,173 6,515 
 Total international loans 45,886 46,999 47,264 
 North America 87,410 74,734 82,125 
 Total loans retained $ 133,296 $ 121,733 $ 129,389 
 Client deposits and other third-party 
 liabilities (average)(b) 
 Europe/Middle East/Africa $ 211,592 $ 174,477 $ 162,846 
 Asia-Pacific 124,145 90,364 82,867 
 Latin America/Caribbean 37,664 29,024 26,668 
 Total international $ 373,401 $ 293,865 $ 272,381 
 North America 237,154 170,930 162,041 
 Total client deposits and other $ 610,555 $ 464,795 $ 434,422 
 third-party liabilities 
 AUC (period-end)(b)(in billions) 
 North America $ 20,028 $ 16,855 $ 14,359 
 All other regions 10,952 9,976 8,858 
 Total AUC $ 30,980 $ 26,831 $ 23,217 
In the first quarter of 2020, the Merchant Services business was realigned from CCB to CIB as part of
the Firm’s Wholesale Payments business. In the fourth quarter of 2020, payment processing-only
clients along with the associated revenue and expenses were realigned to CIB’s Wholesale Payments
business from CCB and CB. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current
presentation.
(a) Total net revenue and loans retained (excluding loans held-for-sale and loans at fair value) are
based on the location of the trading desk, booking location, or domicile of the client, as
applicable.
(b) Client deposits and other third-party liabilities pertaining to the Wholesale Payments and
Securities Services businesses, and AUC, are based on the domicile of the client.
(c) Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
 76 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 COMMERCIAL BANKING 
 Commercial Banking provides comprehensive 
 financial solutions, including lending, wholesale 
 payments, investment banking and asset management 
 products across three primary client segments: 
 Middle Market Banking, Corporate Client Banking 
 and Commercial Real Estate Banking. Other includes 
 amounts not aligned with a primary client segment. 
 Middle Market Banking covers small and midsized 
 companies, local governments and nonprofit 
 clients. 
 Corporate Client Banking covers large 
 corporations. 
 Commercial Real Estate Banking covers investors, 
 developers, and owners of multifamily, office, 
 retail, industrial and affordable housing 
 properties. 
 Selected income statement data 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Revenue 
 Lending- and deposit-related fees(a) $ 1,187 $ 941 $ 896 
 All other income(a) 1,880 1,769 1,724 
 Noninterest revenue 3,067 2,710 2,620 
 Net interest income 6,246 6,554 6,716 
 Total net revenue(b) 9,313 9,264 9,336 
 Provision for credit losses 2,113 296 129 
 Noninterest expense 
 Compensation expense 1,854 1,785 1,694 
 Noncompensation expense 1,944 1,950 1,933 
 Total noninterest expense 3,798 3,735 3,627 
 Income before income tax expense 3,402 5,233 5,580 
 Income tax expense 824 1,275 1,316 
 Net income $ 2,578 $ 3,958 $ 4,264 
In the first quarter of 2020, the Merchant Services business was realigned from CCB to CIB as part of
the Firm’s Wholesale Payments business. In conjunction with this realignment, treasury services
product revenue has been renamed wholesale payments. In the fourth quarter of 2020, payment
processing-only clients along with the associated revenue and expenses were realigned to CIB’s
Wholesale Payments business from CCB and CB. Prior-period revenue and expense amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation. (a) In the first quarter of 2020, the Firm
reclassified certain fees from asset management, administration and commissions (which are included
in all other income) to lending and deposit-related fees. Prior period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current period presentation. (b) Total net revenue included tax-equivalent
adjustments from income tax credits related to equity investments in designated community development
entities and in entities established for rehabilitation of historic properties, as well as tax-exempt
income related to municipal financing activities of $351 million, $460 million and $444 million for
the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
2020 compared with 2019 Net income was $2.6 billion, a decrease of 35%, driven by an increase in the
provision for credit losses. Net revenue was $9.3 billion, flat compared to the prior year. Net
interest income was $6.2 billion, a decrease of 5%, driven by deposit margin compression,
predominantly offset by higher deposit balances and lending revenue. Noninterest revenue was $3.1
billion, an increase of 13%, driven by higher deposit-related fees, particularly cash management
fees, higher investment banking revenue, and a gain on a strategic investment. The increase was
partially offset by a $56 million markdown of a held-for-sale position and lower card income,
primarily due to lower volumes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Noninterest expense was $3.8
billion, an increase of 2%, driven by higher compensation expense. The provision for credit losses
was $2.1 billion, compared to $296 million in the prior year. The increase was driven by net
additions to the allowance for credit losses as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
across multiple industries.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 77 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 CB product revenue consists of the following: 
 Lendingincludes a variety of financing 
 alternatives, which are primarily provided on a 
 secured basis; collateral includes receivables, 
 inventory, equipment, real estate or other assets. 
 Products include term loans, revolving lines of 
 credit, bridge financing, asset-based structures, 
 leases, and standby letters of credit. 
 Wholesale paymentsincludes revenue from a broad 
 range of products and services that enable CB 
 clients to manage payments and receipts, as well 
 as invest and manage funds. 
 Investment bankingincludes revenue from a range of 
 products providing CB clients with sophisticated 
 capital-raising alternatives, as well as balance 
 sheet and risk management tools through advisory, 
 equity underwriting, and loan syndications. 
 Revenue from Fixed Income and Equity Markets 
 products used by CB clients is also included. 
 Otherproduct revenue primarily includes 
 tax-equivalent adjustments generated from 
 Community Development Banking activities and 
 certain income derived from principal 
 transactions. 
 Selected income statement data (continued) 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except ratios) 2020 2019 2018 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Revenue by product 
 Lending $ 4,396 $ 4,057 $ 4,049 
 Wholesale payments 3,715 4,200 4,351 
 Investment banking(a) 1,069 919 852 
 Other 133 88 84 
 Total Commercial Banking net revenue $ 9,313 $ 9,264 $ 9,336 
 Investment banking revenue, gross(b) $ 3,348 $ 2,744 $ 2,491 
 Revenue by client segment 
 Middle Market Banking $ 3,640 $ 3,805 $ 3,797 
 Corporate Client Banking 3,203 3,119 3,119 
 Commercial Real Estate Banking 2,313 2,169 2,251 
 Other 157 171 169 
 Total Commercial Banking net revenue $ 9,313 $ 9,264 $ 9,336 
 Financial ratios 
 Return on equity 11 % 17 % 20 % 
 Overhead ratio 41 40 39 
In the first quarter of 2020, the Merchant
Services business was realigned from CCB to CIB
as part of the Firm’s Wholesale Payments
business. In conjunction with this realignment,
treasury services product revenue has been
renamed wholesale payments. In the fourth
quarter of 2020, payment processing-only clients
along with the associated revenue and expenses
were realigned to CIB’s Wholesale Payments
business from CCB and CB. Prior-period revenue
and expense amounts have been revised to conform
with the current presentation. (a) Includes CB’s
share of revenue from investment banking
products sold to CB clients through the CIB. (b)
Refer to Business Segment Results page 65 for a
discussion of revenue sharing.
 Selected metrics 
 As of or for the year ended December 31, (in 
 millions, except headcount) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Selected balance sheet data (period-end) 
 Total assets $ 228,932 $ 220,514 $ 220,229 
 Loans: 
 Loans retained 207,880 207,287 204,219 
 Loans held-for-sale and loans at fair 2,245 1,009 1,978 
 value 
 Total loans $ 210,125 $ 208,296 $ 206,197 
 Equity 22,000 22,000 20,000 
 Period-end loans by client segment 
 Middle Market Banking $ 61,115 -a $ 54,188 $ 56,656 
 Corporate Client Banking 47,420 51,165 48,343 
 Commercial Real Estate Banking 101,146 101,951 100,088 
 Other 444 992 1,110 
 Total Commercial Banking loans $ 210,125 -a $ 208,296 $ 206,197 
 Selected balance sheet data (average) 
 Total assets $ 233,158 $ 218,896 $ 218,259 
 Loans: 
 Loans retained 217,767 206,837 204,243 
 Loans held-for-sale and loans at fair 1,129 1,082 1,258 
 value 
 Total loans $ 218,896 $ 207,919 $ 205,501 
 Client deposits and other third-party 237,825 172,734 170,901 
 liabilities 
 Equity 22,000 22,000 20,000 
 Average loans by client segment 
 Middle Market Banking $ 61,558 $ 55,690 $ 57,092 
 Corporate Client Banking 54,172 50,360 47,780 
 Commercial Real Estate Banking 102,479 100,884 99,243 
 Other 687 985 1,386 
 Total Commercial Banking loans $ 218,896 $ 207,919 $ 205,501 
 Headcount 11,675 11,629 11,042 
(a) At December 31, 2020, total loans included
$6.6 billion of loans under the PPP, of which
$6.4 billion were in Middle Market Banking.
Refer to Credit Portfolio on pages 112-113 for a
further discussion of the PPP.
 78 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Selected metrics 
 As of or for the year ended December 31, (in 
 millions, except ratios) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Credit data and quality statistics 
 Net charge-offs/(recoveries) $ 401 $ 160 $ 53 
 Nonperforming assets 
 Nonaccrual loans: 
 Nonaccrual loans retained(a) 1,286 498 511 
 Nonaccrual loans held-for-sale and loans 120 — — 
 at fair value 
 Total nonaccrual loans 1,406 498 511 
 Assets acquired in loan satisfactions 24 25 2 
 Total nonperforming assets 1,430 523 513 
 Allowance for credit losses: 
 Allowance for loan losses 3,335 2,780 2,682 
 Allowance for lending-related 651 293 254 
 commitments 
 Total allowance for credit losses 3,986 3,073 2,936 
 Net charge-off/(recovery) rate(b) 0.18 % 0.08 % 0.03 % 
 Allowance for loan losses to period-end 1.60 1.34 1.31 
 loansretained 
 Allowance for loan losses to nonaccrual 259 558 525 
 loans retained(a) 
 Nonaccrual loans to period-end total 0.67 0.24 0.25 
 loans 
(a) Allowance for loan losses of $273 million,
$114 million and $92 million was held against
nonaccrual loans retained at December 31, 2020,
2019 and 2018, respectively. (b) Loans held-for-
sale and loans at fair value were excluded when
calculating the net charge-off/(recovery) rate.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 79 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 ASSET & WEALTH MANAGEMENT 
 Asset & Wealth Management, with client assets of $3.7 trillion, is a global leader in investment 
 and wealth management. 
 Asset Management 
 Offers multi-asset investment management solutions across equities, fixed income, alternatives 
 and money market funds to institutional and retail investors providing for a broad range of 
 clients’ investment needs. 
 Wealth Management 
 Provides retirement products and services, brokerage, custody, trusts and estates, loans, 
 mortgages, deposits and investment management to high net worth clients. 
 The majority of AWM’s client assets are in actively managed portfolios. 
 Selected income statement data 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except ratios 
 and headcount) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Revenue 
 Asset management, administration and $ 10,610 $ 9,818 $ 9,808 
 commissions 
 All other income 212 418 244 
 Noninterest revenue 10,822 10,236 10,052 
 Net interest income 3,418 3,355 3,375 
 Total net revenue 14,240 13,591 13,427 
 Provision for credit losses 263 59 52 
 Noninterest expense 
 Compensation expense 4,959 5,028 4,888 
 Noncompensation expense 4,998 4,719 4,687 
 Total noninterest expense 9,957 9,747 9,575 
 Income before income tax expense 4,020 3,785 3,800 
 Income tax expense 1,028 918 855 
 Net income $ 2,992 $ 2,867 $ 2,945 
 Revenue by line of business 
 Asset Management $ 7,654 $ 7,254 $ 7,163 
 Wealth Management 6,586 6,337 6,264 
 Total net revenue $ 14,240 $ 13,591 $ 13,427 
 Financial ratios 
 Return on common equity 28 % 26 % 32 % 
 Overhead ratio 70 72 71 
 Pre-tax margin ratio: 
 Asset Management 29 26 26 
 Wealth Management 27 30 30 
 Asset & Wealth Management 28 28 28 
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Firm realigned certain wealth management clients from AWM to CCB.
Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation, including a decrease
to net revenue of $725 million and $649 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018,
respectively. Effective in the first quarter of 2021, the Wealth Management business was renamed
Global Private Bank.
2020 compared with 2019 Net income was $3.0 billion, an increase of 4%. Net revenue was $14.2
billion, an increase of 5%. Net interest income was $3.4 billion, up 2%, driven by higher deposit and
loan balances as well as loan margin expansion, offset by deposit margin compression. Noninterest
revenue was $10.8 billion, up 6%, predominantly driven by higher asset management fees as a result of
net inflows into liquidity and long term products, higher performance fees and increased brokerage
commissions on higher client-driven volume, partially offset by lower net investment valuation gains.
Revenue from Asset Management was $7.7 billion, up 6%, predominantly driven by higher asset
management fees as a result of net inflows into liquidity products as well as higher performance
fees, partially offset by lower net investment valuation gains. Revenue from Wealth Management was
$6.6 billion, up 4%, predominantly driven by higher deposit and loan balances, increased brokerage
commissions and asset management fees, largely offset by deposit margin compression. The provision
for credit losses was $263 million, driven by additions to the allowance for credit losses,
predominantly as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Noninterest expense was $10.0
billion, an increase of 2%, driven by legal expense, volume- and revenue-related expense as well as
investments in the business, partially offset by lower structural expense.
 80 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 AWM’s client segments consist of the following: 
 Private Bankingclients include high- and 
 ultra-high-net-worth individuals, families, money 
 managers and business owners. 
 Institutionalclients include both corporate and 
 public institutions, endowments, foundations, 
 nonprofit organizations and governments worldwide. 
 Retailclients include financial intermediaries and 
 individual investors. 
 Asset Management has two high-level measures of 
 its overall fund performance. 
 •Percentage of mutual fund assets under management 
 in funds rated 4- or 5-star: 
 Mutual fund rating services rank funds based on 
 their risk-adjusted performance over various 
 periods. A 5-star rating is the best rating and 
 represents the top 10% of industry-wide ranked 
 funds. A 4-star rating represents the next 22.5% 
 of industry-wide ranked funds. A 3-star rating 
 represents the next 35% of industry-wide ranked 
 funds. A 2-star rating represents the next 22.5% 
 of industry-wide ranked funds. A 1-star rating is 
 the worst rating and represents the bottom 10% of 
 industry-wide ranked funds. The“overall 
 Morningstar rating”is derived from a weighted 
 average of the performance associated with a 
 fund’s three-, five- and ten-year (if applicable) 
 Morningstar Rating metrics. For U.S. domiciled 
 funds, separate star ratings are given at the 
 individual share class level. The Nomura“star 
 rating”is based on three-year risk-adjusted 
 performance only. Funds with fewer than three 
 years of history are not rated and hence excluded 
 from this analysis. All ratings, the assigned peer 
 categories and the asset values used to derive 
 this analysis are sourced from these fund rating 
 providers mentioned in footnote (a). The data 
 providers re-denominate the asset values into U.S. 
 dollars. This % of AUM is based on star ratings at 
 the share class level for U.S. domiciled funds, 
 and at a“primary share class”level to represent 
 the star rating of all other funds except for 
 Japan where Nomura provides ratings at the fund 
 level. The “primary share class”, as defined by 
 Morningstar, denotes the share class recommended 
 as being the best proxy for the portfolio and in 
 most cases will be the most retail version (based 
 upon annual management charge, minimum investment, 
 currency and other factors). The performance data 
 could have been different if all funds/accounts 
 would have been included. Past performance is not 
 indicative of future results. 
 •Percentage of mutual fund assets under management 
 in funds ranked in the 1st or 2nd quartile (one, 
 three and five years): 
 All quartile rankings, the assigned peer 
 categories and the asset values used to derive 
 this analysis are sourced from the fund ranking 
 providers mentioned in footnote (b). Quartile 
 rankings are done on the net-of-fee absolute 
 return of each fund. The data providers 
 re-denominate the asset values into U.S. dollars. 
 This % of AUM is based on fund performance and 
 associated peer rankings at the share class level 
 for U.S. domiciled funds and at the “primary share 
 class” level or fund level for all other funds. 
 The “primary share class”, as defined by 
 Morningstar, denotes the share class recommended 
 as being the best proxy for the portfolio and in 
 most cases will be the most retail version (based 
 upon annual management charge, minimum investment, 
 currency and other factors). Where peer group 
 rankings given for a fund are in more than one 
 “primary share class” territory both rankings are 
 included to reflect local market competitiveness. 
 The performance data could have been different if 
 all funds/accounts would have been included. Past 
 performance is not indicative of future results. 
 Selected metrics 
 As of or for the year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except ranking data and ratios) 2020 2019 2018 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 % of JPM mutual fund assets rated as 4- 55 % 61 % 58 % 
 or 5-star(a) 
 % of JPM mutual fund assets ranked in 1stor 2nd 
 quartile:(b) 
 1 year 55 59 68 
 3 years 69 77 73 
 5 years 68 75 85 
 Selected balance sheet data 
 (period-end)(c) 
 Total assets $ 203,384 $ 173,175 $ 161,047 
 Loans 186,608 158,149 145,794 
 Deposits 198,755 142,740 133,276 
 Equity 10,500 10,500 9,000 
 Selected balance sheet data (average)(c) 
 Total assets $ 181,432 $ 161,863 $ 151,632 
 Loans 166,311 147,404 136,929 
 Deposits 161,955 135,265 132,123 
 Equity 10,500 10,500 9,000 
 Headcount 20,683 21,550 21,520 
 Number of Wealth Management client 2,462 2,419 2,385 
 advisors 
 Credit data and quality statistics(c) 
 Net charge-offs/(recoveries) $ -14 $ 29 $ — 
 Nonaccrual loans 785 115 263 
 Allowance for credit losses: 
 Allowance for loan losses 598 350 326 
 Allowance for lending-related 38 19 16 
 commitments 
 Total allowance for credit losses 636 369 342 
 Net charge-off/(recovery) rate -0.01 % 0.02 % — % 
 Allowance for loan losses to period-end 0.32 0.22 0.22 
 loans 
 Allowance for loan losses to nonaccrual 76 304 124 
 loans 
 Nonaccrual loans to period-end loans 0.42 0.07 0.18 
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Firm
realigned certain wealth management clients from
AWM to CCB. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current
presentation, including a decrease to headcount
of 2,641 and 2,400 as of December 31, 2019 and
2018, respectively. (a) Represents the Nomura
“star rating” for Japan domiciled funds and
Morningstar for all other domiciled funds.
Includes only Asset Management retail open-ended
mutual funds that have a rating. Excludes money
market funds, Undiscovered Managers Fund, and
Brazil domiciled funds. (b) Quartile ranking
sourced from Lipper, Morningstar and Nomura
based on country of domicile. Includes only
Asset Management retail open-ended mutual funds
that are ranked by the aforementioned sources.
Excludes money market funds, Undiscovered
Managers Fund, and Brazil domiciled funds. (c)
Loans, deposits and related credit data and
quality statistics relate to the Wealth
Management business.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 81 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
Client assets 2020 compared with 2019 Client
assets were $3.7 trillion, an increase of 18%.
Assets under management were $2.7 trillion, an
increase of 17% driven by the impact of higher
market levels and net inflows into both long-
term and liquidity products.
 Client assets 
 December 31, 
 (in billions) 
 Assets by asset class 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Liquidity $ 641 $ 539 $ 477 
 Fixed income 671 591 455 
 Equity 595 463 376 
 Multi-asset 656 596 515 
 Alternatives 153 139 135 
 Total assets under management 2,716 2,328 1,958 
 Custody/brokerage/ 936 761 661 
 administration/deposits 
 Total client assets $ 3,652 $ 3,089 $ 2,619 
 Assets by client segment 
 Private Banking $ 689 $ 628 $ 518 
 Institutional 1,273 1,081 930 
 Retail 754 619 510 
 Total assets under management $ 2,716 $ 2,328 $ 1,958 
 Private Banking $ 1,581 $ 1,359 $ 1,155 
 Institutional 1,311 1,106 950 
 Retail 760 624 514 
 Total client assets $ 3,652 $ 3,089 $ 2,619 
 Client assets (continued) 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in billions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Assets under management rollforward 
 Beginning balance $ 2,328 $ 1,958 $ 2,010 
 Net asset flows: 
 Liquidity 104 61 30 
 Fixed income 48 104 -4 
 Equity 33 -11 — 
 Multi-asset 5 2 17 
 Alternatives 6 2 5 
 Market/performance/other impacts 192 212 -100 
 Ending balance, December 31 $ 2,716 $ 2,328 $ 1,958 
 Client assets rollforward 
 Beginning balance $ 3,089 $ 2,619 $ 2,685 
 Net asset flows 276 176 74 
 Market/performance/other impacts 287 294 -140 
 Ending balance, December 31 $ 3,652 $ 3,089 $ 2,619 
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Firm
realigned certain wealth management clients from
AWM to CCB. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current
presentation, including a decrease to client
assets of $137 billion and $114 billion as of
December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
 International metrics 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in billions, except where otherwise noted) 2020 2019 2018 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total net revenue(in millions)(a) 
 Europe/Middle East/Africa(b) $ 2,956 $ 2,869 $ 2,850 
 Asia-Pacific(b) 1,665 1,509 1,538 
 Latin America/Caribbean(b) 782 724 755 
 Total international net revenue 5,403 5,102 5,143 
 North America 8,837 8,489 8,284 
 Total net revenue $ 14,240 $ 13,591 $ 13,427 
 Assets under management 
 Europe/Middle East/Africa(b) $ 517 $ 428 $ 366 
 Asia-Pacific(b) 224 192 163 
 Latin America/Caribbean(b) 70 62 51 
 Total international assets under 811 682 580 
 management 
 North America 1,905 1,646 1,378 
 Total assets under management $ 2,716 $ 2,328 $ 1,958 
 Client assets 
 Europe/Middle East/Africa(b) $ 622 $ 520 $ 440 
 Asia-Pacific(b) 330 272 226 
 Latin America/Caribbean(b) 166 147 125 
 Total international client assets 1,118 939 791 
 North America 2,534 2,150 1,828 
 Total client assets $ 3,652 $ 3,089 $ 2,619 
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Firm
realigned certain wealth management clients from
AWM to CCB. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current
presentation, including a decrease to net
revenue of $725 million and $649 million for the
years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018,
respectively, and client assets of $137 billion
and $114 billion as of December 31, 2019 and
2018, respectively. (a) Regional revenue is
based on the domicile of the client. (b) The
prior period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current period presentation.
 82 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 CORPORATE 
 The Corporate segment consists of Treasury and 
 Chief Investment Office and Other Corporate, which 
 includes corporate staff functions and expense 
 that is centrally managed. Treasury and CIO is 
 predominantly responsible for measuring, 
 monitoring, reporting and managing the Firm’s 
 liquidity, funding, capital, structural interest 
 rate and foreign exchange risks. The major Other 
 Corporate functions include Real Estate, 
 Technology, Legal, Corporate Finance, Human 
 Resources, Internal Audit, Risk Management, 
 Compliance, Control Management, Corporate 
 Responsibility and various Other Corporate groups. 
 Selected income statement and balance sheet data 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except headcount) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Revenue 
 Principal transactions $ 245 $ -461 $ -426 
 Investment securities gains/(losses) 795 258 -395 
 All other income 159 89 558 
 Noninterest revenue 1,199 -114 -263 
 Net interest income -2,375 1,325 135 
 Total net revenue(a) -1,176 1,211 -128 
 Provision for credit losses 66 -1 -4 
 Noninterest expense 1,373 1,067 902 
 Income/(loss) before income tax -2,615 145 -1,026 
 expense/(benefit) 
 Income tax expense/(benefit) -865 -966 215 
 Net income/(loss) $ -1,750 $ 1,111 $ -1,241 
 Total net revenue 
 Treasury and CIO -1,368 2,032 510 
 Other Corporate 192 -821 -638 
 Total net revenue $ -1,176 $ 1,211 $ -128 
 Net income/(loss) 
 Treasury and CIO -1,403 1,394 -69 
 Other Corporate -347 -283 -1,172 
 Total net income/(loss) $ -1,750 $ 1,111 $ -1,241 
 Total assets (period-end) $ 1,359,831 $ 837,618 $ 771,787 
 Loans (period-end) 1,657 1,649 1,597 
 Headcount 38,366 38,033 37,145 
(a) Included tax-equivalent adjustments, driven by tax-exempt income from municipal bonds, of $241
million, $314 million and $382 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018,
respectively.
2020 compared with 2019 Net income was a loss of $1.8 billion compared with income of $1.1 billion in
the prior year. Net revenue was a loss of $1.2 billion, compared with revenue of $1.2 billion in the
prior year, driven by lower net interest income partially offset by higher noninterest revenue. The
decrease in net interest income was predominantly driven by lower rates, including the impact of
faster prepayments on mortgage-backed securities, as well as limited opportunities to deploy funds in
response to significant deposit growth across the LOBs. Noninterest revenue increased reflecting
higher net valuations on certain legacy equity investments and higher net investment securities gains
due to the repositioning of the investment securities portfolio. Noninterest expense of $1.4 billion
was up $305 million driven by an impairment on a legacy investment. The provision for credit losses
relates to the HTM portfolio, which became subject to the CECL accounting guidance beginning on
January 1, 2020. Refer to Note 10 and Note 13 for additional information on the investment securities
portfolio and the allowance for credit losses. The current period income tax benefit was
predominantly driven by a lower level of pre-tax income and changes in the level and mix of income
and expenses subject to U.S. federal, and state and local taxes. The prior period included $1.1
billion of tax benefits related to the resolution of certain tax audits.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 83 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
Treasury and CIO overview Treasury and CIO is predominantly responsible for measuring, monitoring,
reporting and managing the Firm’s liquidity, funding, capital, structural interest rate and foreign
exchange risks. The risks managed by Treasury and CIO arise from the activities undertaken by the
Firm’s four major reportable business segments to serve their respective client bases, which generate
both on- and off-balance sheet assets and liabilities. Treasury and CIO seek to achieve the Firm’s
asset-liability management objectives generally by investing in high-quality securities that are
managed for the longer-term as part of the Firm’s investment securities portfolio. Treasury and CIO
also use derivatives to meet the Firm ’ s asset-liability management objectives. Refer to Note 5 for
further information on derivatives. In addition, Treasury and CIO manage the Firm’s cash position
primarily through deposits at central banks and investments in short-term instruments. Refer to Liq
uidity Risk Management on pages 102–108 for further information on liquidity and funding risk . R
efer to Market Risk Management on pages 135–142 for informatio n on interest rate, foreign exchange
and other risks. The investment securities portfolio primarily consists of U.S. GSE and government
agency and nonagency mortgage-backed securities, U.S. and non-U.S. government securities, obligations
of U.S. states and municipalities, other ABS and corporate debt securities. At December 31, 2020, the
investment securities portfolio was $587.9 billion, and the average credit rating of the securities
comprising the portfolio was AA+ (based upon external ratings where available and, where not
available, based primarily upon internal risk ratings). Refer to Note 10 for further information on
the Firm’s investment securities portfolio and internal risk ratings.
 Selected income statement and balance sheet data 
 As of or for the year ended December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investment securities gains/(losses) $ 795 $ 258 $ -395 
 Available-for-sale securities (average) $ 413,367 $ 283,205 $ 203,449 
 Held-to-maturity securities (average) 94,569 34,939 31,747 
 Investment securities portfolio $ 507,936 $ 318,144 $ 235,196 
 (average) 
 Available-for-sale securities $ 386,065 $ 348,876 $ 228,681 
 (period-end) 
 Held-to-maturity securities, net of 
 allowance for credit losses 201,821 47,540 31,434 
 (period–end)(a)(b) 
 Investment securities portfolio, net of 
 allowance for credit losses $ 587,886 $ 396,416 $ 260,115 
 (period–end)(a) 
(a) At December 31, 2020, the allowance for
credit losses on HTM securities was $78 million.
(b) During 2020, the Firm transferred $164.2
billion of investment securities from AFS to HTM
for capital management purposes. Refer to Note
10 for further information.
 84 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 FIRMWIDE RISK MANAGEMENT 
Risk is an inherent part of JPMorgan Chase’s
business activities. When the Firm extends a
consumer or wholesale loan, advises customers
and clients on their investment decisions, makes
markets in securities, or offers other products
or services, the Firm takes on some degree of
risk. The Firm’s overall objective is to manage
its businesses, and the associated risks, in a
manner that balances serving the interests of
its clients, customers and investors and
protects the safety and soundness of the Firm.
The Firm believes that effective risk management
requires, among other things:
• Acceptance of responsibility, including
identification and escalation of risks by all
individuals within the Firm;
• Ownership of risk identification, assessment,
data and management within each of the LOBs and
Corporate; and
• Firmwide structures for risk governance.
The Firm follows a disciplined and balanced
compensation framework with strong internal
governance and independent oversight by the
Board of Directors (the “Board”). The impact of
risk and control issues is carefully considered
in the Firm’s performance evaluation and
incentive compensation processes.
 Risk governance and oversight framework 
The Firm’s risk management governance and
oversight framework involves understanding
drivers of risks, types of risks, and impacts of
risks.
Drivers of Risks are factors that cause a risk
to exist. Drivers of risks include the economic
environment, regulatory and government policy,
competitor and market evolution, business
decisions, process and judgment error,
deliberate wrongdoing, dysfunctional markets,
and natural disasters.
Types of Risks are categories by which risks
manifest themselves. Risks are generally
categorized in the following four risk types:
• Strategic risk is the risk to earnings,
capital, liquidity or reputation associated with
poorly designed or failed business plans or
inadequate response to changes in the operating
environment.
• Credit and investment risk is the risk
associated with the default or change in credit
profile of a client, counterparty or customer;
or loss of principal or a reduction in expected
returns on investments, including
consumer credit risk, wholesale credit risk, and
investment portfolio risk.
• Market risk is the risk associated with the
effect of changes in market factors, such as
interest and foreign exchange rates, equity and
commodity prices, credit spreads or implied
volatilities, on the value of assets and
liabilities held for both the short and long
term.
• Operational risk is the risk associated with
an adverse outcome resulting from inadequate or
failed internal processes or systems; human
factors; or external events impacting the Firm’s
processes or systems. It includes compliance,
conduct, legal, and estimations and model risk.
Impacts of Risks are consequences of risks, both
quantitative and qualitative. There may be many
consequences of risks manifesting, including
quantitative impacts such as a reduction in
earnings and capital, liquidity outflows, and
fines or penalties, or qualitative impacts such
as reputation damage, loss of clients and
customers, and regulatory and enforcement
actions.
The Firm’s risk governance and oversight
framework is managed on a Firmwide basis. The
Firm has an Independent Risk Management (“IRM”)
function, which consists of the Risk Management
and Compliance organizations. The Chief
Executive Officer (“CEO”) appoints, subject to
approval by the Risk Committee of the Board
(“Board Risk Committee”), the Firm’s Chief Risk
Officer (“CRO”) to lead the IRM organization and
manage the risk governance structure of the
Firm. The framework is subject to approval by
the Board Risk Committee in the form of the Risk
Governance and Oversight Policy. The Firm’s CRO
oversees and delegates authorities to LOB CROs,
Firmwide Risk Executives (“FREs”), and the
Firm’s Chief Compliance Officer (“CCO”), who
each establish Risk Management and Compliance
organizations, set the Firm’s risk governance
policies and standards, and define and oversee
the implementation of the Firm’s risk
governance. The LOB CROs are responsible for
risks that arise in their LOBs, while FREs
oversee risk areas that span across the
individual LOBs, functions and regions.
 Three lines of defense 
The Firm relies upon each of its LOBs and
Corporate areas giving rise to risk to operate
within the parameters identified by the IRM
function, and within its own management-
identified risk and control standards. Each LOB
and Treasury & CIO, including their aligned
Operations, Technology and Control Management,
are the Firm’s “first line of defense” and own
the identification of risks, as well as the
design and execution of controls to manage those
risks. The first line of defense is responsible
for adherence to applicable laws, rules and
regulations and for the implementation of the
risk management structure (which may include
policy, standards, limits, thresholds and
controls) established by IRM.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 85 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
The IRM function is independent of the
businesses and is the Firm’s “second line of
defense.” The IRM function independently
assesses and challenges the first line of
defense risk management practices. IRM is also
responsible for its own adherence to applicable
laws, rules and regulations and for the
implementation of policies and standards
established by IRM with respect to its own
processes.
Internal Audit is an independent function that
provides objective assessment on the adequacy
and effectiveness of Firmwide processes,
controls, governance and risk management as the
“third line of defense.” The Internal Audit
Function is headed by the General Auditor, who
reports to the Audit Committee and
administratively to the CEO.
In addition, there are other functions that
contribute to the Firmwide control environment
but are not considered part of a particular line
of defense, including Finance, Human Resources
and Legal.
 Risk identification and ownership 
Each LOB and Corporate area owns the ongoing
identification of risks, as well as the design
and execution of controls, inclusive of IRM-
specified controls, to manage those risks. To
support this activity, the Firm has a formal
Risk Identification framework designed to
facilitate their responsibility to identify
material risks inherent to the Firm, catalog
them in a central repository and review the most
material risks on a regular basis. The IRM
function reviews and challenges the LOB and
Corporate’s identified risks, maintains the
central repository and provides the consolidated
Firmwide results to the Firmwide Risk Committee
(“FRC”) and Board Risk Committee.
 Risk appetite 
The Firm’s overall appetite for risk is governed
by a “Risk Appetite” framework. The framework
and the Firm’s risk appetite are set and
approved by the Firm’s CEO, Chief Financial
Officer (“CFO”) and CRO. Quantitative parameters
and qualitative factors are used to monitor and
measure the Firm’s capacity to take risk
consistent with its stated risk appetite.
Qualitative factors have been established to
assess select operational risks, and impact to
the Firm’s reputation. Risk Appetite results are
reported to the Board Risk Committee.
 86 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Risk governance and oversight structure 
The independent status of the IRM function is
supported by a governance structure that
provides for escalation of risk issues to senior
management, the FRC, and the Board of Directors,
as appropriate.
The chart below illustrates the committees of
the Board of Directors and key senior
management-level committees in the Firm’s risk
governance structure. In addition, there are
other committees, forums and paths of escalation
that support the oversight of risk which are not
shown in the chart below or described in this
Form 10-K.
The Firm’s Operating Committee, which consists
of the Firm’s CEO, CRO, CFO, General Counsel,
CEOs of the LOBs and other senior executives, is
accountable to and may refer matters to the
Firm’s Board of Directors. The Operating
Committee is responsible for escalating to the
Board the information necessary to facilitate
the Board’s exercise of its duties.
 Board oversight 
The Firm’s Board of Directors provides oversight
of risk. The Board Risk Committee is the
principal committee that oversees risk matters.
The Audit Committee oversees the control
environment, and the Compensation & Management
Development Committee oversees compensation and
other management-related matters. Each committee
of the Board oversees reputational risks and
conduct risks within its scope of
responsibility.
The JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. Board of Directors
is responsible for the oversight of management
of the bank. The JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. Board
accomplishes this function acting directly and
through the principal standing committees of the
Firm’s Board of Directors. Risk and control
oversight on behalf of JPMorgan Chase Bank N.A.
is primarily the responsibility of the Risk
Committee and the Audit Committee, respectively,
and, with respect to
compensation and other management-related
matters, the Compensation & Management
Development Committee.
The Board Risk Committee assists the Board in
its oversight of management’s responsibility to
implement a global risk management framework
reasonably designed to identify, assess and
manage the Firm’s risks. The Board Risk
Committee’s responsibilities include approval of
applicable primary risk policies and review of
certain associated frameworks, analysis and
reporting established by management. Breaches in
risk appetite and parameters, issues that may
have a material adverse impact on the Firm,
including capital and liquidity issues, and
other significant risk-related matters are
escalated to the Board Risk Committee, as
appropriate.
The Audit Committee assists the Board in its
oversight of management’s responsibility to
ensure that there is an effective system of
controls reasonably designed to safeguard the
Firm’s assets and income, ensure the integrity
of the Firm’s financial statements, and maintain
compliance with the Firm’s ethical standards,
policies, plans and procedures, and with laws
and regulations. It also assists the Board in
its oversight of the Firm’s independent
registered public accounting firm’s
qualifications, independence and performance,
and of the performance of the Firm’s Internal
Audit function.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 87 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
The Compensation & Management Development
Committee (“CMDC”) assists the Board in its
oversight of the Firm’s compensation principles
and practices. The CMDC reviews and approves the
Firm’s compensation and qualified benefits
programs. The Committee reviews the performance
of Operating Committee members against their
goals, and approves their compensation awards.
In addition, the CEO’s award is subject to
ratification by the independent directors of the
Board. The CMDC also reviews the development of
and succession for key executives, and provides
oversight of the Firm’s culture, including
reviewing updates from management regarding
significant conduct issues and any related
employee actions, including compensation
actions.
The Public Responsibility Committee assists the
Board in its oversight of the Firm's positions
and practices on public responsibility matters
such as community investment, fair lending,
sustainability, consumer practices and other
public policy issues that reflect the Firm's
values and character and could impact the Firm's
reputation among its stakeholders. The Committee
also provides guidance on these matters to
management and the Board, as appropriate.
The Corporate Governance & Nominating Committee
exercises general oversight with respect to the
governance of the Board of Directors. It reviews
the qualifications of and recommends to the
Board of Directors proposed nominees for
election to the Board. The Committee evaluates
and recommends to the Board corporate governance
practices applicable to the Firm. It also
appraises the framework for assessing the
Board’s performance and self-evaluation.
 Management oversight 
The Firm’s senior management-level committees
that are primarily responsible for key risk-
related functions include:
The Firmwide Risk Committee (“FRC”) is the
Firm’s highest management-level risk committee.
It provides oversight of the risks inherent in
the Firm’s businesses and serves as an
escalation point for risk topics and issues
raised by underlying committees and/or FRC
members.
The Firmwide Control Committee (“FCC”) is an
escalation committee for senior management to
review and discuss the Firmwide operational risk
environment including identified issues,
operational risk metrics and significant events
that have been escalated.
Line of Business and Regional Risk Committees
are responsible for providing oversight of the
governance, limits, and controls that are in
place through the scope of their activities.
These committees review the ways in which the
particular LOB or the business operating in a
particular region could be exposed to adverse
outcomes with a focus on identifying, accepting,
escalating and/or requiring remediation of
matters brought to these committees.
Line of Business and Corporate Function Control
Committees over see the operational risk and
control environment of their respective business
or function, inclusive of Operational Risk,
Compliance and Conduct Risks. As part of that
mandate, they are responsible for reviewing
indicators of elevated or emerging risks and
other data that may impact the level of
operating risk in a business or function,
addressing key operational risk issues ,
focusing on processes with control concerns and
overseeing control remediation.
The Asset and Liability Committee (“ALCO”) is
responsible for overseeing the Firm’s asset and
liability management (“ALM”) activities and the
management of liquidity risk, balance sheet,
interest rate risk, and capital risk.
The Firmwide Valuation Governance Forum (“VGF”)
is composed of senior finance and risk
executives and is responsible for overseeing the
management of risks arising from valuation
activities conducted across the Firm.
 88 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Risk governance and oversight functions The Firm
manages its risk through risk governance and
oversight functions. The scope of a particular
function may include one or more drivers, types
and/or impacts of risk. For example, Country
Risk Management oversees country risk which may
be a driver of risk or an aggregation of
exposures that could give rise to multiple risk
types such as credit or market risk. The
following sections discuss the risk governance
and oversight functions in place to manage the
risks inherent in the Firms business activities.
 Risk governance and oversight functions Page 
 Strategic Risk 90 
 Capital risk 91-101 
 Liquidity risk 102-108 
 Reputation risk 109 
 Consumer Credit Risk 114-120 
 Wholesale credit risk 121-131 
 Investment portfolio risk 134 
 Market risk 135-142 
 Country risk 143-144 
 Operational risk 145-151 
 Compliance Risk 148 
 Conduct risk 149 
 Legal risk 150 
 Estimations and Model risk 151 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 89 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 STRATEGIC RISK MANAGEMENT 
Strategic risk is the risk to earnings, capital,
liquidity or reputation associated with poorly
designed or failed business plans or inadequate
response to changes in the operating
environment.
 Management and oversight 
The Operating Committee and the senior
leadership of each LOB and Corporate are
responsible for managing the Firm’s most
significant strategic risks. Strategic risks are
overseen by IRM through participation in
relevant business reviews, LOB and Corporate
senior management meetings, risk and control
committees and other relevant governance forums
and ongoing discussions. The Board of Directors
oversees management’s strategic decisions, and
the Board Risk Committee oversees IRM and the
Firm’s risk management framework.
In the process of developing business plans and
strategic initiatives, LOB and Corporate senior
management identify the associated risks that
are incorporated into the Firmwide Risk
Identification process and monitored and
assessed as part of the Firmwide Risk Appetite
framework.
In addition, IRM conducts a qualitative
assessment of the LOB and Corporate strategic
initiatives to assess their impact on the risk
profile of the Firm.
The Firm’s strategic planning process, which
includes the development and execution of
strategic initiatives, is one component of
managing the Firm’s strategic risk. Guided by
the Firm’s How We Do Business Principles (the
“Principles”) , the Operating Committee and
senior management teams in each LOB and
Corporate review and update the strategic plan
periodically. The process includes evaluating
the high-level strategic framework and
performance against prior-year initiatives,
assessing the operating environment, refining
existing strategies and developing new
strategies.
These strategic initiatives, along with IRM’s
assessment, are incorporated in the Firm’s
budget and provided to the Board for review.
The Firm’s balance sheet strategy, which focuses
on risk-adjusted returns, strong capital and
robust liquidity, is also a component in the
management of strategic risk. Refer to Capital
Risk Management on pages 91-101 for further
information on capital risk. Refer to Liquidity
Risk Management on pages 102–108 for further
information on liquidity risk. Refer to
Reputation Risk Management on page 109 for
further information on reputation risk.
 90 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 CAPITAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
Capital risk is the risk the Firm has an
insufficient level or composition of capital to
support the Firm’s business activities and
associated risks during normal economic
environments and under stressed conditions.
A strong capital position is essential to the
Firm’s business strategy and competitive
position. Maintaining a strong balance sheet to
manage through economic volatility is considered
a strategic imperative of the Firm’s Board of
Directors, CEO and Operating Committee. The
Firm’s fortress balance sheet philosophy focuses
on risk-adjusted returns, strong capital and
robust liquidity. The Firm’s capital risk
management strategy focuses on maintaining long-
term stability to enable the Firm to build and
invest in market-leading businesses, including
in highly stressed environments. Senior
management considers the implications on the
Firm’s capital prior to making any significant
decisions that could impact future business
activities. In addition to considering the
Firm’s earnings outlook, senior management
evaluates all sources and uses of capital with a
view to ensuring the Firm’s capital strength.
 Capital management oversight 
The Firm has a Capital Management Oversight
function whose primary objective is to provide
independent oversight of capital risk across the
Firm.
Capital Management Oversight’s responsibilities
include:
• Defining, monitoring and reporting capital
risk metrics;
• Establishing, calibrating and monitoring
capital risk limits and indicators, including
capital risk appetite;
• Developing a process to classify, monitor and
report capital limit breaches; and
• Performing an independent assessment of the
Firm’s capital management activities, including
changes made to the Contingency Capital Plan
described below.
In addition, the Basel Independent Review
function (“BIR”), which is a part of the IRM
function, conducts independent assessments of
the Firm’s regulatory capital framework. These
assessments are intended to ensure compliance
with the applicable regulatory capital rules in
support of senior management’s responsibility
for managing capital and for the Board Risk
Committee’s oversight of management in executing
that responsibility.
 Capital management 
Treasury & CIO is responsible for capital
management.
The primary objectives of the Firm’s capital
management are to:
• Maintain sufficient capital in order to
continue to build and invest in the Firm’s
businesses through the cycle and in stressed
environments;
• Retain flexibility to take advantage of future
investment opportunities;
• Promote the Firm’s ability to serve as a
source of strength to its subsidiaries;
• Ensure the Firm operates above the minimum
regulatory capital ratios as well as maintain
“well-capitalized” status for the Firm and its
insured depository institution (“IDI”)
subsidiaries at all times under applicable
regulatory capital requirements;
• Meet capital distribution objectives; and
• Maintain sufficient capital resources to
operate throughout a resolution period in
accordance with the Firm’s preferred resolution
strategy.
The Firm addresses these objectives through
establishing internal minimum capital
requirements and a strong capital governance
framework. The internal minimum capital levels
consider the Firm’s regulatory capital
requirements as well as an internal assessment
of capital adequacy, in normal economic cycles
and in stress events, when setting its minimum
capital levels.
Capital management is intended to be flexible in
order to react to a range of potential events.
The current capital governance framework
requires regular monitoring of the Firm’s
capital position and follows prescribed
escalation protocols, both at the Firm and
material legal entity levels.
 Governance 
Committees responsible for overseeing the Firm’s
capital management include the Capital
Governance Committee, the Treasurer Committee
and the Firmwide ALCO. Oversight of capital
management is governed through the CIO, Treasury
and Corporate (“CTC”) Risk Committee. In
addition, the Board Risk Committee periodically
reviews the Firm’s capital risk tolerance. Refer
to Firmwide Risk Management on pages 85-89 for
additional discussion on the Board Risk
Committee and the ALCO.
 Capital planning and stress testing 
Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review
The Federal Reserve requires large BHCs,
including the Firm, to submit at least annually
a capital plan that has been reviewed and
approved by the Board of Directors. The Federal
Reserve uses CCAR and other stress testing
processes to ensure that large BHCs have
sufficient capital during periods of economic
and financial stress, and have robust, forward-
looking capital assessment and planning
processes in place that address each BHC’s
unique risks to enable it to absorb losses under
certain stress scenarios. Through CCAR, the
Federal Reserve evaluates each BHC’s capital
adequacy and internal capital adequacy
assessment processes (“ICAAP”), as well as its
plans to make capital distributions, such as
dividend payments or stock repurchases. The
Federal Reserve uses results under the severely
adverse scenario from its supervisory stress
test to determine each firm’s SCB requirement
for the coming
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 91 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
year. Refer to Key Regulatory Developments on
pages 93–94 for additional information.
On June 29, 2020, the Firm announced that it had
completed the 2020 CCAR stress test process. On
August 10, 2020, the Federal Reserve affirmed
the Firm's SCB requirement of 3.3% and the
Firm's minimum Standardized CET1 capital ratio
of 11.3% (up from 10.5%). The SCB requirement
became effective on October 1, 2020.
In June 2020, the Federal Reserve determined
that changes in financial markets or the
macroeconomic outlook due to the COVID-19
pandemic could have a material effect on a
firm’s risk profile and financial condition and
therefore required all large bank holding
companies, including the Firm, to update and
resubmit their capital plans by November 2,
2020. On December 18, 2020, the Federal Reserve
released its results from the 2020 CCAR Round 2
stress test, which showed that large banks had
strong levels of capital and announced that it
would allow all large banks, including the Firm,
to resume share repurchases commencing in the
first quarter of 2021, subject to certain
restrictions for at least the first quarter of
2021 given considerable economic uncertainty
remained. The Federal Reserve has stated that
due to uncertainty about future economic
conditions and the ultimate path of the current
recovery, the SCB will not be reset at this
time. The Federal Reserve will notify firms by
March 31, 2021 whether a revised SCB requirement
based on the 2020 CCAR Round 2 stress test will
be recalculated ahead of the 2021 annual CCAR
assessment.
Refer to Capital actions on page 99 for
information on actions taken by the Firm’s Board
of Directors following the 2020 CCAR results.
Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process
Annually, the Firm prepares the ICAAP, which
informs the Board of Directors of the ongoing
assessment of the Firm’s processes for managing
the sources and uses of capital as well as
compliance with supervisory expectations for
capital planning and capital adequacy. The
Firm’s ICAAP integrates stress testing protocols
with capital planning.
The CCAR and other stress testing processes
assess the potential impact of alternative
economic and business scenarios on the Firm’s
earnings and capital. Economic scenarios, and
the parameters underlying those scenarios, are
defined centrally and applied uniformly across
the businesses. These scenarios are articulated
in terms of macroeconomic factors, which are key
drivers of business results; global market
shocks, which generate short-term but severe
trading losses; and idiosyncratic operational
risk events. The scenarios are intended to
capture and stress key vulnerabilities and
idiosyncratic risks facing the Firm. However,
when defining a broad range of scenarios, actual
events can be worse. Accordingly, management
considers additional stresses outside these
scenarios, as necessary. These results are
reviewed by management and the Board of
Directors.
 Contingency capital plan 
The Firm’s contingency capital plan establishes
the capital management framework for the Firm
and specifies the principles underlying the
Firm’s approach towards capital management in
normal economic conditions and during stress.
The contingency capital plan defines how the
Firm calibrates its targeted capital levels and
meets minimum capital requirements, monitors the
ongoing appropriateness of planned capital
distributions, and sets out the capital
contingency actions that are expected to be
taken or considered at various levels of capital
depletion during a period of stress.
 Regulatory capital 
The Federal Reserve establishes capital
requirements, including well-capitalized
standards, for the consolidated financial
holding company. The OCC establishes similar
minimum capital requirements and standards for
the Firm’s IDI subsidiaries, including JPMorgan
Chase Bank, N.A. The U.S. capital requirements
generally follow the Capital Accord of the Basel
Committee, as amended from time to time.
Basel III Overview
The capital rules under Basel III establish
minimum capital ratios and overall capital
adequacy standards for large and internationally
active U.S. BHCs and banks, including the Firm
and its IDI subsidiaries, including JPMorgan
Chase Bank, N.A. The minimum amount of
regulatory capital that must be held by BHCs and
banks is determined by calculating risk-weighted
assets (“RWA”), which are on-balance sheet
assets and off-balance sheet exposures, weighted
according to risk. Two comprehensive approaches
are prescribed for calculating RWA: a
standardized approach (“Basel III
Standardized”), and an advanced approach (“Basel
III Advanced”). For each of the risk-based
capital ratios, the capital adequacy of the Firm
is evaluated against the lower of the
Standardized or Advanced approaches compared to
their respective minimum capital ratios.
Basel III establishes capital requirements for
calculating credit risk RWA and market risk RWA,
and in the case of Basel III Advanced,
operational risk RWA. Key differences in the
calculation of credit risk RWA between the
Standardized and Advanced approaches are that
for Basel III Advanced, credit risk RWA is based
on risk-sensitive approaches which largely rely
on the use of internal credit models and
parameters, whereas for Basel III Standardized,
credit risk RWA is generally based on
supervisory risk-weightings which vary primarily
by counterparty type and asset class. Market
risk RWA is calculated on a generally consistent
basis between Basel III Standardized and Basel
III Advanced. In addition to the RWA calculated
under these approaches, the Firm may supplement
such amounts to incorporate management judgment
and feedback from its regulators.
Basel III also includes a requirement for
Advanced Approach banking organizations,
including the Firm, to
 92 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
calculate the SLR. Refer to SLR on page 98 for
additional information.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The Firm has been impacted by market events as a
result of the COVID-19 pandemic, but remains
well-capitalized. However, the continuation or
further deterioration of the current
macroeconomic environment could result in
impacts to the Firm’s capital and leverage.
Key Regulatory Developments
Current Expected Credit Losses. Effective
January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the Financial
Instruments – Credit Losses guidance under U.S.
GAAP. As permitted under the U.S. capital rules
issued by the federal banking agencies in 2019,
the Firm initially elected to phase-in the
January 1, 2020 (“day 1”) CECL adoption impact
to retained earnings of $2.7 billion to CET1
capital, at 25% per year in each of 2020 to
2023. As part of their response to the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic, on March 31, 2020, the
federal banking agencies issued an interim final
rule (issued as final on August 26, 2020) that
provided the option to delay the effects of CECL
on regulatory capital for two years, followed by
a three-year transition period (“CECL capital
transition provisions”).
The final rule provides a uniform approach for
estimating the effects of CECL compared to the
legacy incurred loss model during the first two
years of the transition period (the “day 2”
transition amount), whereby the Firm may exclude
from CET1 capital 25% of the change in the
allowance for credit losses (excluding
allowances on PCD loans). The cumulative day 2
transition amount as at December 31, 2021 that
is not recognized in CET1 capital, as well as
the $2.7 billion day 1 impact, will be phased
into CET1 capital at 25% per year beginning
January 1, 2022. The Firm has elected to apply
the CECL capital transition provisions, and
accordingly, for the year ended December 31,
2020, the capital metrics of the Firm exclude
$5.7 billion, which is the $2.7 billion day 1
impact to retained earnings and 25% of the $12.2
billion increase in the allowance for credit
losses (excluding allowances on PCD loans).
The impacts of the CECL capital transition
provisions have also been incorporated into Tier
2 capital, adjusted average assets, and total
leverage exposure. Refer to Note 1 for further
information on the CECL accounting guidance.
Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility
("MMLF") . The Federal Reserve established the
MMLF facility on March 18, 2020, authorized
through at least March 31, 2021, to enhance the
liquidity and functioning of money markets.
Under the MMLF, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston (“FRBB”) makes nonrecourse advances to
participating financial institutions to purchase
certain types of assets from eligible money
market mutual fund clients. These assets, which
are reflected in other assets on the Firm’s
Consolidated balance sheets, are pledged to the
FRBB as collateral. On March 23, 2020, the
federal banking agencies issued an interim final
rule (issued as final on
September 29, 2020) to neutralize the effects of
purchasing assets through the program on risk-
based and leverage-based capital ratios. As of
December 31, 2020, the Firm excluded assets
purchased from money market mutual fund clients
pursuant to nonrecourse advances provided under
the MMLF in the amount of $187 million from its
RWA and $358 million from adjusted three month
average assets and total leverage exposure.
Supplementary leverage ratio temporary revision.
On April 1, 2020, the Federal Reserve issued an
interim final rule that requires, on a temporary
basis, the calculation of total leverage
exposure for purposes of calculating the SLR for
bank holding companies, to exclude the on-
balance sheet amounts of U.S. Treasury
securities and deposits at Federal Reserve
Banks. These exclusions became effective April
1, 2020, and will remain in effect through March
31, 2021.
On June 1, 2020, the Federal Reserve, OCC and
FDIC issued an interim final rule that provides
IDI subsidiaries with an option to apply this
temporary exclusion subject to certain
restrictions. As of December 31, 2020, JPMorgan
Chase Bank, N.A. has not elected to apply this
exclusion.
Paycheck Protection Program. On April 13, 2020,
the federal banking agencies issued an interim
final rule (issued as final on September 29,
2020) to neutralize the regulatory capital
effects of participating in the PPP on risk-
based capital ratios by applying a zero percent
risk weight to loans originated under the
program. Given that PPP loans are guaranteed by
the SBA, the Firm does not expect to realize
material credit losses on these loans. As of
December 31, 2020, the Firm had approximately
$27 billion of loans under the program.
The rule also provides that if a PPP loan is
pledged as collateral for a non-recourse loan
under the Federal Reserve’s Paycheck Protection
Program Lending (“PPPL”) Facility, the PPP loan
can be excluded from leverage-based capital
ratios. As of December 31, 2020, the Firm had
not participated in the PPPL Facility.
Refer to Regulatory Developments Relating to the
COVID-19 Pandemic on pages 52-53 for additional
information on regulatory actions and
significant financing programs that the U.S.
government and regulators have introduced to
address the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Stress Capital Buffer. On March 4, 2020, the
Federal Reserve issued the final rule
introducing the SCB framework for the Basel III
Standardized approach that is designed to more
closely integrate the results of the
quantitative assessment in the annual CCAR with
the ongoing minimum capital requirements for
BHCs under the U.S. Basel III rules. The final
rule replaces the fixed 2.5% CET1 capital
conservation buffer in the Standardized approach
with a dynamic institution-specific SCB. The
final rule does not apply to the U.S. Basel III
Advanced approach capital requirements. The SCB
requirement for BHCs will be effective on
October 1 of each year and is expected to remain
in effect until September 30 of the following
year.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 93 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
TLAC Holdings rule. On October 20, 2020, the
federal banking agencies issued a final rule
prescribing the regulatory capital treatment for
holdings of TLAC debt instruments by certain
large banking organizations, such as the Firm
and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. This rule expands
the scope of the existing capital deductions
rule around the
holdings of capital instruments of financial
institutions to also include TLAC debt
instruments issued by systemically important
banking organizations. The final rule will
become effective on April 1, 2021 and is not
expected to have a material impact on the Firm’s
risk-based capital metrics.
Risk-based Capital Regulatory Minimums
The following chart presents the Firm’s Basel
III minimum CET1 capital ratio under the Basel
III rules currently in effect.
The Firm’s Basel III Standardized risk-based
ratios are currently more binding than the Basel
III Advanced risk-based ratios.
All banking institutions are currently required
to have a minimum CET1 capital ratio of 4.5% of
risk-weighted assets.
Certain banking organizations, including the
Firm, are required to hold additional levels of
capital to serve as a “capital conservation
buffer”. The capital conservation buffer
incorporates a global systemically important
bank (“GSIB”) surcharge, a discretionary
countercyclical capital buffer and a fixed
capital conservation buffer of 2.5% for Advanced
regulatory capital requirements and a variable
SCB requirement, floored at 2.5%, for
Standardized regulatory capital requirements.
Under the Federal Reserve’s GSIB rule, the Firm
is required to assess its GSIB surcharge on an
annual basis under two separately prescribed
methods based on data for the previous fiscal
year-end, and is subject to the higher of the
two. The first (“Method 1”), reflects the GSIB
surcharge as prescribed by the Basel Committee’s
assessment methodology, and is calculated across
five criteria: size, cross-jurisdictional
activity, interconnectedness, complexity and
substitutability. The second (“Method 2”),
modifies the Method 1 requirements to include a
measure of short-term wholesale funding in place
of substitutability, and introduces a GSIB score
“multiplication factor”.
 94 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
The following table presents the Firm’s
effective GSIB surcharge for the years ended
December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 2020 2019 
 Fully Phased-In: 
 Method 1 2.50 % 2.50 % 
 Method 2 3.50 % 3.50 % 
The Firm’s effective regulatory minimum GSIB surcharge calculated under Method 2 remains unchanged at
3.5% for 2021. On November 11, 2020, the Financial Stability Board (“FSB”) released its annual GSIB
list, which published the Firm’s Method 1 GSIB surcharge of 2.0% (down from 2.5%) effective January
1, 2021, based upon data as of December 31, 2019. The Firm’s estimated Method 2 surcharge calculated
using data as of December 31, 2020 is 4.0%. Accordingly, based on the GSIB rule currently in effect,
the Firm’s effective regulatory minimum GSIB surcharge is expected to increase to 4.0% on January 1,
2023 unless the Firm’s Method 2 GSIB surcharge calculation based upon data as of December 31, 2021 is
lower. The U.S. federal regulatory capital standards include a framework for setting a discretionary
countercyclical capital buffer taking into account the macro financial environment in which large,
internationally active banks function. As of December 31, 2020, the U.S. countercyclical capital
buffer remained at 0%. The Federal Reserve will continue to review the buffer at least annually. The
buffer can be increased if the Federal Reserve, FDIC and OCC determine that systemic risks are
meaningfully above normal and can be calibrated up to an additional 2.5% of RWA subject to a 12-month
implementation period. Failure to maintain regulatory capital equal to or in excess of the risk-based
regulatory capital minimum plus the capital conservation buffer (inclusive of the GSIB surcharge) and
any countercyclical buffer will result in limitations to the amount of capital that the Firm may
distribute, such as through dividends and common share repurchases, as well as certain executive
discretionary bonus payments. The Firm has a target Basel III CET1 capital ratio of 12%. However, the
Firm may remain above that level in order to satisfy leverage-based capital requirements if deposits
continue to grow due to actions taken by the Federal Reserve and the U.S. government in response to
the COVID-19 pandemic. Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity The Federal Reserve’s TLAC rule requires the
U.S. GSIB top-tier holding companies, including the Firm, to maintain minimum levels of external TLAC
and eligible long-term debt (“eligible LTD”). Refer to TLAC on page 100 for additional information.
Leverage-based Capital Regulatory Minimums Supplementary leverage ratio Banking organizations subject
to the Basel III Advanced approach are currently required to have a minimum SLR of
3.0%. Certain banking organizations, including the Firm, are also required to hold an additional 2.0%
leverage buffer. The SLR is defined as Tier 1 capital under Basel III divided by the Firm’s total
leverage exposure. Total leverage exposure is calculated by taking the Firm’s total average on-
balance sheet assets, less amounts permitted to be deducted for Tier 1 capital, and adding certain
off-balance sheet exposures, such as undrawn commitments and derivatives potential future exposure.
Failure to maintain an SLR equal to or greater than the regulatory minimum will result in limitations
on the amount of capital that the Firm may distribute such as through dividends and common share
repurchases. Other regulatory capital In addition to meeting the capital ratio requirements of Basel
III, the Firm and its IDI subsidiaries also must maintain minimum capital and leverage ratios in
order to be “well-capitalized” under the regulations issued by the Federal Reserve and the Prompt
Corrective Action (“PCA”) requirements of the FDIC Improvement Act (“FDICIA”), respectively. Refer to
Note 27 for additional information. Additional information regarding the Firm’s capital ratios, as
well as the U.S. federal regulatory capital standards to which the Firm is subject, is presented in
Note 27. Refer to the Firm’s Pillar 3 Regulatory Capital Disclosures reports, which are available on
the Firm’s website, for further information on the Firm’s Basel III measures.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 95 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
The following table presents the Firm’s risk-based and leverage-based capital metrics under both the
Basel III Standardized and Advanced approaches.
 (in Stand… Advan… 
 mill… Decem… Decem… Minim… Decem… Dece… Minim… 
 exce… 31, 31, capit… 31, 31, capit… 
 rati… 2020(… 2019 ratio… 2020(… 2019 ratio… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Risk… 
 capi… 
 metr… 
 CET1 $ 205,0… $ 187,7… $ 205,0… $ 187,… 
 capi… 
 Tier 
 1 234,8… 214,4… 234,8… 214,… 
 capi… 
 Total 269,9… 242,5… 257,2… 232,… 
 capi… 
 Risk… 1,560… 1,515… 1,484… 1,39… 
 asse… 
 CET1 
 capi… 13.1 % 12.4 % 11.3 % 13.8 % 13.4 % 10.5 % 
 ratio 
 Tier 
 1 15.0 14.1 12.8 15.8 15.3 12.0 
 capi… 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capi… 17.3 16.0 14.8 17.3 16.6 14.0 
 ratio 
 Leve… 
 capi… 
 metr… 
 Adju… 
 aver… $ 3,353… $ 2,730… $ 3,353… $ 2,73… 
 asse… 
 Tier 
 1 7.0 % 7.9 % 4.0 % 7.0 % 7.9 % 4.0 % 
 leve… 
 ratio 
 Total 
 leve… NA NA $ 3,401… $ 3,42… 
 expo… 
 SLR(… NA NA NA 6.9 % 6.3 % 5.0 % 
(a) Adjusted average assets, for purposes of calculating the leverage ratios, includes total
quarterly average assets adjusted for on-balance sheet assets that are subject to deduction from Tier
1 capital, predominantly goodwill and other intangible assets.
(b) As of December 31, 2020, total leverage exposure for purposes of calculating the SLR excludes
U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at Federal Reserve Banks, as provided by the interim final rule
issued by the Federal Reserve on April 1, 2020.
(c) As of December 31, 2020, the capital metrics reflect the CECL capital transition provisions.
(d) As of December 31, 2020, the capital metrics reflect the exclusion of assets purchased from money
market mutual fund clients pursuant to nonrecourse advances provided under the MMLF. Additionally,
loans originated under the PPP receive a zero percent risk weight.
(e) Represents minimum requirements and regulatory buffers applicable to the Firm. For the period
ended December 31, 2019, the CET1, Tier 1, Total, Tier 1 leverage and SLR minimum capital ratios
applicable to the Firm were 10.5%, 12.0%, 14.0%, 4.0% and 5.0%, respectively. Refer to Note 27 for
additional information.
 96 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Capital components The following table presents
reconciliations of total stockholders’ equity to
Basel III CET1 capital, Tier 1 capital and Total
capital as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 December 31, December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total stockholders’ equity $ 279,354 $ 261,330 
 Less: Preferred stock 30,063 26,993 
 Common stockholders’ equity 249,291 234,337 
 Add: 
 Certain deferred tax liabilities(a) 2,453 2,381 
 Less: 
 Goodwill 49,248 47,823 
 Other intangible assets 904 819 
 Other CET1 capital adjustments(b) -3,486 323 
 Standardized/Advanced CET1 capital 205,078 187,753 
 Preferred stock 30,063 26,993 
 Less: Other Tier 1 adjustments 297 314 
 Standardized/Advanced Tier 1 capital $ 234,844 $ 214,432 
 Long-term debt and other instruments $ 16,645 $ 13,733 
 qualifying as Tier 2 capital 
 Qualifying allowance for credit 18,372 14,314 
 losses(c) 
 Other 62 110 
 Standardized Tier 2 capital $ 35,079 $ 28,157 
 Standardized Total capital $ 269,923 $ 242,589 
 Adjustment in qualifying allowance for 
 credit losses for Advanced Tier 2 -12,695 -10,477 
 capital(d) 
 Advanced Tier 2 capital $ 22,384 $ 17,680 
 Advanced Total capital $ 257,228 $ 232,112 
(a) Represents deferred tax liabilities related
to tax-deductible goodwill and to identifiable
intangibles created in nontaxable transactions,
which are netted against goodwill and other
intangibles when calculating CET1 capital. (b)
As of December 31, 2020, the impact of the CECL
capital transition provision was an increase in
CET1 capital of $5.7 billion. (c) Represents the
allowance for credit losses eligible for
inclusion in Tier 2 capital up to 1.25% of
credit risk RWA, including the impact of the
CECL capital transition provision with any
excess deducted from RWA. (d) Represents an
adjustment to qualifying allowance for credit
losses for the excess of eligible credit
reserves over expected credit losses up to 0.6%
of credit risk RWA, including the impact of the
CECL capital transition provision with any
excess deducted from RWA.
Capital rollforward The following table presents
the changes in Basel III CET1 capital, Tier 1
capital and Tier 2 capital for the year ended
December 31, 2020.
 Year Ended December 31, (in millions) 
 Standardized/Advanced CET1 capital at December 31, 2019 187,753 2020 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income applicable to common equity 27,548 
 Dividends declared on common stock -11,119 
 Net purchase of treasury stock -5,135 
 Changes in additional paid-in capital -128 
 Changes related to AOCI 6,417 
 Adjustment related to AOCI(a) -1,829 
 Changes related to other CET1 capital 1,571 
 adjustments(b) 
 Change in Standardized/Advanced CET1 17,325 
 capital 
 Standardized/Advanced CET1 capital at $ 205,078 
 December 31, 2020 
 Standardized/Advanced Tier 1 capital at $ 214,432 
 December 31, 2019 
 Change in CET1 capital(b) 17,325 
 Net issuance of noncumulative perpetual 3,070 
 preferred stock 
 Other 17 
 Change in Standardized/Advanced Tier 1 20,412 
 capital 
 Standardized/Advanced Tier 1 capital at $ 234,844 
 December 31, 2020 
 Standardized Tier 2 capital at December $ 28,157 
 31, 2019 
 Change in long-term debt and other 2,912 
 instruments qualifying as Tier 2 
 Change in qualifying allowance for 4,058 
 credit losses(b) 
 Other -48 
 Change in Standardized Tier 2 capital 6,922 
 Standardized Tier 2 capital at December $ 35,079 
 31, 2020 
 Standardized Total capital at December $ 269,923 
 31, 2020 
 Advanced Tier 2 capital at December 31, $ 17,680 
 2019 
 Change in long-term debt and other 2,912 
 instruments qualifying as Tier 2 
 Change in qualifying allowance for 1,840 
 credit losses(b) 
 Other -48 
 Change in Advanced Tier 2 capital 4,704 
 Advanced Tier 2 capital at December 31, $ 22,384 
 2020 
 Advanced Total capital at December 31, $ 257,228 
 2020 
(a) Includes cash flow hedges and DVA related to
structured notes recorded in AOCI. (b) Includes
the impact of the CECL capital transition
provisions.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 97 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
RWA rollforward
The following table presents changes in the components of RWA under Basel III Standardized and
Advanced approaches for the year ended December 31, 2020. The amounts in the rollforward categories
are estimates, based on the predominant driver of the change.
 Year 
 ended 
 Dece… 
 31, 
 2020 
 (in Stand… Advan… 
 mill… Credit Market Credit Market Operat… 
 Dece… risk risk Total risk risk risk Total 
 31, RWA RWA RWA RWA RWA RWA RWA 
 2019 1,440… 75,649 1,515… 932,9… 75,652 389,278 1,397… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Model 
 & -800 -16,3… -17,1… -6,100 -16,3… — -22,4… 
 data 
 chan… 
 Port… -4,450 — -4,450 -4,000 — — -4,000 
 runo… 
 Move… 
 in 29,249 37,061 66,310 79,482 37,578 -4,087 112,9… 
 port… 
 leve… 
 Chan… 
 in 23,999 20,741 44,740 69,382 21,258 -4,087 86,553 
 RWA 
 Dece… 
 31, $ 1,464… $ 96,390 $ 1,560… $ 1,002… $ 96,910 $ 385,191 $ 1,484… 
 2020 
(a) Model & data changes refer to material
movements in levels of RWA as a result of
revised methodologies and/or treatment per
regulatory guidance (exclusive of rule changes).
(b) Portfolio runoff for credit risk RWA
primarily reflects reduced risk from position
rolloffs in legacy portfolios in Home Lending.
(c) Movement in portfolio levels (inclusive of
rule changes) refers to: changes in book size,
composition, credit quality, and market
movements for credit risk RWA; changes in
position and market movements for market risk
RWA; updates to cumulative losses for
operational risk RWA; and deductions to credit
risk RWA for excess eligible credit reserves not
eligible for inclusion in Tier 2 capital.
Supplementary leverage ratio The following table
presents the components of the Firm’s SLR.
 Three months ended December 31, December 31, 
 (in millions, except ratio) 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Tier 1 capital $ 234,844 214,432 
 Total average assets 3,399,818 2,777,270 
 Less: Regulatory capital adjustments(a) 46,499 47,031 
 Total adjusted average assets(b) 3,353,319 2,730,239 
 Add: Off-balance sheet exposures(c) 729,978 693,192 
 Less: Exclusion for U.S. Treasuries and 681,755 — 
 Federal Reserve Bank deposits 
 Total leverage exposure $ 3,401,542 $ 3,423,431 
 SLR 6.9 % 6.3 % 
(a) For purposes of calculating the SLR,
includes total quarterly average assets adjusted
for on-balance sheet assets that are subject to
deduction from Tier 1 capital, predominantly
goodwill and other intangible assets. As of
December 31, 2020, includes adjustments for the
CECL capital transition provisions and the
exclusion of average assets purchased from money
market mutual fund clients pursuant to
nonrecourse advances provided under the MMLF.
(b) Adjusted average assets used for the
calculation of Tier 1 leverage ratio. (c) Off-
balance sheet exposures are calculated as the
average of the three month-end spot balances
during the reporting quarter. Refer to Note 27
for JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.’s SLR.
Line of business equity Each business segment is
allocated capital by taking into consideration a
variety of factors including capital levels of
similarly rated peers and applicable regulatory
capital requirements. ROE is measured and
internal targets for expected returns are
established as key measures of a business
segment’s performance. The Firm’s allocation
methodology incorporates Basel III Standardized
RWA, Basel III Advanced RWA, the GSIB surcharge,
and a simulation of capital in a severe stress
environment. As of January 1, 2021, the Firm has
changed its line of business capital allocations
primarily as a result of changes in exposures
for each LOB and an increase in the relative
risk weighting toward Standardized RWA. The
assumptions and methodologies used to allocate
capital are periodically assessed and as a
result, the capital allocated to the LOBs may
change from time to time. The following table
presents the capital allocated to each business
segment.
 Line of business equity 
 (Allocated capital) January 1, 
 (in billions) 2021 December 31, 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer & Community Banking $ 50.0 $ 52.0 $ 52.0 
 Corporate & Investment Bank 83.0 80.0 80.0 
 Commercial Banking 24.0 22.0 22.0 
 Asset & Wealth Management 14.0 10.5 10.5 
 Corporate 78.3 84.8 69.8 
 Total common stockholders’ $ 249.3 $ 249.3 $ 234.3 
 equity 
 98 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Capital actions Common stock dividends The
Firm’s common stock dividends are planned as
part of the Capital Management governance
framework in line with the Firm’s capital
management objectives. The Firm’s quarterly
common stock dividend is currently $0.90 per
share. The Firm’s dividends are subject to the
Board of Directors’ approval on a quarterly
basis. Refer to Note 21 and Note 26 for
information regarding dividend restrictions. The
following table shows the common dividend payout
ratio based on net income applicable to common
equity.
 Year ended December 31, 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Common dividend payout ratio 40 % 31 % 30 % 
Common stock On March 15, 2020, in response to
the economic disruptions caused by the COVID-19
pandemic, the Firm temporarily suspended
repurchases of its common stock. Subsequently,
the Federal Reserve directed all large banks,
including the Firm, to discontinue net share
repurchases through the end of 2020. On December
18, 2020, the Federal Reserve announced that all
large banks, including the Firm, could resume
share repurchases commencing in the first
quarter of 2021. As directed by the Federal
Reserve, total net repurchases and common stock
dividends in the first quarter of 2021 are
restricted and cannot exceed the average of the
Firm’s net income for the four preceding
calendar quarters. The Firm's Board of Directors
has authorized a new common share repurchase
program for up to $30 billion. The following
table sets forth the Firm’s repurchases of
common stock for the years ended December 31,
2020, 2019 and 2018.
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total number of shares of common stock 50.0 213.0 181.5 
 repurchased 
 Aggregate purchase price of common stock $ 6,397 $ 24,121 $ 19,983 
 repurchases 
The authorization to repurchase common shares is utilized at management’s discretion, and the timing
of purchases and the exact amount of common shares that may be repurchased is subject to various
factors, including market conditions; legal and regulatory considerations affecting the amount and
timing of repurchase activity; the Firm’s capital position (taking into account goodwill and
intangibles); internal capital generation; and alternative investment opportunities. The repurchase
program does not include specific price targets or timetables; may be suspended by management at any
time; and may be executed through open market purchases or privately negotiated transactions, or
utilizing Rule 10b5-1 plans, which are written trading plans that the Firm may enter into from time
to time under Rule 10b5-1 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and which allow the Firm to
repurchase its common shares during periods when it may otherwise not be repurchasing common shares —
for example, during internal trading blackout periods. Refer to Part II, Item 5: Market for
Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities on
page 34 of the 2020 Form 10-K for additional information regarding repurchases of the Firm’s equity
securities. Preferred stock Preferred stock dividends declared were $1.6 billion for the year ended
December 31, 2020. The Firm has not issued or redeemed any preferred stock since the first quarter of
2020. Refer to Note 21 for additional information on the Firm’s preferred stock, including the
issuance and redemption of preferred stock. Subordinated Debt On May 13, 2020, the Firm issued $3.0
billion of fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due 2031. Refer to Long-term funding and
issuance on page 107 and Note 20 for additional information .
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 99 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
Other capital requirements Total Loss-Absorbing
Capacity The Federal Reserve’s TLAC rule
requires the U.S. GSIB top-tier holding
companies, including the Firm, to maintain
minimum levels of external TLAC and eligible
long-term debt. The minimum external TLAC and
the minimum level of eligible long-term debt
requirements are shown below: (a) RWA is the
greater of Standardized and Advanced compared to
their respective minimum capital ratios. Failure
to maintain TLAC equal to or in excess of the
regulatory minimum plus applicable buffers will
result in limitations to the amount of capital
that the Firm may distribute, such as through
dividends and common share repurchases. The
following table presents the TLAC and external
long-term debt minimum requirements including
applicable regulatory buffers, as of December
31, 2020 and 2019.
 Minimum Requirements 
 TLAC to RWA 23.0 % 
 TLAC to leverage exposure 9.5 
 External long-term debt to RWA 9.5 
 External long-term debt to leverage 4.5 
Effective January 1, 2021, Method 1 GSIB
surcharge is 2.0% (down from 2.5%). As a result,
the Firm’s TLAC to RWA requirement will become
22.5%. Refer to Risk-based Capital Regulatory
Minimums on pages 94-95 for further information
on the GSIB surcharge.
The following table presents the eligible
external TLAC and eligible LTD amounts, as well
as a representation of the amounts as a
percentage of the Firm’s total RWA and total
leverage exposure applying the impact of the
CECL capital transition provisions as of
December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (in billions, External TLAC LTD External TLAC LTD 
 except ratio) 
 Total eligible $ 421.0 $ 181.4 $ 386.4 $ 161.8 
 amount 
 % of RWA 27.0 % 11.6 % 25.5 % 10.7 % 
 Surplus/(shortfall) $ 62.1 $ 33.1 $ 37.7 $ 17.8 
 % of total leverage 12.4 % 5.3 % 11.3 % 4.7 % 
 exposure 
 Surplus/(shortfall) $ 97.9 $ 28.3 $ 61.2 $ 7.8 
Refer to Part I, Item 1A: Risk Factors on pages
8-32 of the 2020 Form 10-K for information on
the financial consequences to holders of the
Firm’s debt and equity securities in a
resolution scenario.
 100 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Broker-dealer regulatory capital 
J.P. Morgan Securities JPMorgan Chase’s
principal U.S. broker-dealer subsidiary is J.P.
Morgan Securities. J.P. Morgan Securities is
subject to Rule 15c3-1 under the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Net Capital Rule”).
J.P. Morgan Securities is also registered as a
futures commission merchant and is subject to
regulatory capital requirements, including those
imposed by the SEC, Commodity Futures Trading
Commission (“CFTC”), Financial Industry
Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”) and the National
Futures Association (“NFA”). J.P. Morgan
Securities has elected to compute its minimum
net capital requirements in accordance with the
“Alternative Net Capital Requirements” of the
Net Capital Rule. The following table presents
J.P. Morgan Securities’ net capital:
 December 31, 2020 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (in millions) Actual(a) Minimum 
 Net Capital $ 27,651 $ 5,024 
(a) Net capital reflects the exclusion of assets
purchased from money market mutual fund clients
pursuant to nonrecourse advances provided under
the MMLF. In addition to its alternative minimum
net capital requirements, J.P. Morgan Securities
is required to hold “tentative net capital” in
excess of $1.0 billion and is also required to
notify the SEC in the event that its tentative
net capital is less than $5.0 billion. Tentative
net capital is net capital before deducting
market and credit risk charges as defined by the
Net Capital Rule. As of December 31, 2020, J.P.
Morgan Securities maintained tentative net
capital in excess of the minimum and
notification requirements.
J.P. Morgan Securities plc J.P. Morgan
Securities plc is a wholly-owned subsidiary of
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and has authority to
engage in banking, investment banking and
broker-dealer activities. J.P. Morgan Securities
plc is jointly regulated by the U.K. Prudential
Regulation Authority (“PRA”) and the Financial
Conduct Authority (“FCA”). J.P. Morgan
Securities plc is subject to the European Union
Capital Requirements Regulation and the PRA
capital rules, each of which implement Basel III
and thereby subject J.P. Morgan Securities plc
to its requirements. Effective January 1, 2021,
J.P. Morgan Securities plc is subject to the
amended EU Capital Requirement Regulation, as
adopted in the U.K. The Bank of England
requires, on a transitional basis, that U.K.
banks, including U.K. regulated subsidiaries of
overseas groups, maintain a minimum requirement
for own funds and eligible liabilities (“MREL”).
As of December 31, 2020, J.P. Morgan Securities
plc was compliant with the requirements of the
MREL rule. The following table presents J.P.
Morgan Securities plc’s capital metrics:
 December 31, 2020 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (in millions, except ratios) Estimated Minimum ratios 
 Total capital $ 55,156 
 CET1 ratio 17.9 % 4.5 % 
 Total capital ratio 22.8 % 8.0 % 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 101 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 LIQUIDITY RISK MANAGEMENT 
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Firm will be
unable to meet its contractual and contingent
financial obligations as they arise or that it
does not have the appropriate amount,
composition and tenor of funding and liquidity
to support its assets and liabilities.
 Liquidity risk oversight 
The Firm has a Liquidity Risk Oversight function
whose primary objective is to provide oversight
of liquidity risk across the Firm. Liquidity
Risk Oversight’s responsibilities include:
• Defining, monitoring and reporting liquidity
risk metrics;
• Establishing and monitoring limits and
indicators, including liquidity risk appetite;
• Developing a process to classify, monitor and
report limit breaches;
• Performing an independent review of liquidity
risk management processes;
• Monitoring and reporting internal Firmwide and
legal entity liquidity stress tests as well as
regulatory defined liquidity stress tests;
• Approving or escalating for review new or
updated liquidity stress assumptions; and
• Monitoring liquidity positions, balance sheet
variances and funding activities;
 Liquidity management 
The primary objectives of the Firm’s liquidity
management are to:
• Ensure that the Firm’s core businesses and
material legal entities are able to operate in
support of client needs and meet contractual and
contingent financial obligations through normal
economic cycles as well as during stress events,
and
• Manage an optimal funding mix and availability
of liquidity sources.
As part of the Firm’s overall liquidity
management strategy, the Firm manages liquidity
and funding using a centralized, global approach
in order to:
• Optimize liquidity sources and uses;
• Monitor exposures;
• Identify constraints on the transfer of
liquidity between the Firm’s legal entities; and
• Maintain the appropriate amount of surplus
liquidity at a Firmwide and legal entity level,
where relevant.
In the context of the Firm’s liquidity
management, Treasury and CIO is responsible for:
• Analyzing and understanding the liquidity
characteristics of the assets and liabilities of
the Firm, LOBs and legal entities, taking into
account legal, regulatory, and operational
restrictions;
• Developing internal liquidity stress testing
assumptions;
• Defining and monitoring Firmwide and legal
entity-specific liquidity strategies, policies,
reporting and contingency funding plans;
• Managing liquidity within the Firm’s approved
liquidity risk appetite tolerances and limits;
• Managing compliance with regulatory
requirements related to funding and liquidity
risk; and
• Setting transfer pricing in accordance with
underlying liquidity characteristics of balance
sheet assets and liabilities as well as certain
off-balance sheet items.
 Governance 
Committees responsible for liquidity governance
include the Firmwide ALCO as well as LOB and
regional ALCOs, the Treasurer Committee, and the
CTC Risk Committee. In addition, the Board Risk
Committee reviews and recommends to the Board of
Directors, for formal approval, the Firm’s
liquidity risk tolerances, liquidity strategy,
and liquidity policy. Refer to Firmwide Risk
Management on pages 85-89 for further discussion
of ALCO and other risk-related committees.
 Internal stress testing 
Liquidity stress tests are intended to ensure
that the Firm has sufficient liquidity under a
variety of adverse scenarios, including
scenarios analyzed as part of the Firm’s
resolution and recovery planning. Stress
scenarios are produced for JPMorgan Chase & Co.
(“Parent Company”) and the Firm’s material legal
entities on a regular basis, and other stress
tests are performed in response to specific
market events or concerns. Liquidity stress
tests assume all of the Firm’s contractual
financial obligations are met and take into
consideration:
• Varying levels of access to unsecured and
secured funding markets,
• Estimated non-contractual and contingent cash
outflows, and
• Potential impediments to the availability and
transferability of liquidity between
jurisdictions and material legal entities such
as regulatory, legal or other restrictions.
Liquidity outflow assumptions are modeled across
a range of time horizons and currency dimensions
and contemplate both market and idiosyncratic
stresses.
Results of stress tests are considered in the
formulation of the Firm’s funding plan and
assessment of its liquidity position. The Parent
Company acts as a source of funding for the Firm
through equity and long-term debt issuances, and
its intermediate holding company, JPMorgan Chase
Holdings LLC (the “IHC”) provides funding
support to the ongoing operations of the Parent
Company and its subsidiaries. The Firm maintains
liquidity at the Parent Company, IHC, and
operating subsidiaries at levels sufficient to
comply with liquidity risk tolerances and
minimum liquidity requirements, and to manage
through periods of
 102 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
stress when access to normal funding sources may
be disrupted. Contingency funding plan The
Firm’s Contingency Funding Plan (“CFP”) sets out
the strategies for addressing and managing
liquidity resource needs during a liquidity
stress event and incorporates liquidity risk
limits, indicators and risk appetite tolerances
that make up Liquidity Escalation Points. The
CFP also identifies the alternative contingent
funding and liquidity resources available to the
Firm and its legal entities in a period of
stress. Liquidity Coverage Ratio The LCR rule
requires that the Firm and JPMorgan Chase Bank,
N.A. maintain an amount of eligible HQLA that is
sufficient to meet its estimated total net cash
outflows over a prospective 30 calendar-day
period of significant stress. Eligible HQLA, for
purposes of calculating the LCR, is the amount
of unencumbered HQLA that satisfy certain
operational considerations as defined in the LCR
rule. HQLA primarily consist of cash and certain
high-quality liquid securities as defined in the
LCR rule. Under the LCR rule, the amount of
eligible HQLA held by JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.
that is in excess of its stand-alone 100%
minimum LCR requirement, and that is not
transferable to non-bank affiliates, must be
excluded from the Firm’s reported eligible HQLA.
Estimated net cash outflows are based on
standardized stress outflow and inflow rates
prescribed in the LCR rule, which are applied to
the balances of the Firm’s assets, sources of
funds, and obligations. The LCR for both the
Firm and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. is required
to be a minimum of 100%.
The following table summarizes the Firm and
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.’s average LCR for the
three months ended December 31, 2020, September
30, 2020 and December 31, 2019 based on the
Firm’s interpretation of the LCR framework.
 Average amount Three months ended December 31, 
 (in millions) December 31, 2020 September 30, 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co.: 
 Eligible HQLA 
 Eligible cash(a) $ 455,612 $ 458,336 $ 203,296 
 Eligible 241,447 211,841 341,990 
 securities(b)(c) 
 Total eligible HQLA(d) $ 697,059 $ 670,177 $ 545,286 
 Net cash outflows $ 634,037 $ 587,811 $ 469,402 
 LCR 110 % 114 % 116 % 
 Net excess eligible $ 63,022 $ 82,366 $ 75,884 
 HQLA(d) 
 JPMorgan Chase Bank, 
 N.A.: 
 LCR 160 % 157 % 116 % 
 Net excess eligible $ 401,903 $ 366,096 $ 79,483 
 HQLA 
(a) Represents cash on deposit at central banks,
primarily the Federal Reserve Banks. (b)
Predominantly U.S. Treasuries, U.S. GSE and
government agency MBS, and sovereign bonds net
of applicable haircuts under the LCR rule. (c)
Eligible HQLA securities may be reported in
securities borrowed or purchased under resale
agreements, trading assets, or investment
securities on the Firm’s Consolidated balance
sheets. (d) Excludes average excess eligible
HQLA at JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. that are not
transferable to non-bank affiliates. The Firm’s
average LCR decreased during the three months
ended December 31, 2020, compared with the
three-month period ended September 30, 2020,
predominantly driven by a decrease in cash from
long-term debt maturities, including the early
termination of certain of the Firm's debt at the
end of the third quarter 2020. The Firm's
average LCR decreased during the three months
ended December 31, 2020, compared with the prior
year period primarily due to the relative impact
on net cash outflows from the significant
increase in deposits as well as elevated market
activities in the CIB. JPMorgan Chase Bank,
N.A.’s average LCR increased during the three
months ended December 31, 2020, compared with
both the three month periods ended September 30,
2020 and December 31, 2019 primarily due to
growth in deposits. Deposits continued to
increase in the fourth quarter primarily driven
by the COVID-19 pandemic and the related effect
of certain government actions. The increase in
excess liquidity in JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. is
excluded from the Firm’s reported LCR under the
LCR rule. The Firm’s average LCR fluctuates from
period to period, due to changes in its eligible
HQLA and estimated net cash outflows as a result
of ongoing business activity. Refer to the
Firm’s U.S. LCR Disclosure reports, which are
available on the Firm’s website for a further
discussion of the Firm’s LCR.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 103 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 Other liquidity sources 
In addition to the assets reported in the Firm’s
eligible HQLA above, the Firm had unencumbered
marketable securities, such as equity and debt
securities, that the Firm believes would be
available to raise liquidity. This includes
securities included as part of the excess
eligible HQLA at JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. that
are not transferable to non-bank affiliates. The
fair value of these securities was approximately
$740 billion and $315 billion as of December 31,
2020 and 2019, respectively, although the amount
of liquidity that could be raised would be
dependent on prevailing market conditions. The
fair value increased compared to December 31,
2019, due to an increase in excess eligible HQLA
at JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. which was primarily
a result of increased deposits.
The Firm also had available borrowing capacity
at FHLBs and the discount window at the Federal
Reserve Bank as a result of collateral pledged
by the Firm to such banks of approximately $307
billion and $322 billion as of December 31, 2020
and 2019, respectively. This borrowing capacity
excludes the benefit of cash and securities
reported in the Firm’s eligible HQLA or other
unencumbered securities that are currently
pledged at the Federal Reserve Bank discount
window and other central banks. Available
borrowing capacity decreased from December 31,
2019 primarily due to lower pledged credit card
receivable balances driven by the COVID-19
pandemic and a decrease in pledged mortgage
collateral as a result of paydown and maturity
activity. Although available, the Firm does not
view this borrowing capacity at the Federal
Reserve Bank discount window and the other
central banks as a primary source of liquidity.
 NSFR 
The net stable funding ratio (“NSFR”) is a
liquidity requirement for large banking
organizations that is intended to measure the
adequacy of “available” and “required” amounts
of stable funding over a one-year horizon. On
October 20, 2020, the federal banking agencies
issued a final NSFR rule under which large
banking organizations such as the Firm will be
required to maintain an NSFR of at least 100% on
an ongoing basis. The final NSFR rule will
become effective on July 1, 2021, and the Firm
will be required to publicly disclose its
quarterly average NSFR semi-annually beginning
in 2023.
As of December 31, 2020 the Firm estimates that
it was compliant with the 100% minimum NSFR
based on its current understanding of the final
rule.
 104 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Funding 
 Sources of funds 
Management believes that the Firm’s unsecured
and secured funding capacity is sufficient to
meet its on- and off-balance sheet obligations.
The Firm funds its global balance sheet through
diverse sources of funding including stable
deposits, secured and unsecured funding in the
capital markets and stockholders’ equity.
Deposits are the primary funding source for
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. Additionally, JPMorgan
Chase Bank, N.A. may also access funding through
short- or long-term secured borrowings, through
the issuance of
unsecured long-term debt, or from borrowings
from the Parent Company or the IHC. The Firm’s
non-bank subsidiaries are primarily funded from
long-term unsecured borrowings and short-term
secured borrowings, primarily securities loaned
or sold under repurchase agreements. Excess
funding is invested by Treasury and CIO in the
Firm’s investment securities portfolio or
deployed in cash or other short-term liquid
investments based on their interest rate and
liquidity risk characteristics.
 Deposits 
The table below summarizes, by LOB and Corporate, the period-end and average deposit balances as of
and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 As of or for the year 
 ended December 31, Average 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer & Community $ 958,706 $ 723,418 -a $ 851,390 $ 698,378 -a 
 Banking 
 Corporate & 702,215 511,905 -a 655,095 515,938 -a 
 Investment Bank 
 Commercial Banking 284,263 184,115 237,645 172,666 
 Asset & Wealth 198,755 142,740 -a 161,955 135,265 -a 
 Management 
 Corporate 318 253 666 820 
 Total Firm $ 2,144,257 $ 1,562,431 $ 1,906,751 $ 1,523,067 
(a) In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Firm
realigned certain wealth management clients from
AWM to the J.P. Morgan Wealth Management
business unit within CCB. In the first quarter
of 2020, the Merchant Services business was
realigned from CCB to CIB as part of the Firm’s
Wholesale Payments business. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation.
Deposits provide a stable source of funding and
reduce the Firm’s reliance on the wholesale
funding markets. A significant portion of the
Firm’s deposits are consumer deposits and
wholesale operating deposits, which are both
considered to be stable sources of liquidity.
Wholesale operating deposits are considered to
be stable sources of liquidity because they are
generated from customers that maintain operating
service relationships with the Firm. The table
below shows the loan and deposit balances, the
loans-to-deposits ratios, and deposits as a
percentage of total liabilities, as of December
31, 2020 and 2019.
 As of December 31, 
 (in billions except ratios) 
 2020 2019 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Deposits $ 2,144.3 $ 1,562.4 
 Deposits as a % of total liabilities 69 % 64 % 
 Loans 1,012.9 997.6 
 Loans-to-deposits ratio 47 % 64 % 
The Firm believes that average deposit balances are generally more representative of deposit trends
than period-end deposit balances, over time. However, during periods of market disruption those
trends could be affected. Average deposits increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting
significant inflows across the LOBs primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the
related effect of certain government actions. In the wholesale businesses, while the inflows
principally occurred in March as clients sought to remain liquid as a result of market conditions,
balances continued to increase through the end of 2020. In CCB, the increase was driven by lower
spending and higher cash balances across both consumer and small business customers, as well as
growth from existing and new accounts. Refer to the discussion of the Firm’s Business Segment Results
and the Consolidated Balance Sheets Analysis on pages 65–84 and pages 57-58, respectively, for
further information on deposit and liability balance trends.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 105 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
The following table summarizes short-term and long-term funding, excluding deposits, as of December
31, 2020 and 2019, and average balances for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Refer to the
Consolidated Balance Sheets Analysis on pages 57-58 and Note 20 for additional information.
 Sources of funds (excluding deposits) 
 As of or for the year ended December 31, Average 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2020 2019 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Commercial paper $ 12,031 $ 14,754 $ 12,129 $ 22,977 
 Other borrowed funds 8,510 7,544 9,198 10,369 
 Total short-term unsecured funding $ 20,541 $ 22,298 $ 21,327 $ 33,346 
 Securities sold under agreements to $ 207,877 $ 175,709 $ 246,354 $ 217,807 
 repurchase(a) 
 Securities loaned(a) 4,886 5,983 6,536 8,816 
 Other borrowed funds(b) 24,667 18,622 23,812 26,050 
 Obligations of Firm-administered 10,523 9,223 11,430 10,929 
 multi-seller conduits(c) 
 Total short-term secured funding $ 247,953 $ 209,537 $ 288,132 $ 263,602 
 Senior notes $ 166,089 $ 166,185 $ 171,509 $ 168,546 
 Subordinated debt 21,608 17,591 20,789 17,387 
 Structured notes(d) 75,325 74,724 73,056 65,487 
 Total long-term unsecured funding $ 263,022 $ 258,500 $ 265,354 $ 251,420 
 Credit card securitization(c) $ 4,943 $ 6,461 $ 5,520 $ 9,707 
 FHLB advances 14,123 28,635 27,076 34,143 
 Other long-term secured funding(e) 4,540 4,363 4,460 4,643 
 Total long-term secured funding $ 23,606 $ 39,459 $ 37,056 $ 48,493 
 Preferred stock(f) $ 30,063 $ 26,993 $ 29,899 $ 27,511 
 Common stockholders’ equity(f) $ 249,291 $ 234,337 $ 236,865 $ 232,907 
(a) Primarily consists of short-term securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase.
(b) Effective March 2020, includes nonrecourse advances provided under the MMLF.
(c) Included in beneficial interests issued by consolidated variable interest entities on the Firm’s
Consolidated balance sheets.
(d) Includes certain TLAC-eligible long-term unsecured debt issued by the Parent Company.
(e) Includes long-term structured notes which are secured.
(f) Refer to Capital Risk Management on pages 91-101, Consolidated statements of changes in
stockholders’ equity on page 165, Note 21 and Note 22 for additional information on preferred stock
and common stockholders’ equity.
 Short-term funding 
The Firm’s sources of short-term secured funding
primarily consist of securities loaned or sold
under agreements to repurchase. These
instruments are secured predominantly by high-
quality securities collateral, including
government-issued debt and U.S. GSE and
government agency MBS. Securities sold under
agreements to repurchase increased at December
31, 2020, compared with December 31, 2019,
reflecting higher secured financing of AFS
investment securities in Treasury and CIO, as
well as trading assets in CIB, partially offset
by a decline in client-driven market-making
activities in CIB, including the Firm's non-
participation in the Federal Reserve's open
market operations.
The balances associated with securities loaned
or sold under agreements to repurchase fluctuate
over time due to investment and financing
activities of clients, the Firm’s demand for
financing, the ongoing management of the mix of
the Firm’s liabilities, including its secured
and unsecured financing (for both the investment
securities and market-making portfolios), and
other market and portfolio factors.
As of December 31, 2020, the Firm participated
in the MMLF government facility. The secured
nonrecourse advances under the MMLF are included
in other borrowed funds. Refer to Capital Risk
Management on pages 91-101 for additional
information on the MMLF.
The Primary Dealer Credit Facility ("PDCF") was
established by the Federal Reserve on March 20,
2020. Under the PDCF, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York (“FRBNY”) provides collateralized
financing on a term basis to primary dealers.
These financing transactions were reported as
securities sold under agreements to repurchase.
The Firm participated in the PDCF in the first
quarter of 2020, and ceased its participation in
May 2020 as the secured financing market
normalized.
The Firm’s sources of short-term unsecured
funding consist of other borrowed funds and
issuance of wholesale commercial paper. The
decrease in short-term unsecured funding at
December 31, 2020, from December 31, 2019 and
for the average year ended December 31, 2020
compared to the prior year period, was due to
lower net commercial paper issuance primarily
for short-term liquidity management.
 106 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Long-term funding and issuance 
Long-term funding provides an additional source of stable funding and liquidity for the Firm. The
Firm’s long-term funding plan is driven primarily by expected client activity, liquidity
considerations, and regulatory requirements, including TLAC. Long-term funding objectives include
maintaining diversification, maximizing market access and optimizing funding costs. The Firm
evaluates various funding markets, tenors and currencies in creating its optimal long-term funding
plan.
The significant majority of the Firm’s long-term unsecured funding is issued by the Parent Company to
provide flexibility in support of both bank and non-bank subsidiary funding needs. The Parent Company
advances substantially all net funding proceeds to its subsidiary, the IHC. The IHC does not issue
debt to external counterparties. The following table summarizes long-term unsecured issuance and
maturities or redemptions for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Refer to Note 20 for
additional information on long-term debt.
 Long-term unsecured funding 
 Year ended December 31, 2020 2019 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (Notional in millions) Parent Company Subsidiaries 
 Issuance 
 Senior notes issued in the U.S. $ 25,500 $ 14,000 $ 60 $ 1,750 
 market 
 Senior notes issued in non-U.S. 1,355 5,867 — — 
 markets 
 Total senior notes 26,855 19,867 60 1,750 
 Subordinated debt 3,000 — — — 
 Structured notes(a) 7,596 5,844 24,185 33,563 
 Total long-term unsecured 
 funding – $ 37,451 $ 25,711 $ 24,245 $ 35,313 
 issuance 
 Maturities/redemptions 
 Senior notes $ 28,719 $ 18,098 $ 7,701 $ 5,367 
 Subordinated debt 135 183 — — 
 Structured notes 5,340 2,944 30,002 19,271 
 Total long-term unsecured 
 funding – $ 34,194 $ 21,225 $ 37,703 $ 24,638 
 maturities/redemptions 
(a) Includes certain TLAC-eligible long-term unsecured debt issued by the Parent Company.
The Firm can also raise secured long-term funding through securitization of consumer credit card
loans and through FHLB advances. The following table summarizes the securitization issuance and FHLB
advances and their respective maturities or redemptions for the years ended December 31, 2020 and
2019.
 Long-term secured funding 
 Year ended December 31, Issuance Maturities/Redemptions 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Credit card securitization $ 1,000 $ — $ 2,525 $ 6,975 
 FHLB advances 15,000 — 29,509 15,817 
 Other long-term secured 1,130 204 1,048 927 
 funding(a) 
 Total long-term secured $ 17,130 $ 204 $ 33,082 $ 23,719 
 funding 
(a) Includes long-term structured notes which are secured.
The Firm’s wholesale businesses also securitize loans for client-driven transactions; those client-
driven loan securitizations are not considered to be a source of funding for the Firm and are not
included in the table above. Refer to Note 14 for a further description of client-driven loan
securitizations.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 107 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 Credit ratings 
The cost and availability of financing are
influenced by credit ratings. Reductions in
these ratings could have an adverse effect on
the Firm’s access to liquidity sources, increase
the cost of funds, trigger additional collateral
or funding requirements and decrease the number
of investors and counterparties willing to lend
to the Firm. The nature and magnitude of the
impact of ratings downgrades depends on numerous
contractual and behavioral factors,
which the Firm believes are incorporated in its
liquidity risk and stress testing metrics. The
Firm believes that it maintains sufficient
liquidity to withstand a potential decrease in
funding capacity due to ratings downgrades.
Additionally, the Firm’s funding requirements
for VIEs and other third-party commitments may
be adversely affected by a decline in credit
ratings.
The credit ratings of the Parent Company and the
Firm’s principal bank and non-bank subsidiaries
as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
 J.P. 
 Morgan 
 Securi… 
 LLC 
 JPMor… J.P. 
 JPMor… Chase Morgan 
 Chase Bank, Securi… 
 Dece… & Co. N.A. plc 
 31, Long-… Short… Long-… Short… Long-t… Short… 
 2020 issuer issuer Outlo… issuer issuer Outlo… issuer issuer Outlook 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Mood… 
 Inve… A2 P-1 Stable Aa2 P-1 Stable Aa3 P-1 Stable 
 Serv… 
 Stan… 
 & A- A-2 Stable A+ A-1 Stable A+ A-1 Stable 
 Poor… 
 Fitch AA- F1+ Negat… AA F1+ Negat… AA F1+ Negati… 
 Rati… 
(a) On April 18, 2020, Fitch affirmed the credit
ratings of the Parent Company and the Firm’s
principal bank and non-bank subsidiaries but
revised the outlook on the credit ratings from
stable to negative given expectations that
credit fundamentals will deteriorate as a result
of the COVID-19 pandemic.
JPMorgan Chase’s unsecured debt does not contain
requirements that would call for an acceleration
of payments, maturities or changes in the
structure of the existing debt, provide any
limitations on future borrowings or require
additional collateral, based on unfavorable
changes in the Firm’s credit ratings, financial
ratios, earnings, or stock price.
Critical factors in maintaining high credit
ratings include a stable and diverse earnings
stream, strong capital and liquidity ratios,
strong credit quality and risk management
controls, and diverse funding sources. Rating
agencies continue to evaluate economic and
geopolitical trends, regulatory developments,
future profitability, risk management practices,
and litigation matters, as well as their broader
ratings methodologies. Changes in any of these
factors could lead to changes in the Firm’s
credit ratings.
 108 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 REPUTATION RISK MANAGEMENT 
Reputation risk is the risk that an action or
inaction may negatively impact perception of the
Firm’s integrity and reduce confidence in the
Firm’s competence by various constituents,
including clients, counterparties, customers,
investors, regulators, employees, communities or
the broader public.
 Organization and management 
Reputation Risk Management establishes the
governance framework for managing reputation
risk across the Firm. As reputation risk is
inherently challenging to identify, manage, and
quantify, a reputation risk management function
is critical.
The Firm’s reputation risk management function
includes the following activities:
• Maintaining a Firmwide Reputation Risk
Governance policy and standards consistent with
the reputation risk framework
• Managing the governance infrastructure and
processes that support consistent
identification, escalation, management and
monitoring of reputation risk issues Firmwide
• Providing guidance to LOB Reputation Risk
Offices (“RRO”), as appropriate
The types of events that give rise to reputation
risk are wide-ranging and could be introduced in
various ways, including by the Firm’s employees
and the clients, customers and counterparties
the Firm does business with. These events could
result in financial losses, litigation and
regulatory fines, as well as other damages to
the Firm.
 Governance and oversight 
The Reputation Risk Governance policy
establishes the principles for managing
reputation risk for the Firm. It is the
responsibility of employees in each LOB and
Corporate to consider the reputation of the Firm
when deciding whether to offer a new product,
engage in a transaction or client relationship,
enter a new jurisdiction, initiate a business
process or other matters. Sustainability, social
responsibility and environmental impacts are
important considerations in assessing the Firm’s
reputation risk, and are a component of the
Firm’s reputation risk governance.
Reputation risk issues deemed material are
escalated as appropriate.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 109 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 CREDIT AND INVESTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT 
Credit and investment risk is the risk
associated with the default or change in credit
profile of a client, counterparty or customer;
or loss of principal or a reduction in expected
returns on investments, including consumer
credit risk, wholesale credit risk, and
investment portfolio risk.
 Credit risk management 
Credit risk is the risk associated with the
default or change in credit profile of a client,
counterparty or customer. The Firm provides
credit to a variety of customers, ranging from
large corporate and institutional clients to
individual consumers and small businesses. In
its consumer businesses, the Firm is exposed to
credit risk primarily through its home lending,
credit card, auto, and business banking
businesses. In its wholesale businesses, the
Firm is exposed to credit risk through its
underwriting, lending, market-making, and
hedging activities with and for clients and
counterparties, as well as through its operating
services activities (such as cash management and
clearing activities), and securities financing
activities. The Firm is also exposed to credit
risk through its investment securities portfolio
and cash placed with banks.
Credit Risk Management monitors, measures and
manages credit risk throughout the Firm and
defines credit risk policies and procedures. The
Firm’s credit risk management governance
includes the following activities:
• Maintaining a credit risk policy framework
• Monitoring, measuring and managing credit risk
across all portfolio segments, including
transaction and exposure approval
• Setting industry and geographic concentration
limits, as appropriate, and establishing
underwriting guidelines
• Assigning and managing credit authorities in
connection with the approval of credit exposure
• Managing criticized exposures and delinquent
loans and
• Estimating credit losses and ensuring
appropriate credit risk-based capital management
 Risk identification and measurement 
The Credit Risk Management function monitors,
measures, manages and limits credit risk across
the Firm’s businesses. To measure credit risk,
the Firm employs several methodologies for
estimating the likelihood of obligor or
counterparty default. Methodologies for
measuring credit risk vary depending on several
factors, including type of asset (e.g., consumer
versus wholesale), risk measurement parameters
(e.g., delinquency status and borrower’s credit
score versus wholesale risk-rating) and risk
management and collection processes (e.g.,
retail collection center versus centrally
managed workout groups). Credit risk measurement
is based on the probability of default of an
obligor or counterparty, the loss severity given
a default event and the exposure at default.
Based on these factors and the methodology and
estimates described in Note 13 and Note 10, the
Firm estimates credit losses for its exposures.
The allowance for loan losses reflects credit
losses related to the consumer and wholesale
held-for-investment loan portfolios, the
allowance for lending-related commitments
reflects credit losses related to the Firm’s
lending-related commitments and the allowance
for investment securities reflects the credit
losses related to the Firm’s HTM and AFS
securities. Refer to Note 13, Note 10 and
Critical Accounting Estimates used by the Firm
on pages 152-155 for further information.
In addition, potential and unexpected credit
losses are reflected in the allocation of credit
risk capital and represent the potential
volatility of actual losses relative to the
established allowances for loan losses and
lending-related commitments. The analyses for
these losses include stress testing that
considers alternative economic scenarios as
described in the Stress testing section below.
 Stress testing 
Stress testing is important in measuring and
managing credit risk in the Firm’s credit
portfolio. The stress testing process assesses
the potential impact of alternative economic and
business scenarios on estimated credit losses
for the Firm. Economic scenarios and the
underlying parameters are defined centrally,
articulated in terms of macroeconomic factors
and applied across the businesses. The stress
test results may indicate credit migration,
changes in delinquency trends and potential
losses in the credit portfolio. In addition to
the periodic stress testing processes,
management also considers additional stresses
outside these scenarios, including industry and
country- specific stress scenarios, as
necessary. The Firm uses stress testing to
inform decisions on setting risk appetite both
at a Firm and LOB level, as well as to assess
the impact of stress on individual
counterparties.
 110 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Risk monitoring and management 
The Firm has developed policies and practices
that are designed to preserve the independence
and integrity of the approval and decision-
making process of extending credit to ensure
credit risks are assessed accurately, approved
properly, monitored regularly and managed
actively at both the transaction and portfolio
levels. The policy framework establishes credit
approval authorities, concentration limits,
risk-rating methodologies, portfolio review
parameters and guidelines for management of
distressed exposures. In addition, certain
models, assumptions and inputs used in
evaluating and monitoring credit risk are
independently validated by groups that are
separate from the LOBs.
Consumer credit risk is monitored for
delinquency and other trends, including any
concentrations at the portfolio level, as
certain of these trends can be modified through
changes in underwriting policies and portfolio
guidelines. Consumer Risk Management evaluates
delinquency and other trends against business
expectations, current and forecasted economic
conditions, and industry benchmarks. Historical
and forecasted economic performance and trends
are incorporated into the modeling of estimated
consumer credit losses and are part of the
monitoring of the credit risk profile of the
portfolio.
Wholesale credit risk is monitored regularly at
an aggregate portfolio, industry, and individual
client and counterparty level with established
concentration limits that are reviewed and
revised periodically as deemed appropriate by
management. Industry and counterparty limits, as
measured in terms of exposure and economic risk
appetite, are subject to stress-based loss
constraints. Wrong-way risk is the risk that
exposure to a counterparty is positively
correlated with the impact of a default by the
same counterparty, which could cause exposure to
increase at the same time as the counterparty’s
capacity to meet its obligations is decreasing.
Management of the Firm’s wholesale credit risk
exposure is accomplished through a number of
means, including:
• Loan underwriting and credit approval process
• Loan syndications and participations
• Loan sales and securitizations
• Credit derivatives
• Master netting agreements, and
• Collateral and other risk-reduction techniques
In addition to Credit Risk Management, an
independent Credit Review function is
responsible for:
• I ndependently validating or changing the risk
grades assigned to exposures in the Firm’s
wholesale credit portfolio, and assessing the
timeliness of risk grade changes initiated by
responsible business units; and
• Evaluating the effectiveness of business
units’ credit management processes, including
the adequacy of credit analyses and risk
grading/LGD rationales, proper monitoring and
management of credit exposures, and compliance
with applicable grading policies and
underwriting guidelines.
Refer to Note 12 for further discussion of
consumer and wholesale loans.
 Risk reporting 
To enable monitoring of credit risk and
effective decision-making, aggregate credit
exposure, credit quality forecasts,
concentration levels and risk profile changes
are reported regularly to senior members of
Credit Risk Management. Detailed portfolio
reporting of industry, clients, counterparties
and customers, product and geography are
prepared, and the appropriateness of the
allowance for credit losses is reviewed by
senior management at least on a quarterly basis.
Through the risk reporting and governance
structure, credit risk trends and limit
exceptions are provided regularly to, and
discussed with, risk committees, senior
management and the Board of Directors.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 111 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 CREDIT PORTFOLIO 
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the
CECL accounting guidance. The adoption resulted
in a change in the accounting for PCI loans,
which are considered PCD loans under CECL. In
conjunction with the adoption of CECL, the Firm
reclassified risk-rated loans and lending-
related commitments from the consumer, excluding
credit card portfolio segment to the wholesale
portfolio segment, to align with the methodology
applied when determining the allowance. Prior-
period amounts have been revised to conform with
the current presentation. Refer to Note 1 for
further information.
The Firm has provided various forms of
assistance to customers and clients impacted by
the COVID-19 pandemic, including payment
deferrals and covenant modifications. The
majority of the Firm’s COVID-19 related loan
modifications have not been considered troubled
debt restructurings (“TDRs”) because:
• they represent short-term or other
insignificant modifications, whether under the
Firm’s regular loan modification assessments or
the IA Statement guidance, or
• the Firm has elected to apply the option to
suspend the application of accounting guidance
for TDRs provided by the CARES Act and extended
by the Consolidated Appropriations Act.
To the extent that certain modifications do not
meet any of the above criteria, the Firm
accounts for them as TDRs. The Firm considers
expected losses of principal and accrued
interest associated with all COVID-19 related
loan modifications in its allowance for credit
losses. Refer to Business Developments on pages
50-51 for more information on customer and
client assistance granted. Refer to Notes 12 and
13 for further information on the Firm’s
accounting policies on loan modifications and
the allowance for credit losses.
The effectiveness of the Firm’s actions in
helping borrowers recover and in mitigating the
Firm’s credit losses remains uncertain in light
of the unpredictable nature and duration of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Assistance provided in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic could delay
the recognition of delinquencies, nonaccrual
status, and net charge-offs for those customers
and clients who would have otherwise moved into
past due or nonaccrual status. Refer to Consumer
Credit Portfolio on pages 114-120 and Wholesale
Credit Portfolio on pages 121-131 for
information on loan modifications as of December
31, 2020.
In the following tables, reported loans include
loans retained (i.e., held-for-investment);
loans held-for-sale; and certain loans accounted
for at fair value. The following tables do not
include loans which the Firm accounts for at
fair value and classifies as trading assets;
refer to Notes 2 and 3 for further information
regarding these loans. Refer to Notes 12, 28,
and 5 for additional information on the Firm’s
loans, lending-related commitments and
derivative receivables, including the Firm’s
accounting policies.
Refer to Note 10 for information regarding the
credit risk inherent in the Firm’s investment
securities portfolio; and refer to Note 11 for
information regarding credit risk inherent in
the securities financing portfolio. Refer to
Consumer Credit Portfolio on pages 114-120 and
Note 12 for further discussions of the consumer
credit environment and consumer loans. Refer to
Wholesale Credit Portfolio on pages 121-131 and
Note 12 for further discussions of the wholesale
credit environment and wholesale loans.
 112 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Total 
 credit 
 portfolio 
 December 
 31, 
 (in Credit 
 millions) exposure Nonperformi… 
 2020 2019 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans $ 960,506 $ 945,601 $ 8,782 $ 3,983 
 retained 
 Loans 7,873 7,064 284 7 
 held-for-s… 
 Loans at 
 fair 44,474 44,955 1,507 647 
 value(a) 
 Total loans 1,012,853 997,620 10,573 4,637 
 – reported 
 Derivative 79,630 49,766 56 30 
 receivables 
 Receivables 
 from 47,710 33,706 — — 
 customers(… 
 Total 
 credit-rel… 1,140,193 1,081,092 10,629 4,667 
 assets 
 Assets 
 acquired in 
 loan 
 satisfacti… 
 Real estate NA NA 256 344 
 owned 
 Other NA NA 21 43 
 Totalassets 
 acquired in NA NA 277 387 
 loan 
 satisfacti… 
 Lending-re… 1,165,688 1,108,399 577 474 
 commitment… 
 Total 
 credit $ 2,305,881 $ 2,189,491 $ 11,483 $ 5,528 
 portfolio 
 Credit 
 derivatives 
 used in 
 credit $ -22,239 $ -18,530 $ — $ — 
 portfolio 
 management 
 activities… 
 Liquid 
 securities 
 and other 
 cash -14,806 -13,052 NA NA 
 collateral 
 held 
 against 
 derivative… 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except ratios) 2020 2019 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net charge-offs $ 5,259 $ 5,629 
 Average retained loans 958,303 941,919 
 Net charge-off rates 0.55 % 0.60 % 
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans, which resulted in a corresponding reclassification of
certain off-balance sheet commitments. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation. (b) Receivables from customers reflect held-for-investment margin loans to
brokerage clients in CIB, CCB and AWM; these are reported within accrued interest and accounts
receivable on the Consolidated balance sheets. (c) Represents the net notional amount of protection
purchased and sold through credit derivatives used to manage both performing and nonperforming
wholesale credit exposures; these derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting under U.S. GAAP.
Refer to Credit derivatives on page 131 and Note 5 for additional information. (d) Prior-period
amount has been revised to conform with the current presentation. (e) In the fourth quarter of 2020,
the Firm refined its approach for disclosing additional collateral held by the Firm that may be used
as security when the fair value of the client’s exposure is in the Firm’s favor. Prior-period amounts
have been revised to conform with the current presentation. (f) At December 31, 2020 and 2019,
nonperforming assets excluded mortgage loans 90 or more days past due and insured by U.S. government
agencies of $874 million and $1.1 billion, respectively, and real estate owned (“REO”) insured by
U.S. government agencies of $9 million and $41 million, respectively. Prior-period amount of mortgage
loans 90 or more days past due and insured by U.S. government agencies excluded from nonperforming
assets has been revised to conform with the current presentation; refer to footnote (a) for
additional information. These amounts have been excluded based upon the government guarantee. In
addition, the Firm’s policy is generally to exempt credit card loans from being placed on nonaccrual
status as permitted by regulatory guidance. (g) At December 31, 2020, nonperforming loans included $
1.6billion of PCD loans on nonaccrual status. Prior to the adoption of CECL, nonaccrual loans
excluded PCI loans as the Firm recognized interest income on each pool of PCI loans as each of the
pools was performing.
Paycheck Protection Program The PPP, established by the CARES Act and implemented by the SBA,
provided the Firm with delegated authority to process and originate PPP loans. When certain criteria
are met, PPP loans are subject to forgiveness and the Firm will receive payment of the forgiveness
amount from the SBA. PPP loans have a contractual term of two or five years and provide borrowers
with an automatic payment deferral of principal and interest. Given that PPP loans are guaranteed by
the SBA, the Firm does not expect to realize material credit losses on these loans. PPP processing
fees are deferred and accreted into interest income over the contractual life of the loans, but may
be accelerated upon forgiveness or prepayment. The impact on interest income related to PPP loans was
not material for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Firm was in the early stages of the PPP loan
forgiveness process at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020, the Firm had approximately $27
billion of loans under the PPP, of which $19 billion are in the consumer portfolio and $8 billion are
in the wholesale portfolio.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 113 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 CONSUMER CREDIT PORTFOLIO 
The Firm’s retained consumer portfolio consists
primarily of residential real estate loans,
credit card loans, scored auto and business
banking loans, as well as associated lending-
related commitments. The Firm’s focus is on
serving primarily the prime segment of the
consumer credit market. Originated mortgage
loans are retained in the residential real
estate portfolio, securitized or sold to U.S.
government agencies and U.S. government-
sponsored enterprises; other types of consumer
loans are typically retained on the balance
sheet. Refer to Note 12 for further information
on the consumer loan portfolio. Refer to Note 28
for further information on lending-related
commitments.
In 2020, the allowance for credit losses
increased, reflecting the deterioration in and
uncertainty around the future macroeconomic
environment as a result of the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Net charge-offs for the year
ended December 31, 2020 decreased when compared
to December 31, 2019, benefiting from payment
assistance and government stimulus. The
potential for increased infection rates and
related lock downs, as well as the duration and
effectiveness of government and other consumer
relief measures remains uncertain which could
have a longer term impact on delinquency rates
and net charge-offs.
 114 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
The following table presents consumer credit-related information with respect to the scored credit
portfolio held in CCB, AWM, CIB and Corpora te.
 … 
 … … … 
 … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … … % … % 
 … … … $ … … $ … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … 
 … … — 2 … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … … … … … … … 
 … — … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … … % … % 
(a) Includes scored mortgage and home equity loans held in CCB and AWM, and scored mortgage loans
held in Corporate .
(b) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, excluded operating lease assets of $20.6 billion and $22.8
billion, respectively. These operating lease assets are included in other assets on the Firm’s
Consolidated balance sheets. Refer to Note 18 for further information.
(c) Includes scored auto and business banking loans and overdrafts.
(d) At December 31, 2020, included $19.2 billion of loans in Business Banking under the PPP. Given
that PPP loans are guaranteed by the SBA, the Firm does not expect to realize material credit losses
on these loans. Refer to Credit Portfolio on pages 112-113 for a further discussion of the PPP.
(e) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform
with the current presentation.
(f) Includes scored mortgage loans held in CCB and CIB.
(g) Credit card, home equity and certain business banking lending-related commitments represent the
total available lines of credit for these products. The Firm has not experienced, and does not
anticipate, that all available lines of credit would be used at the same time. For credit card
commitments, and if certain conditions are met, home equity commitments and certain business banking
commitments, the Firm can reduce or cancel these lines of credit by providing the borrower notice or,
in some cases as permitted by law, without notice. Refer to Note 28 for further information.
(h) Includes billed interest and fees.
(i) Also includes commercial card lending-related commitments primarily in CB and CIB.
(j) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, nonaccrual loans excluded mortgage loans 90 or more days past due
and insured by U.S. government agencies of $874 million and $1.1 billion, respectively. Prior-period
amount of mortgage loans 90 or more days past due and insured by U.S. government agencies excluded
from nonaccrual loans has been revised to conform with the current presentation; refer to footnote
(e) for additional information. These amounts have been excluded from nonaccrual loans based upon the
government guarantee. In addition, the Firm’s policy is generally to exempt credit card loans from
being placed on nonaccrual status, as permitted by regulatory guidance.
(k) At December 31, 2020, nonaccrual loans included $ 1.6billion of PCD loans. Prior to the adoption
of CECL, nonaccrual loans excluded PCI loans as the Firm recognized interest income on each pool of
PCI loans as each of the pools was performing .
(l) Generally excludes loans under payment deferral programs offered in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. Includes loans to customers that have exited COVID-19 payment deferral programs and are 90
or more days past due, predominantly all of which were also at least 150 days past due and therefore
considered collateral-dependent. Collateral-dependent loans are charged down to the lower of
amortized cost or fair value of the underlying collateral less costs to sell.
(m) Average consumer loans held-for-sale and loans at fair value were $18.3 billion and $20.4 billion
for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Prior-period amounts have been revised
to conform with the current presentation; refer to footnote (e) for additional information. These
amounts were excluded when calculating net charge-off/(recovery) rates.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 115 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 Consumer assistance 
In March 2020, the Firm began providing
assistance to customers in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, predominantly in the form of
payment deferrals.
As of December 31, 2020, the Firm had $10.7
billion of retained loans under payment deferral
programs, which represented a decrease of
approximately $1.5 billion from September 30,
2020 and $17.5 billion from June 30, 2020.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, there were
approximately $1.4 billion of new enrollments in
payment deferral
programs predominantly in residential real
estate and credit card. Predominantly all
borrowers that exited payment deferral programs
are current. The Firm continues to monitor the
credit risk associated with loans subject to
payment deferrals throughout the deferral period
and on an ongoing basis after the borrowers are
required to resume making regularly scheduled
payments and considers expected losses of
principal and accrued interest on these loans in
its allowance for credit losses.
 Decem… Septe… June 
 31, 30, 30, 
 2020 2020 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Perce… 
 of 
 Perce… accou… 
 (in of who 
 mill… Loan loan exited Loan Loan Type of 
 exce… balan… class payme… balan… balan… assist… 
 rati… balan… defer… 
 and 
 are 
 curre… 
 Rolling 
 three 
 month 
 payment 
 deferr… 
 up to 
 one 
 Resi… year; 
 real $ 10,106 4.5 % 95 % $ 11,458 $ 20,548 in most 
 esta… cases, 
 deferr… 
 paymen… 
 will be 
 due at 
 the end 
 of the 
 loan 
 term 
 •Auto: 
 Curren… 
 offeri… 
 one 
 month 
 payment 
 deferr… 
 (initi… 
 offered 
 three 
 month 
 payment 
 deferr… 
 Maturi… 
 date is 
 extend… 
 by 
 Auto number 
 and 377 0.5 94 457 3,357 of 
 othe… months 
 deferr… 
 •Busin… 
 Bankin… 
 Three 
 month 
 deferr… 
 with 
 automa… 
 deferm… 
 to 
 either 
 maturi… 
 (loan) 
 or one 
 year 
 forward 
 (line) 
 Curren… 
 offeri… 
 deferr… 
 of one 
 month 
 minimum 
 payment 
 (initi… 
 offered 
 three 
 month 
 minimum 
 Cred… payment 
 card 264 0.2 90 -f 368 4,384 deferr… 
 Intere… 
 contin… 
 to 
 accrue 
 during 
 the 
 deferr… 
 period 
 and is 
 added 
 to the 
 princi… 
 balance 
 Total $ 10,747 2.4 % 91 % $ 12,283 $ 28,289 
 cons… 
(a) Excludes $13.4 billion, $17.1 billion and
$34.0 billion of third-party mortgage loans
serviced at December 31, 2020, September 30,
2020 and June 30, 2020, respectively.
(b) The weighted average LTV ratio of
residential real estate loans under payment
deferral at December 31, 2020 was 57%.
(c) Excludes risk-rated business banking and
auto dealer loans held in CCB and auto operating
lease assets that were still under payment
deferral programs as of December 31, 2020,
September 30, 2020 and June 30, 2020. Auto
operating lease asset payment assistance is
currently offering one month payment deferral
(initially offered three month payment
deferral). Deferrals do not extend the term of
the lease and all deferred payments are due at
the end of the lease term.
(d) Includes $3.8 billion, $3.8 billion and $5.7
billion of loans that were accounted for as TDRs
prior to payment deferral as of December 31,
2020, September 30, 2020 and June 30, 2020,
respectively.
(e) Represents the unpaid principal balance of
retained loans which were still under payment
deferral programs, divided by the total unpaid
principal balance of the respective loan classes
retained loans.
(f) 85% of the balance that exited deferral were
current at December 31, 2020.
Of the $10.7 billion of loans still under
payment deferral programs as of December 31,
2020, approximately $4.0 billion were accounted
for as TDRs, either because they were accounted
for as TDRs prior to payment deferral, or
because they did not qualify for or the Firm did
not elect the option to suspend TDR accounting
guidance provided by the CARES Act and extended
by the Consolidated Appropriations Act. A
portion of the remaining $6.7 billion of loans
could become TDRs in future periods, depending
on the nature and timing of further
modifications or payment arrangements offered to
these borrowers. If the remaining $6.7 billion
of loans were considered TDRs, the Firm
estimates that it would result in an increase in
standardized RWA of as much as $2.5 billion.
Predominantly all borrowers, including those
accounted for as TDRs, were current upon
enrollment in payment deferral programs and are
expected to exit payment deferral programs in a
current status, either because no payments are
contractually due during the deferral period or
because payments originally contractually due
during the deferral period will be due at
maturity upon exit. For those borrowers that are
unable to resume making payments in accordance
with the original or modified contractual terms
of their agreements upon exit from deferral
programs, they will be placed on nonaccrual
status in line with the Firm’s nonaccrual
policy, except for credit cards as permitted by
regulatory guidance, and charged off or down in
accordance with the Firm’s charge-off policies.
Refer to Note 12 for additional information on
the Firm’s nonaccrual and charge-off policies.
 116 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Consumer, excluding credit card 
 Portfolio analysis 
Loan balances were flat from December 31, 2019
as PPP loan originations in Business Banking
were offset by lower residential real estate
loans, reflecting paydowns. The following
discussions provide information concerning
individual loan products. Refer to Note 12 for
further information about this portfolio,
including information about delinquencies, loan
modifications and other credit quality
indicators. Residential real estate: The
residential real estate portfolio, including
loans held-for-sale and loans at fair value,
predominantly consists of prime mortgage loans
and home equity lines of credit. The portfolio
decreased from December 31, 2019 driven by
paydowns largely offset by originations of prime
mortgage loans that have been retained on the
balance sheet. The 30+ delinquency rate
decreased to 0.98% at December 31, 2020, from
1.35% at December 31, 2019, primarily due to
payment assistance and government stimulus.
Nonaccrual loans increased from December 31,
2019 due primarily to loans placed on nonaccrual
status related to the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic as well as the adoption of CECL, as PCD
loans became subject to nonaccrual treatment.
Net recoveries for the year ended December 31,
2020 were higher when compared with the prior
year as the current year benefited from a
recovery on a loan sale. The carrying value of
home equity lines of credit outstanding was
$23.7 billion at December 31, 2020. This amount
included $8.6 billion of HELOCs that have recast
from interest-only to fully amortizing payments
or have been modified and $7.7 billion of
interest-only balloon HELOCs, which primarily
mature after 2030. The Firm manages the risk of
HELOCs during their revolving period by closing
or reducing the undrawn line to the extent
permitted by law when borrowers are exhibiting a
material deterioration in their credit risk
profile. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the
carrying value of interest-only residential
mortgage loans were $25.6 billion and $22.5
billion, respectively. These loans have an
interest-only payment period generally followed
by an adjustable-rate or fixed-rate fully
amortizing payment period to maturity and are
typically originated as higher-balance loans to
higher-income borrowers, predominantly in AWM.
The net charge-off rate for the year ended
December 31, 2020 was consistent with the rate
of the broader residential mortgage portfolio as
the performance of this portfolio is generally
in line with the performance of the broader
residential mortgage portfolio.
The following table provides a summary of the
Firm’s residential mortgage portfolio insured
and/or guaranteed by U.S. government agencies,
predominantly loans held-for-sale and loans at
fair value. The Firm monitors its exposure to
certain potential unrecoverable claim payments
related to government-insured loans and
considers this exposure in estimating the
allowance for loan losses.
 (in millions) December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Current $ 669 $ 1,432 
 30-89 days past due 235 704 
 90 or more days past due 874 1,090 
 Total government guaranteed loans(a) $ 1,778 $ 3,226 
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm
reclassified certain fair value option elected
lending-related positions from trading assets to
loans. Prior-period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current presentation.
Geographic composition and current estimated
loan-to-value ratio of residential real estate
loans At December 31, 2020, $146.6 billion, or
65% of the total retained residential real
estate loan portfolio, excluding mortgage loans
insured by U.S. government agencies, were
concentrated in California, New York, Florida,
Texas and Illinois, compared with $157.9
billion, or 65%, at December 31, 2019. Average
current estimated loan-to-value (“LTV”) ratios
have declined consistent with recent
improvements in home prices, customer pay-downs,
and charge-offs or liquidations of higher LTV
loans. Refer to Note 12 for information on the
geographic composition and current estimated
LTVs of the Firm’s residential real estate
loans.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 117 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
Modified residential real estate loans The
following table presents information relating to
modified retained residential real estate loans
for which concessions have been granted to
borrowers experiencing financial difficulty,
which include both TDRs and modified loans
accounted for as PCI loans prior to the adoption
of CECL. The following table does not include
loans with short-term or other insignificant
modifications that are not considered
concessions and, therefore, are not TDRs, or
loans for which the Firm has elected to apply
the option to suspend the application of
accounting guidance for TDRs as provided by the
CARES Act and extended by the Consolidated
Appropriations Act. Refer to Note 12 for further
information on modifications for the years ended
December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 (in millions) December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Retained loans(a) $ 15,406 5,926 
 PCI loans NA 12,372 -d 
 Nonaccrual retained $ 3,899 2,332 
 loans(b)(c) 
(a) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, $7 million
and $14 million, respectively, of loans modified
subsequent to repurchase from Ginnie Mae in
accordance with the standards of the appropriate
government agency (i.e., Federal Housing
Administration (“FHA”), U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs (“VA”), Rural Housing Service
of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (“RHS”))
are not included in the table above. When such
loans perform subsequent to modification in
accordance with Ginnie Mae guidelines, they are
generally sold back into Ginnie Mae loan pools.
Modified loans that do not re-perform become
subject to foreclosure. Refer to Note 14 for
additional information about sales of loans in
securitization transactions with Ginnie Mae. (b)
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, nonaccrual loans
included $3.0 billion and $1.9 billion,
respectively, of TDRs for which the borrowers
were less than 90 days past due. Refer to Note
12 for additional information about loans
modified in a TDR that are on nonaccrual status
. (c) At December 31, 2020, nonaccrual loans
included $1.3 billion of PCD loans. Prior to the
adoption of CECL, nonaccrual loans excluded PCI
loans as the Firm recognized interest income on
each pool of PCI loans as each of the pools was
performing . (d) Amount represents the unpaid
principal balance of modified PCI loans at
December 31, 2019, which were moved to retained
loans upon the adoption of CECL. Auto and other
: The auto and other loan portfolio
predominantly consists of prime-quality scored
auto and business banking loans, as well as
overdrafts. The portfolio increased when
compared with December 31, 2019, predominantly
due to PPP loan originations of $21.9 billion in
Business Banking of which $19.2 billion remained
outstanding at December 31, 2020 as well as from
growth in the auto portfolio from loan
originations, partially offset by paydowns and
charge-offs or liquidation of delinquent loans.
The 30+ delinquency rate decreased to 0.60% at
December 31, 2020, from 1.31% at December 31,
2019, primarily due to payment assistance and
government stimulus, as well as PPP loan
originations as these loans are all considered
current. The scored auto portfolio net charge-
off rates were 0.25% and 0.44% for the years
ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Auto charge-offs for the year ended December 31,

benefited from payment assistance programs and
high vehicle collateral values. Nonperforming
assets The following table presents information
as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, about
consumer, excluding credit card, nonperforming
assets.
 Nonperforming assets(a) 
 December 31, (in millions) 
 Nonaccrual loans 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Residential real estate(b)(c)(d) $ 6,316 $ 3,220 
 Auto and other 151 146 
 Total nonaccrual loans 6,467 3,366 
 Assets acquired in loan satisfactions 
 Real estate owned(e) 131 229 
 Other 21 24 
 Total assets acquired in loan 152 253 
 satisfactions 
 Total nonperforming assets $ 6,619 $ 3,619 
(a) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, nonperforming
assets excluded mortgage loans 90 or more days
past due and insured by U.S. government agencies
of $874 million and $1.1 billion, respectively,
and REO insured by U.S. government agencies of
$9 million and $41 million, respectively. Prior-
period amount of mortgage loans 90 or more days
past due and insured by U.S. government agencies
excluded from nonperforming assets has been
revised to conform with the current
presentation; refer to footnote (b) for
additional information. These amounts have been
excluded based upon the government guarantee.
(b) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm
reclassified certain fair value option elected
lending-related positions from trading assets to
loans. Prior-period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current presentation . (c)
Generally excludes loans under payment deferral
programs offered in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. Includes loans to customers that have
exited COVID-19 payment deferral programs and
are 90 or more days past due, predominantly all
of which were also at least 150 days past due
and therefore considered collateral-dependent.
Collateral-dependent loans are charged down to
the lower of amortized cost or fair value of the
underlying collateral less costs to sell. (d) At
December 31, 2020, nonaccrual loans included $
1.6billion of PCD loans. Prior to the adoption
of CECL, nonaccrual loans excluded PCI loans as
the Firm recognized interest income on each pool
of PCI loans as each of the pools was
performing. (e) Prior-period amount has been
revised to conform with the current
presentation.
 118 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Nonaccrual loans The following table presents
changes in consumer, excluding credit card,
nonaccrual loans for the years ended December
31, 2020 and 2019.
 Nonaccrual loan activity(a) 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Beginning balance $ 3,366 $ 3,853 
 Additions: 
 PCD loans, upon adoption of CECL 708 NA 
 Other additions 5,184 -c 2,174 
 Total additions 5,892 2,174 
 Reductions: 
 Principal payments and other(b) 983 1,167 
 Charge-offs 390 371 
 Returned to performing status 1,024 751 
 Foreclosures and other liquidations 394 372 
 Total reductions 2,791 2,661 
 Net changes 3,101 -487 
 Ending balance $ 6,467 $ 3,366 
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm
reclassified certain fair value option elected
lending-related positions from trading assets to
loans. Prior-period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current presentation. (b) Other
reductions includes loan sales. (c) Includes
loans to customers that have exited COVID-19
payment deferral programs and are 90 or more
days past due, predominantly all of which were
also at least 150 days past due and therefore
considered collateral-dependent. Collateral-
dependent loans are charged down to the lower of
amortized cost or fair value of the underlying
collateral less costs to sell. Active and
suspended foreclosure: Refer to Note 12 for
information on loans that were in the process of
active or suspended foreclosure. Refer to Note
12 for further information about the consumer
credit portfolio, including information about
delinquencies, loan modifications and other
credit quality indicators.
Purchased credit deteriorated (“PCD”) loans The
following tables provide credit-related
information for PCD loans, which were accounted
for as PCI loans prior to the adoption of CECL.
PCI loans are considered PCD loans under CECL
and are subject to the Firm’s nonaccrual and
charge-off policies. PCD loans are now reported
in the consumer, excluding credit card
portfolio’s residential real estate class. Refer
to Note 1 for further information.
 (in millions, except ratios) December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loan delinquency(a) 
 Current $ 16,036 $ 18,571 
 30-149 days past due 432 970 
 150 or more days past due(b) 573 822 
 Total PCD loans $ 17,041 $ 20,363 
 % of 30+ days past due to total 
 retained 5.90 % 8.80 % 
 PCD loans 
 Nonaccrual loans(c) $ 1,609 NA 
 Twelve months ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except ratios) 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net charge-offs $ 74 
 Net charge-off rate 0.39 % 
(a) At December 31, 2020, loans under payment
deferral programs offered in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic which are still within their
deferral period and performing according to
their modified terms are generally not
considered delinquent. (b) Includes loans to
customers that have exited COVID-19 payment
deferral programs and are 150 or more days past
due and therefore considered collateral-
dependent. Collateral dependent loans are
charged down to the lower of amortized cost or
fair value of the underlying collateral less
costs to sell. (c) Includes loans to customers
that have exited COVID-19 payment deferral
programs and are 90 or more days past due,
predominantly all of which were also at least
150 days past due and therefore considered
collateral-dependent.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 119 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 Credit card 
Total credit card loans decreased from December
31, 2019 reflecting a decline in sales volume
that began in March as a result of the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic. The December 31, 2020 30+
and 90+ day delinquency rates of 1.68% and
0.92%, respectively, decreased compared to the
December 31, 2019 30+ and 90+ day delinquency
rates of 1.87% and 0.95%, respectively. The
delinquency rates were positively impacted by
borrowers who received payment assistance and
government stimulus. Net charge-offs decreased
for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared
with the prior year reflecting lower charge-offs
and higher recoveries primarily benefiting from
payment assistance and government stimulus.
Consistent with the Firm’s policy, all credit
card loans typically remain on accrual status
until charged off. However, the Firm’s allowance
for loan losses includes the estimated
uncollectible portion of accrued and billed
interest and fee income. Refer to Note 12 for
further information about this portfolio,
including information about delinquencies.
Geographic and FICO composition of credit card
loans
At December 31, 2020, $65.0 billion, or 45% of
the total retained credit card loan portfolio,
was concentrated in California, Texas, New York,
Florida and Illinois, compared with $77.5
billion, or 46%, at December 31, 2019. Refer to
Note 12 for additional information on the
geographic and FICO composition of the Firm’s
credit card loans.
 Modifications of credit card loans 
At December 31, 2020, the Firm had $1.4 billion
of credit card loans outstanding that have been
modified in TDRs, which does not include loans
with short-term or other insignificant
modifications that are not considered TDRs,
compared to $1.5 billion at December 31, 2019.
Refer to Note 12 for additional information
about loan modification programs for borrowers.
 120 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 WHOLESALE CREDIT PORTFOLIO 
In its wholesale businesses, the Firm is exposed to credit risk primarily through its underwriting,
lending, market-making, and hedging activities with and for clients and counterparties, as well as
through various operating services (such as cash management and clearing activities), securities
financing activities and cash placed with banks. A portion of the loans originated or acquired by the
Firm’s wholesale businesses is generally retained on the balance sheet. The Firm distributes a
significant percentage of the loans that it originates into the market as part of its syndicated loan
business and to manage portfolio concentrations and credit risk. The wholesale portfolio is actively
managed, in part by conducting ongoing, in-depth reviews of client credit quality and transaction
structure inclusive of collateral where applicable, and of industry, product and client
concentrations. Refer to the industry discussion on pages 123-127 for further information. The Firm’s
wholesale credit portfolio includes exposure held in CIB, CB, AWM and Corporate, as well as risk-
rated business banking and auto dealer exposures held in CCB for which the wholesale methodology is
applied when determining the allowance for credit losses. In 2020, the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic resulted in broad-based credit deterioration and an increase in the allowance for credit
losses. As of December 31, 2020, the investment-grade percentage of the portfolio decreased from 74%
to 71%, and criticized exposure increased $26.5 billion from $15.1 billion to $41.6 billion. The
increase in criticized exposure was largely driven by downgrades in Consumer & Retail, Oil & Gas and
Real Estate, and to a lesser extent, net portfolio activity in Technology, Media &
Telecommunications. The continuation or worsening of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the
macroeconomic environment could result in further impacts to credit quality metrics, including
investment-grade percentages, as well as to criticized and nonperforming exposures and charge-offs.
As of December 31, 2020 retained loans were up $33.3 billion predominantly driven by AWM and CIB, and
lending-related commitments were up $32.4 billion, predominantly driven by CIB and CB.
 Wholesale 
 credit 
 portfolio 
 December 
 31, 
 (in Credit 
 millions) exposure Nonperformi… 
 2020 2019 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans $ 514,947 $ 481,678 $ 3,318 $ 1,057 
 retained 
 Loans 5,784 4,062 284 5 
 held-for-s… 
 Loans at 
 fair 29,327 25,139 504 209 
 value(a) 
 Loans – 550,058 510,879 4,106 1,271 
 reported 
 Derivative 79,630 49,766 56 30 
 receivables 
 Receivables 
 from 47,710 33,706 — — 
 customers(… 
 Total 
 wholesale 677,398 594,351 4,162 1,301 
 credit-rel… 
 assets 
 Assets 
 acquired in 
 loan 
 satisfacti… 
 Real estate NA NA 125 115 
 owned(c) 
 Other NA NA — 19 
 Totalassets 
 acquired in NA NA 125 134 
 loan 
 satisfacti… 
 Lending-re… 449,863 417,510 577 474 
 commitment… 
 Total 
 wholesale $ 1,127,261 $ 1,011,861 $ 4,864 $ 1,909 
 credit 
 portfolio 
 Credit 
 derivatives 
 used 
 in credit $ -22,239 $ -18,530 $ — $ — 
 portfolio 
 management 
 activities… 
 Liquid 
 securities 
 and other 
 cash -14,806 -13,052 NA NA 
 collateral 
 held 
 against 
 derivative… 
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm
reclassified certain fair value option elected
lending-related positions from trading assets to
loans, which resulted in a corresponding
reclassification of certain off-balance sheet
commitments. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation
. (b) Receivables from customers reflect held-
for-investment margin loans to brokerage clients
in CIB, CCB and AWM; these are reported within
accrued interest and accounts receivable on the
Consolidated balance sheets. (c) Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation . (d) Represents the net
notional amount of protection purchased and sold
through credit derivatives used to manage both
performing and nonperforming wholesale credit
exposures; these derivatives do not qualify for
hedge accounting under U.S. GAAP. Refer to
Credit derivatives on page 131 and Note 5 for
additional information. (e) In the fourth
quarter of 2020, the Firm refined its approach
for disclosing additional collateral held by the
Firm that may be used as security when the fair
value of the client’s exposure is in the Firm’s
favor. Prior-period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current presentation. (f) Loans
that were modified in response to the COVID-19
pandemic continue to be risk-rated in accordance
with the Firm’s overall credit risk management
framework. As of December 31, 2020,
predominantly all of these loans were considered
performing.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 121 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 Wholesale assistance 
In March 2020, the Firm began providing
assistance to clients in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, predominantly in the form of
payment deferrals and covenant modifications.
As of December 31, 2020, the Firm had
approximately $1.6 billion of retained loans
still under payment deferral, which has
decreased approximately $4.6 billion from the
third quarter, and $15.1 billion from the second
quarter. Predominantly all clients that exited
deferral are current or
have paid down their loans, and the Firm has not
experienced significant new payment deferral
requests. The Firm continues to monitor the
credit risk associated with loans subject to
deferrals throughout the deferral period and on
an ongoing basis after the borrowers are
required to resume making regularly scheduled
payments and considers expected losses of
principal and accrued interest on these loans in
its allowance for credit losses.
 (in 
 millio… 
 except December September June 30, 
 ratios) 31, 2020 30, 2020 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 IG 
 Percent percent… 
 Loan of total of loan Loan Loan 
 Indust… balance industry balance balance balance 
 loan in 
 balance(… payment 
 deferral 
 Real $ 550 0.46 % 36 % $ 4,385 $ 5,211 
 Estate 
 Indivi… 
 and 402 0.37 4 691 809 
 Indivi… 
 Entiti… 
 Transp… 394 5.99 92 346 294 
 Consum… 
 & 82 0.21 2 413 690 
 Retail 
 Automo… 22 0.13 — 15 8,827 
 Indust… 19 0.09 — 91 335 
 Health… 7 0.04 — 100 300 
 All 
 Other 147 0.08 99 233 309 
 indust… 
 Total $ 1,623 0.32 % 45 % $ 6,274 $ 16,775 
 wholes… 
(a) Represents the balance of the retained loans
which were still under payment deferral, divided
by the respective industry total retained loans
balance.
In addition, the Firm granted assistance in the
form of covenant modifications. These types of
assistance, both payment deferrals and covenant
modifications, are generally not reported as
TDRs, either because the modifications were
insignificant or they qualified for the option
to suspend the application of accounting
guidance for TDRs as provided by the CARES Act
and extended by the Consolidated Appropriations
Act. A portion of the $1.6 billion of loans
under payment deferral as December 31,
2020 could become TDRs in future periods,
depending on the nature and timing of further
modifications or payment arrangements offered to
these borrowers. If the $1.6 billion of loans
under payment deferral were considered TDRs, the
Firm estimates that it would result in an
increase in standardized RWA of as much as $500
million. Loans under assistance continue to be
risk-rated in accordance with the Firm’s overall
credit risk management framework. As of December
31, 2020, predominantly all of these loans were
considered performing.
Wholesale credit exposure – maturity and ratings
profile
The following tables present the maturity and
internal risk ratings profiles of the wholesale
credit portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and
2019. The Firm generally considers internal
ratings with qualitative characteristics
equivalent to BBB-/Baa3 or higher as investment
grade, and takes into consideration collateral
and structural support when determining the
internal risk rating for each credit facility.
Refer to Note 12 for further information on
internal risk ratings.
 Dec… 
 31, Matu… 1 
 2020 prof… year 
 (in 1 thro… Tot… 
 mil… year 5 After % 
 exc… or years 5 Tot… Rati… of 
 rat… less Inve… years Non… prof… Total IG 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loa… $ 183,… $ 197,… $ 133,… $ 514… $ 379,… $ 135… $ 514,… 74 % 
 ret… 
 Der… 79,… 79,6… 
 rec… 
 Les… 
 Liq… 
 sec… 
 and 
 oth… -14… -14,… 
 cash 
 col… 
 held 
 aga… 
 der… 
 Tot… 
 der… 
 rec… 18,4… 17,5… 28,7… 64,… 38,9… 25,… 64,8… 60 
 net 
 of 
 col… 
 Len… 116,… 315,… 17,7… 449… 312,… 137… 449,… 70 
 com… 
 Sub… 319,… 530,… 179,… 1,0… 730,… 298… 1,02… 71 
 Loa… 
 hel… 
 and 
 loa… 35,… 35,1… 
 at 
 fair 
 val… 
 Rec… 
 from 47,… 47,7… 
 cus… 
 Tot… 
 exp… 
 – 
 net 
 of 
 liq… 
 sec… $ 1,1… $ 1,11… 
 and 
 oth… 
 cash 
 col… 
 held 
 aga… 
 der… 
 Cre… 
 der… 
 used 
 in $ -6,1… $ -13,… $ -2,8… $ -22… $ -17,… $ -4,… $ -22,… 80 % 
 cre… 
 por… 
 man… 
 act… 
 122 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Dec… 
 31, Matu… 1 
 2019 prof… year 
 (in 1 thro… Tot… 
 mil… year 5 After % 
 exc… or years 5 Tot… Rati… of 
 rat… less Inve… years Non… prof… Total IG 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loa… $ 159,… $ 186,… $ 136,… $ 481… $ 363,… $ 118… $ 481,… 75 % 
 ret… 
 Der… 49,… 49,7… 
 rec… 
 Les… 
 Liq… 
 sec… 
 and 
 oth… -13… -13,… 
 cash 
 col… 
 held 
 aga… 
 der… 
 Tot… 
 der… 
 rec… 7,136 7,569 22,0… 36,… 29,4… 7,2… 36,7… 80 
 net 
 of 
 col… 
 Len… 87,5… 312,… 16,9… 417… 296,… 120… 417,… 71 
 com… 
 Sub… 253,… 506,… 175,… 935… 689,… 246… 935,… 74 
 Loa… 
 hel… 
 and 
 loa… 29,… 29,2… 
 at 
 fair 
 val… 
 Rec… 
 from 33,… 33,7… 
 cus… 
 Tot… 
 exp… 
 – 
 net 
 of 
 liq… 
 sec… $ 998… $ 998,… 
 and 
 oth… 
 cash 
 col… 
 held 
 aga… 
 der… 
 Cre… 
 der… 
 used 
 in $ -5,4… $ -10,… $ -3,0… $ -18… $ -16,… $ -1,… $ -18,… 90 % 
 cre… 
 por… 
 man… 
 act… 
(a) Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
(b) In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Firm refined its approach for disclosing additional collateral
held by the Firm that may be used as security when the fair value of the client’s exposure is in the
Firm’s favor. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
(c) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans, which resulted in a corresponding reclassification of
certain off-balance sheet commitments. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation.
(d) Represents loans held-for-sale, primarily related to syndicated loans and loans transferred from
the retained portfolio, and loans at fair value.
(e) These derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting under U.S. GAAP.
(f) The notional amounts are presented on a net basis by underlying reference entity and the ratings
profile shown is based on the ratings of the reference entity on which protection has been purchased.
Predominantly all of the credit derivatives entered into by the Firm where it has purchased
protection used in credit portfolio management activities are executed with investment-grade
counterparties.
(g) The maturity profile of retained loans, lending-related commitments and derivative receivables is
generally based on remaining contractual maturity. Derivative contracts that are in a receivable
position at December 31, 2020, may become payable prior to maturity based on their cash flow profile
or changes in market conditions.
 Wholesale credit exposure – industry exposures 
The Firm focuses on the management and
diversification of its industry exposures, and
pays particular attention to industries with
actual or potential credit concerns.
Exposures deemed criticized align with the U.S.
banking regulators’ definition of criticized
exposures, which consist of the special mention,
substandard and doubtful
categories. Total criticized exposure excluding
loans held-for-sale and loans at fair value, was
$41.6 billion at December 31, 2020, compared
with $15.1 billion at December 31, 2019,
representing approximately 4.0% and 1.5% of
total wholesale credit exposure, respectively.
The increase in total criticized exposure was
largely driven by downgrades in Consumer &
Retail, Oil & Gas and Real Estate due to impacts
from the COVID-19 pandemic, and to a lesser
extent, net portfolio activity in Technology,
Media & Telecommunications. Predominantly all of
the $41.6 billion was performing and largely
undrawn.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 123 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
The table below summarizes by industry the Firm’s exposures as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The
industry of risk category is generally based on the client or counterparty’s primary business
activity. Refer to Note 4 for additional information on industry concentrations.
 W… 
 c… 
 e… 
 – 
 i… 
 As 
 of Se… 
 or me… Liq… 
 f… 30 sec… 
 t… da… and 
 y… or oth… 
 e… mo… cash 
 D… pa… col… 
 3… due held 
 2… and Net Cr… aga… 
 (… Cre… In… Non… Cr… Cri… ac… cha… de… der… 
 m… exp… gr… Non… pe… non… lo… (re… he… rec… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 R… $ 148… $ 11… $ 27,… $ 4,… $ 504 $ 374 $ 94 $ -1… $ — 
 E… 
 I… 
 a… 122… 10… 14,… 227 689 1,… -17 — — 
 I… 
 E… 
 C… 
 & 108… 57… 41,… 8,… 381 203 55 -3… -5 
 R… 
 T… 
 M… 72,… 36… 27,… 7,… 207 10 73 -9… -56 
 & 
 T… 
 A… 66,… 57… 8,8… 85 21 19 1 — -4,… 
 M… 
 I… 66,… 37… 26,… 1,… 225 278 70 -6… -61 
 H… 60,… 44… 13,… 1,… 177 96 104 -3… -191 
 B… 
 & 54,… 35… 17,… 1,… 52 20 13 -5… -1,… 
 F… 
 C… 
 A… 43,… 25… 15,… 2,… 59 152 22 -4… — 
 O… 
 & 39,… 18… 14,… 4,… 782 11 249 -2… -4 
 G… 
 S… 
 & 38,… 37… 574 2 5 41 — — -41 
 M… 
 G… 
 U… 30,… 22… 7,0… 571 54 14 -7 -4… -1 
 C… 
 & 17,… 10… 5,7… 822 29 6 — -83 — 
 P… 
 C… 17,… 16… 373 — — — — -8… -982 
 G… 
 T… 16,… 7,… 6,3… 2,… 206 30 117 -83 -26 
 M… 
 & 15,… 5,… 8,6… 704 181 8 16 -1… -13 
 M… 
 I… 13,… 10… 2,9… 3 1 7 — — -1,… 
 S… 8,0… 6,… 1,9… 1 4 — 18 -49 -3,… 
 F… 
 F… 
 M… 6,5… 6,… 66 — — — — — -10 
 I… 
 A… 100… 84… 15,… 504 374 83 -9 -9… -1,… 
 o… 
 S… $ 1,0… $ 74… $ 258… $ 37… $ 3,9… $ 2,… $ 799 $ -2… $ -14… 
 L… 
 h… 
 a… 
 l… 35,… 
 at 
 f… 
 v… 
 R… 
 f… 47,… 
 c… 
 T… $ 1,1… 
 124 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 As 
 of Se… 
 or me… L… 
 f… 30 s… 
 t… da… a… 
 y… or o… 
 e… mo… c… 
 D… pa… c… 
 3… due h… 
 2… and Net Cr… a… 
 (… Cr… In… No… Cr… Cr… ac… ch… de… d… 
 m… ex… gr… No… pe… no… lo… (r… he… r… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 R… $ 15… $ 12… $ 27… $ 1,… $ 58 $ 104 $ 13 $ -1… $ — 
 E… 
 I… 
 a… 10… 93… 11… 192 37 388 33 — -… 
 I… 
 E… 
 C… 
 & 10… 58… 45… 2,… 215 118 124 -2… -5 
 R… 
 T… 
 M… 60… 35… 21… 2,… 136 27 27 -6… -… 
 & 
 T… 
 A… 54… 47… 6,… 6 13 18 — — -… 
 M… 
 I… 62… 39… 21… 1,… 219 172 48 -7… -1 
 H… 50… 36… 12… 1,… 151 108 14 -4… -… 
 B… 
 & 50… 34… 15… 808 6 — — -8… -… 
 F… 
 C… 
 A… 35… 24… 10… 615 2 8 1 -1… — 
 O… 
 & 41… 22… 17… 995 579 — 98 -4… -6 
 G… 
 S… 
 & 30… 29… 509 — — 33 7 — -… 
 M… 
 G… 
 U… 34… 22… 12… 301 13 2 39 -4… -… 
 C… 
 & 17… 12… 5,… 221 2 5 — -10 -… 
 P… 
 C… 14… 14… 341 — — — — -9… -… 
 G… 
 T… 14… 8,… 5,… 353 74 30 8 -37 -… 
 M… 
 & 15… 7,… 7,… 661 41 2 -1 -33 -2 
 M… 
 I… 12… 9,… 2,… 19 4 3 — -36 -… 
 S… 7,… 6,… 1,… 27 — — — -48 -… 
 F… 
 F… 
 M… 4,… 3,… 152 — — — — — -4 
 I… 
 A… 79… 73… 5,… 412 11 4 4 -5… -j -… 
 o… 
 S… $ 94… $ 70… $ 23… $ 13… $ 1,… $ 1,… $ 415 $ -1… $ -… 
 L… 
 h… 
 a… 
 l… 29… 
 at 
 f… 
 v… 
 R… 
 f… 33… 
 c… 
 T… $ 1,… 
(a) T he industry rankings presented in the table as of December 31, 2019, are based on the industry
rankings of the corresponding exposures at December 31, 2020, not actual rankings of such exposures
at December 31, 2019.
(b) Individuals and Individual Entities predominantly consists of Wealth Management clients within
AWM and includes exposure to personal investment companies and personal and testamentary trusts.
(c) In addition to the credit risk exposure to states and municipal governments (both U.S. and
non-U.S.) at December 31, 2020 and 2019, noted above, the Firm held: $7.2 billion and $6.5 billion,
respectively, of trading assets; $20.4 billion and $29.8 billion, respectively, of AFS securities;
and $12.8 billion and $4.8 billion, respectively, of HTM securities, issued by U.S. state and
municipal governments. Refer to Note 2 and Note 10 for further information.
(d) All other includes: SPEs and Private education and civic organizations, representing
approximately 92% and 8%, respectively, at December 31, 2020 and 90% and 10%, respectively, at
December 31, 2019 .
(e) Excludes cash placed with banks of $516.9 billion and $254.0 billion, at December 31, 2020 and
2019, respectively, which is predominantly placed with various central banks, primarily Federal
Reserve Banks.
(f) Credit exposure is net of risk participations and excludes the benefit of credit derivatives used
in credit portfolio management activities held against derivative receivables or loans and liquid
securities and other cash collateral held against derivative receivables.
(g) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans, which resulted in a corresponding reclassification of
certain off-balance sheet commitments. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation.
(h) Generally excludes loans under payment deferral programs offered in response to the COVID-19
pandemic.
(i) Represents the net notional amounts of protection purchased and sold through credit derivatives
used to manage the credit exposures; these derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting under U.S.
GAAP. The All other category includes purchased credit protection on certain credit indices.
(j) Prior-period amount has been revised to conform with the current presentation.
(k) In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Firm refined its approach for disclosing additional collateral
held by the Firm that may be used as security when the fair value of the client’s exposure is in the
Firm’s favor. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 125 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
Presented below is additional detail on certain of the Firm’s largest industry exposures and/or
certain industries which present potential heightened credit concerns .
 Real Estate 
Real Estate exposure was $148.5 billion as of December 31, 2020, of which $85.6 billion was
multifamily lending as shown in the table below. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the
following changes were primarily driven by impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic:
• the investment-grade portion of the Real Estate portfolio decreased from 81% to 78%.
• the drawn percentage of this portfolio increased from 78% to 80%
• criticized exposure increased by $3.3 billion from $1.5 billion to $4.8 billion
 December 
 31, 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (in Loans and 
 millions, Lending-re… Derivative Credit % % Drawn(e) 
 except Commitment… Receivabl… exposure Investmen… 
 ratios) 
 Multifami… $ 85,368 $ 183 $ 85,551 85 % 92 % 
 Office 16,372 475 16,847 76 70 
 Other 
 Income 13,435 421 13,856 76 55 
 Producing 
 Propertie… 
 Retail 10,573 199 10,772 60 69 
 Services 
 and Non 9,242 22 9,264 62 47 
 Income 
 Producing 
 Industrial 9,039 69 9,108 76 73 
 Lodging 3,084 16 3,100 24 57 
 Total Real 
 Estate 147,113 1,385 148,498 78 80 
 Exposure(… 
 December 
 31, 2019 
 (in Loans and % 
 millions, Lending-re… Derivative Credit Investmen… % Drawn(e) 
 except Commitment… Receivabl… exposure grade 
 ratios) 
 Multifami… $ 86,381 $ 58 $ 86,439 91 % 92 % 
 Office 15,734 231 15,965 80 70 
 Other 
 Income 14,372 181 14,553 48 45 
 Producing 
 Propertie… 
 Retail 11,347 87 11,434 83 68 
 Services 
 and Non 9,922 19 9,941 57 47 
 Income 
 Producing 
 Industrial 8,842 24 8,866 74 75 
 Lodging 3,702 19 3,721 51 38 
 Total Real 
 Estate 150,300 619 150,919 81 78 
 Exposure 
(a) Multifamily exposure is largely in California.
(b) Other Income Producing Properties consists of clients with diversified property types or other
property types outside of multifamily, office, retail, industrial and lodging with less material
exposures.
(c) Real Estate exposure is approximately 80% secured; unsecured exposure is approximately 78%
investment-grade.
(d) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans, which resulted in a corresponding reclassification of
certain off-balance sheet commitments. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation.
(e) Represents drawn exposure as a percentage of credit exposure.
 126 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Consumer & Retail 
Consumer & Retail exposure was $108.4 billion as of December 31, 2020, and predominantly included
Retail, Food and Beverage, and Business and Consumer Services as shown in the table below. During the
year ended December 31, 2020, the following changes were primarily driven by impacts from the
COVID-19 pandemic:
• the investment-grade portion of the Consumer & Retail portfolio decreased from 55% to 53%
• the drawn percentage of this portfolio increased from 35% to 36%
• criticized exposure increased by $6.7 billion from $2.5 billion to $9.2 billion
 December 
 31, 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (in Loans and 
 millions, Lending-re… Derivative Credit % % Drawn(d) 
 except Commitments Receivabl… exposure Investmen… 
 ratios) 
 Retail(a) $ 32,486 $ 887 $ 33,373 52 % 33 % 
 Food and 28,012 897 28,909 62 33 
 Beverage 
 Business 
 and 24,760 599 25,359 52 41 
 Consumer 
 Services 
 Consumer 12,937 178 13,115 59 36 
 Hard Goods 
 Leisure(b) 7,440 241 7,681 18 43 
 Total 
 Consumer & 105,635 2,802 108,437 53 36 
 Retail(c) 
 December 
 31, 2019 
 (in Loans and % 
 millions, Lending-re… Derivative Credit Investmen… % Drawn(d) 
 except Commitments Receivabl… exposure grade 
 ratios) 
 Retail(a) $ 29,290 $ 294 $ 29,584 54 % 37 % 
 Food and 27,956 625 28,581 67 36 
 Beverage 
 Business 
 and 24,242 249 24,491 51 37 
 Consumer 
 Services 
 Consumer 13,144 109 13,253 65 35 
 Hard Goods 
 Leisure(b) 10,930 147 11,077 21 19 
 Total 
 Consumer & 105,562 1,424 106,986 55 35 
 Retail 
(a) Retail consists of Home Improvement & Specialty Retailers, Restaurants, Supermarkets, Discount &
Drug Stores, Specialty Apparel and Department Stores.
(b) Leisure consists of Gaming, Arts & Culture, Travel Services and Sports & Recreation. As of
December 31, 2020 approximately 75% of the noninvestment-grade Leisure portfolio is secured.
(c) Approximately 80% of the noninvestment-grade portfolio is secured.
(d) Represents drawn exposure as a percent of credit exposure.
 Oil & Gas 
Oil & Gas exposure was $39.2 billion as of December 31, 2020, including $19.3 billion of Exploration
& Production and Oil field Services as shown in the table below. During the year ended December 31,
2020, the following changes were driven by lower oil prices and impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic:
• the investment-grade portion of the Oil & Gas portfolio decreased from 53% to 47%
• criticized exposure increased by $4.1 billion from $1.6 billion to $5.7 billion
 December 
 31, 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (in Loans and 
 millions, Lending-re… Derivative Credit % % Drawn(c) 
 except Commitments Receivabl… exposure Investmen… 
 ratios) 
 Explorati… 
 & 
 Production 
 ("E&P") $ 18,228 $ 1,048 $ 19,276 32 % 37 % 
 and Oil 
 field 
 Services 
 Other Oil 19,288 595 19,883 62 21 
 & Gas(a) 
 Total Oil 37,516 1,643 39,159 47 29 
 & Gas(b) 
 December 
 31, 2019 
 (in Loans and % 
 millions, Lending-re… Derivative Credit Investmen… % Drawn(c) 
 except Commitments Receivabl… exposure grade 
 ratios) 
 Explorati… 
 & 
 Production 
 ("E&P") $ 22,543 $ 646 $ 23,189 38 % 38 % 
 and Oil 
 field 
 Services 
 Other Oil 18,246 206 18,452 73 23 
 & Gas(a) 
 Total Oil 40,789 852 41,641 53 31 
 & Gas(b) 
(a) Other Oil & Gas includes Integrated Oil & Gas companies, Midstream/Oil Pipeline companies and
refineries.
(b) Secured lending was $13.2 billion and $15.7 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019 , respectively,
approximately half of which is reserve-based lending to the Exploration & Production sub-sector;
unsecured exposure is largely investment-grade.
(c) Represents drawn exposure as a percent of credit exposure.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 127 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 Loans 
In its wholesale businesses, the Firm provides
loans to a variety of clients, ranging from
large corporate and institutional clients to
high-net-worth individuals. Refer to Note 12 for
a further discussion on loans, including
information about delinquencies, loan
modifications and other credit quality
indicators. The following table presents the
change in the nonaccrual loan portfolio for the
years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The
increase was driven by downgrades across
multiple industries on client credit
deterioration, with the largest concentration in
Real Estate, predominantly within retail and
lodging .
 Wholesale nonaccrual loan activity 
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Beginning balance $ 1,271 $ 1,587 
 Additions(a) 6,753 2,552 
 Reductions: 
 Paydowns and other 2,290 1,585 
 Gross charge-offs 922 425 
 Returned to performing status 569 652 
 Sales 137 206 
 Total reductions 3,918 2,868 
 Net changes 2,835 -316 
 Ending balance $ 4,106 $ 1,271 
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm
reclassified certain fair value option elected
lending-related positions from trading assets to
loans. Prior-period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current presentation .
The following table presents net charge-
offs/recoveries, which are defined as gross
charge-offs less recoveries, for the years ended
December 31, 2020 and 2019. The amounts in the
table below do not include gains or losses from
sales of nonaccrual loans.
 Wholesale net charge-offs/(recoveries) 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except ratios) 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans – reported 
 Average loans retained $ 509,907 $ 472,628 
 Gross charge-offs 954 472 
 Gross recoveries collected -155 -57 
 Net charge-offs/(recoveries) 799 415 
 Net charge-off/(recovery) rate 0.16 % 0.09 % 
 128 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Lending-related commitments The Firm uses
lending-related financial instruments, such as
commitments (including revolving credit
facilities) and guarantees, to address the
financing needs of its clients. The contractual
amounts of these financial instruments represent
the maximum possible credit risk should the
clients draw down on these commitments or when
the Firm fulfills its obligations under these
guarantees, and the clients subsequently fail to
perform according to the terms of these
contracts. Most of these commitments and
guarantees have historically been refinanced,
extended, cancelled, or expired without being
drawn upon or a default occurring. As a result,
the Firm does not believe that the total
contractual amount of these wholesale lending-
related commitments is representative of the
Firm’s expected future credit exposure or
funding requirements. Refer to Note 28 for
further information on wholesale lending-related
commitments. Receivables from Customers
Receivables from customers reflect held-for-
investment margin loans to brokerage clients in
CIB, CCB and AWM that are collateralized by
assets maintained in the clients’ brokerage
accounts (e.g., cash on deposit, liquid and
readily marketable debt or equity securities).
Because of this collateralization, no allowance
for credit losses is generally held against
these receivables. To manage its credit risk the
Firm establishes margin requirements and
monitors the required margin levels on an
ongoing basis, and requires clients to deposit
additional cash or other collateral, or to
reduce positions, when appropriate. These
receivables are reported within accrued interest
and accounts receivable on the Firm’s
Consolidated balance sheets. Clearing services
The Firm provides clearing services for clients
entering into certain securities and derivative
contracts. Through the provision of these
services the Firm is exposed to the risk of non-
performance by its clients and may be required
to share in losses incurred by CCPs. Where
possible, the Firm seeks to mitigate its credit
risk to its clients through the collection of
adequate margin at inception and throughout the
life of the transactions and can also cease the
provision of clearing services if clients do not
adhere to their obligations under the clearing
agreement. Refer to Note 28 for a further
discussion of clearing services. Derivative
contracts Derivatives enable clients and
counterparties to manage risks including credit
risk and risks arising from fluctuations in
interest rates, foreign exchange, equities, and
commodities. The Firm makes markets in
derivatives in order to meet these needs and
uses derivatives to manage certain risks
associated with net open risk positions from its
market-making activities, including the
counterparty credit risk arising from derivative
receivables. The Firm also uses derivative
instruments to manage its own credit risk and
other market risk exposure. The nature of the
counterparty and the settlement mechanism of the
derivative affect the credit risk to which the
Firm is exposed. For OTC derivatives the Firm is
exposed to
the credit risk of the derivative counterparty.
For exchange-traded derivatives (“ETD”), such as
futures and options, and cleared over-the-
counter (“OTC-cleared”) derivatives, the Firm
can also be exposed to the credit risk of the
relevant CCP. Where possible, the Firm seeks to
mitigate its credit risk exposures arising from
derivative contracts through the use of legally
enforceable master netting arrangements and
collateral agreements. The percentage of the
Firm’s over-the-counter derivative transactions
subject to collateral agreements — excluding
foreign exchange spot trades, which are not
typically covered by collateral agreements due
to their short maturity and centrally cleared
trades that are settled daily — was
approximately 88% and 90% at December 31, 2020
and 2019, respectively. Refer to Note 5 for
additional information on the Firm’s use of
collateral agreements. Refer to Note 5 for a
further discussion of derivative contracts,
counterparties and settlement types. The fair
value of derivative receivables reported on the
Consolidated balance sheets were $79.6 billion
and $49.8 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019,
respectively, with increases in CIB resulting
from market movements. Derivative receivables
represent the fair value of the derivative
contracts after giving effect to legally
enforceable master netting agreements and the
related cash collateral held by the Firm. In
addition, the Firm held liquid securities and
other cash collateral that the Firm believes is
legally enforceable and may be used as security
when the fair value of the client’s exposure is
in the Firm’s favor. Liquid securities
represents high quality liquid assets as defined
in the LCR rule. In management’s view, the
appropriate measure of current credit risk
should also take into consideration other
collateral, which generally represents
securities that do not qualify as high quality
liquid assets under the LCR rule, but that the
Firm believes is legally enforceable. The
collateral amounts for each counterparty are
limited to the net derivative receivables for
the counterparty. The following tables summarize
the net derivative receivables and the internal
ratings profile for the periods presented.
 Derivative receivables 
 December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total, net of cash collateral $ 79,630 $ 49,766 
 Liquid securities and other cash 
 collateral held against derivative -14,806 -13,052 
 receivables(a) 
 Total, net of liquid securities and $ 64,824 $ 36,714 
 other cash collateral 
 Other collateral -6,022 -1,837 
 held against derivative receivables(a) 
 Total, net of collateral $ 58,802 $ 34,877 
(a) In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Firm
refined its approach for disclosing additional
collateral held by the Firm that may be used as
security when the fair value of the client’s
exposure is in the Firm’s favor. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 129 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 Ratings 
 profile of 
 derivative 
 receivables 
 December 31, 
 (in millions, 2020(a) % of exposure 2019(a) % of exposure 
 except Exposure net net Exposure net net 
 ratios) of collateral of collateral of collateral of collateral 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investment-g… $ 37,013 63 % $ 27,851 80 % 
 Noninvestmen… 21,789 37 7,026 20 
 Total $ 58,802 100 % $ 34,877 100 % 
(a) In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Firm
refined its approach for disclosing additional
collateral held by the Firm that may be used as
security when the fair value of the client’s
exposure is in the Firm’s favor. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation.
The Firm also holds additional collateral
(primarily cash, G7 government securities, other
liquid government agency and guaranteed
securities, and corporate debt and equity
securities) delivered by clients at the
initiation of transactions, as well as
collateral related to contracts that have a non-
daily call frequency and collateral that the
Firm has agreed to return but has not yet
settled as of the reporting date. Although this
collateral does not reduce the balances and is
not included in the table above, it is available
as security against potential exposure that
could arise should the fair value of the
client’s derivative contracts move in the Firm’s
favor. Refer to Note 5 for additional
information on the Firm’s use of collateral
agreements.
While useful as a current view of credit
exposure, the net fair value of the derivative
receivables does not capture the potential
future variability of that credit exposure. To
capture the potential future variability of
credit exposure, the Firm calculates, on a
client-by-client basis, three measures of
potential derivatives-related credit loss: Peak,
Derivative Risk Equivalent (“DRE”), and Average
exposure (“AVG”). These measures all incorporate
netting and collateral benefits, where
applicable.
Peak represents a conservative measure of
potential derivative exposure, including the
benefit of collateral, to a counterparty
calculated in a manner that is broadly
equivalent to a 97.5% confidence level over the
life of the transaction. Peak is the primary
measure used by the Firm for setting credit
limits for derivative contracts, senior
management reporting and derivatives exposure
management.
DRE exposure is a measure that expresses the
risk of derivative exposure, including the
benefit of collateral, on a basis intended to be
equivalent to the risk of loan exposures. DRE is
a less extreme measure of potential credit loss
than Peak and is used as an input for
aggregating derivative credit risk exposures
with loans and other credit risk.
Finally, AVG is a measure of the expected fair
value of the Firm’s derivative exposure,
including the benefit of collateral, at future
time periods. AVG over the total life of the
derivative contract is used as the primary
metric for pricing purposes and is used to
calculate credit risk capital and CVA, as
further described below.
The fair value of the Firm’s derivative
receivables incorporates CVA to reflect the
credit quality of counterparties. CVA is based
on the Firm’s AVG to a counterparty and the
counterparty’s credit spread in the credit
derivatives market. The Firm believes that
active risk management is essential to
controlling the dynamic credit risk in the
derivatives portfolio. In addition, the Firm’s
risk management process takes into consideration
the potential impact of wrong-way risk, which is
broadly defined as the risk that exposure to a
counterparty is positively correlated with the
impact of a default by the same counterparty,
which could cause exposure to increase at the
same time as the counterparty’s capacity to meet
its obligations is decreasing. Many factors may
influence the nature and magnitude of these
correlations over time. To the extent that these
correlations are identified, the Firm may adjust
the CVA associated with a particular
counterparty’s AVG. The Firm risk manages
exposure to changes in CVA by entering into
credit derivative contracts, as well as interest
rate, foreign exchange, equity and commodity
derivative contracts.
The below graph shows exposure profiles to the
Firm’s current derivatives portfolio over the
next 10 years as calculated by the Peak, DRE and
AVG metrics. The three measures generally show
that exposure will decline after the first year,
if no new trades are added to the portfolio.
 Exposure profile of derivatives measures 
December 31, 2020
(in billions)
 130 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Credit derivatives The Firm uses credit derivatives for two primary purposes: first, in its capacity
as a market-maker, and second, as an end-user, to manage the Firm’s own credit risk associated with
various exposures. Credit portfolio management activities Included in the Firm’s end-user activities
are credit derivatives used to mitigate the credit risk associated with traditional lending
activities (loans and lending-related commitments) and derivatives counterparty exposure in the
Firm’s wholesale businesses (collectively, “credit portfolio management activities”). Information on
credit portfolio management activities is provided in the table below. The Firm also uses credit
derivatives as an end-user to manage other exposures, including credit risk arising from certain
securities held in the Firm’s market-making businesses. These credit derivatives are not included in
credit portfolio management activities.
 Credit derivatives used in credit portfolio 
 management activities Notional amount of protection 
 December 31, (in millions) purchased and sold(b) 
 Credit derivatives used to manage: 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans and lending-related commitments $ 3,877 $ 2,047 
 Derivative receivables(a) 18,362 16,483 
 Credit derivatives used in credit $ 22,239 $ 18,530 
 portfolio management activities 
(a) Prior-period amount has been revised to
conform with the current presentation. (b)
Amounts are presented net, considering the
Firm’s net protection purchased or sold with
respect to each underlying reference entity or
index. The credit derivatives used in credit
portfolio management activities do not qualify
for hedge accounting under U.S. GAAP; these
derivatives are reported at fair value, with
gains and losses recognized in principal
transactions revenue. In contrast, the loans and
lending-related commitments being risk-managed
are accounted for on an accrual basis. This
asymmetry in accounting treatment, between loans
and lending-related commitments and the credit
derivatives used in credit portfolio management
activities, causes earnings volatility that is
not representative, in the Firm’s view, of the
true changes in value of the Firm’s overall
credit exposure. The effectiveness of credit
default swaps (“CDS”) as a hedge against the
Firm’s exposures may vary depending on a number
of factors, including the named reference entity
(i.e., the Firm may experience losses on
specific exposures that are different than the
named reference entities in the purchased CDS);
the contractual terms of the CDS (which may have
a defined credit event that does not align with
an actual loss realized by the Firm); and the
maturity of the Firm’s CDS protection (which in
some cases may be shorter than the Firm’s
exposures). However, the Firm generally seeks to
purchase credit protection with a maturity date
that is the same or similar to the maturity date
of the exposure for which the protection was
purchased, and remaining differences in maturity
are actively monitored and managed by the Firm.
Refer to Credit derivatives in Note 5 for a
detailed description of credit derivatives.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 131 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES 
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the
CECL accounting guidance. The adoption of this
guidance established a single allowance
framework for all financial assets measured at
amortized cost and certain off-balance sheet
credit exposures. This framework requires that
management’s estimate reflects credit losses
over the instrument’s remaining expected life
and considers expected future changes in
macroeconomic conditions. Refer to Note 1 for
further information. The Firm’s allowance for
credit losses comprises: • the allowance for
loan losses, which covers the Firm’s retained
loan portfolios (scored and risk-rated) and is
presented separately on the Consolidated balance
sheets, • the allowance for lending-related
commitments, which is presented on the
Consolidated balance sheets in accounts payable
and other liabilities, and • the allowance for
credit losses on investment securities, which
covers the Firm’s HTM and AFS securities and is
recognized within Investment Securities on the
Consolidated balance sheets. The allowance for
credit losses increased compared with December
31, 2019, primarily reflecting the deterioration
and uncertainty in the macroeconomic
environment, in particular in the first half of
2020, as a result of the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic, consisting of: • a net $7.4 billion
addition in consumer, predominantly in the
credit card portfolio, and • a net $4.7 billion
addition in wholesale, across the LOBs,
impacting multiple industries. The adoption of
CECL on January 1, 2020, resulted in a $4.3
billion addition to the allowance for credit
losses. Discussion of changes in the allowance
during 2020 The increase in the allowance for
loan losses and lending-related commitments was
primarily driven by an increase in the provision
for credit losses, reflecting the deterioration
in and uncertainty around the future
macroeconomic environment as a result of the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December
31, 2020, the Firm’s central case reflected U.S.
unemployment rates of approximately 7% through
the second quarter of 2021 and remaining above
5% until the second half of 2022. This compared
with relatively low levels of unemployment of
approximately 4% throughout 2020 and 2021 in the
Firm’s January 1, 2020 central case. Further,
while the Firm’s January 1, 2020 central case
U.S. GDP forecast reflected a 1.7% expansion in
2020, actual U.S. GDP contracted approximately
2.5% in 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the
Firm’s central case assumptions reflect a return
to pre-pandemic GDP levels in the fourth quarter
of 2021. Due to elevated uncertainty in the near
term outlook, driven by the potential for
increased infection rates and related lock downs
resulting from the pandemic, as well as the
prospect that government and other consumer
relief measures set to expire may not be
extended, the Firm has placed significant
weighting on its adverse scenarios. These
scenarios incorporate more punitive
macroeconomic factors than the central case
assumptions, resulting in weighted average U.S.
unemployment rates remaining elevated throughout
2021 and 2022, ending the fourth quarter of 2022
at approximately 6%, and in U.S. GDP ending 2022
approximately 0.9% higher than fourth quarter
2019 actual pre-pandemic levels. The Firm’s
central case assumptions reflected U.S.
unemployment rates and U.S. real GDP as follows:
 Assumptions at January 1, 2020 
 2Q20 4Q20(b) 2Q21 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. unemployment rate(a) 3.7 % 3.8 % 4.0 % 
 Cumulative change in U.S. real GDP 
 from 0.9 % 1.7 % 2.4 % 
 12/31/2019 
 Assumptions at December 31, 2020 
 2Q21 4Q21 2Q22 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. unemployment rate(a) 6.8 % 5.7 % 5.1 % 
 Cumulative change in U.S. real GDP 
 from -1.9 % 0.6 % 2.0 % 
 12/31/2019 
(a) Reflects quarterly average of forecasted
U.S. unemployment rate. (b) 4Q20 actual U.S.
unemployment rate (quarterly average) was 6.8%.
4Q20 actual cumulative change in U.S. real GDP
from 4Q19 was (2.5%). Subsequent changes to this
forecast and related estimates will be reflected
in the provision for credit losses in future
periods. Refer to Note 13 and Note 10 for a
description of the policies, methodologies and
judgments used to determine the Firm’s
allowances for credit losses on loans, lending-
related commitments, and investment securities.
Refer to Critical Accounting Estimates Used by
the Firm on pages 152-155 for further
information on the allowance for credit losses
and related management judgments. Refer to
Consumer Credit Portfolio on pages 114-120,
Wholesale Credit Portfolio on pages 121-131 and
Note 12 for additional information on the
consumer and wholesale credit portfolios.
 132 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
The adoption of the CECL accounting guidance resulted in a change in the accounting for PCI loans,
which are considered PCD loans under CECL. In conjunction with the adoption of CECL, the Firm
reclassified risk-rated loans and lending-related commitments from the consumer, excluding credit
card portfolio segment to the wholesale portfolio segment, to align with the methodology applied when
determining the allowance. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current
presentation. Refer to Note 1 for further information.
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 20… 20… 
 … Co… Co… 
 … ex… ex… 
 … cr… C… cr… C… 
 … ca… c… Wh… T… ca… c… Wh… T… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 2,… $ 5… $ 4,… $ 1… $ 3,… $ 5… $ 4,… $ 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 a 297 5… -1… 4… NA NA NA NA 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 805 5… 954 6… 902 5… 472 6… 
 … 
 … 
 … -6… -… -1… -… -5… -… -57 -… 
 … 
 … 174 4… 799 5… 366 4… 415 5… 
 … 
 … 
 … NA NA NA NA 151 — — 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 974 1… 4,… 1… -3… 5… 479 5… 
 … 
 … 
 … 1 — — 1 -1 -1 11 9 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 3,… $ 1… $ 6,… $ 2… $ 2,… $ 5… $ 4,… $ 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 12 $ — $ 1,… $ 1… $ 12 $ — $ 1,… $ 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 a 133 — -35 98 NA NA NA NA 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 42 — 1,… 1… — — 136 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … — — -1 -1 — — — — 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 187 $ — $ 2,… $ 2… $ 12 $ — $ 1,… $ 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ -7 $ 6… $ 682 $ 1… $ 75 $ 4… $ 295 $ 8… 
 … 3,… 1… 6,… 2… 1,… 5… 4,… 1… 
 … NA NA NA NA 987 — — 9… 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 3,… $ 1… $ 6,… $ 2… $ 2,… $ 5… $ 4,… $ 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ — $ — $ 114 $ 1… $ — $ — $ 102 $ 1… 
 … 187 — 2,… 2… 12 — 1,… 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 187 $ — $ 2,… $ 2… $ 12 $ — $ 1,… $ 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 3,… $ 1… $ 9,… $ 3… $ 2,… $ 5… $ 6,… $ 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 30… $ 1… $ 51… $ 9… $ 29… $ 1… $ 48… $ 9… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 30… 1… 50… 9… 31… 1… 47… 9… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1.… % 1… % 1.… % 2… % 0.… % 3… % 1.… % 1… % 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 67 NM 208 3… 87 NM 464 3… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 67 NM 208 1… 87 NM 464 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 0.… 2… 0.… 0… 0.… 3… 0.… 0… 
 … 
(a) Prior to the adoption of CECL, write-offs of PCI loans were recorded against the allowance for
loan losses when actual losses for a pool exceeded estimated losses that were recorded as purchase
accounting adjustments at the time of acquisition. A write-off of a PCI loan was recognized when the
underlying loan was removed from a pool.
(b) Includes modified PCD loans and loans that have been modified or are reasonably expected to be
modified in a TDR. Also includes risk-rated loans that have been placed on nonaccrual status for the
wholesale portfolio segment. The asset-specific credit card allowance for loan losses modified or
reasonably expected to be modified in a TDR is calculated based on the loans’ original contractual
interest rates and does not consider any incremental penalty rates.
(c) The Firm’s policy is generally to exempt credit card loans from being placed on nonaccrual status
as permitted by regulatory guidance.
(d) Excludes HTM securities, which had an allowance for credit losses of $ 78million and a provision
for credit losses of $ 68million as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 133 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO RISK MANAGEMENT 
Investment portfolio risk is the risk associated
with the loss of principal or a reduction in
expected returns on investments arising from the
investment securities portfolio or from
principal investments. The investment securities
portfolio is predominantly held by Treasury and
CIO in connection with the Firm's balance sheet
or asset-liability management objectives.
Principal investments are predominantly
privately-held non-traded financial instruments
and are managed in the LOBs and Corporate.
Investments are typically intended to be held
over extended periods and, accordingly, the Firm
has no expectation for short-term realized gains
with respect to these investments.
 Investment securities risk 
Investment securities risk includes the exposure
associated with a default in the payment of
principal and interest. This risk is mitigated
given that the investment securities portfolio
held by Treasury and CIO is predominantly
invested in high-quality securities. At December
31, 2020, the Treasury and CIO investment
securities portfolio, net of allowance for
credit losses, was $587.9 billion, and the
average credit rating of the securities
comprising the portfolio was AA+ (based upon
external ratings where available and where not
available, based primarily upon internal risk
ratings). Refer to Corporate segment results on
pages 83–84 and Note 10 for further information
on the investment securities portfolio and
internal risk ratings. Refer to Market Risk
Management on pages 135–142 for further
information on the market risk inherent in the
portfolio. Refer to Liquidity Risk Management on
pages 102–108 for further information on related
liquidity risk.
Governance and oversight
Investment securities risks are governed by the
Firm’s Risk Appetite framework, and reviewed at
the CTC Risk Committee with regular updates to
the Board Risk Committee.
The Firm’s independent control functions are
responsible for reviewing the appropriateness of
the carrying value of investment securities in
accordance with relevant policies. Approved
levels for investment securities are established
for each risk category, including capital and
credit risks.
 Principal investment risk 
Principal investments are typically privately
held non-traded financial instruments
representing ownership or other forms of junior
capital and span multiple asset classes. These
investments are made by dedicated investing
businesses or as part of a broader business
strategy. In general, principal investments
include tax-oriented investments and investments
made to enhance or accelerate the Firm’s
business strategies . The Firm’s investments
will continue to evolve in line with its
strategies, including the Firm’s commitment to
support underserved communities and minority-
owned businesses. The Firm’s principal
investments are managed by the LOBs and
Corporate and are reflected within their
respective financial results. The aggregate
carrying values of the principal investment
portfolios have not been significantly affected
by recent market events as a result of the
COVID-19 pandemic. However, the duration and
severity of adverse macroeconomic conditions
could subject certain principal investments to
impairments, write-downs, or other negative
impacts.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the aggregate
carrying values of the principal investment
portfolios were $27.5 billion and $24.2 billion,
respectively, which included tax-oriented
investments (e.g., alternative energy and
affordable housing investments) of $21.3 billion
and $18.2 billion, respectively, and private
equity, various debt and equity instruments, and
real assets of $6.2 billion and $6.0 billion,
respectively.
Governance and oversight
The Firm’s approach to managing principal risk
is consistent with the Firm’s risk governance
structure. A Firmwide risk policy framework
exists for all principal investing activities
and includes approval by executives who are
independent from the investing businesses, as
appropriate.
The Firm’s independent control functions are
responsible for reviewing the appropriateness of
the carrying value of investments in accordance
with relevant policies. As part of the risk
governance structure, approved levels for
investments are established and monitored for
each relevant business or segment in order to
manage the overall size of the portfolios. The
Firm also conducts stress testing on these
portfolios using specific scenarios that
estimate losses based on significant market
moves and/or other risk events.
 134 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 MARKET RISK MANAGEMENT 
Market risk is the risk associated with the
effect of changes in market factors, such as
interest and foreign exchange rates, equity and
commodity prices, credit spreads or implied
volatilities, on the value of assets and
liabilities held for both the short and long
term.
 Market Risk Management 
Market Risk Management monitors market risks
throughout the Firm and defines market risk
policies and procedures.
Market Risk Management seeks to manage risk,
facilitate efficient risk/return decisions,
reduce volatility in operating performance and
provide transparency into the Firm’s market risk
profile for senior management, the Board of
Directors and regulators. Market Risk Management
is responsible for the following functions:
• Maintaining a market risk policy framework
• Independently measuring, monitoring and
controlling LOB, Corporate, and Firmwide market
risk
• Defining, approving and monitoring of limits
• Performing stress testing and qualitative risk
assessments
 Risk measurement 
Measures used to capture market risk
There is no single measure to capture market
risk and therefore Market Risk Management uses
various metrics, both statistical and
nonstatistical, to assess risk including:
• Value-at-risk (VaR)
• Stress testing
• Profit and loss drawdowns
• Earnings-at-risk
• Other sensitivity-based measures
 Risk monitoring and control 
Market risk exposure is managed primarily
through a series of limits set in the context of
the market environment and business strategy. In
setting limits, Market Risk Management takes
into consideration factors such as market
volatility, product liquidity, accommodation of
client business, and management experience.
Market Risk Management maintains different
levels of limits. Firm level limits include VaR
and stress limits. Similarly, LOB and Corporate
limits include VaR and stress limits and may be
supplemented by certain nonstatistical risk
measures such as profit and loss drawdowns.
Limits may also be set within the LOBs and
Corporate, as well as at the legal entity level.
Market Risk Management sets limits and regularly
reviews and updates them as appropriate. Senior
management is responsible for reviewing and
approving certain of these risk limits on an
ongoing basis. Limits that have not been
reviewed within specified time periods by Market
Risk Management are reported to senior
management. The LOBs and Corporate are
responsible for adhering to established limits
against which exposures are monitored and
reported.
Limit breaches are required to be reported in a
timely manner to limit approvers, which include
Market Risk Management and senior management. In
the event of a breach, Market Risk Management
consults with appropriate members of the Firm to
determine the suitable course of action required
to return the applicable positions to
compliance, which may include a reduction in
risk in order to remedy the breach or granting a
temporary increase in limits to accommodate an
expected increase in client activity and/or
market volatility. Certain Firm, Corporate or
LOB-level limit breaches are escalated as
appropriate.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Market Risk Management continues to actively
monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
market risk exposures by leveraging existing
risk measures and controls.
Models used to measure market risk are
inherently imprecise and are limited in their
ability to measure certain risks or to predict
losses. This imprecision may be heightened when
sudden or severe shifts in market conditions
occur, such as those observed at the onset of
the COVID-19 pandemic. For additional discussion
on model uncertainty refer to Estimations and
Model Risk Management on page 151.
Market Risk Management periodically reviews the
Firm’s existing market risk measures to identify
opportunities for enhancement, and to the extent
appropriate, will calibrate those measures
accordingly over time. This is increasingly
important in periods of sustained, heightened
market volatility.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 135 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
The following table summarizes the predominant business activities and related market risks, as well
as positions which give rise to market risk and certain measures used to capture those risks, for
each LOB and Corporate.
In addition to the predominant business activities, each LOB and Corporate may engage in principal
investing activities. To the extent principal investments are deemed market risk sensitive, they are
reflected in relevant risk measures and captured in the table below. Refer to Investment Portfolio
Risk Management on page 134 for additional discussion on principal investments.
 Positions Positions 
 LOBs and Predominant Related included in Positions included in 
 Corporate business market risks Risk included in other 
 activities Management earnings-at-… sensitivity-… 
 VaR measures 
 •Mortgage 
 commitments, 
 classified as 
 derivatives 
 •Warehouse 
 loans that 
 are fair 
 value option 
 elected, 
 classified as 
 loans – debt 
 instruments 
 •Risk from •MSRs 
 changes in •Hedges of 
 the mortgage 
 •Services probability commitments, 
 mortgage of newly warehouse •Retained •Fair value 
 loans originated loans and loan option 
 CCB •Originates mortgage MSRs, portfolio elected 
 loans and commitments classified as •Deposits liabilities 
 takes closing derivatives DVA(a) 
 deposits •Interest •Interest-on… 
 rate risk and and 
 prepayment mortgage-bac… 
 risk securities, 
 classified as 
 trading 
 assets debt 
 instruments, 
 and related 
 hedges, 
 classified as 
 derivatives 
 •Fair value 
 option 
 elected 
 liabilities(… 
 •Trading 
 assets/liabi… 
 – debt and 
 •Risk of loss marketable 
 from adverse equity 
 movements in instruments, 
 market prices and 
 and implied derivatives, 
 volatilities including •Privately 
 •Makes across hedges of the held equity 
 markets and interest retained loan and other 
 services rate, foreign portfolio investments 
 clients exchange, •Certain measured at 
 across fixed credit, securities fair value; 
 income, commodity and purchased, •Retained and certain 
 foreign equity loaned or loan asset-backed 
 CIB exchange, instruments sold under portfolio fair value 
 equities and •Basis and resale •Deposits option 
 commodities correlation agreements elected loans 
 •Originates risk from and •Derivatives 
 loans and changes in securities FVA and fair 
 takes the way asset borrowed value option 
 deposits values move •Fair value elected 
 relative to option liabilities 
 one another elected DVA(a) 
 •Interest liabilities(… 
 rate risk and •Derivative 
 prepayment CVA and 
 risk associated 
 hedges 
 •Marketable 
 equity 
 investments 
 •Originates •Interest •Marketable •Retained 
 CB loans and rate risk and equity loan 
 takes prepayment investments(… portfolio 
 deposits risk •Deposits 
 •Initial seed 
 capital 
 investments 
 and related 
 hedges, 
 •Provides classified as 
 initial derivatives 
 capital •Risk from •Certain 
 investments adverse •Debt deferred 
 in products movements in securities compensation 
 such as market held in and related 
 mutual funds factors advance of •Retained hedges, 
 and capital (e.g., market distribution loan classified as 
 AWM invested prices, rates to clients, portfolio derivatives 
 alongside and credit classified as •Deposits •Capital 
 third-party spreads) trading invested 
 investors •Interest assets - debt alongside 
 •Originates rate risk and instruments(… third-party 
 loans and prepayment investors, 
 takes risk typically in 
 deposits privately 
 distributed 
 collective 
 vehicles 
 managed by 
 AWM (i.e., 
 co-investmen… 
 •Privately 
 •Deposits held equity 
 •Structural •Derivative with banks and other 
 •Manages the interest rate positions •Investment investments 
 Firm’s risk from the measured at securities measured at 
 liquidity, Firm’s fair value portfolio and fair value 
 funding, traditional through related •Foreign 
 Corporate capital, banking noninterest interest rate exchange 
 structural activities revenue in hedges exposure 
 interest rate •Structural earnings •Long-term related to 
 and foreign non-USD •Marketable debt and Firm-issued 
 exchange foreign equity related non-USD 
 risks exchange investments interest rate long-term 
 risks hedges debt (“LTD”) 
 and related 
 hedges 
(a) Reflects structured notes in Risk Management VaR and the DVA on structured notes in other
sensitivity-based measures.
(b) The AWM and CB contributions to Firmwide average VaR were not material for the year ended
December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 136 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Value-at-risk 
JPMorgan Chase utilizes VaR, a statistical risk
measure, to estimate the potential loss from
adverse market moves in the current market
environment. The Firm has a single VaR framework
used as a basis for calculating Risk Management
VaR and Regulatory VaR.
The framework is employed across the Firm using
historical simulation based on data for the
previous 12 months. The framework’s approach
assumes that historical changes in market values
are representative of the distribution of
potential outcomes in the immediate future. The
Firm believes the use of Risk Management VaR
provides a daily measure of risk that is closely
aligned to risk management decisions made by the
LOBs and Corporate and, along with other market
risk measures, provides the appropriate
information needed to respond to risk events.
The Firm’s Risk Management VaR is calculated
assuming a one-day holding period and an
expected tail-loss methodology which
approximates a 95% confidence level. Risk
Management VaR provides a consistent framework
to measure risk profiles and levels of
diversification across product types and is used
for aggregating risks and monitoring limits
across businesses. VaR results are reported to
senior management, the Board of Directors and
regulators.
Under the Firm’s Risk Management VaR
methodology, assuming current changes in market
values are consistent with the historical
changes used in the simulation, the Firm would
expect to incur VaR “backtesting exceptions,”
defined as losses greater than that predicted by
VaR estimates, an average of five times every
100 trading days. The number of VaR backtesting
exceptions observed can differ from the
statistically expected number of backtesting
exceptions if the current level of market
volatility is materially different from the
level of market volatility during the 12 months
of historical data used in the VaR calculation.
Underlying the overall VaR model framework are
individual VaR models that simulate historical
market returns for individual risk factors
and/or product types. To capture material market
risks as part of the Firm’s risk management
framework, comprehensive VaR model calculations
are performed daily for businesses whose
activities give rise to market risk. These VaR
models are granular and incorporate numerous
risk factors and inputs to simulate daily
changes in market values over the historical
period; inputs are selected based on the risk
profile of each portfolio, as sensitivities and
historical time series used to generate daily
market values may be different across product
types or risk management systems. The VaR model
results across all portfolios are aggregated at
the Firm level.
As VaR is based on historical data, it is an
imperfect measure of market risk exposure and
potential future losses. In addition, based on
their reliance on available historical data,
limited time horizons, and other factors, VaR
measures are inherently limited in their ability
to measure certain risks and to predict losses,
particularly those associated with market
illiquidity and sudden or severe shifts in
market conditions.
For certain products, specific risk parameters
are not captured in VaR due to the lack of
liquidity and availability of appropriate
historical data. The Firm uses proxies to
estimate the VaR for these and other products
when daily time series are not available. It is
likely that using an actual price-based time
series for these products, if available, would
affect the VaR results presented. The Firm
therefore considers other nonstatistical
measures such as stress testing, in addition to
VaR, to capture and manage its market risk
positions.
The daily market data used in VaR models may be
different than the independent third-party data
collected for VCG price testing in its monthly
valuation process. For example, in cases where
market prices are not observable, or where
proxies are used in VaR historical time series,
the data sources may differ. Refer to Valuation
process in Note 2 for further information on the
Firm’s valuation process. As VaR model
calculations require daily data and a consistent
source for valuation, it may not be practical to
use the data collected in the VCG monthly
valuation process for VaR model calculations.
The Firm’s VaR model calculations are
periodically evaluated and enhanced in response
to changes in the composition of the Firm’s
portfolios, changes in market conditions,
improvements in the Firm’s modeling techniques
and measurements, and other factors. Such
changes may affect historical comparisons of VaR
results. Refer to Estimations and Model Risk
Management on page 151 for information regarding
model reviews and approvals.
The Firm calculates separately a daily
aggregated VaR in accordance with regulatory
rules (“Regulatory VaR”), which is used to
derive the Firm’s regulatory VaR-based capital
requirements under Basel III. This Regulatory
VaR model framework currently assumes a ten
business-day holding period and an expected tail
loss methodology which approximates a 99%
confidence level. Regulatory VaR is applied to
“covered” positions as defined by Basel III,
which may be different than the positions
included in the Firm’s Risk Management VaR. For
example, credit derivative hedges of accrual
loans are included in the Firm’s Risk Management
VaR, while Regulatory VaR excludes these credit
derivative hedges. In addition, in contrast to
the Firm’s Risk Management VaR, Regulatory VaR
currently excludes the diversification benefit
for certain VaR models.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 137 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
Refer to JPMorgan Chase’s Basel III Pillar 3 Regulatory Capital Disclosures reports, which are
available on the Firm’s website, for additional information on Regulatory VaR and the other
components of market risk regulatory capital for the Firm (e.g., VaR-based measure, stressed VaR-
based measure and the respective backtesting).
The table below shows the results of the Firm’s Risk Management VaR measure using a 95% confidence
level. VaR can vary significantly as positions change, market volatility fluctuates, and
diversification benefits change.
 … 2… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … M… … A… M… … 
 $ … $ 35 $ … $ 40 $ 31 $ … 
 … 4 … 7 4 … 
 … 13 … 20 13 … 
 … 7 … 8 6 … 
 … … … -b NM … -… … … -b NM … 
 … 32 -b … … 42 29 -b … … 
 … 3 … 5 3 7 
 … … … -b NM … -5 … … -b NM … 
 … 31 -b … … 42 29 -b … … 
 5 1 … 5 1 … 
 … 9 … … 10 9 … 
 … … … -b NM … -4 … … -b NM … 
 … 10 -b … … 11 8 -b … … 
 … … … -b NM … -… … … -b NM … 
 $ … $ 32 -b $ … … $ 43 $ 30 -b $ … … 
(a) Diversification benefit represents the
difference between the portfolio VaR and the sum
of its individual components. This reflects the
non-additive nature of VaR due to imperfect
correlation across LOBs, Corporate, and risk
types.
(b) The maximum and minimum VaR for each
portfolio may have occurred on different trading
days than the components and consequently
diversification benefit is not meaningful.
(c) Maximum Corporate and other LOB VaR was
higher than the prior year, due to increases in
the fourth quarter of 2020 driven by a private
equity position that became publicly traded at
the end of the third quarter of 2020.
Generally, average VaR and maximum VaR across
risk types and LOBs were higher due to increased
volatility that occurred at the onset of the
COVID-19 pandemic, which remains in the one-year
historical look-back period. As a result average
total VaR increased by $52 million for the year-
ended December 31, 2020 when compared with the
prior year driven by the fixed income and
commodities risk types.
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm refined the
scope of VaR to exclude positions related to the
risk management of interest rate exposure from
changes in the Firm’s own credit spread on fair
value option elected liabilities, and included
these positions in other sensitivity-based
measures. Additionally, effective July 1, 2020,
the Firm refined the scope of VaR to exclude
certain asset-backed fair value option elected
loans, and included them in other sensitivity-
based measures to more effectively measure the
risk from these loans. In the absence of these
refinements, the average Total VaR and each of
the components would have been higher by the
amounts reported in the following table:
 Amount by which reported average VaR would have been higher for 
 the year ended 
 (in millions) December 31, 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 CIB fixed income VaR $ 9 
 CIB trading VaR 7 
 CIB VaR 9 
 Total VaR 8 
 138 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 VaR backtesting 
The Firm performs daily VaR model backtesting, which compares the daily Risk Management VaR results
with the daily gains and losses that are utilized for VaR backtesting purposes. The gains and losses
in the chart below do not reflect the Firm’s revenue results as they exclude select components of
total net revenue, such as those associated with the execution of new transactions (i.e., intraday
client-driven trading and intraday risk management activities), fees, commissions, certain valuation
adjustments and net interest income. These excluded components of total net revenue may more than
offset backtesting gains and losses on a particular day. The definition of backtesting gains and
losses above is consistent with the requirements for backtesting under Basel III capital rules.
The following chart compares Firmwide daily backtesting gains and losses with the Firm’s Risk
Management VaR for the year ended December 31, 2020. The results in the chart below differ from the
results of backtesting disclosed in the Market Risk section of the Firm’ s B asel III Pillar 3
Regulatory Capital Disclosures reports, which are based on Regulatory VaR applied to the Firm’s
covered positions.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Firm posted backtesting gains on 162 of the 260 days, and
observed 10 VaR backtesting exceptions, which were predominantly driven by volatility at the onset of
the COVID-19 pandemic that was materially higher than the levels realized in the historical data used
for the VaR calculation. Firmwide backtesting loss days can differ from the loss days for which Fixed
Income Markets and Equity Markets posted losses, as disclosed in CIB Markets revenue, as the
population of positions which compose each metric are different and due to the exclusion of select
components of total net revenue in backtesting gains and losses as described above. For more
information on CIB Markets revenue, refer to pages 74-75.
 Daily Risk Management VaR Backtesting Results 
Year ended December 31, 2020
Backtesting Gains and Losses
 Risk Management VaR 
 (1-day, 95% Confidence level) 
 First Quarter Second Quarter Third Quarter Fourth Quarter 
 2020 2020 2020 2020 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 139 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 Other risk measures 
 Stress testing 
Along with VaR, stress testing is an important
tool used to assess risk. While VaR reflects the
risk of loss due to adverse changes in markets
using recent historical market behavior, stress
testing reflects the risk of loss from
hypothetical changes in the value of market risk
sensitive positions applied simultaneously.
Stress testing measures the Firm’s vulnerability
to losses under a range of stressed but possible
economic and market scenarios. The results are
used to understand the exposures responsible for
those potential losses and are measured against
limits.
The Firm’s stress framework covers market risk
sensitive positions in the LOBs and Corporate.
The framework is used to calculate multiple
magnitudes of potential stress for both market
rallies and market sell-offs, assuming
significant changes in market factors such as
credit spreads, equity prices, interest rates,
currency rates and commodity prices, and
combines them in multiple ways to capture an
array of hypothetical economic and market
scenarios.
The Firm generates a number of scenarios that
focus on tail events in specific asset classes
and geographies, including how the event may
impact multiple market factors simultaneously.
Scenarios also incorporate specific
idiosyncratic risks and stress basis risk
between different products. The flexibility in
the stress framework allows the Firm to
construct new scenarios that can test the
outcomes against possible future stress events.
Stress testing results are reported on a regular
basis to senior management of the Firm, as
appropriate.
Stress scenarios are governed by an overall
stress framework and are subject to the
standards outlined in the Firm’s policies
related to model risk management. Significant
changes to the framework are reviewed as
appropriate.
The Firm’s stress testing framework is utilized
in calculating the Firm’s CCAR and other stress
test results, which are reported to the Board of
Directors. In addition, stress testing results
are incorporated into the Firm’s Risk Appetite
framework, and are reported periodically to the
Board Risk Committee.
 Profit and loss drawdowns 
Profit and loss drawdowns are used to highlight
trading losses above certain levels of risk
tolerance. A profit and loss drawdown is a
decline in revenue from its year-to-date peak
level.
 Earnings-at-risk 
The effect of interest rate exposure on the
Firm’s reported net income is important as
interest rate risk represents one of the Firm’s
significant market risks. Interest rate risk
arises not only from trading activities but also
from the Firm’s traditional banking activities,
which include extension of loans and credit
facilities, taking deposits and issuing debt as
well as from the investment securities
portfolio. Refer to the table on page 136 for a
summary by
LOB and Corporate, identifying positions
included in earnings-at-risk .
The CTC Risk Committee establishes the Firm’s
structural interest rate risk policy and related
limits, which are subject to approval by the
Board Risk Committee. Treasury and CIO, working
in partnership with the LOBs, calculates the
Firm’s structural interest rate risk profile and
reviews it with senior management, including the
CTC Risk Committee. In addition, oversight of
structural interest rate risk is managed through
a dedicated risk function reporting to the CTC
CRO. This risk function is responsible for
providing independent oversight and governance
around assumptions and establishing and
monitoring limits for structural interest rate
risk. The Firm manages structural interest rate
risk generally through its investment securities
portfolio and interest rate derivatives.
Structural interest rate risk can occur due to a
variety of factors, including:
• Differences in timing among the maturity or
repricing of assets, liabilities and off-balance
sheet instruments
• Differences in the amounts of assets,
liabilities and off-balance sheet instruments
that are maturing or repricing at the same time
• Differences in the amounts by which short-term
and long-term market interest rates change (for
example, changes in the slope of the yield
curve)
• The impact of changes in the maturity of
various assets, liabilities or off-balance sheet
instruments as interest rates change
The Firm manages interest rate exposure related
to its assets and liabilities on a consolidated,
Firmwide basis. Business units transfer their
interest rate risk to Treasury and CIO through
funds transfer pricing, which takes into account
the elements of interest rate exposure that can
be risk-managed in financial markets. These
elements include asset and liability balances
and contractual rates of interest, contractual
principal payment schedules, expected prepayment
experience, interest rate reset dates and
maturities, rate indices used for repricing, and
any interest rate ceilings or floors for
adjustable rate products.
One way the Firm evaluates its structural
interest rate risk is through earnings-at-risk.
Earnings-at-risk estimates the Firm’s interest
rate exposure for a given interest rate
scenario. It is presented as a sensitivity to a
baseline, which includes net interest income and
certain interest rate sensitive fees. The
baseline uses market interest rates and in the
case of deposits, pricing assumptions. The Firm
conducts simulations of changes to this baseline
for interest rate-sensitive assets and
liabilities denominated in U.S. dollars and
other currencies (“non-U.S. dollar” currencies).
These simulations primarily include retained
loans, deposits, deposits with banks, investment
securities, long-term debt and any related
interest rate hedges, and funds transfer pricing
of positions in risk management VaR and other
sensitivity-based measures as described on page
136.
 140 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Earnings-at-risk scenarios estimate the
potential change to a net interest income
baseline, over the following 12 months utilizing
multiple assumptions. These scenarios include a
parallel shift involving changes to both short-
term and long-term rates by an equal amount; a
steeper yield curve involving holding short-term
rates constant and increasing long-term rates;
and a flatter yield curve involving increasing
short-term rates and holding long-term rates
constant. These scenarios consider many
different factors, including: • The impact on
exposures as a result of instantaneous changes
in interest rates from baseline rates. •
Forecasted balance sheet, as well as modeled
prepayment and reinvestment behavior, but do not
include assumptions about actions that could be
taken by the Firm or its clients and customers
in response to any such instantaneous rate
changes. Mortgage prepayment assumptions are
based on the interest rates used in the
scenarios compared with underlying contractual
rates, the time since origination, and other
factors which are updated periodically based on
historical experience. • The pricing sensitivity
of deposits, known as deposit betas, represent
the amount by which deposit rates paid could
change upon a given change in market interest
rates over the cycle. The deposit rates paid in
these scenarios may differ from actual deposit
rates paid, due to repricing lags and other
factors. The Firm’s earnings-at-risk scenarios
are periodically evaluated and enhanced in
response to changes in the composition of the
Firm’s balance sheet, changes in market
conditions, improvements in the Firm’s
simulation and other factors. While a relevant
measure of the Firm’s interest rate exposure,
the earnings at risk analysis does not represent
a forecast of the Firm’s net interest income
(Refer to Outlook on page 49 for additional
information) .
The Firm’s U.S. dollar sensitivities are
presented in the table below.
 December 31, 
 (in billions) 
 Parallel shift: 2020 2019 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 +100 bps shift in rates $ 6.9 $ 0.3 
 Steeper yield curve: 
 +100 bps shift in long-term rates 2.4 1.2 
 Flatter yield curve: 
 +100 bps shift in short-term rates 4.5 -0.9 
The change in the Firm’s U.S. dollar
sensitivities as of December 31, 2020 compared
to December 31, 2019 reflected updates to the
Firm’s baseline for lower short-term and long-
term rates as well as the impact of changes in
the Firm’s balance sheet. In addition, during
the fourth quarter of 2020 as part of the Firm’s
continuous evaluation and periodic enhancement
to its earnings-at-risk calculations, the Firm
updated the deposit rates paid betas for
consumer deposit products based upon observed
pricing during the most recent economic cycle.
In the absence of this update, the Firm’s U.S.
dollar sensitivities as of December 31, 2020
would have been lower by $2.0 billion to the
+100bps shift in short-term and parallel rate
scenarios. The Firm’s sensitivity to rates is
primarily a result of assets repricing at a
faster pace than deposits. Based upon current
and implied market rates as of December 31,
2020, scenarios reflecting lower rates could
result in negative interest rates. The U.S. has
never experienced an interest rate environment
where the Federal Reserve has a negative
interest rate policy. While the impact of
negative interest rates on the Firm's earnings-
at-risk would vary by scenario, a parallel shift
downward of up to 100bps would negatively impact
net interest income. In a negative interest rate
environment, the modeling assumptions used for
certain assets and liabilities require
additional management judgment and therefore,
the actual outcomes may differ from these
assumptions. The Firm’s non-U.S. dollar
sensitivities are presented in the table below.
 December 31, 
 (in billions) 
 Parallel shift: 2020 2019 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 +100 bps shift in rates $ 0.9 $ 0.5 
 Flatter yield curve: 
 +100 bps shift in short-term rates 0.8 0.5 
The results of the non-U.S. dollar interest rate
scenario involving a steeper yield curve with
long-term rates rising by 100 basis points and
short-term rates staying at current levels were
not material to the Firm’s earnings-at-risk at
December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 141 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 Non-U.S. dollar foreign exchange risk 
Non-U.S. dollar FX risk is the risk that changes in foreign exchange rates affect the value of the
Firm’s assets or liabilities or future results. The Firm has structural non-U.S. dollar FX exposures
arising from capital investments, forecasted expense and revenue, the investment securities portfolio
and non-U.S. dollar-denominated debt issuance. Treasury and CIO, working in partnership with the
LOBs, primarily manage these risks on behalf of the Firm. Treasury and CIO may hedge certain of these
risks using derivatives.
 Other sensitivity-based measures 
The Firm quantifies the market risk of certain debt and equity and funding activities by assessing
the potential impact on net revenue, other comprehensive income (“OCI”) and noninterest expense due
to changes in relevant market variables. Refer to the table Predominant business activities that give
rise to market risk on page 136 for additional information on the positions captured in other
sensitivity-based measures.
The table below represents the potential impact to net revenue, OCI or noninterest expense for market
risk sensitive instruments that are not included in VaR or earnings-at-risk. Where appropriate,
instruments used for hedging purposes are reported net of the positions being hedged. The
sensitivities disclosed in the table below may not be representative of the actual gain or loss that
would have been realized at December 31, 2020 and 2019, as the movement in market parameters across
maturities may vary and are not intended to imply management’s expectation of future changes in these
sensitivities.
 Year 
 ended 
 Decemb… 
 31, 
 Gain/(… 
 millio… Sensit… 
 Activi… Descrip… measure 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Debt 
 and 
 equity… 
 Consists 
 of seed 
 capital 
 and 
 related 
 hedges; 10% 
 Asset fund decline 
 Manage… co-inve… in $ -48 $ -68 
 activi… and market 
 certain value 
 deferred 
 compens… 
 and 
 related 
 hedges(… 
 Consists 
 of 
 certain 
 asset-b… 
 fair 
 value 
 option 10% 
 Other elected decline 
 debt loans, in -919 -867 -e 
 and private… market 
 equity held value 
 equity 
 and 
 other 
 investm… 
 held at 
 fair 
 value(b) 
 Funding 
 activi… 
 Represe… 
 the 
 basis 
 risk on 1 basis 
 derivat… point 
 Non-USD used to parall… 
 LTD hedge tighte… -16 -17 
 cross-… the of 
 basis foreign cross 
 exchange curren… 
 risk on basis 
 the 
 non-USD 
 LTD(d) 
 Primari… 
 represe… 
 Non-USD the 
 LTD foreign 
 hedges exchange 10% 
 foreign revalua… deprec… 13 15 
 curren… on the of 
 (“FX”) fair curren… 
 exposu… value of 
 the 
 derivat… 
 hedges(… 
 Impact 
 of 1 basis 
 Deriva… changes point 
 – in the parall… 
 funding spread increa… -4 -5 
 spread related in 
 risk to spread 
 derivat… 
 FVA(b) 
 Impact 
 Fair of 
 value changes 
 option in the 1 basis 
 elected spread point 
 liabil… related parall… 33 29 
 – to fair increa… 
 funding value in 
 spread option spread 
 risk elected 
 liabili… 
 DVA(d) 
 Interest 
 rate 
 sensiti… 
 Fair on fair 
 value value 1 basis 
 option option point 
 elected liabili… parall… 
 liabil… resulti… increa… -3 -2 
 –inter… from a in 
 rate change spread 
 sensit… in the 
 Firm’s 
 own 
 credit 
 spread(… 
 Interest 
 rate 
 sensiti… 
 related 
 to risk 
 managem… 1 basis 
 of point 
 changes parallel 
 in the increase 3 2 
 Firm’s in 
 own spread 
 credit 
 spread 
 on fair 
 value 
 option 
 liabili… 
(a) Excludes equity securities without readily determinable fair values that are measured under the
measurement alternative. Refer to Note 2 for additional information.
(b) Impact recognized through net revenue.
(c) In the second quarter of 2020, the Firm refined the approach for risk management of certain
deferred compensation, which is recognized through noninterest expense. As a result, certain deferred
compensation and related hedges are now included in other sensitivity-based measures.
(d) Impact recognized through OCI.
(e) Prior-period amount has been revised to conform with the current presentation. In the absence of
the scope refinement, Other debt and equity would have been $(203) million and $(192) million for the
periods ending December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Refer to Total VaR on page 138 for
additional information.
 142 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 COUNTRY RISK MANAGEMENT 
The Firm, through its LOBs and Corporate, may be
exposed to country risk resulting from
financial, economic, political or other
significant developments which adversely affect
the value of the Firm’s exposures related to a
particular country or set of countries. The
Country Risk Management group actively monitors
the various portfolios which may be impacted by
these developments and measures the extent to
which the Firm’s exposures are diversified given
the Firm’s strategy and risk tolerance relative
to a country.
 Organization and management 
Country Risk Management is an independent risk
management function that assesses, manages and
monitors country risk originated across the
Firm.
The Firm’s country risk management function
includes the following activities:
• Maintaining policies, procedures and standards
consistent with a comprehensive country risk
framework
• Assigning sovereign ratings, assessing country
risks and establishing risk tolerance relative
to a country
• Measuring and monitoring country risk exposure
and stress across the Firm
• Managing and approving country limits and
reporting trends and limit breaches to senior
management
• Developing surveillance tools, such as
signaling models and ratings indicators, for
early identification of potential country risk
concerns
• Providing country risk scenario analysis
 Sources and measurement 
The Firm is exposed to country risk through its
lending and deposits, investing, and market-
making activities, whether cross-border or
locally funded. Country exposure includes
activity with both government and private-sector
entities in a country.
Under the Firm’s internal country risk
management approach, attribution of exposure to
an individual country is based on the country
where the largest proportion of the assets of
the counterparty, issuer, obligor or guarantor
are located or where the largest proportion of
its revenue is derived, which may be different
than the domicile (i.e. legal residence) or
country of incorporation.
Individual country exposures reflect an
aggregation of the Firm’s risk to an immediate
default, with zero recovery, of the
counterparties, issuers, obligors or guarantors
attributed to that country. Activities which
result in contingent or indirect exposure to a
country are not included in the country exposure
measure (for exa mple, providing clearing
services or secondary exposure to collateral on
securities financing receivables).
Assumptions are sometimes required in
determining the measurement and allocation of
country exposure, particularly in the case of
certain non-linear or index products, or where
the nature of the counterparty, issuer,
obligor or guarantor is not suitable for
attribution to an individual country. The use of
different measurement approaches or assumptions
could affect the amount of reported country
exposure.
Under the Firm’s internal country risk
measurement framework:
• Lending exposures are measured at the total
committed amount (funded and unfunded), net of
the allowance for credit losses and eligible
cash and marketable securities collateral
received
• Deposits are measured as the cash balances
placed with central and commercial banks
• Securities financing exposures are measured at
their receivable balance, net of eligible
collateral received
• Debt and equity securities are measured at the
fair value of all positions, including both long
and short positions
• Counterparty exposure on derivative
receivables is measured at the derivative’s fair
value, net of the fair value of the eligible
collateral received
• Credit derivatives protection purchased and
sold is reported based on the underlying
reference entity and is measured at the notional
amount of protection purchased or sold, net of
the fair value of the recognized derivative
receivable or payable. Credit derivatives
protection purchased and sold in the Firm’s
market-making activities is measured on a net
basis, as such activities often result in
selling and purchasing protection related to the
same underlying reference entity; this reflects
the manner in which the Firm manages these
exposures
The Firm’s internal country risk reporting
differs from the reporting provided under the
FFIEC bank regulatory requirements. Refer to
Cross-border outstandings on page 318 of the
2020 Form 10-K for further information on the
FFIEC’s reporting methodology.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 143 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
Stress testing Stress testing is an important component of the Firm’s country risk management
framework, which aims to estimate and limit losses arising from a country crisis by measuring the
impact of adverse asset price movements to a country based on market shocks combined with
counterparty specific assumptions. Country Risk Management periodically designs and runs tailored
stress scenarios to test vulnerabilities to individual countries or sets of countries in response to
specific or potential market events, sector performance concerns, sovereign actions and geopolitical
risks. These tailored stress results are used to inform potential risk reduction across the Firm, as
necessary. COVID-19 Pandemic Country Risk Management continues to monitor the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic, leveraging existing stress testing, exposure reporting and controls, as well as tailored
analysis, to assess the extent to which individual countries may be adversely impacted. Risk
reporting Country exposure and stress are measured and reported regularly, and used by Country Risk
Management to identify trends, and monitor high usages and breaches against limits. For country risk
management purposes, the Firm may report exposure to jurisdictions that are not fully autonomous,
including Special Administrative Regions (“SAR”) and dependent territories, separately from the
independent sovereign states with which they are associated. The following table presents the Firm’s
top 20 exposures by country (excluding the U.S.) as of December 31, 2020, and their comparative
exposures as of December 31, 2019. The selection of countries represents the Firm’s largest total
exposures by individual country, based on the Firm’s internal country risk management approach, and
does not represent the Firm’s view of any actual or potentially adverse credit conditions. Country
exposures may fluct uate from period to period due to client activity and market flows. The overall
increase in top 20 exposures was largely driven by client activity and growth in client deposits,
relative to the period ending December 31, 2019. This resulted in an increase in cash placements with
the central banks of Germany and the United Kingdom.
 Top 20 
 count… 
 (excl… 
 the 
 U.S.)… 
 Decem… 
 31, Lending Trading 
 (in and and Total Total 
 billi… 2020 deposi… investi… Other(… exposure 2019(f) exposu… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Germa… $ 120.8 $ 5.8 $ 0.6 $ 127.2 $ 51.6 
 United 57.2 9.4 1.8 68.4 42.4 
 Kingd… 
 Japan 36.7 8.6 0.3 45.6 43.8 
 China 9.7 9.9 1.6 21.2 19.2 
 France 13.4 4.6 0.8 18.8 18.1 
 Switz… 14.7 0.5 3.5 18.7 18.3 
 Austr… 9.9 5.7 0.3 15.9 11.7 
 Canada 13.4 0.9 0.2 14.5 13.2 
 Luxem… 11.1 1.3 — 12.4 12.9 
 Brazil 4.2 6.6 — 10.8 7.2 
 India 3.9 5.1 1.5 10.5 11.3 
 South 5.4 4.3 0.4 10.1 6.4 
 Korea 
 Italy 4.7 4.7 0.3 9.7 6.8 
 Singa… 4.0 2.7 2.0 8.7 6.8 
 Nethe… 5.4 0.1 2.2 7.7 5.8 
 Hong 
 Kong 3.7 1.9 0.6 6.2 5.1 
 SAR 
 Spain 4.1 1.6 0.1 5.8 5.8 
 Saudi 4.9 0.9 — 5.8 5.2 
 Arabia 
 Mexico 3.9 1.0 — 4.9 4.7 
 Sweden 5.4 -1.1 — 4.3 1.1 
(a) Country exposures presented in the table
reflect 90% and 87% of total Firmwide non-U.S.
exposure, where exposure is attributed to an
individual country, at December 31, 2020 and
2019, respectively. (b) In the fourth quarter of
2020, Country Risk Management determined that
the exposure for certain commodities contracts
corresponds to an EU-wide risk and should not be
attributed to the individual country of
registration, previously the Netherlands. As
such, the exposure is no longer included and the
prior-period amount has been revised to conform
with the current presentation. (c) Lending and
deposits includes loans and accrued interest
receivable, lending-related commitments (net of
eligible collateral and the allowance for credit
losses), deposits with banks (including central
banks), acceptances, other monetary assets, and
issued letters of credit net of participations.
Excludes intra-day and operating exposures, such
as those from settlement and clearing
activities. (d) Includes market-making
inventory, Investment securities, and
counterparty exposure on derivative and
securities financings net of eligible collateral
and hedging. Includes exposure from single
reference entity (“single-name”), index and
other multiple reference entity transactions for
which one or more of the underlying reference
entities is in a country listed in the above
table. (e) Predominantly includes physical
commodity inventory. (f) The country rankings
presented in the table as of December 31, 2019,
are based on the country rankings of the
corresponding exposures at December 31, 2020 ,
not actual rankings of such exposures at
December 31, 2019.
 144 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 OPERATIONAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
Operational risk is the risk of an adverse
outcome resulting from inadequate or failed
internal processes or systems; human factors; or
external events impacting the Firm’s processes
or systems; Operational Risk includes
compliance, conduct, legal, and estimations and
model risk. Operational risk is inherent in the
Firm’s activities and can manifest itself in
various ways, including fraudulent acts,
business interruptions, cyber attacks,
inappropriate employee behavior, failure to
comply with applicable laws and regulations or
failure of vendors to perform in accordance with
their agreements. Operational Risk Management
attempts to manage operational risk at
appropriate levels in light of the Firm’s
financial position, the characteristics of its
businesses, and the markets and regulatory
environments in which it operates.
 Operational Risk Management Framework 
The Firm’s Compliance, Conduct, and Operational
Risk (“CCOR”) Management Framework is designed
to enable the Firm to govern, identify, measure,
monitor and test, manage and report on the
Firm’s operational risk.
Operational Risk Governance
The LOBs and Corporate are responsible for the
management of operational risk. The Control
Management Organization, which consists of
control managers within each LOB and Corporate,
is responsible for the day-to-day execution of
the CCOR Framework and the evaluation of the
effectiveness of their control environments to
determine where targeted remediation efforts may
be required.
The Firm’s Global Chief Compliance Officer
(“CCO”) and FRE for Operational Risk is
responsible for defining the CCOR Management
Framework and establishing minimum standards for
its execution. Operational Risk Officers
(“OROs”) report to both the LOB CROs and to the
FRE for Operational Risk, and are independent of
the respective businesses or functions they
oversee.
The Firm’s CCOR Management policy establishes
the CCOR Management Framework for the Firm. The
CCOR Management Framework is articulated in the
Risk Governance and Oversight Policy which is
reviewed and approved by the Board Risk
Committee periodically.
Operational Risk identification
The Firm utilizes a structured risk and control
self-assessment process that is executed by the
LOBs and Corporate. As part of this process, the
LOBs and Corporate evaluate the effectiveness of
their control environment to assess where
controls have failed, and to determine where
remediation efforts may be required. The Firm’s
Operational Risk and Compliance organization
(“Operational Risk and Compliance”) provides
oversight of these activities and may also
perform independent assessments of significant
operational risk events and areas of
concentrated or emerging risk.
Operational Risk Measurement
Operational Risk and Compliance performs
independent risk assessments of the Firm’s
operational risks, which includes assessing the
effectiveness of the control environment and
reporting the results to senior management.
In addition, operational risk measurement
includes operational risk-based capital and
operational risk loss projections under both
baseline and stressed conditions.
The primary component of the operational risk
capital estimate is the Loss Distribution
Approach (“LDA”) statistical model, which
simulates the frequency and severity of future
operational risk loss projections based on
historical data. The LDA model is used to
estimate an aggregate operational risk loss over
a one-year time horizon, at a 99.9% confidence
level. The LDA model incorporates actual
internal operational risk losses in the quarter
following the period in which those losses were
realized, and the calculation generally
continues to reflect such losses even after the
issues or business activities giving rise to the
losses have been remediated or reduced.
As required under the Basel III capital
framework, the Firm’s operational risk-based
capital methodology, which uses the Advanced
Measurement Approach (“AMA”), incorporates
internal and external losses as well as
management’s view of tail risk captured through
operational risk scenario analysis, and
evaluation of key business environment and
internal control metrics. The Firm does not
reflect the impact of insurance in its AMA
estimate of operational risk capital.
The Firm considers the impact of stressed
economic conditions on operational risk losses
and develops a forward looking view of material
operational risk events that may occur in a
stressed environment. The Firm’s operational
risk stress testing framework is utilized in
calculating results for the Firm’s CCAR and
other stress testing processes.
Refer to Capital Risk Management section, on
pages 91-101 for information related to
operational risk RWA, and CCAR.
Operational Risk Monitoring and testing
The results of risk assessments performed by
Operational Risk and Compliance are leveraged as
one of the key criteria in the independent
monitoring and testing of the LOBs and
Corporate’s compliance with laws and regulation.
Through monitoring and testing, Operational Risk
and Compliance independently identify areas of
operational risk and tests the effectiveness of
controls within the LOBs and Corporate.
Management of Operational Risk
The operational risk areas or issues identified
through monitoring and testing are escalated to
the LOBs and Corporate to be remediated through
action plans, as needed, to mitigate operational
risk. Operational Risk and
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 145 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
Compliance may advise the LOBs and Corporate in
the development and implementation of action
plans.
Operational Risk Reporting
Escalation of risks is a fundamental expectation
for employees at the Firm. Risks identified by
Operational Risk and Compliance are escalated to
the appropriate LOB and Corporate Control
Committees, as needed. Operational Risk and
Compliance has established standards to ensure
that consistent operational risk reporting and
operational risk reports are produced on a
Firmwide basis as well as by the LOBs and
Corporate. Reporting includes the evaluation of
key risk indicators and key performance
indicators against established thresholds as
well as the assessment of different types of
operational risk against stated risk appetite.
The standards reinforce escalation protocols to
senior management and to the Board of Directors.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Under the CCOR Management Framework, Operational
Risk and Compliance monitors and assesses
COVID-19 related legal and regulatory
developments associated with the Firm’s
financial products and services offered to
clients and customers as part of the existing
change management process. The Firm will
continue to review and assess the impact of the
pandemic on operational risk and implement
adequate measures as needed.
 Subcategories and examples of operational risks 
Operational risk can manifest itself in various
ways. Operational risk subcategories such as
Compliance risk, Conduct risk, Legal risk, and
Estimations and Model risk as well as other
operational risks, can lead to losses which are
captured through the Firm’s operational risk
measurement processes. Refer to pages 148, 149,
150 and 151, respectively for more information
on Compliance, Conduct, Legal, and Estimations
and Model risk. Details on other select examples
of operational risks are provided below.
Cybersecurity risk
Cybersecurity risk is the risk of the Firm’s
exposure to harm or loss resulting from misuse
or abuse of technology by malicious actors.
Cybersecurity risk is an important and
continuously evolving focus for the Firm.
Significant resources are devoted to protecting
and enhancing the security of computer systems,
software, networks and other technology assets.
The Firm’s security efforts are designed to
protect against, among other things,
cybersecurity attacks by unauthorized parties
attempting to obtain access to confidential
information, destroy data, disrupt or degrade
service, sabotage systems or cause other damage.
Ongoing business expansions may expose the Firm
to potential new threats as well as expanded
regulatory scrutiny including the introduction
of new cybersecurity requirements. The Firm
continues to make significant investments in
enhancing its cyber defense capabilities and to
strengthen its partnerships with the appropriate
government and law enforcement agencies and
other businesses in order to understand the full
spectrum of cybersecurity risks in the operating
environment, enhance defenses and improve
resiliency against cybersecurity
threats. The Firm actively participates in
discussions of cybersecurity risks with law
enforcement, government officials, peer and
industry groups, and has significantly increased
efforts to educate employees and certain clients
on the topic of cybersecurity risks.
Third parties with which the Firm does business
or that facilitate the Firm’s business
activities (e.g., vendors, supply chain,
exchanges, clearing houses, central
depositories, and financial intermediaries) are
also sources of cybersecurity risk to the Firm.
Third party cybersecurity incidents such as
system breakdowns or failures, misconduct by the
employees of such parties, or cyberattacks could
affect their ability to deliver a product or
service to the Firm or result in lost or
compromised information of the Firm or its
clients. Clients are also sources of
cybersecurity risk to the Firm, particularly
when their activities and systems are beyond the
Firm’s own security and control systems. As a
result, the Firm engages in regular and ongoing
discussions with certain vendors and clients
regarding cybersecurity risks and opportunities
to improve security. However, where
cybersecurity incidents occur as a result of
client failures to maintain the security of
their own systems and processes, clients are
responsible for losses incurred.
To protect the confidentiality, integrity and
availability of the Firm’s infrastructure,
resources and information, the Firm maintains a
cybersecurity program designed to prevent,
detect, and respond to cyberattacks. The Audit
Committee is updated periodically on the Firm’s
Information Security Program, recommended
changes, cybersecurity policies and practices,
ongoing efforts to improve security, as well as
its efforts regarding significant cybersecurity
events. In addition, the Firm has a
cybersecurity incident response plan (“IRP”)
designed to enable the Firm to respond to
attempted cybersecurity incidents, coordinate
such responses with law enforcement and other
government agencies, and notify clients and
customers, as applicable. Among other key focus
areas, the IRP is designed to mitigate the risk
of insider trading connected to a cybersecurity
incident, and includes various escalation
points. Due to the impact of COVID-19, the Firm
increased the use of remote access and also
video conferencing solutions provided by third
parties to facilitate remote work. As a result
the Firm took additional precautionary measures
to mitigate cybersecurity risks.
The Cybersecurity and Technology Control
functions are responsible for governance and
oversight of the Firm’s Information Security
Program. In partnership with the Firm’s LOBs and
Corporate, the Cybersecurity and Technology
Control organization identifies information
security risk issues and oversees programs for
the technological protection of the Firm’s
information resources including applications,
infrastructure as well as confidential and
personal information related to the Firm’s
customers. The Cybersecurity and Technology
organization consists of business aligned
information security managers that are supported
within the organization by the following
products that execute the Information Security
Program for the Firm:
• Cyber Defense & Fraud
 146 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
• Data Management, Protection & Privacy
• Identity & Access Management
• Governance & Controls
• Production Management & Resiliency
• Software & Platform Enablement
The Global Cybersecurity and Technology Control
governance structure is designed to identify,
escalate, and mitigate information security
risks. This structure uses key governance forums
to disseminate information and monitor
technology efforts. These forums are established
at multiple levels throughout the Firm and
include representatives from each LOB and
Corporate. Reports containing overviews of key
technology risks and efforts to enhance related
controls are produced for these forums, and are
reviewed by management at multiple levels. The
forums are used to escalate information security
risks or other matters as appropriate.
The IRM function provides oversight of the
activities designed to identify, assess,
measure, and mitigate cybersecurity risk.
The Firm’s Security Awareness Program includes
training that reinforces the Firm's Information
Technology Risk and Security Management
policies, standards and practices, as well as
the expectation that employees comply with these
policies. The Security Awareness Program engages
personnel through training on how to identify
potential cybersecurity risks and protect the
Firm’s resources and information. This training
is mandatory for all employees globally on a
periodic basis, and it is supplemented by
Firmwide testing initiatives, including periodic
phishing tests. Finally, the Firm’s Global
Privacy Program requires all employees to take
periodic awareness training on data privacy.
This privacy-focused training includes
information about confidentiality and security,
as well as responding to unauthorized access to
or use of information.
Business and technology resiliency risk
Business disruptions can occur due to forces
beyond the Firm’s control such as the spread of
infectious diseases or pandemics, severe
weather, power or telecommunications loss,
accidents, failure of a third party to provide
expected services, cyberattack, flooding,
transit strikes, terrorism, health emergencies.
The safety of the Firm’s employees and customers
is of the highest priority. The Firmwide
resiliency program is intended to enable the
Firm to recover its critical business functions
and supporting assets (i.e., staff, technology
and facilities) in the event of a business
interruption. The program includes governance,
awareness training, and testing of recovery
strategies, as well as strategic and tactical
initiatives to identify, assess, and manage
business interruption and public safety risks.
The strength and proficiency of the Firmwide
resiliency program has played an integral role
in maintaining the Firm’s business operations
during and after various events.
Payment fraud risk
Payment fraud risk is the risk of external and
internal parties unlawfully obtaining personal
monetary benefit through misdirected or
otherwise improper payment. The risk of payment
fraud remains at a heightened level across the
industry, particularly during the current
COVID-19 pandemic due to the use of contingent
forms of payment authentication methods, scams
involving the pandemic being perpetrated
including an increase in the level of fraud
attempts against consumers. The complexities of
these incidents and the strategies used by
perpetrators continue to evolve. The Firm
employs various controls for managing payment
fraud risk as well as providing employee and
client education and awareness trainings. The
Firm’s monitoring of customer behavior to detect
new fraud strategies is periodically evaluated
and enhanced in an effort to mitigate these
fraud risks.
Third-party outsourcing risk
The Firm‘s Third-Party Oversight (“TPO”) and
Inter-affiliates Oversight (“IAO”) framework
assist the LOBs and Corporate in selecting,
documenting, onboarding, monitoring and managing
their supplier relationships including services
provided by affiliates. The objectives of the
TPO framework are to hold suppliers to a high
level of operational performance and to mitigate
key risks including data loss and business
disruption. The Corporate Third-Party Oversight
group is responsible for Firmwide training,
monitoring, reporting and standards.
 Insurance 
One of the ways in which operational risk may be
mitigated is through insurance maintained by the
Firm. The Firm purchases insurance from
commercial insurers and maintains a wholly-owned
captive insurer, Park Assurance Company.
Insurance may also be required by third parties
with whom the Firm does business.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 147 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 COMPLIANCE RISK MANAGEMENT 
Compliance risk, a subcategory of operational
risk, is the risk of failing to comply with
laws, rules, regulations or codes of conduct and
standards of self-regulatory organizations.
 Overview 
Each LOB and Corporate hold primary ownership of
and accountability for managing compliance risk.
The Firm’s Operational Risk and Compliance
Organization (“Operational Risk and
Compliance”), which is independent of the LOBs
and Corporate, provides independent review,
monitoring and oversight of business operations
with a focus on compliance with the laws, rules,
and regulations applicable to the delivery of
the Firm’s products and services to clients and
customers.
These compliance risks relate to a wide variety
of laws, rules and regulations depending on the
LOB and the jurisdiction, and include risks
related to financial products and services,
relationships and interactions with clients and
customers, and employee activities. For example,
compliance risks include those associated with
anti-money laundering compliance, trading
activities, market conduct, and complying with
the laws, rules, and regulations related to the
offering of products and services across
jurisdictional borders. Compliance risk is also
inherent in the Firm’s fiduciary activities,
including the failure to exercise the applicable
standard of care (such as the duties of loyalty
or care), to act in the best interest of clients
and customers or to treat clients and customers
fairly.
Other functions provide oversight of significant
regulatory obligations that are specific to
their respective areas of responsibility.
Operational Risk and Compliance implements
policies and standards designed to govern,
identify, measure, monitor and test, manage, and
report on compliance risk.
 Governance and oversight 
Operational Risk and Compliance is led by the
Firm’s Global CCO and FRE for Operational Risk.
The Firm maintains oversight and coordination of
its compliance risk through the implementation
of the CCOR Risk Management Framework. The
Firm’s CCO also provides regular updates to the
Audit Committee and t he Board Risk Committee.
In certain Special Purpose Committees of the
Board have previously been established to
oversee the Firm’s compliance with regulatory
Consent Orders.
Code of Conduct
The Firm has a Code of Conduct (the “Code”) that
sets forth the Firm’s expectation that employees
will conduct themselves with integrity at all
times and provides the principles that govern
employee conduct with clients, customers,
shareholders and one another, as well as with
the markets and communities in which the Firm
does business. The Code requires employees to
promptly report any potential or actual
violation of the Code, any internal Firm policy,
or any law or regulation applicable to the
Firm’s business. It also requires employees to
report any illegal conduct, or conduct that
violates the underlying principles of the Code,
by any of the Firm’s employees, clients,
customers, suppliers, contract workers, business
partners, or agents. All newly hired employees
are assigned Code training and current employees
are periodically assigned Code training on an
ongoing basis. Employees are required to affirm
their compliance with the Code periodically.
Employees can report any potential or actual
violations of the Code through the JPMC Conduct
Hotline by phone or the internet. The Hotline is
anonymous, except in certain non-U.S.
jurisdictions where laws prohibit anonymous
reporting, and is available at all times
globally, with translation services. It is
administered by an outside service provider. The
Code prohibits retaliation against anyone who
raises an issue or concern in good faith.
Periodically, the Audit Committee receives
reports on the Code of Conduct program.
 148 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 CONDUCT RISK MANAGEMENT 
Conduct risk, a subcategory of operational risk,
is the risk that any action or inaction by an
employee or employees could lead to unfair
client or customer outcomes, impact the
integrity of the markets in which the Firm
operates, or compromise the Firm’s reputation.
 Overview 
Each LOB and Corporate is accountable for
identifying and managing its conduct risk to
provide appropriate engagement, ownership and
sustainability of a culture consistent with the
Firm’s How We Do Business Principles (the
“Principles”). The Principles serve as a guide
for how employees are expected to conduct
themselves. With the Principles serving as a
guide, the Firm’s Code sets out the Firm’s
expectations for each employee and provides
information and resources to help e mployees
conduct business ethically and in compliance
with the laws everywhere the Firm operates.
Refer to Compliance Risk Management on page 148
for further discussion of the Code.
 Governance and oversight 
The Conduct Risk Program is governed by the CCOR
Management policy, which establishes the
framework for governance, identification,
measurement, monitoring and testing, management
and reporting conduct ris k in the Firm.
The Firm has a senior committee that provides
oversight of the Firm’s conduct initiatives to
develop a more holistic view of conduct risks
and to connect key programs across the Firm in
order to identify opportunities and emerging
areas of focus. This committee is responsible
for setting overall program direction for
strategic enhancements to the Firm's employee
conduct framework and review the consolidated
Firmwide Conduct Risk Appetite Assessment.
Conduct risk management encompasses various
aspects of people management practices
throughout the employee life cycle, including
recruiting, onboarding, training and
development, performance management, promotion
and compensation processes. Each LOB, Treasury
and CIO, and designated corporate functions
completes an assessment of conduct risk
periodically, reviews metrics and issues which
may involve conduct risk, and provides business
conduct training as appropriate.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 149 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 LEGAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
Legal risk, a subcategory of operational risk,
is the risk of loss primarily caused by the
actual or alleged failure to meet legal
obligations that arise from the rule of law in
jurisdictions in which the Firm operates,
agreements with clients and customers, and
products and services offered by the Firm.
 Overview 
The global Legal function (“Legal”) provides
legal services and advice to the Firm. Legal is
responsible for managing the Firm’s exposure to
legal risk by:
• managing actual and potential litigation and
enforcement matters, including internal reviews
and investigations related to such matters
• advising on products and services, including
contract negotiation and documentation
• advising on offering and marketing documents
and new business initiatives
• managing dispute resolution
• interpreting existing laws, rules and
regulations, and advising on changes to them
• advising on advocacy in connection with
contemplated and proposed laws, rules and
regulations, and
• providing legal advice to the LOBs, Corporate,
functions and the Board.
Legal selects, engages and manages outside
counsel for the Firm on all matters in which
outside counsel is engaged. In addition, Legal
advises the Firm’s Conflicts Office which
reviews the Firm’s wholesale transactions that
may have the potential to create conflicts of
interest for the Firm.
 Governance and oversight 
The Firm’s General Counsel reports to the CEO
and is a member of the Operating Committee, the
Firmwide Risk Committee and the Firmwide Control
Committee. The Firm’s General Counsel and other
members of Legal report on significant legal
matters to the Firm’s Board of Directors and to
the Audit Committee.
Legal serves on and advises various committees
and advises the Firm’s LOBs and Corporate on
potential reputation risk issues.
 150 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 ESTIMATIONS AND MODEL RISK MANAGEMENT 
Estimations and Model risk, a subcategory of
operational risk, is the potential for adverse
consequences from decisions based on incorrect
or misused estimation outputs.
The Firm uses models and other analytical and
judgment-based estimations across various
businesses and functions. The estimation methods
are of varying levels of sophistication and are
used for many purposes, such as the valuation of
positions and measurement of risk, assessing
regulatory capital requirements, conducting
stress testing, and making business decisions. A
dedicated independent function, Model Risk
Governance and Review (“MRGR”), defines and
governs the Firm’s policies relating to the
management of model risk and risks associated
with certain analytical and judgment-based
estimations, such as those used in risk
management, budget forecasting and capital
planning and analysis.
The governance of analytical and judgment-based
estimations within MRGR’s scope follows a
consistent approach to the approach used for
models, which is described in detail below.
Model risks are owned by the users of the models
within the Firm based on the specific purposes
of such models. Users and developers of models
are responsible for developing, implementing and
testing their models, as well as referring
models to the MRGR for review and approval. Once
models have been approved, model users and
developers are responsible for maintaining a
robust operating environment, and must monitor
and evaluate the performance of the models on an
ongoing basis. Model users and developers may
seek to enhance models in response to changes in
the portfolios and in product and market
developments, as well as to capture improvements
in available modeling techniques and systems
capabilities.
Models are tiered based on an internal standard
according to their complexity, the exposure
associated with the model and the Firm’s
reliance on the model. This tiering is subject
to the approval of the MRGR. In its review of a
model, the MRGR considers whether the model is
suitable for the specific purposes for which it
will be used. When reviewing a model, the MRGR
analyzes and challenges the model methodology
and the reasonableness of model assumptions, and
may perform or require additional testing,
including back-testing of model outcomes. Model
reviews are approved by the appropriate level of
management within the MRGR based on the relevant
model tier.
Under the Firm’s Estimations and Model Risk
Management Policy, the MRGR reviews and approves
new models, as well as material changes to
existing models, prior to implementation in the
operating environment. In certain circumstances
exceptions may be granted to the Firm’s policy
to allow a model to be used prior to review or
approval. The MRGR may also require the user to
take appropriate actions to mitigate the model
risk if it is to be used in the interim. These
actions will depend on the model and may
include, for example, limitation of trading
activity.
While models are inherently imprecise, the
degree of imprecision or uncertainty can be
heightened by the market or economic
environment. This is particularly true when the
current and forecasted environment is
significantly different from the historical
macroeconomic environments upon which the models
were trained, as the Firm has experienced during
the COVID-19 pandemic. This uncertainty may
necessitate a greater degree of judgment and
analytics to inform adjustments to model outputs
than in typical periods.
Refer to Critical Accounting Estimates Used by
the Firm on pages 152-155 and Note 2 for a
summary of model-based valuations and other
valuation techniques.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 151 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES USED BY THE FIRM 
JPMorgan Chase’s accounting policies and use of
estimates are integral to understanding its
reported results. The Firm’s most complex
accounting estimates require management’s
judgment to ascertain the appropriate carrying
value of assets and liabilities. The Firm has
established policies and control procedures
intended to ensure that estimation methods,
including any judgments made as part of such
methods, are well-controlled, independently
reviewed and applied consistently from period to
period. The methods used and judgments made
reflect, among other factors, the nature of the
assets or liabilities and the related business
and risk management strategies, which may vary
across the Firm’s businesses and portfolios. In
addition, the policies and procedures are
intended to ensure that the process for changing
methodologies occurs in an appropriate manner.
The Firm believes its estimates for determining
the carrying value of its assets and liabilities
are appropriate. The following is a brief
description of the Firm’s critical accounting
estimates involving significant judgments.
 Allowance for credit losses 
The Firm’s allowance for credit losses
represents management’s estimate of expected
credit losses over the remaining expected life
of the Firm’s financial assets measured at
amortized cost and certain off-balance sheet
lending-related commitments. The allowance for
credit losses comprises:
• The allowance for loan losses, which covers
the Firm’s retained loan portfolios (scored and
risk-rated),
• The allowance for lending-related commitments,
and
• The allowance for credit losses on investment
securities, which covers the Firm’s HTM and AFS
securities.
The allowance for credit losses involves
significant judgment on a number of matters
including development and weighting of
macroeconomic forecasts, incorporation of
historical loss experience, assessment of risk
characteristics, assignment of risk ratings,
valuation of collateral, and the determination
of remaining expected life. Refer to Note 10 and
Note 13 for further information on these
judgments as well as the Firm’s policies and
methodologies used to determine the Firm’s
allowance for credit losses.
One of the most significant judgments involved
in estimating the Firm’s allowance for credit
losses relates to the macroeconomic forecasts
used to estimate credit losses over the eight-
quarter forecast period within the Firm’s
methodology. The eight-quarter forecast
incorporates hundreds of macroeconomic variables
(“MEVs”) that are relevant for exposures across
the Firm, with modeled credit losses being
driven primarily by a subset of less than twenty
variables. The specific variables that have the
greatest effect on the modeled losses of each
portfolio vary by portfolio and geography.
• Key MEVs for the consumer portfolio include
U.S. unemployment, house price index (“HPI”) and
U.S. real gross domestic product (“GDP”).
• Key MEVs for the wholesale portfolio include
U.S. real GDP, U.S. unemployment, U.S. equity
prices, corporate credit spreads, oil prices,
commercial real estate prices and HPI.
Changes in the Firm’s assumptions and forecasts
of economic conditions could significantly
affect its estimate of expected credit losses in
the portfolio at the balance sheet date or lead
to significant changes in the estimate from one
reporting period to the next.
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in a weak
labor market and weak overall economic
conditions that will continue to affect
borrowers across the Firm’s consumer and
wholesale lending portfolios. Significant
judgment is required to estimate the severity
and duration of the current economic downturn,
as well as its potential impact on borrower
defaults and loss severities. In particular,
macroeconomic conditions and forecasts regarding
the duration and severity of the economic
downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have
been rapidly changing and remain highly
uncertain. It is difficult to predict exactly
how borrower behavior will be impacted by these
changes in economic conditions. The
effectiveness of government support, customer
assistance and enhanced unemployment benefits
should act as mitigants to credit losses, but
the extent of the mitigation impact remains
uncertain.
It is difficult to estimate how potential
changes in any one factor or input might affect
the overall allowance for credit losses because
management considers a wide variety of factors
and inputs in estimating the allowance for
credit losses. Changes in the factors and inputs
considered may not occur at the same rate and
may not be consistent across all geographies or
product types, and changes in factors and inputs
may be directionally inconsistent, such that
improvement in one factor or input may offset
deterioration in others.
To consider the impact of a hypothetical
alternate macroeconomic forecast, the Firm
compared the modeled credit losses determined
using its central and relative adverse
macroeconomic scenarios, which are two of the
five scenarios considered in estimating the
allowances for loan losses and lending-related
commitments. The central and relative adverse
scenarios each included a full suite of MEVs,
but differed in the levels, paths and
peaks/troughs of those variables over the eight-
quarter forecast period.
For example, compared to the Firm’s central
scenario described on page 132 and in Note 13,
the Firm’s relative adverse scenario assumes a
significantly elevated U.S. unemployment rate
throughout 2021, averaging 3.0% higher over the
eight-quarter forecast, with a peak difference
of approximately 4.0% in the second quarter of
2021; lower U.S. real GDP with a slower
recovery,
 152 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
remaining nearly 2.6% lower at the end of the
eight-quarter forecast, with a peak difference
of nearly 4.1% in the third quarter of 2021; and
a 10.1% further deterioration in the national
HPI with a trough in the first quarter of 2022.
This analysis is not intended to estimate
expected future changes in the allowance for
credit losses, for a number of reasons,
including: • the Firm has placed significant
weight on its adverse scenarios in estimating
its allowance for credit losses as of December
31, 2020 , and accordingly, the existing
allowance already reflects credit losses beyond
those estimated under the central scenario • the
impacts of changes in many MEVs are both
interrelated and nonlinear, so the results of
this analysis cannot be simply extrapolated for
more severe changes in macroeconomic variables •
the COVID-19 pandemic has stressed many MEVs at
a speed and to degrees not seen in recent
history, adding significantly higher degrees of
uncertainty around modeled credit loss
estimations • significant changes in the
expected severity and duration of the economic
downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the
effects of government support and customer
assistance, and the speed of the subsequent
recovery could significantly affect the Firm’s
estimate of expected credit losses irrespective
of the estimated sensitivities described below.
Without considering the additional weight the
Firm has placed on its adverse scenarios or any
other offsetting or correlated effects in other
qualitative components of the Firm’s allowance
for credit losses for the lending exposures
noted below, the difference between the modeled
estimates under the Firm’s relative adverse and
central scenarios at December 31, 2020 would
result in the following: • An increase of
approximately $700 million for residential real
estate loans and lending-related commitments •
An increase of approximately $5.1 billion for
credit card loans • An increase of approximately
$2.8 billion for wholesale loans and lending-
related commitments This analysis relates only
to the modeled credit loss estimates and is not
intended to estimate changes in the overall
allowance for credit losses as it does not
reflect any potential changes in other
adjustments to the quantitative calculation,
which would also be influenced by the judgment
management applies to the modeled lifetime loss
estimates to reflect the uncertainty and
imprecision of these modeled lifetime loss
estimates based on then-current circumstances
and conditions. Recognizing that forecasts of
macroeconomic conditions are inherently
uncertain, particularly in light of the recent
economic conditions, the Firm believes that its
process to consider the available information
and associated risks and
uncertainties is appropriately governed and that
its estimates of expected credit losses were
reasonable and appropriate for the period ended
December 31, 2020 . Fair value JPMorgan Chase
carries a portion of its assets and liabilities
at fair value. The majority of such assets and
liabilities are measured at fair value on a
recurring basis, including, derivatives and
structured note products. Certain assets and
liabilities are measured at fair value on a
nonrecurring basis, including certain mortgage,
home equity and other loans, where the carrying
value is based on the fair value of the
underlying collateral. Assets measured at fair
value The following table includes the Firm’s
assets measured at fair value and the portion of
such assets that are classified within level 3
of the valuation hierarchy. Refer to Note 2 for
further information.
 December 31, 2020 Total assets at 
 (in billions, except ratios) fair value Total level 3 assets 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Federal Funds sold and securities $ 238.0 $ — 
 purchased under resale agreements 
 Securities borrowed 53.0 — 
 Trading assets: 
 Trading debt and equity instruments $ 423.5 $ 2.6 
 Derivative receivables(a) 79.6 7.7 
 Total trading assets 503.1 10.3 
 AFS securities 388.2 — 
 Loans 44.5 2.3 
 MSRs 3.3 3.3 
 Other 304.1 0.5 
 Total assets measuredat fair value on a 1,243.2 16.4 
 recurring basis 
 Total assets measured at fair value on a 3.6 2.0 
 nonrecurring basis 
 Total assets measuredat fair value $ 1,246.8 $ 18.4 
 Total Firm assets $ 3,386.1 
 Level 3 assets at fair value as a 0.5 % 
 percentage of total Firm assets(a) 
 Level 3 assets at fair value as a 
 percentage of total Firm assets at fair 1.5 % 
 value(a) 
(a) For purposes of the table above, the
derivative receivables total reflects the impact
of netting adjustments; however, the $7.7
billion of derivative receivables classified as
level 3 does not reflect the netting adjustment
as such netting is not relevant to a
presentation based on the transparency of inputs
to the valuation of an asset. The level 3
balances would be reduced if netting were
applied, including the netting benefit
associated with cash collateral. Valuation
Details of the Firm’s processes for determining
fair value are set out in Note 2. Estimating
fair value requires the application of judgment.
The type and level of judgment required is
largely dependent on the amount of observable
market information available to the Firm. For
instruments valued using internally developed
valuation models and other valuation techniques
that use significant unobservable inputs and are
therefore classified within level 3 of the
valuation hierarchy, judgments used to estimate
fair value are more significant than those
required when estimating the fair value of
instruments classified within levels 1 and 2.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 153 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
In arriving at an estimate of fair value for an
instrument within level 3, management must first
determine the appropriate valuation model or
other valuation technique to use. Second, the
lack of observability of certain significant
inputs requires management to assess all
relevant empirical data in deriving valuation
inputs including, for example, transaction
details, yield curves, interest rates,
prepayment speed, default rates, volatilities,
correlations, prices (such as commodity, equity
or debt prices), valuations of comparable
instruments, foreign exchange rates and credit
curves. Refer to Note 2 for a further discussion
of the valuation of level 3 instruments,
including unobservable inputs used.
For instruments classified in levels 2 and 3,
management judgment must be applied to assess
the appropriate level of valuation adjustments
to reflect counterparty credit quality, the
Firm’s creditworthiness, market funding rates,
liquidity considerations, unobservable
parameters, and for portfolios that meet
specified criteria, the size of the net open
risk position. The judgments made are typically
affected by the type of product and its specific
contractual terms, and the level of liquidity
for the product or within the market as a whole.
In periods of heightened market volatility and
uncertainty judgments are further affected by
the wider variation of reasonable valuation
estimates, particularly for positions that are
less liquid. Refer to Note 2 for a further
discussion of valuation adjustments applied by
the Firm.
Imprecision in estimating unobservable market
inputs or other factors can affect the amount of
gain or loss recorded for a particular position.
Furthermore, while the Firm believes its
valuation methods are appropriate and consistent
with those of other market participants, the
methods and assumptions used reflect management
judgment and may vary across the Firm’s
businesses and portfolios.
The Firm uses various methodologies and
assumptions in the determination of fair value.
The use of methodologies or assumptions
different than those used by the Firm could
result in a different estimate of fair value at
the reporting date. Refer to Note 2 for a
detailed discussion of the Firm’s valuation
process and hierarchy, and its determination of
fair value for individual financial instruments.
 Goodwill impairment 
Under U.S. GAAP, goodwill must be allocated to
reporting units and tested for impairment at
least annually. The Firm’s process and
methodology used to conduct goodwill impairment
testing is described in Note 15.
Management applies significant judgment when
testing goodwill for impairment. The goodwill
associated with each business combination is
allocated to the related reporting units for
goodwill impairment testing.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Firm
reviewed current economic conditions, including
the potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic
on business performance, estimated market cost
of equity, as well as actual business results
and projections of business
performance for all its reporting units. The
Firm has concluded that the goodwill allocated
to its reporting units was not impaired as of
December 31, 2020. The fair values of these
reporting units exceeded their carrying values
by at least 15% and did not indicate a
significant risk of goodwill impairment based on
current projections and valuations.
The projections for all of the Firm’s reporting
units are consistent with management’s current
business outlook assumptions in the short term,
and the Firm’s best estimates of long-term
growth and return on equity in the longer term.
Where possible, the Firm uses third-party and
peer data to benchmark its assumptions and
estimates.
Refer to Note 15 for additional information on
goodwill, including the goodwill impairment
assessment as of December 31, 2020.
 Credit card rewards liability 
JPMorgan Chase offers credit cards with various
rewards programs which allow cardholders to earn
rewards points based on their account activity
and the terms and conditions of the rewards
program. Generally, there are no limits on the
points that an eligible cardholder can earn, nor
do the points expire, and the points can be
redeemed for a variety of rewards, including
cash (predominantly in the form of account
credits), gift cards and travel. The Firm
maintains a rewards liability which represents
the estimated cost of rewards points earned and
expected to be redeemed by cardholders. The
liability is accrued as the cardholder earns the
benefit and is reduced when the cardholder
redeems points. This liability was $7.7 billion
and $6.4 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019,
respectively, and is recorded in accounts
payable and other liabilities on the
Consolidated balance sheets.
The rewards liability is sensitive to redemption
rate (“RR”) and cost per point (“CPP”)
assumptions. The RR assumption is used to
estimate the number of points earned by
customers that will be redeemed over the life of
the account. The CPP assumption is used to
estimate the cost of future point redemptions.
These assumptions are evaluated periodically
considering historical actuals and cardholder
redemption behavior and updates to them will
impact the rewards liability. As of December 31,
2020, a combined increase of 25 basis points in
RR and 1 basis point in CPP would increase the
rewards liability by approximately $215 million.
 Income taxes 
JPMorgan Chase is subject to the income tax laws
of the various jurisdictions in which it
operates, including U.S. federal, state and
local, and non-U.S. jurisdictions. These laws
are often complex and may be subject to
different interpretations. To determine the
financial statement impact of accounting for
income taxes, including the provision for income
tax expense and unrecognized tax benefits,
JPMorgan Chase must make assumptions and
judgments about how to interpret and apply these
complex tax laws to numerous transactions and
business events, as well as make judgments
regarding the timing of when
 154 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
certain items may affect taxable income in the
U.S. and non-U.S. tax jurisdictions.
JPMorgan Chase’s interpretations of tax laws
around the world are subject to review and
examination by the various taxing authorities in
the jurisdictions where the Firm operates, and
disputes may occur regarding its view on a tax
position. These disputes over interpretations
with the various taxing authorities may be
settled by audit, administrative appeals or
adjudication in the court systems of the tax
jurisdictions in which the Firm operates.
JPMorgan Chase regularly reviews whether it may
be assessed additional income taxes as a result
of the resolution of these matters, and the Firm
records additional reserves as appropriate. In
addition, the Firm may revise its estimate of
income taxes due to changes in income tax laws,
legal interpretations, and business strategies.
It is possible that revisions in the Firm’s
estimate of income taxes may materially affect
the Firm’s results of operations in any
reporting period.
The Firm’s provision for income taxes is
composed of current and deferred taxes. Deferred
taxes arise from differences between assets and
liabilities measured for financial reporting
versus income tax return purposes. Deferred tax
assets are recognized if, in management’s
judgment, their realizability is determined to
be more likely than not. The Firm has also
recognized deferred tax assets in connection
with certain tax attributes, including net
operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards and foreign
tax credit (“FTC”) carryforwards. The Firm
performs regular reviews to ascertain whether
its deferred tax assets are realizable. These
reviews include management’s estimates and
assumptions regarding future taxable income,
which also incorporates various tax planning
strategies, including strategies that may be
available to utilize NOLs before they expire. In
connection with these reviews, if it is
determined that a deferred tax asset is not
realizable, a valuation allowance is
established. The valuation allowance may be
reversed in a subsequent reporting period if the
Firm determines that, based on revised estimates
of future taxable income or changes in tax
planning strategies, it is more likely than not
that all or part of the deferred tax asset will
become realizable. As of December 31, 2020,
management has determined it is more likely than
not that the Firm will realize its deferred tax
assets, net of the existing valuation allowance.
The Firm adjusts its unrecognized tax benefits
as necessary when additional information becomes
available. Uncertain tax positions that meet the
more-likely-than-not recognition threshold are
measured to determine the amount of benefit to
recognize. An uncertain tax position is measured
at the largest amount of benefit that management
believes is more likely than not to be realized
upon settlement. It is possible that the
reassessment of JPMorgan Chase’s unrecognized
tax benefits may have a material impact on its
effective income tax rate in the period in which
the reassessment occurs.
Refer to Note 25 for additional information on
income taxes.
 Litigation reserves 
Refer to Note 30 for a description of the
significant estimates and judgments associated
with establishing litigation reserves.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 155 
 Management’s discussion and analysis 
 ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING DEVELOPMENTS 
 Financial Accounting 
 Standards Board 
 (“FASB”) Standards Adopted 
 since January 
 1, 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Standard Summary of guidance Effects on financial 
 statements 
 •Establishes a single 
 allowance framework for all 
 financial assets measured at 
 amortized cost and certain 
 off-balance sheet credit 
 exposures. This framework 
 requires that management’s 
 estimate reflects credit 
 losses over the instrument’s 
 remaining expected life and 
 considers expected future 
 changes in macroeconomic 
 conditions. 
 •Eliminates existing guidance 
 for PCI loans, and requires 
 recognition of the 
 nonaccretable difference as an 
 increase to the allowance for 
 expected credit losses on 
 financial assets purchased 
 with more than insignificant 
 Financial Instruments - credit deterioration since •Adopted January 1, 2020. 
 Credit Losses (“CECL”) origination, with a •Refer to Note 1 for further 
 Issued June 2016 corresponding increase in the information. 
 amortized cost of the related 
 loans. 
 •Requires inclusion of 
 expected recoveries, limited 
 to the cumulative amount of 
 prior writeoffs, when 
 estimating the allowance for 
 credit losses for in scope 
 financial assets (including 
 collateral-dependent assets). 
 •Amends existing impairment 
 guidance for AFS securities to 
 incorporate an allowance, 
 which will allow for reversals 
 of credit impairments in the 
 event that the credit of an 
 issuer improves. 
 •Requires a cumulative-effect 
 adjustment to retained 
 earnings as of the beginning 
 of the reporting period of 
 adoption. 
 •Requires recognition of an 
 impairment loss when the 
 estimated fair value of a •Adopted January 1, 2020. 
 reporting unit falls below its •No impact upon adoption as 
 Goodwill carrying value. the guidance was applied 
 Issued January 2017 •Eliminates the requirement prospectively. 
 that an impairment loss be •Refer to Note 15 for further 
 recognized only if the information. 
 estimated implied fair value 
 of the goodwill is below its 
 carrying value. 
 •Provides optional expedients 
 and exceptions to current 
 accounting guidance when 
 financial instruments, hedge 
 accounting relationships, and 
 other transactions are amended 
 due to reference rate reform. 
 •Provides an election to 
 account for certain contract •Issued and effective March 
 amendments related to 12, 2020. The January 7, 2021 
 reference rate reform as update was effective when 
 modifications rather than issued. 
 extinguishments without the •The Firm elected to apply 
 requirement to assess the certain of the practical 
 significance of the expedients related to contract 
 amendments. modifications and hedge 
 •Allows for changes in accounting relationships, and 
 critical terms of a hedge discounting transition 
 Reference Rate accounting relationship beginning in the third quarter 
 Reform without automatic termination of 2020. The discounting 
 Issued March of that relationship. Provides transition election was 
 2020 and updated January 2021 various practical expedients applied retrospectively. The 
 and elections designed to main purpose of the practical 
 allow hedge accounting to expedients is to ease the 
 continue uninterrupted during administrative burden of 
 the transition period. accounting for contracts 
 •Provides a one-time election impacted by reference rate 
 to transfer securities out of reform, and these elections 
 the held-to-maturity did not have a material impact 
 classification if certain on the Consolidated Financial 
 criteria are met. Statements. 
 •The January 2021 update 
 provides an election to 
 account for derivatives 
 modified to change the rate 
 used for discounting, 
 margining, or contract price 
 alignment (collectively 
 “discounting transition”) as 
 modifications. 
 156 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS 
From time to time, the Firm has made and will
make forward-looking statements. These
statements can be identified by the fact that
they do not relate strictly to historical or
current facts. Forward-looking statements often
use words such as “anticipate,” “target,”
“expect,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan,” “goal,”
“believe,” or other words of similar meaning.
Forward-looking statements provide JPMorgan
Chase’s current expectations or forecasts of
future events, circumstances, results or
aspirations. JPMorgan Chase’s disclosures in
this 2020 Form 10-K contain forward-looking
statements within the meaning of the Private
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The
Firm also may make forward-looking statements in
its other documents filed or furnished with the
SEC. In addition, the Firm’s senior management
may make forward-looking statements orally to
investors, analysts, representatives of the
media and others.
All forward-looking statements are, by their
nature, subject to risks and uncertainties, many
of which are beyond the Firm’s control. JPMorgan
Chase’s actual future results may differ
materially from those set forth in its forward-
looking statements. While there is no assurance
that any list of risks and uncertainties or risk
factors is complete, below are certain factors
which could cause actual results to differ from
those in the forward-looking statements:
• Economic, financial, reputational and other
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic;
• Local, regional and global business, economic
and political conditions and geopolitical
events;
• Changes in laws and regulatory requirements,
including capital and liquidity requirements
affecting the Firm’s businesses, and the ability
of the Firm to address those requirements;
• Heightened regulatory and governmental
oversight and scrutiny of JPMorgan Chase’s
business practices, including dealings with
retail customers;
• Changes in trade, monetary and fiscal policies
and laws;
• Changes in income tax laws and regulations;
• Securities and capital markets behavior,
including changes in market liquidity and
volatility;
• Changes in investor sentiment or consumer
spending or savings behavior;
• Ability of the Firm to manage effectively its
capital and liquidity;
• Changes in credit ratings assigned to the Firm
or its subsidiaries;
• Damage to the Firm’s reputation;
• Ability of the Firm to appropriately address
social, environmental and sustainability
concerns that may arise, including from its
business activities;
• Ability of the Firm to deal effectively with
an economic slowdown or other economic or market
disruption, including, but not limited to, in
the interest rate environment;
• Technology changes instituted by the Firm, its
counterparties or competitors;
• The effectiveness of the Firm’s control
agenda;
• Ability of the Firm to develop or discontinue
products and services, and the extent to which
products or services previously sold by the Firm
require the Firm to incur liabilities or absorb
losses not contemplated at their initiation or
origination;
• Acceptance of the Firm’s new and existing
products and services by the marketplace and the
ability of the Firm to innovate and to increase
market share;
• Ability of the Firm to attract and retain
qualified and diverse employees;
• Ability of the Firm to control expenses;
• Competitive pressures;
• Changes in the credit quality of the Firm’s
clients, customers and counterparties;
• Adequacy of the Firm’s risk management
framework, disclosure controls and procedures
and internal control over financial reporting;
• Adverse judicial or regulatory proceedings;
• Changes in applicable accounting policies,
including the introduction of new accounting
standards;
• Ability of the Firm to determine accurate
values of certain assets and liabilities;
• Occurrence of natural or man-made disasters or
calamities, including health emergencies, the
spread of infectious diseases, pandemics or
outbreaks of hostilities, or the effects of
climate change, and the Firm’s ability to deal
effectively with disruptions caused by the
foregoing;
• Ability of the Firm to maintain the security
of its financial, accounting, technology, data
processing and other operational systems and
facilities;
• Ability of the Firm to withstand disruptions
that may be caused by any failure of its
operational systems or those of third parties;
• Ability of the Firm to effectively defend
itself against cyber attacks and other attempts
by unauthorized parties to access information of
the Firm or its customers or to disrupt the
Firm’s systems; and
• The other risks and uncertainties detailed in
Part I, Item 1A: Risk Factors in JPMorgan
Chase’s 2020 Form 10-K.
Any forward-looking statements made by or on
behalf of the Firm speak only as of the date
they are made, and JPMorgan Chase does not
undertake to update any forward-looking
statements. The reader should, however, consult
any further disclosures of a forward-looking
nature the Firm may make in any subsequent Form
10-Ks, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Qs, or
Current Reports on Form 8-K.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 157 
Management’s report on internal control over
financial reporting
Management of JPMorgan Chase & Co. (“JPMorgan
Chase” or the “Firm”) is responsible for
establishing and maintaining adequate internal
control over financial reporting. Internal
control over financial reporting is a process
designed by, or under the supervision of, the
Firm’s principal executive and principal
financial officers, or persons performing
similar functions, and effected by JPMorgan
Chase’s Board of Directors, management and other
personnel, to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United
States of America (“U.S. GAAP”).
JPMorgan Chase’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures
that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records,
that, in reasonable detail, accurately and
fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions
of the Firm’s assets; (2) provide reasonable
assurance that transactions are recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial
statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and
that receipts and expenditures of the Firm are
being made only in accordance with
authorizations of JPMorgan Chase’s management
and directors; and (3) provide reasonable
assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or
disposition of the Firm’s assets that could have
a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal
control over financial reporting may not prevent
or detect misstatements. Also, projections of
any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls
may become inadequate because of changes in
conditions, or that the degree of compliance
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Management has completed an assessment of the
effectiveness of the Firm’s internal control
over financial reporting as of December 31,
2020. In making the assessment, management used
the “Internal Control — Integrated Framework”
(“COSO 2013”) promulgated by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission (“COSO”).
Based upon the assessment performed, management
concluded that as of December 31, 2020, JPMorgan
Chase’s internal control over financial
reporting was effective based upon the COSO 2013
framework. Additionally, based upon management’s
assessment, the Firm determined that there were
no material weaknesses in its internal control
over financial reporting as of December 31,
2020.
The effectiveness of the Firm’s internal control
over financial reporting as of December 31,
2020, has been audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers
LLP, an independent registered public accounting
firm, as stated in their report which appears
herein.
James Dimon
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Jennifer Piepszak
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial
Officer
February 23, 2021
 158 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of
JPMorgan Chase & Co.:
Opinions on the Financial Statements and
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the accompanying consolidated
balance sheets of JPMorgan Chase & Co. and its
subsidiaries (the “Firm”) as of December 31,
2020 and 2019, and the related consolidated
statements of income, comprehensive income,
changes in stockholders’ equity and cash flows
for each of the three years in the period ended
December 31, 2020, including the related notes
(collectively referred to as the “consolidated
financial statements”). We also have audited the
Firm’s internal control over financial reporting
as of December 31, 2020, based on criteria
established in Internal Control - Integrated
Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission (COSO).
In our opinion, the consolidated financial
statements referred to above present fairly, in
all material respects, the financial position of
the Firm as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and
the results of its operations and its cash flows
for each of the three years in the period ended
December 31, 2020 in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United
States of America. Also in our opinion, the Firm
maintained, in all material respects, effective
internal control over financial reporting as of
December 31, 2020, based on criteria established
in Internal Control – Integrated Framework
(2013) issued by the COSO.
Change in Accounting Principle
As discussed in Note 1 and Note 13 to the
consolidated financial statements, the Firm
changed the manner in which it accounts for
credit losses on certain financial instruments
in 2020.
 Basis for Opinions 
The Firm’s management is responsible for these
consolidated financial statements, for
maintaining effective internal control over
financial reporting, and for its assessment of
the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting, included in the
accompanying Management’s report on internal
control over financial reporting. Our
responsibility is to express opinions on the
Firm’s consolidated financial statements and on
the Firm’s internal control over financial
reporting based on our audits. We are a public
accounting firm registered with the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United
States) (PCAOB) and are required to be
independent with respect to the Firm in
accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws
and the applicable rules and regulations of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the
PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the
standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require
that we plan and
perform the audits to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the consolidated
financial statements are free of material
misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and
whether effective internal control over
financial reporting was maintained in all
material respects.
Our audits of the consolidated financial
statements included performing procedures to
assess the risks of material misstatement of the
consolidated financial statements, whether due
to error or fraud, and performing procedures
that respond to those risks. Such procedures
included examining, on a test basis, evidence
regarding the amounts and disclosures in the
consolidated financial statements. Our audits
also included evaluating the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made
by management, as well as evaluating the overall
presentation of the consolidated financial
statements. Our audit of internal control over
financial reporting included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial
reporting, assessing the risk that a material
weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the
design and operating effectiveness of internal
control based on the assessed risk. Our audits
also included performing such other procedures
as we considered necessary in the circumstances.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable
basis for our opinions.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control
over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial
reporting is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability
of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles. A company’s internal control over
financial reporting includes those policies and
procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance
of records that, in reasonable detail,
accurately and fairly reflect the transactions
and dispositions of the assets of the company;
(ii) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles, and that receipts and expenditures
of the company are being made only in accordance
with authorizations of management and directors
of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable
assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or
disposition of the company’s assets that could
have a material effect on the financial
statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal
control over financial reporting may not prevent
or detect misstatements. Also, projections of
any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls
may become inadequate because of changes in
conditions, or that the degree of compliance
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
 PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP300 Madison AvenueNew 
 York, NY 10017 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 159 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 Critical Audit Matters 
The critical audit matters communicated below
are matters arising from the current period
audit of the consolidated financial statements
that were communicated or required to be
communicated to the audit committee and that:
(i) relate to accounts or disclosures that are
material to the consolidated financial
statements and (ii) involved our especially
challenging, subjective, or complex judgments.
The communication of critical audit matters does
not alter in any way our opinion on the
consolidated financial statements, taken as a
whole, and we are not, by communicating the
critical audit matters below, providing separate
opinions on the critical audit matters or on the
accounts or disclosures to which they relate.
Allowance for Loan Losses – Portfolio-based
component of Wholesale Loan and Credit Card Loan
Portfolios
As described in Note 13 to the consolidated
financial statements, the allowance for loan
losses for the portfolio-based component of the
wholesale and credit card loan portfolios was
$23.4 billion on total portfolio-based retained
loans of $653.4 billion at December 31, 2020.
The Firm’s allowance for loan losses represents
management’s estimate of expected credit losses
over the remaining expected life of the Firm's
loan portfolios and considers expected future
changes in macroeconomic conditions. The
portfolio-based component of the Firm’s
allowance for loan losses for the wholesale and
credit card retained loan portfolios begins with
a quantitative calculation of expected credit
losses over the expected life of the loan by
applying credit loss factors to the estimated
exposure at default. The credit loss factors
applied are determined based on the weighted
average of five internally developed
macroeconomic scenarios that take into
consideration the Firm's economic outlook as
derived through forecast macroeconomic
variables, the most significant of which are
U.S. unemployment and U.S. real gross domestic
product. This quantitative calculation is
further adjusted to take into consideration
model imprecision, emerging risk assessments,
trends and other subjective factors that are not
yet otherwise reflected in the credit loss
estimate.
The principal considerations for our
determination that performing procedures
relating to the allowance for loan losses for
the portfolio-based component of the wholesale
and credit card loan portfolios is a critical
audit matter are (i) the significant judgment
and estimation by management in the forecast of
macroeconomic variables, specifically U.S.
unemployment and U.S. real gross domestic
product, as the Firm’s forecasts of economic
conditions significantly affect its estimate of
expected credit losses at the balance sheet
date, (ii) the significant judgment and
estimation by management in determining the
quantitative calculation utilized in their
credit loss estimates and the adjustments to
take into consideration model imprecision,
emerging risk assessments, trends and other
subjective factors that are not yet otherwise
reflected in the credit loss estimate, which
both in turn led to a high degree of auditor
judgment, subjectivity and effort in performing
procedures and in evaluating audit evidence
obtained relating to the credit
loss estimates and the appropriateness of the
adjustments to the credit loss estimates, and
(iii) the audit effort involved professionals
with specialized skill and knowledge to assist
in evaluating the audit evidence.
Addressing the matter involved performing
procedures and evaluating audit evidence in
connection with forming our overall opinion on
the consolidated financial statements. These
procedures included testing the effectiveness of
controls relating to the Firm’s allowance for
loan losses, including controls over model
validation and generation of macroeconomic
scenarios. These procedures also included, among
others, testing management’s process for
estimating the allowance for loan losses, which
involved (i) evaluating the appropriateness of
the models and methodologies used in
quantitative calculations; (ii) evaluating the
reasonableness of forecasts of U.S. unemployment
and U.S. real gross domestic product; (iii)
testing the completeness and accuracy of data
used in the estimate; and (iv) evaluating the
reasonableness of management’s adjustments to
the quantitative output for the impacts of model
imprecision, emerging risk assessments, trends
and other subjective factors that are not yet
otherwise reflected in the credit loss estimate.
These procedures also included the use of
professionals with specialized skill and
knowledge to assist in evaluating the
appropriateness of certain models, methodologies
and macroeconomic variables .
Fair Value of Certain Level 3 Financial
Instruments
As described in Notes 2 and 3 to the
consolidated financial statements, the Firm
carries $1.2 trillion of its assets and $437.6
billion of its liabilities at fair value on a
recurring basis. Included in these balances are
$10.3 billion of trading assets and $41.5
billion of liabilities measured at fair value on
a recurring basis, collectively financial
instruments, which are classified as level 3 as
they contain one or more inputs to valuation
which are unobservable and significant to their
fair value measurement. The Firm utilized
internally developed valuation models and
unobservable inputs to estimate fair value of
the level 3 financial instruments. The
unobservable inputs used by management to
estimate the fair value of certain of these
financial instruments include forward equity
prices, volatility relating to interest rates
and equity prices and correlation relating to
interest rates, equity prices, credit and
foreign exchange rates.
The principal considerations for our
determination that performing procedures
relating to the fair value of certain level 3
financial instruments is a critical audit matter
are (i) the significant judgment and estimation
by management in determining the inputs to
estimate fair value, which in turn led to a high
degree of auditor judgment, subjectivity, and
effort in performing procedures related to the
fair value of these financial instruments, and
(ii) the audit effort involved professionals
with specialized skill and knowledge to assist
in evaluating the audit evidence obtained from
these procedures.
 160 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Report of Independent Registered Public
Accounting Firm
Addressing the matter involved performing
procedures and evaluating audit evidence in
connection with forming our overall opinion on
the consolidated financial statements. These
procedures included testing the effectiveness of
controls relating to the Firm’s processes for
determining fair value which include controls
over models, inputs, and data. These procedures
also included, among others, the involvement of
professionals with specialized skill and
knowledge to assist in developing an independent
estimate of fair value for a sample of these
financial instruments. Developing the
independent estimate involved testing the
completeness and accuracy of data provided by
management, developing independent inputs and,
as appropriate, evaluating and utilizing
management’s aforementioned unobservable inputs;
and comparing management’s estimate to the
independently developed estimate of fair value.
February 23, 2021
We have served as the Firm’s auditor since 1965.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 161 
 Consolidated statements of income 
 Year ended December 31, (in millions, 
 except per share data) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Revenue 
 Investment banking fees $ 9,486 $ 7,501 $ 7,550 
 Principal transactions 18,021 14,018 12,059 
 Lending- and deposit-related fees(a) 6,511 6,626 6,377 
 Asset management, administration and 18,177 16,908 16,793 
 commissions(a) 
 Investment securities gains/(losses) 802 258 -395 
 Mortgage fees and related income 3,091 2,036 1,254 
 Card income(b) 4,435 5,076 4,743 
 Other income 4,457 5,731 5,343 
 Noninterest revenue 64,980 58,154 53,724 
 Interest income 64,523 84,040 76,100 
 Interest expense 9,960 26,795 21,041 
 Net interest income 54,563 57,245 55,059 
 Total net revenue 119,543 115,399 108,783 
 Provision for credit losses 17,480 5,585 4,871 
 Noninterest expense 
 Compensation expense 34,988 34,155 33,117 
 Occupancy expense 4,449 4,322 3,952 
 Technology, communications and 
 equipment 10,338 9,821 8,802 
 expense 
 Professional and outside services 8,464 8,533 8,502 
 Marketing(b) 2,476 3,351 3,044 
 Other expense 5,941 5,087 5,731 
 Total noninterest expense 66,656 65,269 63,148 
 Income before income tax expense 35,407 44,545 40,764 
 Income tax expense 6,276 8,114 8,290 
 Net income $ 29,131 $ 36,431 $ 32,474 
 Net income applicable to common $ 27,410 $ 34,642 $ 30,709 
 stockholders 
 Net income per common share data 
 Basic earnings per share $ 8.89 $ 10.75 $ 9.04 
 Diluted earnings per share 8.88 10.72 9.00 
 Weighted-average basic shares 3,082.4 3,221.5 3,396.4 
 Weighted-average diluted shares 3,087.4 3,230.4 3,414.0 
(a) In the first quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fees from asset management,
administration and commissions to lending- and deposit-related fees. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
(b) In the second quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain spend-based credit card reward costs
from marketing expense to be a reduction of card income, with no effect on net income. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
 The Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of these statements. 
 162 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Consolidated statements of comprehensive income 
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net income $ 29,131 $ 36,431 $ 32,474 
 Other comprehensive income/(loss), 
 after–tax 
 Unrealized gains/(losses) on investment 4,123 2,855 -1,858 
 securities 
 Translation adjustments, net of hedges 234 20 20 
 Fair value hedges 19 30 -107 
 Cash flow hedges 2,320 172 -201 
 Defined benefit pension and OPEB plans 212 964 -373 
 DVA on fair value option elected -491 -965 1,043 
 liabilities 
 Total other comprehensive income/(loss), 6,417 3,076 -1,476 
 after–tax 
 Comprehensive income $ 35,548 $ 39,507 $ 30,998 
 The Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of these statements. 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 163 
 Consolidated balance sheets 
 December 31, (in millions, except share data) 
 Assets 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and due from banks $ 24,874 $ 21,704 
 Deposits with banks 502,735 241,927 
 Federal funds sold and securities 
 purchased under resale agreements 296,284 249,157 
 (included$238,015and $14,561at fair 
 value) 
 Securities borrowed (included$52,983and 160,635 139,758 
 $6,237at fair value) 
 Trading assets (included assets pledged 503,126 369,687 
 of$130,645and $111,522)(a) 
 Available-for-sale securities (amortized 
 cost of$381,729and $345,306; included 388,178 350,699 
 assets pledged of $32,227and $10,325) 
 Held-to-maturity securities (net of 201,821 47,540 
 allowance for credit losses of $78) 
 Investment securities, net of allowance 589,999 398,239 
 for credit losses 
 Loans (included$44,474and $44,955at fair 1,012,853 997,620 
 value)(a) 
 Allowance for loan losses -28,328 -13,123 
 Loans, net of allowance for loan losses 984,525 984,497 
 Accrued interest and accounts receivable 90,503 72,861 
 Premises and equipment 27,109 25,813 
 Goodwill, MSRs and other intangible 53,428 53,341 
 assets 
 Other assets (included$13,827and 
 $12,676at fair value and assets pledged 152,853 130,395 
 of$3,739and $3,349)(a) 
 Total assets(b) $ 3,386,071 $ 2,687,379 
 Liabilities 
 Deposits (included$14,484and $28,589at $ 2,144,257 $ 1,562,431 
 fair value) 
 Federal funds purchased and securities 
 loaned or sold under repurchase 215,209 183,675 
 agreements (included$155,735and $549at 
 fair value) 
 Short-term borrowings 45,208 40,920 
 (included$16,893and $5,920at fair value) 
 Trading liabilities 170,181 119,277 
 Accounts payable and other liabilities 232,599 210,407 
 (included$3,476and $3,728at fair value) 
 Beneficial interests issued by 
 consolidated VIEs (included$41and $36at 17,578 17,841 
 fair value) 
 Long-term debt (included$76,817and 281,685 291,498 
 $75,745at fair value) 
 Total liabilities(b) 3,106,717 2,426,049 
 Commitments and contingencies (refer to 
 Notes 28, 29 and 30) 
 Stockholders’ equity 
 Preferred stock ($1par value; 
 authorized200,000,000shares: 30,063 26,993 
 issued3,006,250and2,699,250shares) 
 Common stock ($1par value; 
 authorized9,000,000,000shares; 4,105 4,105 
 issued4,104,933,895shares) 
 Additional paid-in capital 88,394 88,522 
 Retained earnings 236,990 223,211 
 Accumulated other comprehensive income 7,986 1,569 
 Shares held in restricted stock units 
 (“RSU”) trust, at cost — -21 
 (zeroand472,953shares) 
 Treasury stock, at cost -88,184 -83,049 
 (1,055,499,435and1,020,912,567shares) 
 Total stockholders’ equity 279,354 261,330 
 Total liabilities and stockholders’ $ 3,386,071 $ 2,687,379 
 equity 
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the CECL accounting guidance. Refer to Note 1 for further
information.
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
(b) The following table presents information on assets and liabilities related to VIEs that are
consolidated by the Firm at December 31, 2020 and 2019. The assets of the consolidated VIEs are used
to settle the liabilities of those entities. The holders of the beneficial interests do not have
recourse to the general credit of JPMorgan Chase. The assets and liabilities in the table below
include third-party assets and liabilities of consolidated VIEs and exclude intercompany balances
that eliminate in consolidation. Refer to Note 14 for a further discussion.
 December 31, (in millions) 
 Assets 2020 2019 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Trading assets $ 1,934 $ 2,633 
 Loans 37,619 42,931 
 All other assets 681 881 
 Total assets $ 40,234 $ 46,445 
 Liabilities 
 Beneficial interests issued by $ 17,578 $ 17,841 
 consolidated VIEs 
 All other liabilities 233 447 
 Total liabilities $ 17,811 $ 18,288 
 The Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of these statements. 
 164 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Consolidated statements of changes in stockholders’ equity
 Year ended December 31, (in millions, 
 except per share data) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Preferred stock 
 Balance at January 1 $ 26,993 $ 26,068 $ 26,068 
 Issuance 4,500 5,000 1,696 
 Redemption -1,430 -4,075 -1,696 
 Balance at December 31 30,063 26,993 26,068 
 Common stock 
 Balance at January 1 and December 31 4,105 4,105 4,105 
 Additional paid-in capital 
 Balance at January 1 88,522 89,162 90,579 
 Shares issued and commitments to issue 
 common stock for employee share-based -72 -591 -738 
 compensation awards, and related tax 
 effects 
 Other -56 -49 -679 
 Balance at December 31 88,394 88,522 89,162 
 Retained earnings 
 Balance at January 1 223,211 199,202 177,676 
 Cumulative effect of change in -2,650 62 -183 
 accounting principles 
 Net income 29,131 36,431 32,474 
 Dividends declared: 
 Preferred stock -1,583 -1,587 -1,551 
 Common stock ($3.60, $3.40and $2.72per 
 share for 2020, 2019 and 2018, -11,119 -10,897 -9,214 
 respectively) 
 Balance at December 31 236,990 223,211 199,202 
 Accumulated other comprehensive income 
 Balance at January 1 1,569 -1,507 -119 
 Cumulative effect of change in — — 88 
 accounting principles 
 Other comprehensive income/(loss), 6,417 3,076 -1,476 
 after-tax 
 Balance at December 31 7,986 1,569 -1,507 
 Shares held in RSU Trust, at cost 
 Balance at the beginning of the period -21 -21 -21 
 Liquidation of RSU Trust 21 — — 
 Balance at December 31 — -21 -21 
 Treasury stock, at cost 
 Balance at January 1 -83,049 -60,494 -42,595 
 Repurchase -6,397 -24,121 -19,983 
 Reissuance 1,262 1,566 2,084 
 Balance at December 31 -88,184 -83,049 -60,494 
 Total stockholders’ equity $ 279,354 $ 261,330 $ 256,515 
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the CECL accounting guidance. Refer to Note 1 for further
information.
 The Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of these statements. 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 165 
 Consolidated statements of cash flows 
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating activities 
 Net income $ 29,131 $ 36,431 $ 32,474 
 Adjustments to reconcile net income to 
 net cash provided by/(used in) operating 
 activities: 
 Provision for credit losses 17,480 5,585 4,871 
 Depreciation and amortization 8,614 8,368 7,791 
 Deferred tax expense -3,981 949 1,721 
 Other 1,649 1,996 2,717 
 Originations and purchases of loans -166,504 -169,289 -172,728 
 held-for-sale(a) 
 Proceeds from sales, securitizations and 175,490 171,415 163,747 
 paydowns of loans held-for-sale(a) 
 Net change in: 
 Trading assets(a) -148,749 6,551 -35,067 
 Securities borrowed -20,734 -27,631 -6,861 
 Accrued interest and accounts receivable -18,012 -78 -5,849 
 Other assets(a) -42,434 -17,570 -8,779 
 Trading liabilities 77,198 -14,516 18,290 
 Accounts payable and other liabilities 7,827 -352 14,630 
 Other operating adjustments(a) 3,115 2,233 -1,343 
 Net cash provided by/(used in) operating -79,910 4,092 15,614 
 activities 
 Investing activities 
 Net change in: 
 Federal funds sold and securities -47,115 72,396 -123,201 
 purchased under resale agreements 
 Held-to-maturity securities: 
 Proceeds from paydowns and maturities 21,360 3,423 2,945 
 Purchases -12,400 -13,427 -9,368 
 Available-for-sale securities: 
 Proceeds from paydowns and maturities 57,675 52,200 37,401 
 Proceeds from sales 149,758 70,181 46,067 
 Purchases -397,145 -242,149 -95,091 
 Proceeds from sales and securitizations 23,559 62,095 29,826 
 of loans held-for-investment 
 Other changes in loans, net(a) -50,263 -51,743 -83,013 
 All other investing activities, net -7,341 -5,035 -4,986 
 Net cash (used in) investing activities -261,912 -52,059 -199,420 
 Financing activities 
 Net change in: 
 Deposits 602,765 101,002 26,728 
 Federal funds purchased and securities 
 loaned or sold under repurchase 31,528 1,347 23,415 
 agreements 
 Short-term borrowings 4,438 -28,561 18,476 
 Beneficial interests issued by 1,347 4,289 1,712 
 consolidated VIEs 
 Proceeds from long-term borrowings 78,686 61,085 71,662 
 Payments of long-term borrowings -105,055 -69,610 -76,313 
 Proceeds from issuance of preferred 4,500 5,000 1,696 
 stock 
 Redemption of preferred stock -1,430 -4,075 -1,696 
 Treasury stock repurchased -6,517 -24,001 -19,983 
 Dividends paid -12,690 -12,343 -10,109 
 All other financing activities, net -927 -1,146 -1,430 
 Net cash provided by financing 596,645 32,987 34,158 
 activities 
 Effect of exchange rate changes on cash 
 and due from banks and deposits with 9,155 -182 -2,863 
 banks 
 Net increase/(decrease) in cash and due 263,978 -15,162 -152,511 
 from banks and deposits with banks 
 Cash and due from banks and deposits 
 with banks at the beginning of the 263,631 278,793 431,304 
 period 
 Cash and due from banks and deposits $ 527,609 $ 263,631 $ 278,793 
 with banks at the end of the period 
 Cash interest paid $ 13,077 $ 29,918 $ 21,152 
 Cash income taxes paid, net 7,661 5,624 3,542 
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
 The Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of these statements. 
 166 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
 Note 1 – Basis of presentation 
JPMorgan Chase & Co. (“JPMorgan Chase” or the “Firm”), a financial holding company incorporated under
Delaware law in 1968, is a leading global financial services firm in the U.S., with operations
worldwide. The Firm is a leader in investment banking, financial services for consumers and small
businesses, commercial banking, financial transaction processing and asset management. Refer to Note
32 for a further discussion of the Firm’s business segments. The accounting and financial reporting
policies of JPMorgan Chase and its subsidiaries conform to U.S. GAAP. Additionally, where applicable,
the policies conform to the accounting and reporting guidelines prescribed by regulatory authorities.
Certain amounts reported in prior periods have been reclassified to conform with the current
presentation. Consolidation The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of JPMorgan
Chase and other entities in which the Firm has a controlling financial interest. All material
intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated. Assets held for clients in an agency or
fiduciary capacity by the Firm are not assets of JPMorgan Chase and are not included on the
Consolidated balance sheets. The Firm determines whether it has a controlling financial interest in
an entity by first evaluating whether the entity is a voting interest entity or a variable interest
entity. Voting interest entities Voting interest entities are entities that have sufficient equity
and provide the equity investors voting rights that enable them to make significant decisions
relating to the entity’s operations. For these types of entities, the Firm’s determination of whether
it has a controlling interest is primarily based on the amount of voting equity interests held.
Entities in which the Firm has a controlling financial interest, through ownership of the majority of
the entities’ voting equity interests, or through other contractual rights that give the Firm
control, are consolidated by the Firm. Investments in companies in which the Firm has significant
influence over operating and financing decisions (but does not own a majority of the voting equity
interests) are accounted for (i) in accordance with the equity method of accounting (which requires
the Firm to recognize its proportionate share of the entity’s net earnings), or (ii) at fair value if
the fair value option was elected. These investments are generally included in other assets, with
income or loss included in noninterest revenue. Certain Firm-sponsored asset management funds are
structured as limited partnerships or limited liability companies. For many of these entities, the
Firm is the general partner or managing member, but the non-affiliated partners or members have the
ability to remove the Firm as the general partner or managing member without cause (i.e., kick-out
rights), based on a simple majority vote, or the non-affiliated partners or members have rights to
participate in important decisions. Accordingly, the Firm does not consolidate these voting interest
entities. However, in the limited cases where the non-managing partners or members do not have
substantive kick-out or participating rights, the Firm evaluates the funds as VIEs and consolidates
the funds if the Firm is t h e general partner or managing member and has a potentially significant
interest. The Firm’s investment companies and asset management funds have investments in both
publicly-held and privately-held entities, including investments in buyouts, growth equity and
venture opportunities. These investments are accounted for under investment company guidelines and,
accordingly, irrespective of the percentage of equity ownership interests held, are carried on the
Consolidated balance sheets at fair value, and are recorded in other assets, with income or loss
included in noninterest revenue. If consolidated, the Firm retains the accounting under such
specialized investment company guidelines. Variable interest entities VIEs are entities that, by
design, either (1) lack sufficient equity to permit the entity to finance its activities without
additional subordinated financial support from other parties, or (2) have equity investors that do
not have the ability to make significant decisions relating to the entity’s operations through voting
rights, or do not have the obligation to absorb the expected losses, or do not have the right to
receive the residual returns of the entity. The most common type of VIE is an SPE. SPEs are commonly
used in securitization transactions in order to isolate certain assets and distribute the cash flows
from those assets to investors. The basic SPE structure involves a company selling assets to the SPE;
the SPE funds the purchase of those assets by issuing securities to investors. The legal documents
that govern the transaction specify how the cash earned on the assets must be allocated to the SPE’s
investors and other parties that have rights to those cash flows. SPEs are generally structured to
insulate investors from claims on the SPE’s assets by creditors of other entities, including the
creditors of the seller of the assets. The primary beneficiary of a VIE (i.e., the party that has a
controlling financial interest) is required to consolidate the assets and liabilities of the VIE. The
primary beneficiary is the party that has both (1) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that
most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance; and (2) through its interests in the VIE,
the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially
be significant to the VIE. To assess whether the Firm has the power to direct the activities of a VIE
that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance, the Firm considers all the facts and
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 167 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
circumstances, including its role in establishing the VIE and its ongoing rights and
responsibilities. This assessment includes, first, identifying the activities that most significantly
impact the VIE’s economic performance; and second, identifying which party, if any, has power over
those activities. In general, the parties that make the most significant decisions affecting the VIE
(such as asset managers, collateral managers, servicers, or owners of call options or liquidation
rights over the VIE’s assets) or have the right to unilaterally remove those decision-makers are
deemed to have the power to direct the activities of a VIE. To assess whether the Firm has the
obligation to absorb losses of the VIE or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could
potentially be significant to the VIE, the Firm considers all of its economic interests, including
debt and equity investments, servicing fees, and derivatives or other arrangements deemed to be
variable interests in the VIE. This assessment requires that the Firm apply judgment in determining
whether these interests, in the aggregate, are considered potentially significant to the VIE. Factors
considered in assessing significance include: the design of the VIE, including its capitalization
structure; subordination of interests; payment priority; relative share of interests held across
various classes within the VIE’s capital structure; and the reasons why the interests are held by the
Firm. The Firm performs on-going reassessments of: (1) whether entities previously evaluated under
the majority voting-interest framework have become VIEs, based on certain events, and are therefore
subject to the VIE consolidation framework; and (2) whether changes in the facts and circumstances
regarding the Firm’s involvement with a VIE cause the Firm’s consolidation conclusion to change.
Refer to Note 14 for further discussion of the Firm’s VIEs. Revenue recognition Interest income The
Firm recognizes interest income on loans, debt securities, and other debt instruments, generally on a
level-yield basis, based on the underlying contractual rate. Refer to Note 7 for further discussion
of interest income. Revenue from contracts with customers JPMorgan Chase recognizes noninterest
revenue from certain contracts with customers , in investment banking fees, deposit-related fees,
asset management administration and commissions, and components of card income, when the Firm’s
related performance obligations are satisfied. Refer to Note 6 for further discussion of the Firm’s
revenue from contracts with customers. Principal transactions revenue JPMorgan Chase carries a
portion of its assets and liabilities at fair value. Changes in fair value are reported primarily in
principal transactions revenue. Refer to Notes 2 and 3 for further discussion of fair value
measurement. Refer to Note 6 for further discussion of principal transactions revenue. Use of
estimates in the preparation of consolidated financial statements The preparation of the Consolidated
Financial Statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported
amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expense, and disclosures of contingent assets and
liabilities. Actual results could be different from these estimates. Foreign currency translation
JPMorgan Chase revalues assets, liabilities, revenue and expense denominated in non-U.S. currencies
into U.S. dollars using applicable exchange rates. Gains and losses relating to translating
functional currency financial statements for U.S. reporting are included in the Consolidated
statements of comprehensive income. Gains and losses relating to nonfunctional currency transactions,
including non-U.S. operations where the functional currency is the U.S. dollar, are reported in the
Consolidated statements of income. Offsetting assets and liabilities U.S. GAAP permits entities to
present derivative receivables and derivative payables with the same counterparty and the related
cash collateral receivables and payables on a net basis on the Consolidated balance sheets when a
legally enforceable master netting agreement exists. U.S. GAAP also permits securities sold and
purchased under repurchase agreements and securities borrowed or loaned under securities loan
agreements to be presented net when specified conditions are met, including the existence of a
legally enforceable master netting agreement. The Firm has elected to net such balances when the
specified conditions are met. The Firm uses master netting agreements to mitigate counterparty credit
risk in certain transactions, including derivative contracts, resale, repurchase, securities borrowed
and securities loaned agreements. A master netting agreement is a single agreement with a
counterparty that permits multiple transactions governed by that agreement to be terminated or
accelerated and settled through a single payment in a single currency in the event of a default
(e.g., bankruptcy, failure to make a required payment or securities transfer or deliver collateral or
margin when due). Upon the exercise of derivatives termination rights by the non-defaulting party (i)
all transactions are terminated, (ii) all transactions are valued and the positive values of “in the
money” transactions are netted against the negative values of “out of the money” transactions and
(iii) the only remaining payment obligation is of one of the parties to pay the netted termination
amount. Upon exercise of default rights under repurchase agreements and securities loan agreements in
general (i) all transactions are terminated and accelerated, (ii) all values of securities or cash
held or to be delivered are calculated, and all such sums are netted against each other and (iii) the
only remaining payment obligation is of one of the parties to pay the netted termination amount.
 168 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Typical master netting agreements for these
types of transactions also often contain a
collateral/margin agreement that provides for a
security interest in, or title transfer of,
securities or cash collateral/margin to the
party that has the right to demand margin (the
“demanding party”). The collateral/margin
agreement typically requires a party to transfer
collateral/margin to the demanding party with a
value equal to the amount of the margin deficit
on a net basis across all transactions governed
by the master netting agreement, less any
threshold. The collateral/margin agreement
grants to the demanding party, upon default by
the counterparty, the right to set-off any
amounts payable by the counterparty against any
posted collateral or the cash equivalent of any
posted collateral/margin. It also grants to the
demanding party the right to liquidate
collateral/margin and to apply the proceeds to
an amount payable by the counterparty. Refer to
Note 5 for further discussion of the Firm’s
derivative instruments. Refer to Note 11 for
further discussion of the Firm’s securities
financing agreements. Statements of cash flows
For JPMorgan Chase’s Consolidated statements of
cash flows, cash is defined as those amounts
included in cash and due from banks and deposits
with banks. Accounting standard adopted January
1, 2020 Financial Instruments – Credit Losses
(“CECL”) The adoption of this guidance
established a single allowance framework for all
financial assets measured at amortized cost and
certain off-balance sheet credit exposures. This
framework requires that management’s estimate
reflects credit losses over the instrument’s
remaining expected life and considers expected
future changes in macroeconomic conditions.
Refer to Note 13 for further information. Prior
to the adoption of the CECL accounting guidance,
the Firm’s allowance for credit losses
represented management’s estimate of probable
credit losses inherent in the Firm’s retained
loan portfolios and certain lending-related
commitments.
The following table presents the impacts to the allowance for credit losses and retained earnings
upon adoption of this guidance on January 1, 2020:
 (in billions) December 31, 2019 CECL adoption impact January 1, 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Allowance for credit 
 losses 
 Consumer, excluding $ 2.6 $ 0.4 $ 3.0 
 credit card(a) 
 Credit card 5.7 5.5 11.2 
 Wholesale(a) 6.0 -1.6 4.4 
 Firmwide $ 14.3 $ 4.3 $ 18.6 
 Retained earnings 
 Firmwide allowance $ 4.3 
 increase 
 Balance sheet -0.8 
 reclassification(b) 
 Total pre-tax impact 3.5 
 Tax effect -0.8 
 Decrease to retained $ 2.7 
 earnings 
(a) In conjunction with the adoption of CECL, the Firm reclassified risk-rated business banking and
auto dealer loans and lending-related commitments held in CCB from the consumer, excluding credit
card portfolio segment to the wholesale portfolio segment, to align with the methodology applied when
determining the allowance. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current
presentation. Accordingly, $ 0.6billion of the allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2019 and
$( 0.2) billion of the CECL adoption impact were reclassified.
(b) Represents the recognition of the nonaccretable difference on purchased credit deteriorated loans
and the Firm's election to recognize the reserve for uncollectible accrued interest on credit card
loans in the allowance, both of which resulted in a corresponding increase to loans.
Securities Financing Agreements
As permitted by the guidance, the Firm elected the fair value option for certain securities financing
agreements. The difference between their carrying amount and fair value was immaterial and was
recorded as part of the Firm’s cumulative-effect adjustment. Refer to Note 11 for further
information.
Investment securities
Upon adoption, HTM securities are presented net of an
allowance for credit losses. The guidance also amended the
previous other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) model
for AFS securities to incorporate an allowance. Refer to
Note 10 for further information.
Credit quality disclosures
As a result of the adoption of this guidance, the Firm
expanded credit quality disclosures for financial assets
measured at amortized cost particularly within the retained
loan portfolios. Refer to Note 12 for further information.
PCD loans
The adoption resulted in a change in the accounting for PCI
loans, which are considered purchased credit deteriorated
(“PCD”) loans under CECL. Upon adoption, the Firm
recognized the nonaccretable difference on PCD loans in
the allowance, which resulted in a corresponding increase
to loans. PCD loans are subject to the Firm’s nonaccrual and
charge-off policies and are now reported in the consumer,
excluding credit card portfolio’s residential real estate loan
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 169 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
class. Refer to Note 12 for further information.
Changes in credit portfolio segments and classes
In conjunction with the adoption of CECL, the
Firm reclassified risk-rated loans and lending-
related commitments from the consumer excluding
credit card portfolio segment to the wholesale
portfolio segment, to align with the methodology
applied when determining the allowance. The Firm
also revised its loan classes. Prior- period
amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation. Refer to Note 12 for
further information. Accrued interest
receivables As permitted by the guidance, the
Firm elected to continue classifying accrued
interest on loans, including accrued but
unbilled interest on credit card loans, and
investment securities in accrued interest and
accounts receivables on the Consolidated balance
sheets. For credit card loans, accrued interest
once billed is then recognized in the loan
balances, with the related allowance recorded in
the allowance for credit losses. Changes in the
allowance for credit losses on accrued interest
on credit card loans are recognized in the
provision for credit losses and charge-offs are
recognized by reversing interest income. For
other loans and securities, the Firm generally
does not recognize an allowance for credit
losses on accrued interest receivables,
consistent with its policy to write them off no
later than 90 days past due by reversing
interest income. Capital transition provisions
As permitted under the U.S. capital rules issued
by the federal banking agencies in 2019, the
Firm initially elected to phase-in the January
1, 2020 (“day 1”) CECL adoption impact to
retained earnings of $2.7 billion to CET1
capital, at 25% per year in each of 2020 to
2023. As part of their response to the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic, on March 31, 2020, the
federal banking agencies issued an interim final
rule (issued as final on August 26, 2020) that
provided the option to delay the effects of CECL
on regulatory capital for two years, followed by
a three-year transition period (“CECL capital
transition provisions”). Refer to Note 27 for
further information. Accounting standards
adopted January 1, 2018 Effective January 1,
2018, the Firm adopted several accounting
standards resulting in a net decrease of $
183million to retained earnings and a net
increase of $ 88million to AOCI. The adoption of
the recognition and measurement guidance
resulted in $ 505million of fair value gains in
the first quarter of 2018, recorded in total net
revenue, on certain equity investments that were
previously held at cost.
Significant accounting policies
The following table identifies JPMorgan Chase’s
other significant accounting policies and the
Note and page where a detailed description of
each policy can be found.
 Fair value measurement Note 2 page 171 
 Fair value option Note 3 page 192 
 Derivative instruments Note 5 page 198 
 Noninterest revenue and noninterest Note 6 page 212 
 expense 
 Interest income and Interest expense Note 7 page 215 
 Pension and other postretirement Note 8 page 216 
 employee benefit plans 
 Employee share-based incentives Note 9 page 221 
 Investment securities Note 10 page 223 
 Securities financing activities Note 11 page 229 
 Loans Note 12 page 232 
 Allowance for credit losses Note 13 page 248 
 Variable interest entities Note 14 page 253 
 Goodwill and Mortgage servicing rights Note 15 page 261 
 Premises and equipment Note 16 page 265 
 Leases Note 18 page 266 
 Long-term debt Note 20 page 269 
 Earnings per share Note 23 page 274 
 Income taxes Note 25 page 277 
 Off–balance sheet lending-related 
 financial instruments, guarantees and Note 28 page 283 
 other commitments 
 Litigation Note 30 page 290 
 170 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 2 – Fair value measurement 
JPMorgan Chase carries a portion of its assets
and liabilities at fair value. These assets and
liabilities are predominantly carried at fair
value on a recurring basis (i.e., assets and
liabilities that are measured and reported at
fair value on the Firm’s Consolidated balance
sheets). Certain assets, liabilities and
unfunded lending-related commitments are
measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis;
that is, they are not measured at fair value on
an ongoing basis but are subject to fair value
adjustments only in certain circumstances (for
example, when there is evidence of impairment).
Fair value is defined as the price that would be
received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a
liability in an orderly transaction between
market participants at the measurement date.
Fair value is based on quoted market prices or
inputs, where available. If prices or quotes are
not available, fair value is based on valuation
models and other valuation techniques that
consider relevant transaction characteristics
(such as maturity) and use, as inputs,
observable or unobservable market parameters,
including yield curves, interest rates,
volatilities, prices (such as commodity, equity
or debt prices), correlations, foreign exchange
rates and credit curves. Valuation adjustments
may be made to ensure that financial instruments
are recorded at fair value, as described below.
The level of precision in estimating
unobservable market inputs or other factors can
affect the amount of gain or loss recorded for a
particular position. Furthermore, while the Firm
believes its valuation methods are appropriate
and consistent with those of other market
participants, the methods and assumptions used
reflect management judgment and may vary across
the Firm’s businesses and portfolios. The Firm
uses various methodologies and assumptions in
the determination of fair value. The use of
different methodologies or assumptions by other
market participants compared with those used by
the Firm could result in the Firm deriving a
different estimate of fair value at the
reporting date. Valuation process Risk-taking
functions are responsible for providing fair
value estimates for assets and liabilities
carried on the Consolidated balance sheets at
fair value. The Firm’s VCG, which is part of the
Firm’s Finance function and independent of the
risk-taking functions, is responsible for
verifying these estimates and determining any
fair value adjustments that may be required to
ensure that the Firm’s positions are recorded at
fair value. The VGF is composed of senior
finance and risk executives and is responsible
for overseeing the management of risks arising
from valuation activities conducted across the
Firm. The Firmwide VGF is chaired by the
Firmwide head of the VCG (under the direction of
the Firm’s Controller), and includes sub-forums
covering the CIB, CCB, CB, AWM and certain
corporate functions including Treasury and CIO.
Price verification process The VCG verifies fair
value estimates provided by the risk-taking
functions by leveraging independently derived
prices, valuation inputs and other market data,
where available. Where independent prices or
inputs are not available, the VCG performs
additional review to ensure the reasonableness
of the estimates. The additional review may
include evaluating the limited market activity
including client unwinds, benchmarking valuation
inputs to those used for similar instruments,
decomposing the valuation of structured
instruments into individual components,
comparing expected to actual cash flows,
reviewing profit and loss trends, and reviewing
trends in collateral valuation. There are also
additional levels of management review for more
significant or complex positions. The VCG
determines any valuation adjustments that may be
required to the estimates provided by the risk-
taking functions. No adjustments to quoted
prices are applied for instruments classified
within level 1 of the fair value hierarchy
(refer to the discussion below for further
information on the fair value hierarchy). For
other positions, judgment is required to assess
the need for valuation adjustments to
appropriately reflect liquidity considerations,
unobservable parameters, and, for certain
portfolios that meet specified criteria, the
size of the net open risk position. The
determination of such adjustments follows a
consistent framework across the Firm: •
Liquidity valuation adjustments are considered
where an observable external price or valuation
parameter exists but is of lower reliability,
potentially due to lower market activity.
Liquidity valuation adjustments are made based
on current market conditions. Factors that may
be considered in determining the liquidity
adjustment include analysis of: (1) the
estimated bid-offer spread for the instrument
being traded; (2) alternative pricing points for
similar instruments in active markets; and (3)
the range of reasonable values that the price or
parameter could take. • The Firm manages certain
portfolios of financial instruments on the basis
of net open risk exposure and, as permitted by
U.S. GAAP, has elected to estimate the fair
value of such portfolios on the basis of a
transfer of the entire net open risk position in
an orderly transaction. Where this is the case,
valuation adjustments may be necessary to
reflect the cost of exiting a larger-than-normal
market-size net open risk position. Where
applied, such adjustments are based on factors
that a relevant market participant would
consider in the transfer of the net open risk
position, including the size of the adverse
market move that is likely to occur during the
period required to reduce the net open risk
position to a normal market-size. • Uncertainty
adjustments related to unobservable parameters
may be made when positions are valued using
prices or input parameters to valuation models
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 171 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
that are unobservable due to a lack of market
activity or because they cannot be implied from
observable market data. Such prices or
parameters must be estimated and are, therefore,
subject to management judgment. Adjustments are
made to reflect the uncertainty inherent in the
resulting valuation estimate. • Where
appropriate, the Firm also applies adjustments
to its estimates of fair value in order to
appropriately reflect counterparty credit
quality (CVA), the Firm’s own creditworthiness
(DVA) and the impact of funding (FVA), using a
consistent framework across the Firm. Refer to
Credit and funding adjustments on page 188 of
this Note for more information on such
adjustments. Valuation model review and approval
If prices or quotes are not available for an
instrument or a similar instrument, fair value
is generally determined using valuation models
that consider relevant transaction terms such as
maturity and use as inputs market-based or
independently sourced parameters. Where this is
the case the price verification process
described above is applied to the inputs in
those models. Under the Firm’s Estimations and
Model Risk Management Policy, the MRGR reviews
and approves new models, as well as material
changes to existing models, prior to
implementation in the operating environment. In
certain circumstances exceptions may be granted
to the Firm’s policy to allow a model to be used
prior to review or approval. The MRGR may also
require the user to take appropriate actions to
mitigate the model risk if it is to be used in
the interim. These actions will depend on the
model and may include, for example, limitation
of trading activity. Valuation hierarchy A
three-level valuation hierarchy has been
established under U.S. GAAP for disclosure of
fair value measurements. The valuation hierarchy
is based on the observability of inputs to the
valuation of an asset or liability as of the
measurement date. The three levels are defined
as follows. • Level 1 – inputs to the valuation
methodology are quoted prices (unadjusted) for
identical assets or liabilities in active
markets. • Level 2 – inputs to the valuation
methodology include quoted prices for similar
assets and liabilities in active markets, and
inputs that are observable for the asset or
liability, either directly or indirectly, for
substantially the full term of the financial
instrument. • Level 3 – one or more inputs to
the valuation methodology are unobservable and
significant to the fair value measurement. A
financial instrument’s categorization within the
valuation hierarchy is based on the lowest level
of input that is significant to the fair value
measurement.
 172 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
The following table describes the valuation methodologies generally used by the Firm to measure its
significant products/instruments at fair value, including the general classification of such
instruments pursuant to the valuation hierarchy.
 Product/instrument Valuation methodology Classifications in the 
 valuation hierarchy 
 Securities financing Valuations are based on 
 agreements discounted cash flows, which Predominantly level 2 
 consider: 
 • Derivative features: refer 
 to the 
 discussion of derivatives 
 below for 
 further information. 
 • Market rates for the 
 respective 
 maturity 
 • Collateral characteristics 
 Loans and lending-related 
 commitments — 
 wholesale 
 Loans carried at fair value 
 (trading loans and Where observable market data 
 non-trading loans) and is available, valuations are Level 2 or 3 
 associated based on: 
 lending-related commitments 
 • Observed market prices 
 (circumstances 
 are infrequent) 
 • Relevant broker quotes 
 • Observed market prices for 
 similar 
 instruments 
 Where observable market data 
 is unavailable or limited, 
 valuations are based on 
 discounted cash flows, which 
 consider the following: 
 • Credit spreads derived from 
 the cost of CDS; or benchmark 
 credit curves developed by the 
 Firm, by industry and credit 
 rating 
 • Prepayment speed 
 • Collateral characteristics 
 Loans — consumer 
 Fair value is based on 
 observable prices for 
 mortgage-backed securities 
 Loans carried at fair value — with similar collateral and 
 conforming incorporates adjustments to 
 residential mortgage loans these prices to account for Predominantly level 2 
 expected to differences between the 
 be sold securities and the value of 
 the underlying loans, which 
 include credit 
 characteristics, portfolio 
 composition, and liquidity. 
 Investment and trading Quoted market prices Level 1 
 securities 
 In the absence of quoted 
 market prices, securities are Level 2 or 3 
 valued based on: 
 • Observable market prices 
 for similar securities 
 •Relevant broker quotes 
 •Discounted cash flows 
 In addition, the following 
 inputs to discounted cash 
 flows are used for the 
 following products: 
 Mortgage- and asset-backed 
 securities specific inputs: 
 •Collateral characteristics 
 • Deal-specific payment and 
 loss allocations 
 • Current market assumptions 
 related to yield, prepayment 
 speed, conditional default 
 rates and loss severity 
 Collateralized loan 
 obligations (“CLOs”) specific 
 inputs: 
 •Collateral characteristics 
 •Deal-specific payment and 
 loss allocations 
 •Expected prepayment speed, 
 conditional default rates, 
 loss severity 
 •Credit spreads 
 • Credit rating data 
 Physical commodities Valued using observable market Level 1 or 2 
 prices or data. 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 173 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
 Product/instrument Valuation methodology Classifications in the 
 valuation hierarchy 
 Exchange-traded derivatives 
 Derivatives that are actively traded and Level 1 
 valued using the exchange 
 price. 
 Derivatives that are valued 
 using models such as the 
 Black-Scholes option pricing 
 model, simulation models, or a 
 combination of models that may 
 use observable or unobservable 
 valuation inputs as well as 
 considering the contractual 
 terms. 
 The key valuation inputs used 
 will depend on the type of 
 derivative and the nature of Level 2 or 3 
 the underlying instruments and 
 may include equity prices, 
 commodity prices, interest 
 rate yield curves, foreign 
 exchange rates, volatilities, 
 correlations, CDS spreads and 
 recovery rates.  Additionally, 
 the credit quality of the 
 counterparty and of the Firm 
 as well as market funding 
 levels may also be considered. 
 In addition, specific inputs 
 used for derivatives that are 
 valued based on models with 
 significant unobservable 
 inputs are as follows: 
 Structured credit derivatives 
 specific inputs include: 
 •CDS spreads and recovery 
 rates 
 •Credit correlation between 
 the underlying debt 
 instruments 
 Equity option specific inputs 
 include: 
 •Forward equity price 
 •Equity volatility 
 •Equity correlation 
 •Equity-FX correlation 
 •Equity-IR correlation 
 Interest rate and FX exotic 
 options specific inputs 
 include: 
 •Interest rate volatility 
 •Interest rate spread 
 volatility 
 •Interest rate correlation 
 •Foreign exchange correlation 
 •Interest rate-FX correlation 
 Commodity derivatives specific 
 inputs include: 
 •Commodity volatility 
 •Forward commodity price 
 •Commodity correlation 
 Additionally, adjustments are 
 made to reflect counterparty 
 credit quality (CVA) and the 
 impact of funding (FVA). Refer 
 to page 188 of this Note. 
 Mortgage servicing rights Refer to Mortgage servicing Level 3 
 rights in Note 15. 
 Fair value is estimated using 
 Private equity direct all available information; the Level 2 or 3 
 investments range of potential inputs 
 include: 
 • Transaction prices 
 • Trading multiples of 
 comparable public companies 
 • Operating performance of 
 the underlying portfolio 
 company 
 • Adjustments as required, 
 since comparable public 
 companies are not identical to 
 the company being valued, and 
 for company-specific issues 
 and lack of liquidity. 
 • Additional available inputs 
 relevant to the investment. 
 Fund investments (e.g., 
 mutual/collective investment 
 funds, Net asset value 
 private equity funds, hedge 
 funds, and 
 real estate funds) 
 • NAV is supported by the 
 ability to Level 1 
 redeem and purchase at the 
 NAV level. 
 • Adjustments to the NAV as 
 required, 
 for restrictions on 
 redemption (e.g., Level 2 or 3(a) 
 lock-up periods or withdrawal 
 limitations) or where 
 observable 
 activity is limited. 
 Beneficial interests issued Valued using observable market 
 by information, where available. Level 2 or 3 
 consolidated VIEs 
 In the absence of observable 
 market 
 information, valuations are 
 based on the 
 fair value of the underlying 
 assets held 
 by the VIE. 
(a) Excludes certain investments that are measured at fair value using the net asset value per share
(or its equivalent) as a practical expedient.
 174 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Product/instrument Valuation methodology Classification in the 
 valuation hierarchy 
 • Valuations are based on 
 discounted cash flow analyses 
 that consider the embedded 
 derivative and the terms and 
 payment structure of the note. 
 • The embedded derivative 
 features are considered using 
 models such as the 
 Black-Scholes option pricing 
 model, simulation models, or a 
 Structured notes (included in combination of models that may 
 deposits, use observable or unobservable 
 short-term borrowings and valuation inputs, depending on Level 2 or 3 
 long-term the embedded derivative. The 
 debt) specific inputs used vary 
 according to the nature of the 
 embedded derivative features, 
 as described in the discussion 
 above regarding derivatives 
 valuation. Adjustments are 
 then made to this base 
 valuation to reflect the 
 Firm’s own credit risk (DVA). 
 Refer to page 188 of this 
 Note. 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 175 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
The following table presents the assets and liabilities reported at fair value as of December 31,
2020 and 2019, by major product category and fair value hierarchy.
 Assets and 
 liabilities 
 measured at 
 fair value 
 on a 
 recurring 
 basis 
 December 
 31, 2020 Fair value Derivative 
 (in hierarchy netting Total fair 
 millions) Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 adjustments… value 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Federal 
 funds sold 
 and 
 securities $ — $ 238,015 $ — $ — $ 238,015 
 purchased 
 under 
 resale 
 agreements 
 Securities — 52,983 — — 52,983 
 borrowed 
 Trading 
 assets: 
 Debt 
 instrument… 
 Mortgage-b… 
 securities: 
 U.S. GSEs 
 and — 68,395 449 — 68,844 
 government 
 agencies(a) 
 Residential — 2,138 28 — 2,166 
 – nonagency 
 Commercial — 1,327 3 — 1,330 
 – nonagency 
 Total 
 mortgage-b… — 71,860 480 — 72,340 
 securities 
 U.S. 
 Treasury, 
 GSEs and 104,263 10,996 — — 115,259 
 government 
 agencies(a) 
 Obligations 
 of U.S. — 7,184 8 — 7,192 
 states and 
 municipali… 
 Certificat… 
 of deposit, 
 bankers’ 
 acceptances — 1,230 — — 1,230 
 and 
 commercial 
 paper 
 Non-U.S. 
 government 26,772 40,671 182 — 67,625 
 debt 
 securities 
 Corporate 
 debt — 21,017 507 — 21,524 
 securities 
 Loans(b) — 6,101 893 — 6,994 
 Asset-back… — 2,304 28 — 2,332 
 securities 
 Total debt 131,035 161,363 2,098 — 294,496 
 instruments 
 Equity 97,035 2,652 179 — 99,866 
 securities 
 Physical 6,382 5,189 — — 11,571 
 commoditie… 
 Other — 17,165 346 — 17,511 
 Total debt 
 and equity 234,452 186,369 2,623 — 423,444 
 instrument… 
 Derivative 
 receivable… 
 Interest 2,318 386,865 2,307 -355,765 35,725 
 rate 
 Credit — 12,879 624 -12,823 680 
 Foreign 146 205,127 987 -190,479 15,781 
 exchange 
 Equity — 71,279 3,519 -54,125 20,673 
 Commodity — 21,272 231 -14,732 6,771 
 Total 
 derivative 2,464 697,422 7,668 -627,924 79,630 
 receivables 
 Total 
 trading 236,916 883,791 10,291 -627,924 503,074 
 assets(e) 
 Available-… 
 securities: 
 Mortgage-b… 
 securities: 
 U.S. GSEs 
 and 21,018 92,283 — — 113,301 
 government 
 agencies(a) 
 Residential — 10,233 — — 10,233 
 – nonagency 
 Commercial — 2,856 — — 2,856 
 – nonagency 
 Total 
 mortgage-b… 21,018 105,372 — — 126,390 
 securities 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 201,951 — — — 201,951 
 government 
 agencies 
 Obligations 
 of U.S. — 20,396 — — 20,396 
 states and 
 municipali… 
 Certificat… — — — — — 
 of deposit 
 Non-U.S. 
 government 13,135 9,793 — — 22,928 
 debt 
 securities 
 Corporate 
 debt — 216 — — 216 
 securities 
 Asset-back… 
 securities: 
 Collateral… 
 loan — 10,048 — — 10,048 
 obligations 
 Other — 6,249 — — 6,249 
 Total 
 available-… 236,104 152,074 — — 388,178 
 securities 
 Loans(b)(f) — 42,169 2,305 — 44,474 
 Mortgage 
 servicing — — 3,276 — 3,276 
 rights 
 Other 8,110 4,561 538 — 13,209 
 assets(b)(… 
 Total 
 assets 
 measured at 
 fair value $ 481,130 $ 1,373,593 $ 16,410 $ -627,924 $ 1,243,209 
 on a 
 recurring 
 basis 
 Deposits $ — $ 11,571 $ 2,913 $ — $ 14,484 
 Federal 
 funds 
 purchased 
 and 
 securities — 155,735 — — 155,735 
 loaned or 
 sold under 
 repurchase 
 agreements 
 Short-term — 14,473 2,420 — 16,893 
 borrowings 
 Trading 
 liabilitie… 
 Debt and 
 equity 82,669 16,838 51 — 99,558 
 instrument… 
 Derivative 
 payables: 
 Interest 2,496 349,082 2,049 -340,615 13,012 
 rate 
 Credit — 14,344 848 -13,197 1,995 
 Foreign 132 214,373 1,421 -194,493 21,433 
 exchange 
 Equity — 74,032 7,381 -55,515 25,898 
 Commodity — 21,767 962 -14,444 8,285 
 Total 
 derivative 2,628 673,598 12,661 -618,264 70,623 
 payables 
 Total 
 trading 85,297 690,436 12,712 -618,264 170,181 
 liabilities 
 Accounts 
 payable and 2,895 513 68 — 3,476 
 other 
 liabilities 
 Beneficial 
 interests 
 issued by — 41 — — 41 
 consolidat… 
 VIEs 
 Long-term — 53,420 23,397 — 76,817 
 debt 
 Total 
 liabilities 
 measured at 
 fair value $ 88,192 $ 926,189 $ 41,510 $ -618,264 $ 437,627 
 on a 
 recurring 
 basis 
 176 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 December 
 31, 2019 Fair value Derivative 
 (in hierarchy netting Total fair 
 millions) Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 adjustments… value 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Federal 
 funds sold 
 and 
 securities $ — $ 14,561 $ — $ — $ 14,561 
 purchased 
 under 
 resale 
 agreements 
 Securities — 6,237 — — 6,237 
 borrowed 
 Trading — 
 assets: 
 Debt — 
 instrument… 
 Mortgage-b… — 
 securities: 
 U.S. GSEs 
 and — 44,510 797 — 45,307 
 government 
 agencies(a) 
 Residential — 1,977 23 — 2,000 
 – nonagency 
 Commercial — 1,486 4 — 1,490 
 – nonagency 
 Total 
 mortgage-b… — 47,973 824 — 48,797 
 securities 
 U.S. 
 Treasury, 
 GSEs and 78,289 10,295 — — 88,584 
 government 
 agencies(a) 
 Obligations 
 of U.S. — 6,468 10 — 6,478 
 states and 
 municipali… 
 Certificat… 
 of deposit, 
 bankers’ 
 acceptances — 252 — — 252 
 and 
 commercial 
 paper 
 Non-U.S. 
 government 26,600 27,169 155 — 53,924 
 debt 
 securities 
 Corporate 
 debt — 17,956 558 — 18,514 
 securities 
 Loans(b) — 6,340 673 — 7,013 
 Asset-back… — 2,593 37 — 2,630 
 securities 
 Total debt 104,889 119,046 2,257 — 226,192 
 instruments 
 Equity 71,890 244 196 — 72,330 
 securities 
 Physical 3,638 3,579 — — 7,217 
 commoditie… 
 Other — 13,896 232 — 14,128 
 Total debt 
 and equity 180,417 136,765 2,685 — 319,867 
 instrument… 
 Derivative 
 receivable… 
 Interest 721 311,173 1,400 -285,873 27,421 
 rate 
 Credit — 14,252 624 -14,175 701 
 Foreign 117 137,938 432 -129,482 9,005 
 exchange 
 Equity — 43,642 2,085 -39,250 6,477 
 Commodity — 17,058 184 -11,080 6,162 
 Total 
 derivative 838 524,063 4,725 -479,860 49,766 
 receivables 
 Total 
 trading 181,255 660,828 7,410 -479,860 369,633 
 assets(e) 
 Available-… 
 securities: 
 Mortgage-b… 
 securities: 
 U.S. GSEs 
 and — 110,117 — — 110,117 
 government 
 agencies(a) 
 Residential — 12,989 1 — 12,990 
 – nonagency 
 Commercial — 5,188 — — 5,188 
 – nonagency 
 Total 
 mortgage-b… — 128,294 1 — 128,295 
 securities 
 U.S. 
 Treasury 
 and 139,436 — — — 139,436 
 government 
 agencies 
 Obligations 
 of U.S. — 29,810 — — 29,810 
 states and 
 municipali… 
 Certificat… — 77 — — 77 
 of deposit 
 Non-U.S. 
 government 12,966 8,821 — — 21,787 
 debt 
 securities 
 Corporate 
 debt — 845 — — 845 
 securities 
 Asset-back… — — — 
 securities: 
 Collateral… 
 loan — 24,991 — — 24,991 
 obligations 
 Other — 5,458 — — 5,458 
 Total 
 available-… 152,402 198,296 1 — 350,699 
 securities 
 Loans(b)(f) — 44,439 516 — 44,955 
 Mortgage 
 servicing — — 4,699 — 4,699 
 rights 
 Other 7,305 3,824 917 — 12,046 
 assets(b)(… 
 Total 
 assets 
 measured at 
 fair value $ 340,962 $ 928,185 $ 13,543 $ -479,860 $ 802,830 
 on a 
 recurring 
 basis 
 Deposits $ — $ 25,229 $ 3,360 $ — $ 28,589 
 Federal 
 funds 
 purchased 
 and 
 securities — 549 — — 549 
 loaned or 
 sold under 
 repurchase 
 agreements 
 Short-term — 4,246 1,674 — 5,920 
 borrowings 
 Trading 
 liabilitie… 
 Debt and 
 equity 59,047 16,481 41 — 75,569 
 instrument… 
 Derivative 
 payables: 
 Interest 795 276,746 1,732 -270,670 8,603 
 rate 
 Credit — 14,358 763 -13,469 1,652 
 Foreign 109 143,960 1,039 -131,950 13,158 
 exchange 
 Equity — 47,261 5,480 -40,204 12,537 
 Commodity — 19,685 200 -12,127 7,758 
 Total 
 derivative 904 502,010 9,214 -468,420 43,708 
 payables 
 Total 
 trading 59,951 518,491 9,255 -468,420 119,277 
 liabilities 
 Accounts 
 payable and 3,231 452 45 — 3,728 
 other 
 liabilities 
 Beneficial 
 interests 
 issued by — 36 — — 36 
 consolidat… 
 VIEs 
 Long-term — 52,406 23,339 — 75,745 
 debt 
 Total 
 liabilities 
 measured at 
 fair value $ 63,182 $ 601,409 $ 37,673 $ -468,420 $ 233,844 
 on a 
 recurring 
 basis 
(a) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, included total U.S. GSE obligations of $ 117.6billion and $
104.5billion, respectively, which were mortgage-related.
(b) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
(c) Physical commodities inventories are generally accounted for at the lower of cost or net
realizable value. “Net realizable value” is a term defined in U.S. GAAP as not exceeding fair value
less costs to sell (“transaction costs”). Transaction costs for the Firm’s physical commodities
inventories are either not applicable or immaterial to the value of the inventory. Therefore, net
realizable value approximates fair value for the Firm’s physical commodities inventories. When fair
value hedging has been applied (or when net realizable value is below cost), the carrying value of
physical commodities approximates fair value, because under fair value hedge accounting, the cost
basis is adjusted for changes in fair value. Refer to Note 5 for a further
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 177 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
discussion of the Firm’s hedge accounting relationships. To provide consistent fair value disclosure
information, all physical commodities inventories have been included in each period presented.
(d) Balances reflect the reduction of securities owned (long positions) by the amount of identical
securities sold but not yet purchased (short positions).
(e) Certain investments that are measured at fair value using the net asset value per share (or its
equivalent) as a practical expedient are not required to be classified in the fair value hierarchy.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the fair values of these investments, which include certain hedge
funds, private equity funds, real estate and other funds, were $ 670million and $ 684million,
respectively. Included in these balances at December 31, 2020 and 2019, were trading assets of $
52million and $ 54million, respectively, and other assets of $ 618million and $ 630million,
respectively.
(f) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, included within loans were $ 15.1billion and $ 19.8billion,
respectively, of residential first-lien mortgages, and $ 6.3billion and $ 8.2billion, respectively,
of commercial first-lien mortgages. Residential mortgage loans include conforming mortgage loans
originated with the intent to sell to U.S. GSEs and government agencies of $ 8.4billion and $
13.6billion, respectively.
(g) As permitted under U.S. GAAP, the Firm has elected to net derivative receivables and derivative
payables and the related cash collateral received and paid when a legally enforceable master netting
agreement exists. The level 3 balances would be reduced if netting were applied, including the
netting benefit associated with cash collateral.
 178 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Level 3 valuations
The Firm has established well-structured processes for determining fair value, including for
instruments where fair value is estimated using significant unobservable inputs (level 3). Refer to
pages 171-175 of this Note for further information on the Firm’s valuation process and a detailed
discussion of the determination of fair value for individual financial instruments. Estimating fair
value requires the application of judgment. The type and level of judgment required is largely
dependent on the amount of observable market information available to the Firm. For instruments
valued using internally developed valuation models and other valuation techniques that use
significant unobservable inputs and are therefore classified within level 3 of the fair value
hierarchy, judgments used to estimate fair value are more significant than those required when
estimating the fair value of instruments classified within levels 1 and 2. In arriving at an estimate
of fair value for an instrument within level 3, management must first determine the appropriate
valuation model or other valuation technique to use. Second, due to the lack of observability of
significant inputs, management must assess relevant empirical data in deriving valuation inputs
including transaction details, yield curves, interest rates, prepayment speed, default rates,
volatilities, correlations, prices (such as commodity, equity or debt prices), valuations of
comparable instruments, foreign exchange rates and credit curves. The following table presents the
Firm’s primary level 3 financial instruments, the valuation techniques used to measure the fair value
of those financial instruments, the significant unobservable inputs, the range of values for those
inputs and the weighted or arithmetic averages of such inputs. While the determination to classify an
instrument within level 3 is based on the significance of the unobservable inputs to the overall fair
value measurement, level 3 financial instruments typically include observable components (that is,
components that are actively quoted and can be validated to external sources) in addition to the
unobservable components. The level 1 and/or level 2 inputs are not included in the table. In
addition, the Firm manages the risk of the observable components of level 3 financial instruments
using securities and derivative positions that are classified within levels 1 or 2 of the fair value
hierarchy. The range of values presented in the table is representative of the highest and lowest
level input used to value the significant groups of instruments within a product/instrument
classification. Where provided, the weighted averages of the input values presented in the table are
calculated based on the fair value of the instruments that the input is being used to value. In the
Firm’s view, the input range, weighted and arithmetic average values do not reflect the degree of
input uncertainty or an assessment of the reasonableness of the Firm’s estimates and assumptions.
Rather, they reflect the characteristics of the various instruments held by the Firm and the relative
distribution of instruments within the range of characteristics. For example, two option contracts
may have similar levels of market risk exposure and valuation uncertainty, but may have significantly
different implied volatility levels because the option contracts have different underlyings, tenors,
or strike prices. The input range and weighted average values will therefore vary from period-to-
period and parameter-to-parameter based on the characteristics of the instruments held by the Firm at
each balance sheet date.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 179 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
 Level 3 
 inputs… 
 Decemb… 
 31, 
 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fair Princip… Unobserv… Range of 
 Produc… value(in valuati… inputs(g) input Average… 
 million… techniq… values 
 Reside… 
 mortga… Discoun… 
 securi… $ 1,282 cash Yield 0% – 18% 6% 
 and flows 
 loans(… 
 Prepaym… 0% – 46% 10% 
 speed 
 Conditio… 
 default 0% – 30% 14% 
 rate 
 Loss 0% – 107% 7% 
 severity 
 Commer… 
 mortga… Market 
 securi… 466 compara… Price $0 – $101 $84 
 and 
 loans(… 
 Corpor… Market 
 debt 507 compara… Price $2 – $116 $85 
 securi… 
 Loans(… 1,930 Market Price $10 – $104 $72 
 compara… 
 Asset-… 28 Market Price $1 – $97 $57 
 securi… compara… 
 Net Interest 
 intere… 238 Option rate 7bps – 513bps 101bps 
 rate pricing volatili… 
 deriva… 
 Interest 
 rate 11bps – 23bps 15bps 
 spread 
 volatili… 
 Interest 
 rate (65)% – 99% 35% 
 correlat… 
 IR-FX (35)% – 50% 0% 
 correlat… 
 Discoun… Prepayme… 
 20 cash speed 0% – 30% 8% 
 flows 
 Net Discoun… Credit 
 credit -260 cash correlat… 34% – 65% 48% 
 deriva… flows 
 Credit 3bps – 1,302bps 441bps 
 spread 
 Recovery 0% – 67% 46% 
 rate 
 Conditio… 
 default 2% – 100% 58% 
 rate 
 Loss 100% 100% 
 severity 
 36 Market Price $1 – $115 $71 
 compara… 
 Net 
 foreign -298 Option IR-FX (40)% – 65% 18% 
 exchan… pricing correlat… 
 deriva… 
 Discoun… Prepayme… 
 -136 cash speed 9% 9% 
 flows 
 Net Option Forward 
 equity -3,862 pricing equity 61% – 106% 99% 
 deriva… price(h) 
 Equity 5% – 138% 35% 
 volatili… 
 Equity 18% – 99% 60% 
 correlat… 
 Equity-FX (79)% – 55% (27)% 
 correlat… 
 Equity-IR 20% – 50% 28% 
 correlat… 
 Net Option Oil $600 / $605 / 
 commod… -731 pricing Commodity MT – $609 / MT MT 
 deriva… Forward 
 Forward $12 / $34 / 
 power MWH – $55 / MWH MWH 
 price 
 Commodity 1% – 58% 29% 
 volatili… 
 Commodity (49)% – 95% 23% 
 correlat… 
 Discoun… Refer to 
 MSRs 3,276 cash Note 15 
 flows 
 Other Discoun… Credit 
 assets 299 cash spread 45bps 45bps 
 flows 
 Yield 4% 30% 7% 
 585 Market Price $29 – $29 $29 
 compara… 
 Long-t… 
 debt, Interest 
 short-… 27,912 Option rate 7bps – 513bps 101bps 
 borrow… pricing volatili… 
 and 
 deposi… 
 Interest 
 rate (65)% – 99% 35% 
 correla… 
 IR-FX (35)% – 50% 0% 
 correla… 
 Equity 18% – 99% 60% 
 correla… 
 Equity-… (79)% – 55% (27)% 
 correla… 
 Equity-… 20% – 50% 28% 
 correla… 
 Discoun… Credit 
 818 cash correlat… 34% – 65% 48% 
 flows 
 Other 
 level 3 
 assets 250 
 and 
 liabil… 
 net(f) 
(a) The categories presented in the table have been aggregated based upon the product type, which may
differ from their classification on the Consolidated balance sheets. Furthermore, the inputs
presented for each valuation technique in the table are, in some cases, not applicable to every
instrument valued using the technique as the characteristics of the instruments can differ.
(b) Comprises U.S. GSE and government agency securities of $ 449million, nonagency securities of $
28million and non-trading loans of $ 805million.
(c) Comprises nonagency securities of $ 3million, trading loans of $ 43million and non-trading loans
of $ 420million.
(d) Comprises trading loans of $ 850million and non-trading loans of $ 1.1billion.
(e) Long-term debt, short-term borrowings and deposits include structured notes issued by the Firm
that are financial instruments that typically contain embedded derivatives. The estimation of the
fair value of structured notes includes the derivative features embedded within the instrument. The
significant unobservable inputs are broadly consistent with those presented for derivative
receivables.
(f) Includes level 3 assets and liabilities that are insignificant both individually and in
aggregate.
(g) Price is a significant unobservable input for certain instruments. When quoted market prices are
not readily available, reliance is generally placed on price-based internal valuation techniques. The
price input is expressed assuming a par value of $ 100 .
(h) Forward equity price is expressed as a percentage of the current equity price.
(i) Amounts represent weighted averages except for derivative related inputs where arithmetic
averages are used.
 180 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Changes in and ranges of unobservable inputs The following discussion provides a description of the
impact on a fair value measurement of a change in each unobservable input in isolation, and the
interrelationship between unobservable inputs, where relevant and significant. The impact of changes
in inputs may not be independent, as a change in one unobservable input may give rise to a change in
another unobservable input. Where relationships do exist between two unobservable inputs, those
relationships are discussed below. Relationships may also exist between observable and unobservable
inputs (for example, as observable interest rates rise, unobservable prepayment rates decline); such
relationships have not been included in the discussion below. In addition, for each of the individual
relationships described below, the inverse relationship would also generally apply. The following
discussion also provides a description of attributes of the underlying instruments and external
market factors that affect the range of inputs used in the valuation of the Firm’s positions. Yield –
The yield of an asset is the interest rate used to discount future cash flows in a discounted cash
flow calculation. An increase in the yield, in isolation, would result in a decrease in a fair value
measurement. Credit spread – The credit spread is the amount of additional annualized return over the
market interest rate that a market participant would demand for taking exposure to the credit risk of
an instrument. The credit spread for an instrument forms part of the discount rate used in a
discounted cash flow calculation. Generally, an increase in the credit spread would result in a
decrease in a fair value measurement. The yield and the credit spread of a particular mortgage-backed
security primarily reflect the risk inherent in the instrument. The yield is also impacted by the
absolute level of the coupon paid by the instrument (which may not correspond directly to the level
of inherent risk). Therefore, the range of yield and credit spreads reflects the range of risk
inherent in various instruments owned by the Firm. The risk inherent in mortgage-backed securities is
driven by the subordination of the security being valued and the characteristics of the underlying
mortgages within the collateralized pool, including borrower FICO scores, LTV ratios for residential
mortgages and the nature of the property and/or any tenants for commercial mortgages. For corporate
debt securities, obligations of U.S. states and municipalities and other similar instruments, credit
spreads reflect the credit quality of the obligor and the tenor of the obligation. Prepayment speed –
The prepayment speed is a measure of the voluntary unscheduled principal repayments of a prepayable
obligation in a collateralized pool. Prepayment speeds generally decline as borrower delinquencies
rise. An increase in prepayment speeds, in isolation, would result in a decrease in a fair value
measurement of assets valued at a premium to par and an increase in a fair value measurement of
assets valued at a discount to par. Prepayment speeds may vary from collateral pool to collateral
pool, and are driven by the type and location of the underlying borrower, and the remaining tenor of
the obligation as well as the level and type (e.g., fixed or floating) of interest rate being paid by
the borrower. Typically collateral pools with higher borrower credit quality have a higher prepayment
rate than those with lower borrower credit quality, all other factors being equal. Conditional
default rate – The conditional default rate is a measure of the reduction in the outstanding
collateral balance underlying a collateralized obligation as a result of defaults. While there is
typically no direct relationship between conditional default rates and prepayment speeds,
collateralized obligations for which the underlying collateral has high prepayment speeds will tend
to have lower conditional default rates. An increase in conditional default rates would generally be
accompanied by an increase in loss severity and an increase in credit spreads. An increase in the
conditional default rate, in isolation, would result in a decrease in a fair value measurement.
Conditional default rates reflect the quality of the collateral underlying a securitization and the
structure of the securitization itself. Based on the types of securities owned in the Firm’s market-
making portfolios, conditional default rates are most typically at the lower end of the range
presented. Loss severity – The loss severity (the inverse concept is the recovery rate) is the
expected amount of future realized losses resulting from the ultimate liquidation of a particular
loan, expressed as the net amount of loss relative to the outstanding loan balance. An increase in
loss severity is generally accompanied by an increase in conditional default rates. An increase in
the loss severity, in isolation, would result in a decrease in a fair value measurement. The loss
severity applied in valuing a mortgage-backed security investment depends on factors relating to the
underlying mortgages, including the LTV ratio, the nature of the lender’s lien on the property and
other instrument-specific factors.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 181 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Correlation – Correlation is a measure of the relationship between the movements of two variables.
Correlation is a pricing input for a derivative product where the payoff is driven by one or more
underlying risks. Correlation inputs are related to the type of derivative (e.g., interest rate,
credit, equity, foreign exchange and commodity) due to the nature of the underlying risks. When
parameters are positively correlated, an increase in one parameter will result in an increase in the
other parameter. When parameters are negatively correlated, an increase in one parameter will result
in a decrease in the other parameter. An increase in correlation can result in an increase or a
decrease in a fair value measurement. Given a short correlation position, an increase in correlation,
in isolation, would generally result in a decrease in a fair value measurement. The level of
correlation used in the valuation of derivatives with multiple underlying risks depends on a number
of factors including the nature of those risks. For example, the correlation between two credit risk
exposures would be different than that between two interest rate risk exposures. Similarly, the tenor
of the transaction may also impact the correlation input, as the relationship between the underlying
risks may be different over different time periods. Furthermore, correlation levels are very much
dependent on market conditions and could have a relatively wide range of levels within or across
asset classes over time, particularly in volatile market conditions. Volatility – Volatility is a
measure of the variability in possible returns for an instrument, parameter or market index given how
much the particular instrument, parameter or index changes in value over time. Volatility is a
pricing input for options, including equity options, commodity options, and interest rate options.
Generally, the higher the volatility of the underlying, the riskier the instrument. Given a long
position in an option, an increase in volatility, in isolation, would generally result in an increase
in a fair value measurement. The level of volatility used in the valuation of a particular option-
based derivative depends on a number of factors, including the nature of the risk underlying the
option (e.g., the volatility of a particular equity security may be significantly different from that
of a particular commodity index), the tenor of the derivative as well as the strike price of the
option. Forward price - Forward price is the price at which the buyer agrees to purchase the asset
underlying a forward contract on the predetermined future delivery date, and is such that the value
of the contract is zero at inception. The forward price is used as an input in the valuation of
certain derivatives and depends on a number of factors including interest rates, the current price of
the underlying asset, and the expected income to be received and costs to be incurred by the seller
as a result of holding that asset until the delivery date. An increase in the forward can result in
an increase or a decrease in a fair value measurement. Changes in level 3 recurring fair value
measurements The following tables include a rollforward of the Consolidated balance sheets amounts
(including changes in fair value) for financial instruments classified by the Firm within level 3 of
the fair value hierarchy for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. When a determination
is made to classify a financial instrument within level 3, the determination is based on the
significance of the unobservable inputs to the overall fair value measurement. However, level 3
financial instruments typically include, in addition to the unobservable or level 3 components,
observable components (that is, components that are actively quoted and can be validated to external
sources); accordingly, the gains and losses in the table below include changes in fair value due in
part to observable factors that are part of the valuation methodology. Also, the Firm risk-manages
the observable components of level 3 financial instruments using securities and derivative positions
that are classified within level 1 or 2 of the fair value hierarchy; as these level 1 and level 2
risk management instruments are not included below, the gains or losses in the following tables do
not reflect the effect of the Firm’s risk management activities related to such level 3 instruments.
 182 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … … 
 … … F… … 
 … … … v… … 
 … … … at … 
 … … T… T… … D… … 
 … … r… i… … 3… … 
 … … g… 3… … 2… … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ -… $ 1… $ … $ … $ — $ — $ 4… $ … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 – … 2 15 … … — … 28 … 
 … 
 … 
 – 4 — 1 — … 2 … 3 — 
 … 
 … 
 … … -… 1… … … 2 … 4… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — — — — — — — — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … — — … … — — 8 — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … 21 2… … … — … 1… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … -… 5… … … 4… … 5… … 
 … 
 … … -… 1… … … 7… … 8… … 
 … … -3 44 … … 9 … 28 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … -… 2… … … 1… … 2… … 
 … 
 … … -… 53 … … 5… … 1… … 
 … 
 … … 2… 2… … … 6 … 3… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 – … -… … 2… … … 1… … 2… … -d 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … 2… 3… … … -… … 2… … 
 … 
 … … -… 73 … … 59 … -… … 
 … … 49 49 … … 13 3 -… … 
 … 
 … … -… 1… … … -… … -… … 
 … … -… 27 … … -… … -… … 
 … 
 … … 1… … 2… … … -… … -… … -d 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1 — — — … — — — — 
 … 
 … — — — — — — — — — 
 … 
 … 
 … 1 — — — … — — — — 
 … 
 … … -… … 9… … … 2… … 2… … -d 
 … 
 … … -… … 1… … … — — 3… … -e 
 … 
 … … -… … 75 … … 40 … 5… … -d 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … F… … 
 … … … v… … 
 … … T… … at … 
 … … r… … D… … 
 … … (… … 3… … 
 … … … 2… … 
 … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 T… 
 … … I… … i… 
 3… 
 … 
 … $ … $ 1… … $ — $ — $ 6… $ … $ 2… $ … $ 2… $ … -… 
 … … -… … — — 5… … 1… … 2… … -… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 – 
 … … -2 … -… … — … 1… … 51 … -d 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … 33 … -… … — — 47 … 68 … -d 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — — — — — — — — — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … 40 … — — 9… … 1… … 2… … -… 
 … 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 183 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … … 
 … … … 
 … … … … 
 … … … … 
 … … … … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … … … 
 … 
 $ … $ … $ … $ … … 1 … $ … 
 … … … … … … … 2 
 … 2 … … … … … 1 
 … … … … … … … … 
 — — — — — — — — 
 … … … … … — … … 
 … 1 … … — … … 4 
 … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … 
 … — … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … 2 … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … 5 … … … 
 … … … … 8 … … … 
 … … … … … … 1 … 
 … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 1 — — — — — — — 
 — — — — — — — — 
 1 — — — — — — — 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … — — … 
 … … … … … … 6 … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … 
 … … … 
 … … … … 
 … … … … 
 … … … … 
 … … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … … … 
 … 
 $ … $ … … $ — $ — … … … … $ … 
 … … … — — … … … … … 
 … 2 … … … — 1 … … 3 
 … … … … … — — 6 — … 
 1 … … — — — — — — — 
 … … … — — … … … … … 
 184 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … … 
 … … F… … 
 … … … v… … 
 … … … at … 
 … … T… … D… … 
 … … r… … 3… … 
 … … g… … 2… … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 T… 
 … S… … i… 
 3… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ … $ -… $ 4… $ … $ … $ 94 $ … $ 5… $ … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 – … -2 78 … … 59 … 64 1 
 … 
 … 
 – … 2 18 … … 36 … 11 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … -… 5… … … 1… … 6… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1 — — — — — … — — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … -… 1… … … — — 6… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … -… 4… … … 23 … 1… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … -… 3… … … 2… … 3… … 
 … 
 … … 1 9… … … 6… … 7… … 
 … … 28 98 … … 45 … 1… … 
 … 
 … 
 … … -… 2… … … 1… … 2… … 
 … 
 … … -… 1… … … 1… … 2… 9 
 … 
 … … -… 55 … … 3 … 3… … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 – … -… … 2… … … 1… … 3… … -d 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … 1… 1… … … -… … -… … 
 … 
 … … -… 5 … … 4 … -… … 
 … … 1… 52 … … -… … -… … 
 … 
 … … 1… 1… … … -… … -… … 
 … … -… 1 … … 7 … -… … 
 … 
 … … 3… … 1… … … -… … -… … -d 
 … 
 … 
 … — 
 … 
 … 1 — — — — — — 1 — 
 … 
 … … 1 — — … — — — — 
 … 
 … 
 … … 1 … — — … — — 1 — 
 … 
 … … 9 … 4… … … 1… … 8… … -d 
 … 
 … … 2… … 1… … … — — 6… … -e 
 … 
 … … -… … 1… … … 4 … 1… … -d 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … F… … 
 … … T… … v… … 
 … … T… i… … at … 
 … … r… l… … D… … 
 … … (… 3… … 3… … 
 … … … 2… … 
 … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … S… I… … 
 … 
 … $ … $ -… … $ — $ — $ 1… $ … $ 2 $ … $ 4… $ … -… 
 … … -… … — — 3… … 2… … 1… … -… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 – 
 … … 19 … -… … — … 14 … 50 … -d 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … — -… 5 — — 4 — 10 — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … — — 1 — … — — 1 — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … … -… … — — 1… … 1… … 1… … -… 
 … 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 185 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
(a) Level 3 assets at fair value as a percentage of total Firm assets accounted for at fair value
(including assets measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis) were 1%, 2% and 3% at December 31,
2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Level 3 liabilities at fair value as a percentage of total Firm
liabilities at fair value (including liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis) were
9%, 16% and 15% at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(b) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
(c) All level 3 derivatives are presented on a net basis, irrespective of underlying counterparty.
(d) Predominantly reported in principal transactions revenue, except for changes in fair value for
CCB mortgage loans, and lending-related commitments originated with the intent to sell, and mortgage
loan purchase commitments, which are reported in mortgage fees and related income.
(e) Changes in fair value for MSRs are reported in mortgage fees and related income.
(f) Realized (gains)/losses due to DVA for fair value option elected liabilities are reported in
principal transactions revenue, and they were not material for the years ended December 31, 2020,
2019 and 2018, respectively. Unrealized (gains)/losses are reported in OCI, and they were $
221million, $ 319million and $( 277) million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018,
respectively.
(g) Loan originations are included in purchases.
(h) Includes financial assets and liabilities that have matured, been partially or fully repaid,
impacts of modifications, deconsolidation associated with beneficial interests in VIEs and other
items.
(i) All transfers into and/or out of level 3 are based on changes in the observability and/or
significance of the valuation inputs and are assumed to occur at the beginning of the quarterly
reporting period in which they occur.
(j) Realized gains/(losses) on AFS securities, as well as other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”)
losses that are recorded in earnings, are reported in investment securities gains/(losses).
Unrealized gains/(losses) are reported in OCI. There were norealized gains/(losses) and foreign
exchange hedge accounting adjustments recorded in income on AFS securities for the years ended
December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively and $ 1million recorded for the year ended December 31,
2018. There were nomaterial unrealized gains/(losses) recorded on AFS securities in OCI for the years
ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 respectively.
Level 3 analysis
Consolidated balance sheets changes Level 3 assets at fair value including assets measured at fair
value on a nonrecurring basis were 0.5% of total Firm assets at December 31, 2020. The following
describes significant changes to level 3 assets since December 31, 2019, for those items measured at
fair value on a recurring basis. Refer to Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a
nonrecurring basis on page 189 for further information on changes impacting items measured at fair
value on a nonrecurring basis. For the year ended December 31, 2020 Level 3 assets were $ 16.4billion
at December 31, 2020, reflecting an increase of $ 2.9billion from December 31, 2019. The increase for
the year ended December 31, 2020 was driven by: • $ 907million increase in gross interest rate
derivative receivables and $ 1.4billion increase in gross equity derivative receivables largely due
to gains net of settlements. • $ 1.8billion increase in non-trading loans due to net transfers.
partially offset by • $ 1.4billion decrease in MSRs due to losses and settlements partially offset by
purchases. Refer to the sections below for additional information. Transfers between levels for
instruments carried at fair value on a recurring basis During the year ended December 31, 2020,
significant transfers from level 2 into level 3 included the following: • $ 1.8billion of total debt
and equity instruments, predominantly equity securities and trading loans, driven by a decrease in
observability. • $ 2.6billion of gross equity derivative receivables and $ 3.5billion of gross equity
derivative payables as a result of a decrease in observability and an increase in the significance of
unobservable inputs. • $ 880million of gross interest rate derivative payables as a result of a
decrease in observability and an increase in the significance of unobservable inputs. • $ 2.6billion
of non-trading loans driven by a decrease in observability. • $ 1.2billion of long-term debt driven
by a decrease in observability and an increase in the significance of unobservable inputs for
structured notes. During the year ended December 31, 2020, significant transfers from level 3 into
level 2 included the following: • $ 2.0billion of total debt and equity instruments, predominantly
due to corporate debt and trading loans, driven by an increase in observability. • $ 2.4billion of
gross equity derivative receivables and $ 2.4billion of gross equity derivative payables as a result
of an increase in observability and a decrease in the significance of unobservable inputs. • $
943million of deposits as a result of an increase in observability and a decrease in the significance
of unobservable inputs. • $ 1.3billion of long-term debt driven by an increase in observability and a
decrease in the significance of unobservable inputs for structured notes. During the year ended
December 31, 2019, significant transfers from level 2 into level 3 included the following: • $
993million of total debt and equity instruments, the majority of which were trading loans, driven by
a decrease in observability. • $ 904million of gross equity derivative payables as a result of a
decrease in observability and an increase in the significance of unobservable inputs.
 186 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
During the year ended December 31, 2019, significant transfers from level 3 into level 2 included the
following: • $ 1.5billion of total debt and equity instruments, the majority of which were
obligations of U.S. states and municipalities and trading loans, driven by an increase in
observability. • $ 1.1billion of gross equity derivative receivables and $ 1.3billion of gross equity
derivative payables as a result of an increase in observability and a decrease in the significance of
unobservable inputs. • $ 962million of gross commodities derivative payables as a result of an
increase in observability. • $ 1.2billion of deposits as a result of an increase in observability and
a decrease in the significance of unobservable inputs. • $ 1.4billion of long-term debt as a result
of an increase in observability and a decrease in the significance of unobservable inputs. During the
year ended December 31, 2018, significant transfers from level 2 into level 3 included the following:
• $ 1.4billion of total debt and equity instruments, the majority of which were trading loans, driven
by a decrease in observability. • $ 1.0billion of gross equity derivative receivables and $
1.6billion of gross equity derivative payables as a result of a decrease in observability and an
increase in the significance of unobservable inputs. • $ 1.1billion of long-term debt driven by a
decrease in observability and an increase in the significance of unobservable inputs for certain
structured notes. During the year ended December 31, 2018, significant transfers from level 3 into
level 2 included the following: • $ 1.5billion of total debt and equity instruments, the majority of
which were trading loans, driven by an increase in observability. • $ 1.2billion of gross equity
derivative receivables and $ 1.5billion of gross equity derivative payables as a result of an
increase in observability and a decrease in the significance of unobservable inputs. All transfers
are based on changes in the observability and/or significance of the valuation inputs and are assumed
to occur at the beginning of the quarterly reporting period in which they occur. Gains and losses The
following describes significant components of total realized/unrealized gains/(losses) for
instruments measured at fair value on a recurring basis for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019
and 2018. These amounts exclude any effects of the Firm’s risk management activities where the
financial instruments are classified as level 1 and 2 of the fair value hierarchy. Refer to Changes
in level 3 recurring fair value measurements rollforward tables on pages 182-186 for further
information on these instruments. 2020 • $ 10million of net gains on assets driven by gains in net
interest rate derivative receivables due to market movements largely offset by losses in MSRs
reflecting faster prepayment speeds on lower rates. Refer to Note 15 for additional information on
MSRs. • $ 102million of net gains on liabilities driven by market movements in short-term borrowings.
2019 • $ 2.1billion of net losses on assets largely due to MSRs reflecting faster prepayment speeds
on lower rates. Refer to Note 15 for additional information on MSRs. • $ 3.3billion of net losses on
liabilities predominantly driven by market movements in long-term debt. 2018 • $ 1.6billion of net
gains on liabilities largely driven by market movements in long-term debt.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 187 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Credit and funding adjustments – derivatives
Derivatives are generally valued using models
that use as their basis observable market
parameters. These market parameters generally do
not consider factors such as counterparty
nonperformance risk, the Firm’s own credit
quality, and funding costs. Therefore, it is
generally necessary to make adjustments to the
base estimate of fair value to reflect these
factors. CVA represents the adjustment, relative
to the relevant benchmark interest rate,
necessary to reflect counterparty nonperformance
risk. The Firm estimates CVA using a scenario
analysis to estimate the expected positive
credit exposure across all of the Firm’s
existing positions with each counterparty, and
then estimates losses based on the probability
of default and estimated recovery rate as a
result of a counterparty credit event
considering contractual factors designed to
mitigate the Firm’s credit exposure, such as
collateral and legal rights of offset. The key
inputs to this methodology are (i) the
probability of a default event occurring for
each counterparty, as derived from observed or
estimated CDS spreads; and (ii) estimated
recovery rates implied by CDS spreads, adjusted
to consider the differences in recovery rates as
a derivative creditor relative to those
reflected in CDS spreads, which generally
reflect senior unsecured creditor risk. FVA
represents the adjustment to reflect the impact
of funding and is recognized where there is
evidence that a market participant in the
principal market would incorporate it in a
transfer of the instrument. The Firm’s FVA
framework, applied to uncollateralized
(including partially collateralized) over-the-
counter (“OTC”) derivatives incorporates key
inputs such as: (i) the expected funding
requirements arising from the Firm’s positions
with
each counterparty and collateral arrangements;
and (ii) the estimated market funding cost in
the principal market which, for derivative
liabilities, considers the Firm’s credit risk
(DVA). For collateralized derivatives, the fair
value is estimated by discounting expected
future cash flows at the relevant overnight
indexed swap rate given the underlying
collateral agreement with the counterparty, and
therefore a separate FVA is not necessary.
The following table provides the impact of
credit and funding adjustments on principal
transactions revenue in the respective periods,
excluding the effect of any associated hedging
activities. The FVA presented below includes the
impact of the Firm’s own credit quality on the
inception value of liabilities as well as the
impact of changes in the Firm’s own credit
quality over time.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Credit and funding adjustments: 
 Derivatives CVA $ -337 $ 241 $ 193 
 Derivatives FVA -64 199 -74 
Valuation adjustments on fair value option
elected liabilities
The valuation of the Firm’s liabilities for
which the fair value option has been elected
requires consideration of the Firm’s own credit
risk. DVA on fair value option elected
liabilities reflects changes (subsequent to the
issuance of the liability) in the Firm’s
probability of default and LGD, which are
estimated based on changes in the Firm’s credit
spread observed in the bond market. Realized
(gains)/losses due to DVA for fair value option
elected liabilities are reported in principal
transactions revenue. Unrealized (gains)/losses
are reported in OCI. Refer to page 186 in this
Note and Note 24 for further information.
 188 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis
The following tables present the assets and liabilities held as of December 31, 2020 and 2019,
respectively, for which nonrecurring fair value adjustments were recorded during the years ended
December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, by major product category and fair value hierarchy.
 December 31, Fair value 
 2020 (in hierarchy Total fair 
 millions) Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 value 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans $ — $ 1,611 -c $ 972 -d $ 2,583 
 Other — 5 979 984 
 assets(a) 
 Total assets 
 measured at 
 fair value on $ — $ 1,616 $ 1,951 $ 3,567 
 a 
 nonrecurring 
 basis 
 Accounts 
 payable and — — 12 12 
 other 
 liabilities(b) 
 Total 
 liabilities 
 measured at 
 fair value $ — $ — $ 12 $ 12 
 on a 
 nonrecurring 
 basis 
 December 31, Fair value 
 2019 (in hierarchy Total fair 
 millions) Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 value 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans $ — $ 3,462 -c $ 269 $ 3,731 
 Other assets — 14 1,043 -e 1,057 
 Total assets 
 measured at 
 fair value on $ — $ 3,476 $ 1,312 $ 4,788 
 a 
 nonrecurring 
 basis 
(a) Primarily includes equity securities without readily determinable fair values that were adjusted
based on observable price changes in orderly transactions from an identical or similar investment of
the same issuer (measurement alternative). Of the $ 979million in level 3 assets measured at fair
value on a nonrecurring basis as of December 31, 2020, $ 535million related to equity securities
adjusted based on the measurement alternative. These equity securities are classified as level 3 due
to the infrequency of the observable prices and/or the restrictions on the shares.
(b) There were noliabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis at December 31, 2019.
(c) Primarily includes certain mortgage loans that were reclassified to held-for-sale.
(d) Of the $ 972million in level 3 assets measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis as of
December 31, 2020, $ 602million related to residential real estate loans carried at the net
realizable value of the underlying collateral (e.g., collateral-dependent loans). These amounts are
classified as level 3 as they are valued using information from broker’s price opinions, appraisals
and automated valuation models and discounted based upon the Firm’s experience with actual
liquidation values. These discounts ranged from 13% to 46% with a weighted average of 27%.
(e) Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
Nonrecurring fair value changes
The following table presents the total change in
value of assets and liabilities for which fair
value adjustments have been recognized for the
years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018,
related to assets and liabilities held at those
dates.
 December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans(a) $ -393 $ -274 $ -68 
 Other assets(b) -529 182 -c 132 
 Accounts payable and other liabilities -11 — — 
 Total nonrecurring fair value $ -933 $ -92 $ 64 
 gains/(losses) 
(a) Includes the impact of certain mortgage
loans that were reclassified to held-for-sale.
(b) Included $( 134) million, $ 201million and $
149million for the years ended December 31,
2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively,of net
(losses)/gains as a result of the measurement
alternative.
(c) Prior-period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current presentation.
Refer to Note 12 for further information about
the measurement of collateral-dependent loans.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 189 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Equity securities without readily determinable fair values
The Firm measures certain equity securities without readily determinable fair values at cost less
impairment (if any), plus or minus observable price changes from an identical or similar investment
of the same issuer, with such changes recognized in other income.
In its determination of the new carrying values upon observable price changes, the Firm may adjust
the prices if deemed necessary to arrive at the Firm’s estimated fair values. Such adjustments may
include adjustments to reflect the different rights and obligations of similar securities, and other
adjustments that are consistent with the Firm’s valuation techniques for private equity direct
investments.
The following table presents the carrying value of equity securities without readily determinable
fair values held as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, that are measured under the measurement
alternative and the related adjustments recorded during the periods presented for those securities
with observable price changes. These securities are included in the nonrecurring fair value tables
when applicable price changes are observable.
 As of or for the year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Other assets 
 Carrying value(a) $ 2,368 $ 2,441 
 Upward carrying value changes(b) 167 243 -d 
 Downward carrying value -301 -42 
 changes/impairment(c) 
(a) The period-end carrying values reflect cumulative purchases and sales in addition to upward and
downward carrying value changes.
(b) The cumulative upward carrying value changes between January 1, 2018 and December 31, 2020 were $
708million.
(c) The cumulative downward carrying value changes/impairment between January 1, 2018 and December
31, 2020 were $( 430) million .
(d) Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
Included in other assets above is the Firm’s interest in approximately 40million Visa Class B common
shares, recorded at a nominal carrying value. These shares are subject to certain transfer
restrictions currently and will be convertible into Visa Class A common shares upon final resolution
of certain litigation matters involving Visa. The conversion rate of Visa Class B common shares into
Visa Class A common shares is 1.6228at December 31, 2020, and may be adjusted by Visa depending on
developments related to the litigation matters.
Additional disclosures about the fair value of financial instruments that are not carried on the
Consolidated balance sheets at fair value U.S. GAAP requires disclosure of the estimated fair value
of certain financial instruments, which are included in the following table. However, this table does
not include other items, such as nonfinancial assets, intangible assets, certain financial
instruments, and customer relationships. In the opinion of management, these items, in the aggregate,
add significant value to JPMorgan Chase, but their fair value is not disclosed in this table.
Financial instruments for which carrying value approximates fair value Certain financial instruments
that are not carried at fair value on the Consolidated balance sheets are carried at amounts that
approximate fair value, due to their short-term nature and generally negligible credit risk. These
instruments include cash and due from banks, deposits with banks, federal funds sold, securities
purchased under resale agreements and securities borrowed, short-term receivables and accrued
interest receivable, short-term borrowings, federal funds purchased, securities loaned and sold under
repurchase agreements, accounts payable, and accrued liabilities. In addition, U.S. GAAP requires
that the fair value of deposit liabilities with no stated maturity (i.e., demand, savings and certain
money market deposits) be equal to their carrying value; recognition of the inherent funding value of
these instruments is not permitted.
 190 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
The following table presents by fair value hierarchy classification the carrying values and estimated
fair values at December 31, 2020 and 2019, of financial assets and liabilities, excluding financial
instruments that are carried at fair value on a recurring basis, and their classification within the
fair value hierarchy.
 De… D… 
 31, 3… 
 20… 2… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 E… Es… 
 f… fa… 
 v… va… 
 h… hi… 
 To… T… 
 (… Ca… L… Le… L… es… C… Le… L… Le… e… 
 b… va… 1 2 3 fa… v… 1 2 3 f… 
 va… v… 
 F… 
 a… 
 C… 
 a… 
 d… $ 24… $ 2… $ — $ — $ 24… $ 2… $ 21… $ — $ — $ 2… 
 f… 
 b… 
 D… 
 w… 50… 5… — — 50… 2… 24… — — 2… 
 b… 
 A… 
 i… 
 a… 89… — 89… 0… 89… 7… — 7… 0.1 7… 
 a… 
 r… 
 F… 
 f… 
 s… 
 a… 
 s… 58… — 58… — 58… 2… — 2… — 2… 
 p… 
 u… 
 r… 
 a… 
 S… 10… — 10… — 10… 1… — 1… — 1… 
 b… 
 I… 
 s… 20… 5… 15… — 20… 4… 0.1 4… — 4… 
 h… 
 L… 
 n… 
 of 
 a… 94… — 21… 7… 96… 9… — 2… 73… 9… 
 f… 
 l… 
 l… 
 O… 81… — 80… 1… 81… 6… — 6… 0.8 6… 
 F… 
 l… 
 D… $ 2,… $ — $ 2,… $ — $ 2,… $ 1… $ — $ 1… $ — $ 1… 
 F… 
 f… 
 p… 
 a… 
 s… 
 l… 59… — 59… — 59… 1… — 1… — 1… 
 or 
 s… 
 u… 
 r… 
 a… 
 S… 28… — 28… — 28… 3… — 3… — 3… 
 b… 
 A… 
 p… 
 a… 18… — 18… 4… 18… 1… 0.1 1… 3.5 1… 
 o… 
 l… 
 B… 
 i… 
 i… 17… — 17… — 17… 1… — 1… — 1… 
 by 
 c… 
 V… 
 L… 20… — 20… 3… 21… 2… — 2… 3.5 2… 
 d… 
(a) Fair value is typically estimated using a discounted cash flow model that incorporates the
characteristics of the underlying loans (including principal, contractual interest rate and
contractual fees) and other key inputs, including expected lifetime credit losses, interest rates,
prepayment rates, and primary origination or secondary market spreads. For certain loans, the fair
value is measured based on the value of the underlying collateral. Carrying value of the loan takes
into account the loan’s allowance for loan losses, which represents the loan’s expected credit losses
over its remaining expected life. The difference between the estimated fair value and carrying value
of a loan is generally attributable to changes in market interest rates, including credit spreads,
market liquidity premiums and other factors that affect the fair value of a loan but do not affect
its carrying value.
The majority of the Firm’s lending-related commitments are not carried at fair value on a recurring
basis on the Consolidated balance sheets. The carrying value and the estimated fair value of these
wholesale lending-related commitments were as follows for the periods indicated.
 De… D… 
 31, 3… 
 20… 2… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 E… Es… 
 f… fa… 
 v… va… 
 h… hi… 
 To… T… 
 (… Ca… L… Le… L… es… C… Le… L… Le… e… 
 b… va… 1 2 3 fa… v… 1 2 3 f… 
 va… v… 
 W… 
 l… $ 2.2 $ — $ — $ 2… $ 2.1 $ 1… $ — $ — $ 1.9 $ 1… 
 c… 
(a) Excludes the current carrying values of the guarantee liability and the offsetting asset, each of
which is recognized at fair value at the inception of the guarantees.
(b) Includes the wholesale allowance for lending-related commitments.
The Firm does not estimate the fair value of consumer off-balance sheet lending-related commitments.
In many cases, the Firm can reduce or cancel these commitments by providing the borrower notice or,
in some cases as permitted by law, without notice. Refer to page 173 of this Note for a further
discussion of the valuation of lending-related commitments.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 191 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
 Note 3 – Fair value option 
The fair value option provides an option to elect fair value as an alternative measurement for
selected financial assets, financial liabilities, unrecognized firm commitments, and written loan
commitments. The Firm has elected to measure certain instruments at fair value for several reasons
including to mitigate income statement volatility caused by the differences between the measurement
basis of elected instruments (e.g., certain instruments that otherwise would be accounted for on an
accrual basis) and the associated risk management arrangements that are accounted for on a fair value
basis, as well as to better reflect those instruments that are managed on a fair value basis. The
Firm’s election of fair value includes the following instruments: • Loans purchased or originated as
part of securitization warehousing activity, subject to bifurcation accounting, or managed on a fair
value basis, including lending-related commitments • Certain securities financing agreements • Owned
beneficial interests in securitized financial assets that contain embedded credit derivatives, which
would otherwise be required to be separately accounted for as a derivative instrument • Structured
notes, which are predominantly financial instruments that contain embedded derivatives, that are
issued as part of client-driven activities • Certain long-term beneficial interests issued by CIB’s
consolidated securitization trusts where the underlying assets are carried at fair value
 192 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Changes in fair value under the fair value option election
The following table presents the changes in fair value included in the Consolidated statements of
income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, for items for which the fair value
option was elected. The profit and loss information presented below only includes the financial
instruments that were elected to be measured at fair value; related risk management instruments,
which are required to be measured at fair value, are not included in the table.
 T… … … 
 c… … … 
 … in … … 
 … 2… A… f… 2… A… … 2… … … 
 … P… o… v… P… o… … P… … … 
 … t… i… r… t… i… … t… … … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 12 $ — $ 12 $ -… $ — $ … $ -… $ — $ … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… — 1… 1… — … 22 — … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… -1 -d 1… 2… -1 -d … -… 1 -d … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… — 1… 2… — … 15 — … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … -… — -… -1 — … 28 — … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… 7 -d 1… 4… 2 -d … 3… 1 -d … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 4… 3… -d 3… 2… 1… -d … 1… … -d … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… -… -e 38 8 6 -e … 11 … -e … 
 … 
 … -… — -… -… — … 1… — … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … -6 — -6 -8 — … 11 — … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… — 2… -… — … 8… — … 
 … 
 … 2 — 2 6 — 6 1 — 1 
 … 
 … -… — -… -… — … — — — 
 … 
 … -… -1 -d -… -… 1 -d … 2… — … 
 … 
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
(b) Unrealized gains/(losses) due to instrument-specific credit risk (DVA) for liabilities for which
the fair value option has been elected are recorded in OCI and subsequently recorded in principal
transactions revenue when realized. Realized gains/(losses) due to instrument-specific credit risk
recorded in principal transactions revenue were $ 20million for the year ended December 31,2020 and
were not material for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
(c) Long-term debt measured at fair value predominantly relates to structured notes. Although the
risk associated with the structured notes is actively managed, the gains/(losses) reported in this
table do not include the income statement impact of the risk management instruments used to manage
such risk.
(d) Reported in mortgage fees and related income.
(e) Reported in other income.
(f) Changes in fair value exclude contractual interest, which is included in interest income and
interest expense for all instruments other than hybrid financial instruments. Refer to Note 7 for
further information regarding interest income and interest expense.
Determination of instrument-specific credit risk for items for which the fair value option was
elected The following describes how the gains and losses that are attributable to changes in
instrument-specific credit risk, were determined. • Loans and lending-related commitments: For
floating-rate instruments, all changes in value are attributed to instrument-specific credit risk.
For fixed-rate instruments, an allocation of the changes in value for the period is made between
those changes in value that are interest rate-related and changes in value that are credit-related.
Allocations are generally based on an analysis of borrower-specific credit spread and recovery
information, where available, or benchmarking to similar entities or industries. • Long-term debt:
Changes in value attributable to instrument-specific credit risk were derived principally from
observable changes in the Firm’s credit spread as observed in the bond market. • Securities financing
agreements: Generally, for these types of agreements, there is a requirement that collateral be
maintained with a market value equal to or in excess of the principal amount loaned; as a result,
there would be no adjustment or an immaterial adjustment for instrument-specific credit risk related
to these agreements.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 193 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Difference between aggregate fair value and aggregate remaining contractual principal balance
outstanding
The following table reflects the difference between the aggregate fair value and the aggregate
remaining contractual principal balance outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, for loans,
long-term debt and long-term beneficial interests for which the fair value option has been elected.
 De… 
 31, Fair Fair 
 (in val… val… 
 mi… 2020 ove… 2019 ove… 
 Lo… Con… con… Con… con… 
 No… pri… Fair pri… pri… Fair pri… 
 lo… out… val… out… out… val… out… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Lo… 
 re… 
 as $ 3,3… $ 555 $ -2,… $ 2,5… $ 234 $ -2,… 
 tr… 
 as… 
 Lo… 1,8… 1,5… -360 964 696 -268 
 Su… 5,2… 2,0… -3,… 3,5… 930 -2,… 
 90 
 or 
 mo… 
 da… 
 pa… 
 due 
 and 
 go… 
 gu… 
 Lo… 
 re… 
 as — — — — — — 
 tr… 
 as… 
 Lo… 328 317 -11 138 129 -9 
 Su… 328 317 -11 138 129 -9 
 All 
 ot… 
 pe… 
 lo… 
 Lo… 
 re… 
 as 7,9… 6,4… -1,… 8,2… 6,7… -1,… 
 tr… 
 as… 
 Lo… 42,… 42,… 628 43,… 44,… 175 
 Su… 49,… 49,… -850 52,… 50,… -1,… 
 To… $ 55,… $ 51,… $ -4,… $ 55,… $ 51,… $ -3,… 
 lo… 
 Lo… 
 de… 
 Pr… $ 40,… -e $ 40,… $ -34 $ 40,… -e $ 39,… $ -878 
 de… 
 No… NA 36,… NA NA 36,… NA 
 de… 
 To… 
 lo… NA $ 76,… NA NA $ 75,… NA 
 de… 
 Lo… 
 be… 
 in… 
 No… NA $ 41 NA NA $ 36 NA 
 de… 
 To… 
 lo… NA $ 41 NA NA $ 36 NA 
 be… 
 in… 
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
(b) These balances are excluded from nonaccrual loans as the loans are insured and/or guaranteed by
U.S. government agencies.
(c) There were noperforming loans that were ninety days or more past due as of December 31, 2020 and
2019.
(d) Remaining contractual principal is not applicable to nonprincipal-protected structured notes and
long-term beneficial interests. Unlike principal-protected structured notes and long-term beneficial
interests, for which the Firm is obligated to return a stated amount of principal at maturity,
nonprincipal-protected structured notes and long-term beneficial interests do not obligate the Firm
to return a stated amount of principal at maturity, but for structured notes to return an amount
based on the performance of an underlying variable or derivative feature embedded in the note.
However, investors are exposed to the credit risk of the Firm as issuer for both nonprincipal-
protected and principal-protected notes.
(e) Where the Firm issues principal-protected zero-coupon or discount notes, the balance reflects the
contractual principal payment at maturity or, if applicable, the contractual principal payment at the
Firm’s next call date.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the contractual amount of lending-related commitments for which the
fair value option was elected was $ 18.1billion and $ 8.6billion, respectively, with a corresponding
fair value of $( 39) million and $( 120) million, respectively. Refer to Note 28 for further
information regarding off-balance sheet lending-related financial instruments. Prior-period amounts
have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
 194 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Structured note products by balance sheet classification and risk component
The following table presents the fair value of structured notes, by balance sheet classification and
the primary risk type.
 Dece… Dec… 
 31, 31, 
 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (in Long… Shor… Dep… Total Lon… Shor… Dep… Total 
 mil… debt borr… debt borr… 
 Risk 
 exp… 
 Int… $ 38,1… $ 65 $ 5,0… $ 43,2… $ 35,… $ 34 $ 16,… $ 52,1… 
 rate 
 Cre… 6,409 1,022 — 7,431 5,7… 875 — 6,590 
 For… 3,613 92 — 3,705 3,8… 48 5 3,915 
 exc… 
 Equ… 26,9… 5,021 6,8… 38,8… 29,… 4,852 8,1… 42,3… 
 Com… 250 13 232 495 472 32 1,4… 1,958 
 Tot… 
 str… $ 75,3… $ 6,213 $ 12,… $ 93,7… $ 74,… $ 5,841 $ 26,… $ 106,… 
 not… 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 195 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
 Note 4 – Credit risk concentrations 
Concentrations of credit risk arise when a number of clients, counterparties or customers are engaged
in similar business activities or activities in the same geographic region, or when they have similar
economic features that would cause their ability to meet contractual obligations to be similarly
affected by changes in economic conditions. JPMorgan Chase regularly monitors various segments of its
credit portfolios to assess potential credit risk concentrations and to obtain additional collateral
when deemed necessary and permitted under the Firm’s agreements. Senior management is significantly
involved in the credit approval and review process, and risk levels are adjusted as needed to reflect
the Firm’s risk appetite. In the Firm’s consumer portfolio, concentrations are managed primarily by
product and by U.S. geographic region, with a key focus on trends and concentrations at the portfolio
level, where potential credit risk concentrations can be remedied through changes in underwriting
policies and portfolio guidelines. Refer to Note 12 for additional information on the geographic
composition of the Firm’s consumer loan portfolios. In the wholesale portfolio, credit risk
concentrations are evaluated primarily by industry and monitored regularly on both an aggregate
portfolio level and on an individual client or counterparty basis. The Firm’s wholesale exposure is
managed through loan syndications and participations, loan sales, securitizations, credit
derivatives, master netting agreements, collateral and other risk-reduction techniques. Refer to Note
12 for additional information on loans. The Firm does not believe that its exposure to any particular
loan product or industry segment (e.g., real estate), or its exposure to residential real estate
loans with high LTV ratios, results in a significant concentration of credit risk. Terms of loan
products and collateral coverage are included in the Firm’s assessment when extending credit and
establishing its allowance for loan losses.
 196 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
The table below presents both on–balance sheet and off–balance sheet consumer and wholesale credit
exposure by the Firm’s three credit portfolio segments as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The
wholesale industry of risk category is generally based on the client or counterparty’s primary
business activity.
In conjunction with the adoption of CECL, the Firm reclassified risk-rated loans and lending-related
commitments from the consumer, excluding credit card portfolio segment to the wholesale portfolio
segment, to align with the methodology applied when determining the allowance. Prior-period amounts
have been revised to conform with the current presentation. Refer to Note 1 for further information.
 D… 20… 
 3… Cr… Of… 20… 
 (… ex… On… sh… Cr… On… Of… 
 m… Lo… sh… De… Lo… De… ex… sh… sh… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 C… 
 e… $ 37… $ 31… -j $ — $ 57… $ 35… $ 31… $ — $ 40… 
 c… 
 c… 
 C… 80… 14… — 65… 81… 16… — 65… 
 c… 
 T… 1,… 46… — 71… 1,… 48… — 69… 
 c… 
 W… 
 R… 14… 11… 1,… 28… 15… 11… 619 32… 
 E… 
 I… 
 a… 12… 10… 1,… 11… 10… 94… 694 9,… 
 I… 
 E… 
 C… 
 & 10… 39… 2,… 66… 10… 36… 1,4… 68… 
 R… 
 T… 
 M… 72… 14… 4,… 53… 60… 15… 2,7… 41… 
 & 
 T… 
 A… 66… 31… 9,… 26… 54… 24… 7,1… 23… 
 M… 
 I… 66… 21… 1,… 43… 62… 22… 878 39… 
 H… 60… 19… 3,… 37… 50… 17… 2,0… 31… 
 B… 
 & 54… 31… 8,… 14… 50… 31… 5,1… 14… 
 F… 
 C… 
 A… 43… 17… 5,… 20… 35… 18… 368 15… 
 O… 
 & 39… 11… 1,… 26… 41… 13… 852 27… 
 G… 
 S… 
 & 38… 18… 2,… 17… 30… 13… 2,0… 14… 
 M… 
 G… 
 U… 30… 4,… 3,… 21… 34… 5,… 2,5… 27… 
 C… 
 & 17… 4,… 856 11… 17… 4,… 459 12… 
 P… 
 C… 17… 3,… 12… 1,… 14… 2,… 10,… 1,… 
 G… 
 T… 16… 6,… 1,… 8,… 14… 5,… 715 8,… 
 M… 
 & 15… 4,… 882 9,… 15… 5,… 402 9,… 
 M… 
 I… 13… 1,… 2,… 9,… 12… 1,… 2,2… 8,… 
 S… 8,… 469 4,… 2,… 7,… 757 4,5… 2,… 
 F… 
 F… 
 M… 6,… 19 3,… 2,… 4,… 13 2,4… 1,… 
 I… 
 A… 10… 58… 7,… 35… 79… 51… 1,8… 26… 
 o… 
 S… 1,… 51… 79… 44… 94… 48… 49,… 41… 
 L… 
 h… 
 a… 
 l… 35… 35… — — 29… 29… — — 
 at 
 f… 
 v… 
 R… 
 f… 47… — — — 33… — — — 
 c… 
 T… 1,… 55… 79… 44… 1,… 51… 49,… 41… 
 w… 
 T… $ 2,… $ 1,… $ 79… $ 1,… $ 2,… $ 99… $ 49,… $ 1,… 
 e… 
(a) Also includes commercial card lending-related commitments primarily in CB and CIB.
(b) The industry rankings presented in the table as of December 31, 2019, are based on the industry
rankings of the corresponding exposures at December 31, 2020, not actual rankings of such exposures
at December 31, 2019.
(c) Individuals and Individual Entities predominantly consists of Wealth Management clients within
AWM and includes exposure to personal investment companies and personal and testamentary trusts.
(d) In addition to the credit risk exposure to states and municipal governments (both U.S. and
non-U.S.) at December 31, 2020 and 2019, noted above, the Firm held: $ 7.2billion and $ 6.5billion,
respectively, of trading assets; $ 20.4billion and $ 29.8billion, respectively, of AFS securities;
and $ 12.8billion and $ 4.8billion, respectively, of HTM securities, issued by U.S. state and
municipal governments. Refer to Note 2 and Note 10 for further information.
(e) All other includes: SPEs and Private education and civic organizations, representing
approximately 92% and 8%, respectively, at December 31, 2020 and 90% and 10%, respectively, at
December 31, 2019 . Refer to Note 14 for more information on exposures to SPEs.
(f) Receivables from customers reflect held-for-investment margin loans to brokerage clients in CIB,
CCB and AWM that are collateralized by assets maintained in the clients’ brokerage accounts (e.g.,
cash on deposit, liquid and readily marketable debt or equity securities). Because of this
collateralization, no allowance for credit losses is generally held against these receivables. To
manage its credit risk the Firm establishes margin requirements and monitors the required margin
levels on an ongoing basis, and requires clients to deposit additional cash or other collateral, or
to reduce positions, when appropriate. These receivables are reported within accrued interest and
accounts receivable on the Firm’s Consolidated balance sheets.
(g) Excludes cash placed with banks of $ 516.9billion and $ 254.0billion, at December 31, 2020 and
2019, respectively, which is predominantly placed with various central banks, primarily Federal
Reserve Banks.
(h) Credit exposure is net of risk participations and excludes the benefit of credit derivatives used
in credit portfolio management activities held against derivative receivables or loans and liquid
securities and other cash collateral held against derivative receivables.
(i) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans, which resulted in a corresponding reclassification of
certain off-balance sheet commitments. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the
current presentation.
(j) At December 31, 2020, included $ 19.2billion of loans in Business Banking under the PPP. PPP
loans are guaranteed by the SBA. Other than in certain limited circumstances, the Firm typically does
not recognize charge-offs, classify as nonaccrual nor record an allowance for loan losses on these
loans.
(k) Represents lending-related financial instruments.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 197 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
 Note 5 – Derivative instruments 
Derivative contracts derive their value from underlying asset prices, indices, reference rates, other
inputs or a combination of these factors and may expose counterparties to risks and rewards of an
underlying asset or liability without having to initially invest in, own or exchange the asset or
liability. JPMorgan Chase makes markets in derivatives for clients and also uses derivatives to hedge
or manage its own risk exposures. Predominantly all of the Firm’s derivatives are entered into for
market-making or risk management purposes. Market-making derivatives The majority of the Firm’s
derivatives are entered into for market-making purposes. Clients use derivatives to mitigate or
modify interest rate, credit, foreign exchange, equity and commodity risks. The Firm actively manages
the risks from its exposure to these derivatives by entering into other derivative contracts or by
purchasing or selling other financial instruments that partially or fully offset the exposure from
client derivatives. Risk management derivatives The Firm manages certain market and credit risk
exposures using derivative instruments, including derivatives in hedge accounting relationships and
other derivatives that are used to manage risks associated with specified assets and liabilities. The
Firm generally uses interest rate derivatives to manage the risk associated with changes in interest
rates. Fixed-rate assets and liabilities appreciate or depreciate in market value as interest rates
change. Similarly, interest income and expense increase or decrease as a result of variable-rate
assets and liabilities resetting to current market rates, and as a result of the repayment and
subsequent origination or issuance of fixed-rate assets and liabilities at current market rates.
Gains and losses on the derivative instruments related to these assets and liabilities are expected
to substantially offset this variability. Foreign currency derivatives are used to manage the foreign
exchange risk associated with certain foreign currency–denominated (i.e., non-U.S. dollar) assets and
liabilities and forecasted transactions, as well as the Firm’s net investments in certain non-U.S.
subsidiaries or branches whose functional currencies are not the U.S. dollar. As a result of
fluctuations in foreign currencies, the U.S. dollar–equivalent values of the foreign
currency–denominated assets and liabilities or the forecasted revenues or expenses increase or
decrease. Gains or losses on the derivative instruments related to these foreign currency–denominated
assets or liabilities, or forecasted transactions, are expected to substantially offset this
variability. Commodities derivatives are used to manage the price risk of certain commodities
inventories. Gains or losses on these derivative instruments are expected to substantially offset the
depreciation or appreciation of the related inventory. Credit derivatives are used to manage the
counterparty credit risk associated with loans and lending-related commitments. Credit derivatives
compensate the purchaser when the entity referenced in the contract experiences a credit event, such
as bankruptcy or a failure to pay an obligation when due. Credit derivatives primarily consist of
CDS. Refer to the Credit derivatives section on pages 209-211 of this Note for a further discussion
of credit derivatives. Refer to the risk management derivatives gains and losses table on page 209 of
this Note, and the hedge accounting gains and losses tables on pages 206-208 of this Note for more
information about risk management derivatives. Derivative counterparties and settlement types The
Firm enters into OTC derivatives, which are negotiated and settled bilaterally with the derivative
counterparty. The Firm also enters into, as principal, certain ETD such as futures and options, and
OTC-cleared derivative contracts with CCPs. ETD contracts are generally standardized contracts traded
on an exchange and cleared by the CCP, which is the Firm’s counterparty from the inception of the
transactions. OTC-cleared derivatives are traded on a bilateral basis and then novated to the CCP for
clearing. Derivative clearing services The Firm provides clearing services for clients in which the
Firm acts as a clearing member at certain exchanges and clearing houses. The Firm does not reflect
the clients’ derivative contracts in its Consolidated Financial Statements. Refer to Note 28 for
further information on the Firm’s clearing services. Accounting for derivatives All free-standing
derivatives that the Firm executes for its own account are required to be recorded on the
Consolidated balance sheets at fair value. As permitted under U.S. GAAP, the Firm nets derivative
assets and liabilities, and the related cash collateral receivables and payables, when a legally
enforceable master netting agreement exists between the Firm and the derivative counterparty. Refer
to Note 1 for further discussion of the offsetting of assets and liabilities. The accounting for
changes in value of a derivative depends on whether or not the transaction has been designated and
qualifies for hedge accounting. Derivatives that are not designated as hedges are reported and
measured at fair value through earnings. The tabular disclosures on pages 202-209 of this Note
provide additional information on the amount of, and reporting for, derivative assets, liabilities,
gains and losses. Refer to Notes 2 and 3 for a further discussion of derivatives embedded in
structured notes.
 198 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Derivatives designated as hedges The Firm applies hedge accounting to certain derivatives executed
for risk management purposes – generally interest rate, foreign exchange and commodity derivatives.
However, JPMorgan Chase does not seek to apply hedge accounting to all of the derivatives involved in
the Firm’s risk management activities. For example, the Firm does not apply hedge accounting to
purchased CDS used to manage the credit risk of loans and lending-related commitments, because of the
difficulties in qualifying such contracts as hedges. For the same reason, the Firm does not apply
hedge accounting to certain interest rate, foreign exchange, and commodity derivatives used for risk
management purposes. To qualify for hedge accounting, a derivative must be highly effective at
reducing the risk associated with the exposure being hedged. In addition, for a derivative to be
designated as a hedge, the risk management objective and strategy must be documented. Hedge
documentation must identify the derivative hedging instrument, the asset or liability or forecasted
transaction and type of risk to be hedged, and how the effectiveness of the derivative is assessed
prospectively and retrospectively. To assess effectiveness, the Firm uses statistical methods such as
regression analysis, nonstatistical methods such as dollar-value comparisons of the change in the
fair value of the derivative to the change in the fair value or cash flows of the hedged item, and
qualitative comparisons of critical terms and the evaluation of any changes in those terms. The
extent to which a derivative has been, and is expected to continue to be, highly effective at
offsetting changes in the fair value or cash flows of the hedged item must be assessed and documented
at least quarterly. If it is determined that a derivative is not highly effective at hedging the
designated exposure, hedge accounting is discontinued. There are three types of hedge accounting
designations: fair value hedges, cash flow hedges and net investment hedges. JPMorgan Chase uses fair
value hedges primarily to hedge fixed-rate long-term debt, AFS securities and certain commodities
inventories. For qualifying fair value hedges, the changes in the fair value of the derivative, and
in the value of the hedged item for the risk being hedged, are recognized in earnings. Certain
amounts excluded from the assessment of effectiveness are recorded in OCI and recognized in earnings
over the life of the derivative. If the hedge relationship is terminated, then the adjustment to the
hedged item continues to be reported as part of the basis of the hedged item, and for benchmark
interest rate hedges, is amortized to earnings as a yield adjustment. Derivative amounts affecting
earnings are recognized consistent with the classification of the hedged item – primarily net
interest income and principal transactions revenue. JPMorgan Chase uses cash flow hedges primarily to
hedge the exposure to variability in forecasted cash flows from floating-rate assets and liabilities
and foreign currency–denominated revenue and expense. For qualifying cash flow hedges, changes in the
fair value of the derivative are recorded in OCI and recognized in earnings as the hedged item
affects earnings. Derivative amounts affecting earnings are recognized consistent with the
classification of the hedged item – primarily noninterest revenue, net interest income and
compensation expense. If the hedge relationship is terminated, then the change in value of the
derivative recorded in AOCI is recognized in earnings when the cash flows that were hedged affect
earnings. For hedge relationships that are discontinued because a forecasted transaction is expected
to not occur according to the original hedge forecast, any related derivative values recorded in AOCI
are immediately recognized in earnings. JPMorgan Chase uses net investment hedges to protect the
value of the Firm’s net investments in certain non-U.S. subsidiaries or branches whose functional
currencies are not the U.S. dollar. For qualifying net investment hedges, changes in the fair value
of the derivatives due to changes in spot foreign exchange rates are recorded in OCI as translation
adjustments. Amounts excluded from the assessment of effectiveness are recorded directly in earnings.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 199 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
The following table outlines the Firm’s primary uses of derivatives and the related hedge accounting
designation or disclosure category.
 Type of Use of Derivative Designation and Affected segment Page reference 
 Derivative disclosure or unit 
 Manage 
 specifically 
 identified risk 
 exposures in 
 qualifying hedge 
 accounting 
 relationships: 
 Hedge fixed rate 
 •Interest rate assets and Fair value hedge Corporate 206-207 
 liabilities 
 Hedge 
 •Interest rate floating-rate Cash flow hedge Corporate 208 
 assets and 
 liabilities 
 Hedge foreign 
 •Foreign currency-denomin… Fair value hedge Corporate 206-207 
 exchange assets and 
 liabilities 
 Hedge foreign 
 •Foreign currency-denomin… 
 exchange forecasted Cash flow hedge Corporate 208 
 revenue and 
 expense 
 Hedge the value 
 of the Firm’s 
 •Foreign investments in Net investment Corporate 208 
 exchange non-U.S. dollar hedge 
 functional 
 currency entities 
 •Commodity Hedge commodity Fair value hedge CIB 206-207 
 inventory 
 Manage 
 specifically 
 identified risk 
 exposures not 
 designated in 
 qualifying 
 hedge accounting 
 relationships: 
 Manage the risk 
 associated with 
 •Interest rate mortgage Specified risk CCB 209 
 commitments, management 
 warehouse loans 
 and MSRs 
 Manage the credit 
 •Credit risk associated Specified risk CIB 209 
 with wholesale management 
 lending exposures 
 Manage the risk 
 •Interest rate associated with Specified risk 
 and foreign certain other management Corporate 209 
 exchange specified assets 
 and liabilities 
 Market-making 
 derivatives and 
 other 
 activities: 
 Market-making and Market-making and 
 •Various related risk other CIB 209 
 management 
 •Various Other derivatives Market-making and CIB, AWM, 209 
 other Corporate 
 200 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Notional amount of derivative contracts
The following table summarizes the notional
amount of derivative contracts outstanding as of
December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 December 31, (in billions) 
 Interest rate contracts Notional amounts(b) 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Swaps $ 20,986 $ 21,228 
 Futures and forwards 3,057 3,152 
 Written options 3,375 3,938 
 Purchased options 3,675 4,361 
 Total interest rate contracts 31,093 32,679 
 Credit derivatives(a) 1,201 1,242 
 Foreign exchange contracts 
 Cross-currency swaps 3,924 3,604 
 Spot, futures and forwards 6,871 5,577 
 Written options 830 700 
 Purchased options 825 718 
 Total foreign exchange contracts 12,450 10,599 
 Equity contracts 
 Swaps 448 406 
 Futures and forwards 140 142 
 Written options 676 646 
 Purchased options 621 611 
 Total equity contracts 1,885 1,805 
 Commodity contracts 
 Swaps 138 147 
 Spot, futures and forwards 198 211 
 Written options 124 135 
 Purchased options 105 124 
 Total commodity contracts 565 617 
 Total derivative notional amounts $ 47,194 $ 46,942 
(a) Refer to the Credit derivatives discussion
on pages 209-211 for more information on volumes
and types of credit derivative contracts.
(b) Represents the sum of gross long and gross
short third-party notional derivative contracts.
While the notional amounts disclosed above give
an indication of the volume of the Firm’s
derivatives activity, the notional amounts
significantly exceed, in the Firm’s view, the
possible losses that could arise from such
transactions. For most derivative contracts, the
notional amount is not exchanged; it is simply a
reference amount used to calculate payments.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 201 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Impact of derivatives on the Consolidated balance sheets
The following table summarizes information on derivative receivables and payables (before and after
netting adjustments) that are reflected on the Firm’s Consolidated balance sheets as of December 31,
2020 and 2019, by accounting designation (e.g., whether the derivatives were designated in qualifying
hedge accounting relationships or not) and contract type.
 Fre… 
 der… 
 rec… 
 and Gross Gro… 
 pay… deri… der… 
 Dec… rece… pay… 
 31, Not Not 
 2020 desi… Desi… Tot… Net des… Desi… Tot… Net 
 (in as as der… deri… as as der… deri… 
 mil… hedg… hedg… rec… rece… hed… hedg… pay… paya… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Tra… 
 ass… 
 and 
 lia… 
 Int… $ 390,… $ 831 $ 391… $ 35,7… $ 353… $ — $ 353… $ 13,0… 
 rate 
 Cre… 13,5… — 13,… 680 15,… — 15,… 1,995 
 For… 205,… 901 206… 15,7… 214… 1,697 215… 21,4… 
 exc… 
 Equ… 74,7… — 74,… 20,6… 81,… — 81,… 25,8… 
 Com… 20,5… 924 21,… 6,771 20,… 1,895 22,… 8,285 
 Tot… 
 fair 
 val… 
 of $ 704,… $ 2,656 $ 707… $ 79,6… $ 685… $ 3,592 $ 688… $ 70,6… 
 tra… 
 ass… 
 and 
 lia… 
 Gross Gro… 
 deri… der… 
 rece… pay… 
 Dec… Not Not 
 31, desi… Desi… Tot… Net des… Desi… Tot… Net 
 2019 as as der… deri… as as der… deri… 
 (in hedg… hedg… rec… rece… hed… hedg… pay… paya… 
 mil… 
 Tra… 
 ass… 
 and 
 lia… 
 Int… $ 312,… $ 843 $ 313… $ 27,4… $ 279… $ 1 $ 279… $ 8,603 
 rate 
 Cre… 14,8… — 14,… 701 15,… — 15,… 1,652 
 For… 138,… 308 138… 9,005 144… 983 145… 13,1… 
 exc… 
 Equ… 45,7… — 45,… 6,477 52,… — 52,… 12,5… 
 Com… 16,9… 328 17,… 6,162 19,… 149 19,… 7,758 
 Tot… 
 fair 
 val… 
 of $ 528,… $ 1,479 $ 529… $ 49,7… $ 510… $ 1,133 $ 512… $ 43,7… 
 tra… 
 ass… 
 and 
 lia… 
(a) Balances exclude structured notes for which the fair value option has been elected. Refer to Note
3 for further information.
(b) As permitted under U.S. GAAP, the Firm has elected to net derivative receivables and derivative
payables and the related cash collateral receivables and payables when a legally enforceable master
netting agreement exists.
 202 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Derivatives netting
The following tables present, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, gross and net derivative receivables
and payables by contract and settlement type. Derivative receivables and payables, as well as the
related cash collateral from the same counterparty, have been netted on the Consolidated balance
sheets where the Firm has obtained an appropriate legal opinion with respect to the master netting
agreement. Where such a legal opinion has not been either sought or obtained, amounts are not
eligible for netting on the Consolidated balance sheets, and those derivative receivables and
payables are shown separately in the tables below.
In addition to the cash collateral received and transferred that is presented on a net basis with
derivative receivables and payables, the Firm receives and transfers additional collateral (financial
instruments and cash). These amounts mitigate counterparty credit risk associated with the Firm’s
derivative instruments, but are not eligible for net presentation:
• collateral that consists of liquid securities and other cash collateral held at third-party
custodians, which are shown separately as “Collateral not nettable on the Consolidated balance
sheets” in the tables below, up to the fair value exposure amount. Liquid securities represent high
quality liquid assets as defined in the LCR rule;
• the amount of collateral held or transferred that exceeds the fair value exposure at the individual
counterparty level, as of the date presented, which is excluded from the tables below; and
• collateral held or transferred that relates to derivative receivables or payables where an
appropriate legal opinion has not been either sought or obtained with respect to the master netting
agreement, which is excluded from the tables below.
 Dece… 
 31, 
 (in 
 mill… 
 U.S. 
 GAAP 
 nett… Amoun… Amoun… 
 deri… netted netted 
 rece… 2020 on the 2019 on the 
 Inte… Gross Conso… Net Gross Conso… Net 
 rate deriv… balan… deriv… deriva… balan… deriva… 
 cont… recei… sheets recei… receiv… sheets receiv… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 OTC $ 367,0… $ -337,… $ 29,605 $ 299,205 $ -276,… $ 22,950 
 OTC–… 18,340 -17,9… 421 9,442 -9,360 82 
 Exch… 554 -395 159 347 -258 89 
 Total 
 inte… 385,9… -355,… 30,185 308,994 -285,… 23,121 
 rate 
 cont… 
 Cred… 
 cont… 
 OTC 9,052 -8,514 538 10,743 -10,3… 426 
 OTC–… 4,326 -4,309 17 3,864 -3,858 6 
 Total 
 cred… 13,378 -12,8… 555 14,607 -14,1… 432 
 cont… 
 Fore… 
 exch… 
 cont… 
 OTC 201,3… -189,… 11,694 136,252 -129,… 6,928 
 OTC–… 834 -819 15 185 -152 33 
 Exch… 35 -5 30 10 -6 4 
 Total 
 fore… 202,2… -190,… 11,739 136,447 -129,… 6,965 
 exch… 
 cont… 
 Equi… 
 cont… 
 OTC 34,030 -27,3… 6,656 23,106 -20,8… 2,286 
 Exch… 28,294 -26,7… 1,543 19,654 -18,4… 1,224 
 Total 
 equi… 62,324 -54,1… 8,199 42,760 -39,2… 3,510 
 cont… 
 Comm… 
 cont… 
 OTC 10,924 -7,901 3,023 7,093 -5,149 1,944 
 OTC–… 20 -20 — 28 -28 — 
 Exch… 6,833 -6,811 22 6,154 -5,903 251 
 Total 
 comm… 17,777 -14,7… 3,045 13,275 -11,0… 2,195 
 cont… 
 Deri… 
 rece… 
 with 681,6… -627,… 53,723 -d 516,083 -479,… 36,223 -d 
 appr… 
 legal 
 opin… 
 Deri… 
 rece… 
 where 
 an 
 appr… 
 legal 
 opin… 25,907 25,907 13,543 13,543 
 has 
 not 
 been 
 eith… 
 soug… 
 or 
 obta… 
 Total 
 deri… 
 rece… 
 reco… 
 on $ 707,5… $ 79,630 $ 529,626 $ 49,766 
 the 
 Cons… 
 bala… 
 shee… 
 Coll… 
 not 
 nett… 
 on -14,8… -13,052 
 the 
 Cons… 
 bala… 
 shee… 
 Net $ 64,824 $ 36,714 
 amou… 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 203 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
 Dece… 
 31, 
 (in 
 mill… 
 U.S. 
 GAAP 
 nett… Amoun… Amounts 
 deri… netted netted 
 paya… 2020 on the 2019 on the 
 Inte… Gross Conso… Net Gross Consol… Net 
 rate deriv… balan… deriva… deriv… balance deriv… 
 cont… payab… sheets payabl… payab… sheets payab… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 OTC $ 331,8… $ -320,… $ 11,074 $ 267,3… $ -260,2… $ 7,082 
 OTC–… 19,710 -19,4… 216 10,217 -10,138 79 
 Exch… 358 -341 17 365 -303 62 
 Total 
 inte… 351,9… -340,… 11,307 277,8… -270,6… 7,223 
 rate 
 cont… 
 Cred… 
 cont… 
 OTC 10,671 -9,141 1,530 11,570 -10,080 1,490 
 OTC–… 4,075 -4,056 19 3,390 -3,389 1 
 Total 
 cred… 14,746 -13,1… 1,549 14,960 -13,469 1,491 
 cont… 
 Fore… 
 exch… 
 cont… 
 OTC 210,8… -193,… 17,131 142,3… -131,7… 10,568 
 OTC–… 836 -819 17 186 -152 34 
 Exch… 34 -2 32 12 -6 6 
 Total 
 fore… 211,6… -194,… 17,180 142,5… -131,9… 10,608 
 exch… 
 cont… 
 Equi… 
 cont… 
 OTC 35,330 -28,7… 6,567 27,594 -21,778 5,816 
 Exch… 34,491 -26,7… 7,739 20,216 -18,426 1,790 
 Total 
 equi… 69,821 -55,5… 14,306 47,810 -40,204 7,606 
 cont… 
 Comm… 
 cont… 
 OTC 10,365 -7,544 2,821 8,714 -6,235 2,479 
 OTC–… 32 -32 — 30 -30 — 
 Exch… 7,391 -6,868 523 6,012 -5,862 150 
 Total 
 comm… 17,788 -14,4… 3,344 14,756 -12,127 2,629 
 cont… 
 Deri… 
 paya… 
 with 665,9… -618,… 47,686 -d 497,9… -468,4… 29,557 -d 
 appr… 
 legal 
 opin… 
 Deri… 
 paya… 
 where 
 an 
 appr… 
 legal 
 opin… 22,937 22,937 14,151 14,151 
 has 
 not 
 been 
 eith… 
 soug… 
 or 
 obta… 
 Total 
 deri… 
 paya… 
 reco… 
 on $ 688,8… $ 70,623 $ 512,1… $ 43,708 
 the 
 Cons… 
 bala… 
 shee… 
 Coll… 
 not 
 nett… 
 on -11,964 -6,960 
 the 
 Cons… 
 bala… 
 shee… 
 Net $ 58,659 $ 36,748 
 amou… 
(a) Exchange-traded derivative balances that relate to futures contracts are settled daily.
(b) Includes liquid securities and other cash collateral held at third-party custodians related to
derivative instruments where an appropriate legal opinion has been obtained. For some counterparties,
the collateral amounts of financial instruments may exceed the derivative receivables and derivative
payables balances. Where this is the case, the total amount reported is limited to the net derivative
receivables and net derivative payables balances with that counterparty. In the fourth quarter of
2020, the Firm refined its approach for disclosing additional collateral held by the Firm that may be
used as security when the fair value of the client’s exposure is in the Firm’s favor. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
(c) Derivative collateral relates only to OTC and OTC-cleared derivative instruments.
(d) Net derivatives receivable included cash collateral netted of $ 88.0billion and $ 65.9billion at
December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net derivatives payable included cash collateral netted of
$ 78.4billion and $ 54.4billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Derivative cash
collateral relates to OTC and OTC-cleared derivative instruments.
 204 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Liquidity risk and credit-related contingent features
In addition to the specific market risks introduced by each derivative contract type, derivatives
expose JPMorgan Chase to credit risk — the risk that derivative counterparties may fail to meet their
payment obligations under the derivative contracts and the collateral, if any, held by the Firm
proves to be of insufficient value to cover the payment obligation. It is the policy of JPMorgan
Chase to actively pursue, where possible, the use of legally enforceable master netting arrangements
and collateral agreements to mitigate derivative counterparty credit risk inherent in derivative
receivables.
While derivative receivables expose the Firm to credit risk, derivative payables expose the Firm to
liquidity risk, as the derivative contracts typically require the Firm to post cash or securities
collateral with counterparties as the fair value of the contracts moves in the counterparties’ favor
or upon specified downgrades in the Firm’s and its subsidiaries’ respective credit ratings. Certain
derivative contracts also provide for termination of the contract, generally upon a downgrade of
either the Firm or the counterparty, at the fair value of the derivative contracts. The following
table shows the aggregate fair value of net derivative payables related to OTC and OTC-cleared
derivatives that contain contingent collateral or termination features that may be triggered upon a
ratings downgrade, and the associated collateral the Firm has posted in the normal course of
business, at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 OTC and OTC-cleared derivative payables containing 
 downgrade triggers 
 December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Aggregate fair value of net derivative $ 27,712 $ 14,819 
 payables 
 Collateral posted 26,289 13,329 
The following table shows the impact of a single-notch and two-notch downgrade of the long-term
issuer ratings of JPMorgan Chase & Co. and its subsidiaries, predominantly JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.,
at December 31, 2020 and 2019, related to OTC and OTC-cleared derivative contracts with contingent
collateral or termination features that may be triggered upon a ratings downgrade. Derivatives
contracts generally require additional collateral to be posted or terminations to be triggered when
the predefined threshold rating is breached. A downgrade by a single rating agency that does not
result in a rating lower than a preexisting corresponding rating provided by another major rating
agency will generally not result in additional collateral (except in certain instances in which
additional initial margin may be required upon a ratings downgrade), nor in termination payments
requirements. The liquidity impact in the table is calculated based upon a downgrade below the lowest
current rating of the rating agencies referred to in the derivative contract.
 Liquidity 
 impact of 
 downgrade 
 triggers on 
 OTC and 
 OTC-cleared 
 derivatives 2020 2019 
 December 31, Single-notch Two-notch Single-notch Two-notch 
 (in millions) downgrade downgrade downgrade downgrade 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Amount of 
 additional 
 collateral to $ 119 $ 1,243 $ 189 $ 1,467 
 be 
 posted upon 
 downgrade(a) 
 Amount 
 required to 
 settle 
 contracts 153 2,449 104 1,398 
 with 
 termination 
 triggers upon 
 downgrade(b) 
(a) Includes the additional collateral to be posted for initial margin.
(b) Amounts represent fair values of derivative payables, and do not reflect collateral posted.
Derivatives executed in contemplation of a sale of the underlying financial asset
In certain instances the Firm enters into transactions in which it transfers financial assets but
maintains the economic exposure to the transferred assets by entering into a derivative with the same
counterparty in contemplation of the initial transfer. The Firm generally accounts for such transfers
as collateralized financing transactions as described in Note 11, but in limited circumstances they
may qualify to be accounted for as a sale and a derivative under U.S. GAAP. The amount of such
transfers accounted for as a sale where the associated derivative was outstanding was not material at
both December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 205 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Impact of derivatives on the Consolidated statements of income
The following tables provide information related to gains and losses recorded on derivatives based on
their hedge accounting
designation or purpose.
Fair value hedge gains and losses
The following tables present derivative instruments, by contract type, used in fair value hedge
accounting relationships, as well as pre-tax gains/(losses) recorded on such derivatives and the
related hedged items for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The Firm
includes gains/(losses) on the hedging derivative in the same line item in the Consolidated
statements of income as the related hedged item.
 OCI 
 Year Income impact 
 ended stateme… Derivat… 
 Decemb… Gains/(… impact - 
 31, recorded ofexclu… Gains/(… 
 2020 in Income compone… Changes recorded 
 (in income Hedged stateme… Amortiz… in fair in 
 millio… Derivat… items impact approach value OCI(f) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Contra… 
 type 
 Intere… $ 2,962 $ -1,889 $ 1,073 $ — $ 1,093 $ — 
 rate(a… 
 Foreign 793 -619 174 -457 174 25 
 exchan… 
 Commod… -2,507 2,650 143 — 137 — 
 Total $ 1,248 $ 142 $ 1,390 $ -457 $ 1,404 $ 25 
 Income 
 Gains/(… stateme… 
 recorded impact OCI 
 in of impact 
 income excluded 
 compone… 
 Year Derivat… 
 ended - 
 Decemb… Hedged Income Amortiz… Changes Gains/(… 
 31, Derivat… items stateme… approach in fair recorded 
 2019 impact value in 
 (in OCI(f) 
 millio… 
 Contra… 
 type 
 Intere… $ 3,204 $ -2,373 $ 831 $ — $ 828 $ — 
 rate(a… 
 Foreign 154 328 482 -866 482 39 
 exchan… 
 Commod… -77 148 71 — 63 — 
 Total $ 3,281 $ -1,897 $ 1,384 $ -866 $ 1,373 $ 39 
 Income 
 Gains/(… stateme… 
 recorded impact OCI 
 in of impact 
 income excluded 
 compone… 
 Year Derivat… 
 ended - 
 Decemb… Hedged Income Amortiz… Changes Gains/(… 
 31, Derivat… items stateme… approach in fair recorded 
 2018 impact value in 
 (in OCI(f) 
 millio… 
 Contra… 
 type 
 Intere… $ -1,145 $ 1,782 $ 637 $ — $ 623 $ — 
 rate(a… 
 Foreign 1,092 -616 476 -566 476 -140 
 exchan… 
 Commod… 789 -754 35 — 26 — 
 Total $ 736 $ 412 $ 1,148 $ -566 $ 1,125 $ -140 
(a) Primarily consists of hedges of the benchmark (e.g., London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”))
interest rate risk of fixed-rate long-term debt and AFS securities. Gains and losses were recorded in
net interest income.
(b) Excludes the amortization expense associated with the inception hedge accounting adjustment
applied to the hedged item. This expense is recorded in net interest income and substantially offsets
the income statement impact of the excluded components. Also excludes the accrual of interest on
interest rate swaps and the related hedged items.
(c) Primarily consists of hedges of the foreign currency risk of long-term debt and AFS securities
for changes in spot foreign currency rates. Gains and losses related to the derivatives and the
hedged items due to changes in foreign currency rates and the income statement impact of excluded
components were recorded primarily in principal transactions revenue and net interest income.
(d) Consists of overall fair value hedges of physical commodities inventories that are generally
carried at the lower of cost or net realizable value (net realizable value approximates fair value).
Gains and losses were recorded in principal transactions revenue.
(e) The assessment of hedge effectiveness excludes certain components of the changes in fair values
of the derivatives and hedged items such as forward points on foreign exchange forward contracts,
time values and cross-currency basis spreads. Excluded components may impact earnings either through
amortization of the initial amount over the life of the derivative or through fair value changes
recognized in the current period.
(f) Represents the change in value of amounts excluded from the assessment of effectiveness under the
amortization approach, predominantly cross-currency basis spreads. The amount excluded at inception
of the hedge is recognized in earnings over the life of the derivative.
 206 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the following amounts were recorded on the Consolidated balance
sheets related to certain cumulative fair value hedge basis adjustments that are expected to reverse
through the income statement in future periods as an adjustment to yield.
 Cumulative 
 amount of 
 fair value 
 hedging 
 adjustments 
 included in 
 the carrying 
 amount of 
 Carrying hedged items: 
 December 31, amount of the Discontinued 
 2020 hedged Active hedging hedging 
 (in millions) items(a)(b) relationships relationship… Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Assets 
 Investment 
 securities - $ 139,684 -c $ 3,572 $ 847 $ 4,419 
 AFS 
 Liabilities 
 Long-term $ 177,611 $ 3,194 $ 11,473 $ 14,667 
 debt 
 Beneficial 
 interests 
 issued by 746 — -3 -3 
 consolidated 
 VIEs 
 Cumulative 
 amount of 
 Carrying fair value 
 amount of the hedging 
 hedged adjustments 
 items(a)(b) included in 
 the carrying 
 amount of 
 hedged items: 
 December 31, Active hedging Discontinued 
 2019 relationships hedging Total 
 (in millions) relationship… 
 Assets 
 Investment 
 securities - $ 125,860 -c $ 2,110 $ 278 $ 2,388 
 AFS 
 Liabilities 
 Long-term $ 157,545 $ 6,719 $ 161 $ 6,880 
 debt 
 Beneficial 
 interests 
 issued by 2,365 — -8 -8 
 consolidated 
 VIEs 
(a) Excludes physical commodities with a carrying value of $ 11.5billion and $ 6.5billion at December
31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, to which the Firm applies fair value hedge accounting. As a result
of the application of hedge accounting, these inventories are carried at fair value, thus recognizing
unrealized gains and losses in current periods. Since the Firm exits these positions at fair value,
there is no incremental impact to net income in future periods.
(b) Excludes hedged items where only foreign currency risk is the designated hedged risk, as basis
adjustments related to foreign currency hedges will not reverse through the income statement in
future periods. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the carrying amount excluded for AFS securities is $
14.5billion and $ 14.9billion, respectively, and for long-term debt is $ 6.6billion and $ 2.8billion,
respectively.
(c) Carrying amount represents the amortized cost, net of allowance if applicable. Refer to Note 10
for additional information.
(d) Represents basis adjustments existing on the balance sheet date associated with hedged items that
have been de-designated from qualifying fair value hedging relationships.
(e) Positive amounts related to assets represent cumulative fair value hedge basis adjustments that
will reduce net interest income in future periods. Positive (negative) amounts related to liabilities
represent cumulative fair value hedge basis adjustments that will increase (reduce) net interest
income in future periods.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 207 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Cash flow hedge gains and losses
The following tables present derivative instruments, by contract type, used in cash flow hedge
accounting relationships, and the pre-tax gains/(losses) recorded on such derivatives, for the years
ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The Firm includes the gains/(losses) on the
hedging derivative in the same line item in the Consolidated statements of income as the change in
cash flows on the related hedged item.
 Derivatives 
 gains/(losses) 
 recorded in 
 income and 
 other 
 comprehensive 
 income/(loss) 
 Year ended Amounts 
 December 31, reclassified Total change 
 2020 from AOCI to Amounts recorded in OCI 
 (in millions) income in OCI for period 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Contract type 
 Interest $ 570 $ 3,582 $ 3,012 
 rate(a) 
 Foreign — 41 41 
 exchange(b) 
 Total $ 570 $ 3,623 $ 3,053 
 Derivatives 
 gains/(losses) 
 recorded in 
 income and 
 other 
 comprehensive 
 income/(loss) 
 Year ended Amounts 
 December 31, reclassified 
 2019 from AOCI to Amounts Total changein 
 (in millions) income recorded in OCI OCIfor period 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Contract type 
 Interest $ -28 $ -3 $ 25 
 rate(a) 
 Foreign -75 125 200 
 exchange(b) 
 Total $ -103 $ 122 $ 225 
 Derivatives 
 gains/(losses) 
 recorded in 
 income and 
 other 
 comprehensive 
 income/(loss) 
 Year ended Amounts 
 December 31, reclassified Amounts Total changein 
 2018 from AOCI to recorded in OCI OCIfor period 
 (in millions) income 
 Contract type 
 Interest $ 44 $ -44 $ -88 
 rate(a) 
 Foreign -26 -201 -175 
 exchange(b) 
 Total $ 18 $ -245 $ -263 
(a) Primarily consists of hedges of LIBOR-indexed floating-rate assets and floating-rate liabilities.
Gains and losses were recorded in net interest income.
(b) Primarily consists of hedges of the foreign currency risk of non-U.S. dollar-denominated revenue
and expense. The income statement classification of gains and losses follows the hedged item –
primarily noninterest revenue and compensation expense.
The Firm did not experience any forecasted transactions that failed to occur for the years ended
2020, 2019 and 2018.
Over the next 12 months, the Firm expects that approximately $ 818million (after-tax) of net gains
recorded in AOCI at December 31, 2020, related to cash flow hedges will be recognized in income. For
cash flow hedges that have been terminated, the maximum length of time over which the derivative
results recorded in AOCI will be recognized in earnings is approximately nine years, corresponding to
the timing of the originally hedged forecasted cash flows. For open cash flow hedges, the maximum
length of time over which forecasted transactions are hedged is approximately seven years. The Firm’s
longer-dated forecasted transactions relate to core lending and borrowing activities.
Net investment hedge gains and losses
The following table presents hedging instruments, by contract type, that were used in net investment
hedge accounting relationships, and the pre-tax gains/(losses) recorded on such instruments for the
years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
 Year ended 
 December 2020 Amounts 2019 Amounts 2018 Amounts 
 31, Amounts recorded Amounts recorded Amounts recorded 
 (in recorded in in recorded in in recorded in in 
 millions) income(a)(… OCI income(a)(… OCI income(a)(… OCI 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Foreign 
 exchange $(122) $(1,408) $72 $64 $11 $1,219 
 derivativ… 
(a) Certain components of hedging derivatives are permitted to be excluded from the assessment of
hedge effectiveness, such as forward points on foreign exchange forward contracts. The Firm elects to
record changes in fair value of these amounts directly in other income.
(b) Excludes amounts reclassified from AOCI to income on the sale or liquidation of hedged entities.
The Firm reclassified net pre-tax gains/(losses) of $ 3million and $ 18million to other income, and
$( 17) million to other expense related to the liquidation of certain legal entities during the years
ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Refer to Note 24 for further information.
 208 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Gains and losses on derivatives used for
specified risk management purposes
The following table presents pre-tax
gains/(losses) recorded on a limited number of
derivatives, not designated in hedge accounting
relationships, that are used to manage risks
associated with certain specified assets and
liabilities, including certain risks arising
from mortgage commitments, warehouse loans,
MSRs, wholesale lending exposures, and foreign
currency denominated assets and liabilities.
 Year ended December 31, Derivatives gains/(losses) 
 (in millions) recorded in income 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Contract type 
 Interest rate(a) $ 2,994 $ 1,491 $ 79 
 Credit(b) -176 -30 -21 
 Foreign exchange(c) 43 -5 117 
 Total $ 2,861 $ 1,456 $ 175 
(a) Primarily represents interest rate
derivatives used to hedge the interest rate risk
inherent in mortgage commitments, warehouse
loans and MSRs, as well as written commitments
to originate warehouse loans. Gains and losses
were recorded predominantly in mortgage fees and
related income.
(b) Relates to credit derivatives used to
mitigate credit risk associated with lending
exposures in the Firm’s wholesale businesses.
These derivatives do not include credit
derivatives used to mitigate counterparty credit
risk arising from derivative receivables, which
is included in gains and losses on derivatives
related to market-making activities and other
derivatives. Gains and losses were recorded in
principal transactions revenue.
(c) Primarily relates to derivatives used to
mitigate foreign exchange risk of specified
foreign currency-denominated assets and
liabilities. Gains and losses were recorded in
principal transactions revenue.
Gains and losses on derivatives related to market-making activities and other derivatives The Firm
makes markets in derivatives in order to meet the needs of customers and uses derivatives to manage
certain risks associated with net open risk positions from its market-making activities, including
the counterparty credit risk arising from derivative receivables. All derivatives not included in the
hedge accounting or specified risk management categories above are included in this category. Gains
and losses on these derivatives are primarily recorded in principal transactions revenue. Refer to
Note 6 for information on principal transactions revenue.
Credit derivatives Credit derivatives are financial instruments whose value is derived from the
credit risk associated with the debt of a third-party issuer (the reference entity) and which allow
one party (the protection purchaser) to transfer that risk to another party (the protection seller).
Credit derivatives expose the protection purchaser to the creditworthiness of the protection seller,
as the protection seller is required to make payments under the contract when the reference entity
experiences a credit event, such as a bankruptcy, a failure to pay its obligation or a restructuring.
The seller of credit protection receives a premium for providing protection but has the risk that the
underlying instrument referenced in the contract will be subject to a credit event. The Firm is both
a purchaser and seller of protection in the credit derivatives market and uses these derivatives for
two primary purposes. First, in its capacity as a market-maker, the Firm actively manages a portfolio
of credit derivatives by purchasing and selling credit protection, predominantly on corporate debt
obligations, to meet the needs of customers. Second, as an end-user, the Firm uses credit derivatives
to manage credit risk associated with lending exposures (loans and unfunded commitments) and
derivatives counterparty exposures in the Firm’s wholesale businesses, and to manage the credit risk
arising from certain financial instruments in the Firm’s market-making businesses. Following is a
summary of various types of credit derivatives.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 209 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Credit default swaps Credit derivatives may reference the credit of either a single reference entity
(“single-name”) or a broad-based index. The Firm purchases and sells protection on both single- name
and index-reference obligations. Single-name CDS and index CDS contracts are either OTC or OTC-
cleared derivative contracts. Single-name CDS are used to manage the default risk of a single
reference entity, while index CDS contracts are used to manage the credit risk associated with the
broader credit markets or credit market segments. Like the S&P 500 and other market indices, a CDS
index consists of a portfolio of CDS across many reference entities. New series of CDS indices are
periodically established with a new underlying portfolio of reference entities to reflect changes in
the credit markets. If one of the reference entities in the index experiences a credit event, then
the reference entity that defaulted is removed from the index. CDS can also be referenced against
specific portfolios of reference names or against customized exposure levels based on specific client
demands: for example, to provide protection against the first $ 1million of realized credit losses in
a $ 10million portfolio of exposure. Such structures are commonly known as tranche CDS. For both
single-name CDS contracts and index CDS contracts, upon the occurrence of a credit event, under the
terms of a CDS contract neither party to the CDS contract has recourse to the reference entity. The
protection purchaser has recourse to the protection seller for the difference between the face value
of the CDS contract and the fair value of the reference obligation at settlement of the credit
derivative contract, also known as the recovery value. The protection purchaser does not need to hold
the debt instrument of the underlying reference entity in order to receive amounts due under the CDS
contract when a credit event occurs. Credit-related notes A credit-related note is a funded credit
derivative where the issuer of the credit-related note purchases from the note investor credit
protection on a reference entity or an index. Under the contract, the investor pays the issuer the
par value of the note at the inception of the transaction, and in return, the issuer pays periodic
payments to the investor, based on the credit risk of the referenced entity. The issuer also repays
the investor the par value of the note at maturity unless the reference entity (or one of the
entities that makes up a reference index) experiences a specified credit event. If a credit event
occurs, the issuer is not obligated to repay the par value of the note, but rather, the issuer pays
the investor the difference between the par value of the note and the fair value of the defaulted
reference obligation at the time of settlement. Neither party to the credit-related note has recourse
to the defaulting reference entity. The following tables present a summary of the notional amounts of
credit derivatives and credit-related notes the Firm sold and purchased as of December 31, 2020 and
2019. Upon a credit event, the Firm as a seller of protection would typically pay out only a
percentage of the full notional amount of net protection sold, as the amount actually required to be
paid on the contracts takes into account the recovery value of the reference obligation at the time
of settlement. The Firm manages the credit risk on contracts to sell protection by purchasing
protection with identical or similar underlying reference entities. Other purchased protection
referenced in the following tables includes credit derivatives bought on related, but not identical,
reference positions (including indices, portfolio coverage and other reference points) as well as
protection purchased through credit-related notes.
 210 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
The Firm does not use notional amounts of credit derivatives as the primary measure of risk
management for such derivatives, because the notional amount does not take into account the
probability of the occurrence of a credit event, the recovery value of the reference obligation, or
related cash instruments and economic hedges, each of which reduces, in the Firm’s view, the risks
associated with such derivatives.
 Total 
 credit 
 derivat… 
 and 
 credit-… 
 notes 
 December 
 31, Maximum Protection 
 2020(in payout/N… purchased Net 
 million… amount with protecti… Other 
 Credit Protecti… identical (sold)/p… protection 
 derivat… sold underlyin… c) purchased… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Credit 
 default $ -535,094 $ 554,565 $ 19,471 $ 4,001 
 swaps 
 Other 
 credit -40,084 57,344 17,260 9,415 
 derivat… 
 Total 
 credit -575,178 611,909 36,731 13,416 
 derivat… 
 Credit-… — — — 10,248 
 notes 
 Total $ -575,178 $ 611,909 $ 36,731 $ 23,664 
 Maximum 
 payout/N… 
 amount 
 Protection 
 Protecti… purchased Net Other 
 sold with protecti… protection 
 identical (sold)/p… purchased… 
 underlyin… 
 December 
 31, 2019 
 (in 
 million… 
 Credit 
 derivat… 
 Credit 
 default $ -562,338 $ 571,892 $ 9,554 $ 3,936 
 swaps 
 Other 
 credit -50,395 -e 46,541 -e -3,854 7,364 
 derivat… 
 Total 
 credit -612,733 618,433 5,700 11,300 
 derivat… 
 Credit-… — — — 9,606 
 notes 
 Total $ -612,733 $ 618,433 $ 5,700 $ 20,906 
(a) Other credit derivatives predominantly consist of credit swap options and total return swaps.
(b) Represents the total notional amount of protection purchased where the underlying reference
instrument is identical to the reference instrument on protection sold; the notional amount of
protection purchased for each individual identical underlying reference instrument may be greater or
lower than the notional amount of protection sold.
(c) Does not take into account the fair value of the reference obligation at the time of settlement,
which would generally reduce the amount the seller of protection pays to the buyer of protection in
determining settlement value.
(d) Represents protection purchased by the Firm on referenced instruments (single-name, portfolio or
index) where the Firm has not sold any protection on the identical reference instrument.
(e) Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
The following tables summarize the notional amounts by the ratings, maturity profile, and total fair
value, of credit derivatives and credit-related notes as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, where
JPMorgan Chase is the seller of protection. The maturity profile is based on the remaining
contractual maturity of the credit derivative contracts. The ratings profile is based on the rating
of the reference entity on which the credit derivative contract is based. The ratings and maturity
profile of credit derivatives and credit-related notes where JPMorgan Chase is the purchaser of
protection are comparable to the profile reflected below.
 Prot… 
 sold 
 – 
 cred… 
 deri… 
 and 
 cred… 
 notes 
 rati… 
 prof… 
 Dece… 
 31, Fair Fair 
 2020 Total value value Net 
 (in <1 1–5 >5 notio… of of fair 
 mill… year years years amount recei… payab… value 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Risk 
 rati… 
 of 
 refe… 
 enti… 
 Inve… $ -93,9… $ -307,… $ -35,3… $ -436,… $ 5,521 $ -835 $ 4,686 
 Noni… -31,8… -97,3… -9,153 -138,… 3,953 -2,542 1,411 
 Total $ -125,… $ -404,… $ -44,4… $ -575,… $ 9,474 $ -3,377 $ 6,097 
 Dece… 
 31, Fair Fair 
 2019 Total value value Net 
 (in <1 1–5 >5 notio… of of fair 
 mill… year(… years years amount recei… payab… value 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Risk 
 rati… 
 of 
 refe… 
 enti… 
 Inve… $ -119,… $ -311,… $ -42,1… $ -473,… $ 6,168 $ -901 $ 5,267 
 Noni… -41,7… -87,7… -9,841 -139,… 4,287 -2,817 1,470 
 Total $ -161,… $ -399,… $ -51,9… $ -612,… $ 10,455 $ -3,718 $ 6,737 
(a) The ratings scale is primarily based on external credit ratings defined by S&P and Moody’s.
(b) Amounts are shown on a gross basis, before the benefit of legally enforceable master netting
agreements including cash collateral netting.
(c) Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 211 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Note 6 – Noninterest revenue and noninterest
expense
Noninterest revenue The Firm records noninterest
revenue from certain contracts with customers in
investment banking fees, deposit-related fees,
asset management, administration, and
commissions, and components of card income. The
related contracts are often terminable on demand
and the Firm has no remaining obligation to
deliver future services. For arrangements with a
fixed term, the Firm may commit to deliver
services in the future. Revenue associated with
these remaining performance obligations
typically depends on the occurrence of future
events or underlying asset values, and is not
recognized until the outcome of those events or
values are known. Investment banking fees This
revenue category includes debt and equity
underwriting and advisory fees. As an
underwriter, the Firm helps clients raise
capital via public offering and private
placement of various types of debt and equity
instruments. Underwriting fees are primarily
based on the issuance price and quantity of the
underlying instruments, and are recognized as
revenue typically upon execution of the client’s
transaction. The Firm also manages and
syndicates loan arrangements. Credit arrangement
and syndication fees, included within debt
underwriting fees, are recorded as revenue after
satisfying certain retention, timing and yield
criteria. The Firm also provides advisory
services, by assisting its clients with mergers
and acquisitions, divestitures, restructuring
and other complex transactions. Advisory fees
are recognized as revenue typically upon
execution of the client’s transaction.
The following table presents the components of investment banking fees.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Underwriting 
 Equity $ 2,759 $ 1,648 $ 1,684 
 Debt 4,362 3,513 3,347 
 Total underwriting 7,121 5,161 5,031 
 Advisory 2,365 2,340 2,519 
 Total investment banking fees $ 9,486 $ 7,501 $ 7,550 
Investment banking fees are earned primarily by
CIB. Refer to Note 32 for segment results.
Principal transactions Principal transactions
revenue is driven by many factors, including: •
the bid-offer spread, which is the difference
between the price at which a market participant
is willing and able to sell an instrument to the
Firm and the price at which another market
participant is willing and able to buy it from
the Firm, and vice versa; and • realized and
unrealized gains and losses on financial
instruments and commodities transactions,
including those accounted for under the fair
value option, primarily used in client-driven
market-making activities, and on private equity
investments. – Realized gains and losses result
from the sale of instruments, closing out or
termination of transactions, or interim cash
payments. – Unrealized gains and losses result
from changes in valuation. In connection with
its client-driven market-making activities, the
Firm transacts in debt and equity instruments,
derivatives and commodities, including physical
commodities inventories and financial
instruments that reference commodities.
Principal transactions revenue also includes
realized and unrealized gains and losses related
to: • derivatives designated in qualifying hedge
accounting relationships, primarily fair value
hedges of commodity and foreign exchange risk; •
derivatives used for specific risk management
purposes, primarily to mitigate credit risk and
foreign exchange risk. Refer to Note 5 for
further information on the income statement
classification of gains and losses from
derivatives activities. In the financial
commodity markets, the Firm transacts in OTC
derivatives (e.g., swaps, forwards, options) and
ETD that reference a wide range of underlying
commodities. In the physical commodity markets,
the Firm primarily purchases and sells precious
and base metals and may hold other commodities
inventories under financing and other
arrangements with clients. The following table
presents all realized and unrealized gains and
losses recorded in principal transactions
revenue. This table excludes interest income and
interest expense on trading assets and
liabilities, which are an integral part of the
overall performance of the Firm’s client-driven
market-making activities in CIB and cash
deployment activities in Treasury and CIO. Refer
to Note 7 for further information on interest
income and interest expense. Trading revenue is
presented primarily by instrument type. The
Firm’s client-driven market-making businesses
generally utilize a variety of instrument types
in connection with their market-making and
related risk-management activities; accordingly,
the trading revenue presented in the table below
is not representative of the total revenue of
any individual LOB.
 212 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Trading revenue by 
 instrument type 
 Interest rate(a) $ 2,575 $ 2,739 -c $ 1,844 -c 
 Credit(b) 2,753 1,628 -c 1,625 -c 
 Foreign exchange 4,253 3,179 -c 3,222 -c 
 Equity 6,171 5,589 -c 4,822 -c 
 Commodity 2,088 1,133 -c 895 -c 
 Total trading revenue 17,840 14,268 12,408 
 Private equity gains/ 181 -250 -349 
 (losses) 
 Principal transactions $ 18,021 $ 14,018 $ 12,059 
(a) Includes the impact of changes in funding
valuation adjustments on derivatives.
(b) Includes the impact of changes in credit
valuation adjustments on derivatives, net of the
associated hedging activities.
(c) The prior-period amounts have been revised
to conform with the current presentation.
Principal transactions revenue is earned
primarily by CIB. Refer to Note 32 for segment
results. Lending- and deposit-related fees
Lending-related fees include fees earned from
loan commitments, standby letters of credit,
financial guarantees, and other loan-servicing
activities. Deposit-related fees include fees
earned from providing overdraft and other
deposit account services, and from performing
cash management activities. Lending- and
deposit-related fees in this revenue category
are recognized over the period in which the
related service is provided.
The following table presents the components of lending- and deposit-related fees.
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Lending-related fees $ 1,271 $ 1,184 $ 1,117 
 Deposit-related fees(a) 5,240 5,442 5,260 
 Total lending- and deposit-related fees $ 6,511 $ 6,626 $ 6,377 
(a) In the first quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fees from asset management,
administration and commissions to lending- and deposit-related fees. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
Lending- and deposit-related fees are earned by
CCB, CIB, CB, and AWM. Refer to Note 32 for
segment results. Asset management,
administration and commissions This revenue
category includes fees from investment
management and related services, custody,
brokerage services and other products. The Firm
manages assets on behalf of its clients,
including investors in Firm-sponsored funds and
owners of separately managed investment
accounts. Management fees are typically based on
the value of assets under management and are
collected and recognized at the end of each
period over which the management services are
provided and the value of the managed assets is
known. The Firm also receives performance-based
management fees, which are earned based on
exceeding certain benchmarks or other
performance targets and are accrued and
recognized when the probability of reversal is
remote, typically at the end of
the related billing period. The Firm has
contractual arrangements with third parties to
provide distribution and other services in
connection with its asset management activities.
Amounts paid to these third-party service
providers are generally recorded in professional
and outside services expense.
The following table presents the components of Firmwide asset management, administration and
commissions.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Asset management fees 
 Investment management fees(a) $ 11,694 $ 10,865 $ 10,768 
 All other asset management fees(b) 338 315 270 
 Total asset management fees 12,032 11,180 11,038 
 Total administration fees(c) 2,249 2,197 2,179 
 Commissions and other fees 
 Brokerage commissions(d) 2,959 2,439 2,505 
 All other commissions and fees(e) 937 1,092 1,071 
 Total commissions and fees 3,896 3,531 3,576 
 Total asset management, administration $ 18,177 $ 16,908 $ 16,793 
 and commissions 
(a) Represents fees earned from managing assets on behalf of the Firm’s clients, including investors
in Firm-sponsored funds and owners of separately managed investment accounts.
(b) Represents fees for services that are ancillary to investment management services, such as
commissions earned on the sales or distribution of mutual funds to clients. These fees are recorded
as revenue at the time the service is rendered or, in the case of certain distribution fees based on
the underlying fund’s asset value and/or investor redemption, recorded over time as the investor
remains in the fund or upon investor redemption.
(c) Predominantly includes fees for custody, securities lending, funds services and securities
clearance. These fees are recorded as revenue over the period in which the related service is
provided.
(d) Represents commissions earned when the Firm acts as a broker, by facilitating its clients’
purchases and sales of securities and other financial instruments. Brokerage commissions are
collected and recognized as revenue upon occurrence of the client transaction. The Firm reports
certain costs paid to third-party clearing houses and exchanges net against commission revenue.
(e) In the first quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fees from asset management,
administration and commissions to lending- and deposit-related fees. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
Asset management, administration and commissions
are earned primarily by AWM, CIB and CCB. Refer
to Note 32 for segment results. Mortgage fees
and related income This revenue category
reflects CCB’s Home Lending net production and
net mortgage servicing revenue. Net production
revenue includes fees and income recognized as
earned on mortgage loans originated with the
intent to sell, and the impact of risk
management activities associated with the
mortgage pipeline and warehouse loans. Net
production revenue also includes gains and
losses on sales and lower of cost or fair value
adjustments on mortgage loans held-for-sale
(excluding certain repurchased loans insured by
U.S. government agencies), and changes in the
fair value of financial instruments measured
under the fair value option. Net mortgage
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 213 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
servicing revenue includes operating revenue
earned from servicing third-party mortgage
loans, which is recognized over the period in
which the service is provided; changes in the
fair value of MSRs; the impact of risk
management activities associated with MSRs; and
gains and losses on securitization of excess
mortgage servicing. Net mortgage servicing
revenue also includes gains and losses on sales
and lower of cost or fair value adjustments of
certain repurchased loans insured by U.S.
government agencies. Refer to Note 15 for
further information on risk management
activities and MSRs. Net interest income from
mortgage loans is recorded in interest income.
Card income This revenue category includes
interchange and other income from credit and
debit card transactions; and fees earned from
processing card transactions for merchants, both
of which are recognized when purchases are made
by a cardholder and presented net of certain
transaction-related costs. Card income also
includes account origination costs and annual
fees, which are deferred and recognized on a
straight-line basis over a 12-month period.
Certain credit card products offer the
cardholder the ability to earn points based on
account activity, which the cardholder can
choose to redeem for cash and non-cash rewards.
The cost to the Firm related to these
proprietary rewards programs varies based on
multiple factors including the terms and
conditions of the rewards programs, cardholder
activity, cardholder reward redemption rates and
cardholder reward selections. The Firm maintains
a liability for its obligations under its
rewards programs and reports the current-period
cost as a reduction of card income. Credit card
revenue sharing agreements The Firm has
contractual agreements with numerous co-brand
partners that grant the Firm exclusive rights to
issue co-branded credit card products and market
them to the customers of such partners. These
partners endorse the co-brand credit card
programs and provide their customer or member
lists to the Firm. The partners may also conduct
marketing activities and provide rewards
redeemable under their own loyalty programs that
the Firm will grant to co-brand credit
cardholders based on account activity. The terms
of these agreements generally range from fiveto
ten years.
The Firm typically makes payments to the co-
brand credit card partners based on the cost of
partners’ marketing activities and loyalty
program rewards provided to credit cardholders,
new account originations and sales volumes.
Payments to partners based on marketing efforts
undertaken by the partners are expensed by the
Firm as incurred and reported as marketing
expense. Payments for partner loyalty program
rewards are reported as a reduction of card
income when incurred. Payments to partners based
on new credit card account originations are
accounted for as direct loan origination costs
and are deferred and recognized as a reduction
of card income on a straight-line basis over a
12-month period. Payments to partners based on
sales volumes are reported as a reduction of
card income when the related interchange income
is earned.
The following table presents the components of card income:
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interchange and merchant processing $ 18,563 $ 20,370 $ 18,808 
 income 
 Reward costs and partner payments(a) -13,637 -14,540 -13,320 -c 
 Other card income(b) -491 -754 -745 
 Total card income $ 4,435 $ 5,076 $ 4,743 
(a) In the second quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain spend-based credit card reward costs
from marketing expense to be a reduction of card income, with no effect on net income. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
(b) Predominantly represents the amortization of account origination costs and annual fees, which are
deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over a 12-month period.
(c) Includes an adjustment to the credit card
rewards liability of approximately $ 330million,
recorded in the second quarter of 2018. Card
income is earned primarily by CCB, CIB and CB.
Refer to Note 32 for segment results. Refer to
Note 18 for information on operating lease
income included within other income. Noninterest
expense Other expense
Other expense on the Firm’s Consolidated statements of income included the following:
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Legal expense/(benefit) $ 1,115 $ 239 $ 72 
 FDIC-related expense 717 457 1,239 
 214 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 7 – Interest income and Interest expense 
Interest income and interest expense are
recorded in the Consolidated statements of
income and classified based on the nature of the
underlying asset or liability.
The following table presents the components of
interest income and interest expense:
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest income 
 Loans(a)(b) $ 43,758 $ 51,855 $ 49,032 
 Taxable securities 7,843 7,962 5,653 
 Non-taxable securities(c) 1,184 1,329 1,595 
 Total investment securities(a) 9,027 9,291 7,248 
 Trading assets - debt instruments(b) 7,832 9,141 7,146 
 Federal funds sold and securities 2,436 6,146 3,819 
 purchased under resale agreements 
 Securities borrowed(d) -302 1,574 913 
 Deposits with banks 749 3,887 5,907 
 All other interest-earning assets(b)(e) 1,023 2,146 2,035 
 Total interest income $ 64,523 $ 84,040 $ 76,100 
 Interest expense 
 Interest bearing deposits $ 2,357 $ 8,957 $ 5,973 
 Federal funds purchased and securities 
 loaned or sold under repurchase 1,058 4,630 3,066 
 agreements 
 Short-term borrowings(f) 372 1,248 1,144 
 Trading liabilities - debt and all other 195 2,585 2,387 
 interest-bearing liabilities(d)(g) 
 Long-term debt 5,764 8,807 7,978 
 Beneficial interest issued by 214 568 493 
 consolidated VIEs 
 Total interest expense $ 9,960 $ 26,795 $ 21,041 
 Net interest income $ 54,563 $ 57,245 $ 55,059 
 Provision for credit losses 17,480 5,585 4,871 
 Net interest income after provision for $ 37,083 $ 51,660 $ 50,188 
 credit losses 
(a) Includes the amortization/accretion of
unearned income (e.g., purchase
premiums/discounts, net deferred fees/costs, and
others).
(b) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm
reclassified certain fair value option elected
lending-related positions from trading assets to
loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts
have been revised to conform with the current
presentation.
(c) Represents securities that are tax-exempt
for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
(d) Negative interest income is related to the
impact of current interest rates combined with
the fees paid on client-driven securities
borrowed balances. The negative interest expense
related to prime brokerage customer payables is
recognized in interest expense and reported
within trading liabilities - debt and all other
interest-bearing liabilities.
(e) Includes interest earned on brokerage-
related held-for-investment customer
receivables, which are classified in accrued
interest and accounts receivable, and all other
interest-earning assets, which are classified in
other assets on the Consolidated balance sheets.
(f) Includes commercial paper.
(g) All other interest-bearing liabilities includes interest expense on brokerage-related customer
payables.
Interest income and interest expense includes the current-period interest accruals for financial
instruments measured at fair value, except for derivatives and financial instruments containing
embedded derivatives that would be separately accounted for in accordance with U.S. GAAP, absent the
fair value option election; for those instruments, all changes in fair value including any interest
elements, are reported in principal transactions revenue. For financial instruments that are not
measured at fair value, the related interest is included within interest income or interest expense,
as applicable. Refer to Notes 12, 10, 11 and 20, for further information on accounting for interest
income and interest expense related to loans, investment securities, securities financing activities
(i.e., securities purchased or sold under resale or repurchase agreements; securities borrowed; and
securities loaned) and long-term debt, respectively.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 215 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Note 8 – Pension and other postretirement
employee benefit plans
The Firm has various defined benefit pension
plans and OPEB plans that provide benefits to
its employees in the U.S. and certain non-U.S.
locations. The Firm also provides a qualified
defined contribution plan in the U.S. and
maintains other similar arrangements in certain
non-U.S. locations. The principal defined
benefit pension plan in the U.S. is a qualified
noncontributory plan that provides benefits to
substantially all U.S. employees who were hired
prior to December 2, 2017. The Firm has frozen
the U.S. defined benefit pension plan (the “Plan
Freeze”). Effective as of January 1, 2020 (and
January 1, 2019 for new hires), new pay credits
have been directed to the U.S. defined
contribution plan. Interest credits will
continue to accrue on the U.S. defined benefit
pension plan. As a result of the Plan Freeze, a
curtailment was triggered and a remeasurement of
the U.S. defined benefit pension obligation and
plan assets occurred as of November 30, 2018.
The plan design change did not have a material
impact on the U.S. defined benefit pension plan
or the Firm’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Firm also has defined benefit pension plans
that are offered in certain non-U.S. locations
based on factors such as eligible compensation,
age and/or years of service. It is the Firm’s
policy to fund the pension plans in amounts
sufficient to meet the requirements under
applicable laws. The Firm does not anticipate at
this time making any contribution to the U.S.
defined benefit pension plan in 2021. The 2021
contributions to the non-U.S. defined benefit
pension plans are expected to be $ 50million, of
which $ 35million are contractually required.
The Firm also has a number of nonqualified
noncontributory defined benefit pension plans
that are unfunded. These plans provide
supplemental defined pension benefits to certain
employees.
The Firm offers postretirement medical and life
insurance benefits to certain U.S. retirees and
postretirement medical benefits to certain
qualifying U.S. and U.K. employees. The Firm
partially defrays the cost of its U.S. OPEB
obligation through corporate-owned life
insurance (“COLI”) purchased on the lives of
eligible employees and retirees. While the Firm
owns the COLI policies, certain COLI proceeds
(death benefits, withdrawals and other
distributions) may be used only to reimburse the
Firm for its net postretirement benefit claim
payments and related administrative expense. The
Firm has prefunded its U.S. postretirement
benefit obligations. The U.K. OPEB plan is
unfunded. Pension and OPEB accounting guidance
generally requires that the difference between
plan assets at fair value and the benefit
obligation be measured and recorded on the
balance sheet. Plans that are overfunded (excess
of plan assets over benefit obligation) are
recorded in other assets and plans that are
underfunded (excess benefit obligation over plan
assets) are recorded in other liabilities. Gains
or losses resulting from changes in the benefit
obligation and the fair value of plan assets are
recorded in OCI and recognized as part of the
net periodic benefit cost over subsequent
periods as discussed in the Gains and losses
section of this Note. Additionally, benefits
earned during the year are reported in
compensation expense; all other components of
net periodic defined benefit costs are reported
in other expense in the Consolidated statements
of income.
 216 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
The following table presents the pretax changes in benefit obligations, plan assets, the net funded
status, and the amounts recorded in AOCI on the Consolidated balance sheets for the Firm’s defined
benefit pension and OPEB plans.
 Defined benefit 
 As of or for the year ended December 31, pension and OPEB plans 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Change in projected and accumulated 
 benefit obligations, U.S. defined 
 benefit pension plans 
 Benefit obligation, beginning of year $ -13,277 $ -12,173 
 Benefits earned during the year -2 -327 
 Interest cost on benefit obligations -422 -518 
 Plan amendments — -5 
 Net gain/(loss) -1,086 -944 
 Benefits paid 640 690 
 Benefit obligations, end of year, U.S. $ -14,147 $ -13,277 
 defined benefit pension plans 
 Benefit obligations, other defined -4,990 -4,428 
 benefit pension and OPEB plans 
 Benefit obligations, end of year $ -19,137 $ -17,705 
 Change in plan assets, U.S. defined 
 benefit pension plans 
 Fair value of plan assets, beginning of $ 16,329 $ 14,521 
 year 
 Actual return on plan assets 1,901 2,465 
 Firm contributions 29 33 
 Benefits paid -640 -690 
 Fair value of plan assets, end of year, $ 17,619 $ 16,329 
 U.S. defined benefit pension plans 
 Fair value of plan assets, other defined 7,798 7,037 
 benefit pension and OPEB plans 
 Fair value of plan assets, end of year $ 25,417 $ 23,366 
 Net funded status, U.S. defined benefit $ 3,472 $ 3,052 
 pension plans 
 Net funded status, other defined benefit 2,808 2,609 
 pension and OPEB plans 
 Net funded status $ 6,280 $ 5,661 
 Amounts recorded in accumulated other 
 comprehensive income/(loss), U.S. 
 defined benefit pension plans 
 Net gain/(loss), U.S. defined benefit $ -1,558 $ -1,745 
 pension plans 
 Prior service credit/(cost), U.S. -4 -5 
 defined benefit pension plans 
 Accumulated other comprehensive 
 income/(loss), end of year, U.S. defined $ -1,562 $ -1,750 
 benefit pension plans 
 Accumulated other comprehensive 
 income/(loss), other defined benefit -24 -66 
 pension and OPEB plans 
 Accumulated other comprehensive $ -1,586 $ -1,816 
 income/(loss) 
The following table presents the weighted-average actuarial assumptions used to value the benefit
obligations for the U.S. defined benefit pension plans.
 U.S. defined benefit 
 pension plans 
 As of December 31, 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Discount rate 2.50% 3.30% 
 Rate of compensation increase NA NA 
 Interest crediting rate 4.65 4.65 
Gains and losses
For the Firm’s defined benefit pension plans, fair value is used to determine the expected return on
plan assets. Amortization of net gains and losses is included in annual net periodic benefit cost if,
as of the beginning of the year, the net gain or loss exceeds 10% of the greater of the projected
benefit obligation or the fair value of the plan assets. Any excess is amortized over the average
expected remaining lifetime of plan participants, which for the U.S. defined benefit pension plans is
currently 37years and for the non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans is the period appropriate for
the affected plan. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the net gain was primarily
attributable to a market-driven increase in the fair value of plan assets, predominantly offset by a
decrease in the discount rate.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 217 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
The following table presents the components of net periodic benefit costs reported in the
Consolidated statements of income for the Firm’s defined benefit pension, defined contribution and
OPEB plans, and in other comprehensive income for the defined benefit pension and OPEB plans.
 Pension and OPEB plans 
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Components of net periodic benefit cost, 
 U.S. defined benefit pension plans 
 Benefits earned during the year $ 2 $ 327 $ 323 
 Interest cost on benefit obligations 422 518 478 
 Expected return on plan assets -634 -776 -836 
 Amortization: 
 Net (gain)/loss 6 147 80 
 Prior service (credit)/cost — — -21 
 Curtailment (gain)/loss — — 21 
 Net periodic defined benefit plan 
 cost/(credit), U.S. defined benefit $ -204 $ 216 $ 45 
 pension plans 
 Other defined benefit pension and OPEB -81 -72 -72 
 plans 
 Total net periodic defined benefit plan $ -285 $ 144 $ -27 
 cost/(credit) 
 Total defined contribution plans 1,332 952 872 
 Total pension and OPEB cost included in $ 1,047 $ 1,096 $ 845 
 noninterest expense 
 Changes recognized in other 
 comprehensive income, U.S. defined 
 benefit pension plans 
 Prior service (credit)/cost arising — 5 — 
 during the year 
 Net (gain)/loss arising during the year -181 -745 453 
 Amortization of net (loss)/gain -6 -147 -80 
 Amortization of prior service — — 21 
 (cost)/credit 
 Curtailment (loss)/gain — — -21 
 Total recognized in other comprehensive 
 income, U.S. defined benefit pension $ -187 $ -887 $ 373 
 plans 
 Other defined benefit pension and OPEB -27 -270 77 
 plans 
 Total recognized in other comprehensive $ -214 $ -1,157 $ 450 
 income 
 Total recognized in net periodic defined 
 benefit plan cost/(credit) and other $ -499 $ -1,013 $ 423 
 comprehensive income 
The following table presents the weighted-average actuarial assumptions used to determine the net
periodic benefit costs for the U.S. defined benefit pension plans.
 Year ended December 31, (in U.S. defined benefit 
 millions) pension plans 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Discount rate 3.30% 4.30% 3.70/4.50% 
 Expected long-term rate of 
 return on 4.00 5.50 5.50 
 plan assets 
 Rate of compensation increase NA 2.30 2.30 
 Interest crediting rate 4.65 4.90 4.90 
Plan assumptions The Firm’s expected long-term
rate of return for defined benefit pension plan
assets is a blended weighted average, by asset
allocation of the projected long-term returns
for the various asset classes, taking into
consideration local market conditions and the
specific allocation of plan assets. Returns on
asset classes are developed using a forward-
looking approach and are not strictly based on
historical returns. Consideration is also given
to current market conditions and the portfolio
mix of each plan. The discount rate used in
determining the benefit obligation under the
U.S. defined benefit pension plan was provided
by the Firm’s actuaries. This rate was selected
by reference to the yields on portfolios of
bonds with maturity dates and coupons that
closely match each of the plan’s projected cash
flows.
At December 31, 2020, the Firm decreased the
discount rates used to determine its benefit
obligations for the U.S. defined benefit pension
plans in light of current market interest rates,
which is expected to decrease expense by
approximately $ 64million in 2021. The 2021
expected long-term rate of return on U.S.
defined benefit pension plan assets is 3.00%.
The following table represents the effect of a 25-basis point decline in the expected long-term rate
of return of 3.00% and discount rate of 2.50%.
 Effect on U.S. defined benefit pension plans 
 (in millions) Pension expense Benefit obligation 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Expected long-term rate of return $ 43 NA 
 Discount rate -20 404 
 218 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Investment strategy and asset allocation The assets of the Firm’s defined benefit pension plans are
held in various trusts and are invested in well-diversified portfolios of equity and fixed income
securities, cash and cash equivalents, and alternative investments. The trust-owned assets of the
Firm’s U.S. OPEB plan are invested primarily in fixed income securities. COLI policies used to
partially defray the cost of the Firm’s U.S. OPEB plan are invested in separate accounts of an
insurance company and are allocated to investments intended to replicate equity and fixed income
indices. The investment policies for the assets of the Firm’s defined benefit pension plans are to
optimize the risk-return relationship as appropriate to the needs and goals of each plan. Assets are
managed by a combination of internal and external investment managers. The Firm regularly reviews the
asset allocations and asset managers, as well as other factors that could impact the portfolios,
which are rebalanced when deemed necessary. Investments held by the Firm’s defined benefit pension
and OPEB plans include financial instruments which are exposed to various risks such as interest
rate, market and credit risks. Exposure to a concentration of credit risk is mitigated by the broad
diversification of both U.S. and non-U.S. investments. Additionally, the investments in each of the
collective investment funds and/or registered investment companies are further diversified into
various financial instruments. As of December 31, 2020, assets held by the Firm’s defined benefit
pension and OPEB plans do not include securities issued by JPMorgan Chase or its affiliates, except
through indirect exposures through investments in ETFs, mutual funds and collective investment funds
managed by third-parties. The defined benefit pension and OPEB plans hold investments that are
sponsored or managed by affiliates of JPMorgan Chase in the amount of $ 2.7billion and $ 3.1billion,
as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table presents the weighted-average asset allocation of the fair values of total plan
assets at December 31 for the years indicated, as well as the respective approved asset allocation
ranges by asset class.
 U.S. defined benefit pension plan(c) 
 Asset % of plan assets 
 December 31, Allocation 2020 2019 
 Asset class 
 Debt securities(a) 42-100% 77 % 74 % 
 Equity securities 0-40 15 16 
 Real estate 0-4 1 1 
 Alternatives(b) 0-15 7 9 
 Total 100 % 100 % 100 % 
(a) Debt securities primarily includes cash and cash equivalents, corporate debt, U.S. federal,
state, local and non-U.S. government, asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities.
(b) Alternatives primarily include limited partnerships.
(c) Represents the U.S. defined benefit pension plan only as it is the most significant plan. The
other U.S. defined benefit pension plans are unfunded. The weighted-average asset allocation for the
U.S. OPEB plan was 59% debt securities and 41% equity securities and 60% debt securities and 40%
equity securities at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 219 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Fair value measurement of the plans’ assets and liabilities
Refer to Note 2 for information on fair value measurements, including descriptions of level 1, 2, and
3 of the fair value hierarchy and the valuation methods employed by the Firm.
 Pen… 
 plan 
 ass… 
 and 
 lia… Defi… 
 mea… bene… 
 at pens… 
 fair and 
 val… OPEB 
 Dec… plans 
 31, 2020 Tot… 2019 Tot… 
 (in Level Level Level fair Level Lev… Level fair 
 mil… 1 2 3 val… 1 2 3 val… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Equ… $ 2,353 $ — $ 2 $ 2,3… $ 2,259 $ 3 $ 2 $ 2,2… 
 sec… 
 Cor… 
 debt — 7,414 11 7,4… — 6,4… 2 6,4… 
 sec… 
 U.S. 
 fed… 
 sta… 
 loc… 
 and 1,395 360 — 1,7… 1,616 401 — 2,0… 
 non… 
 gov… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 Mor… 461 1,184 31 1,6… 312 681 4 997 
 sec… 
 Oth… 788 861 201 1,8… 718 49 250 1,0… 
 U.S. 
 def… 
 ben… $ 4,997 $ 9,819 $ 245 $ 15,… $ 4,905 $ 7,6… $ 258 $ 12,… 
 pen… 
 pla… 
 Oth… 
 def… 
 ben… 
 pen… 2,034 2,565 2,707 7,3… 1,834 2,3… 2,431 6,5… 
 and 
 OPEB 
 pla… 
 Tot… 
 ass… 
 mea… $ 7,031 $ 12,3… $ 2,952 $ 22,… $ 6,739 $ 9,9… $ 2,689 $ 19,… 
 at 
 fair 
 val… 
(a) Other consists primarily of mutual funds, money market funds and participating annuity contracts.
(b) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, excludes $ 3.2billion and $ 3.9billion, respectively, of certain
investments that are measured at fair value using the net asset value per share (or its equivalent)
as a practical expedient, and $ 606million and $ 343million, respectively, of net defined benefit
pension plan payables, primarily for investments sold and purchased, which are not required to be
classified in the fair value hierarchy. Investments in level 3 of the valuation hierarchy include $
199million and $ 250million of participating annuity contracts at December 31, 2020 and 2019,
respectively.
(c) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, excludes $ 487million and $ 465million, respectively, of certain
investments that are measured at fair value using the net asset value per share (or its equivalent)
as a practical expedient. Investments in level 3 of the valuation hierarchy include $ 2.7billion and
$ 2.4billion of COLI policies at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Changes in level 3 fair value measurements using
significant unobservable inputs
Investments classified in level 3 of the
valuation hierarchy increased $ 263million in
2020 from $ 2.7billion to $ 3.0billion,
consisting of $ 343million in unrealized gains,
partially offset by $ 113million in settlements.
In addition, there were transfers into level 3
of $ 33million. In 2019, there was an increase
of $ 307million from $ 2.4billion to $
2.7billion, consisting of $ 401million in
unrealized gains, partially offset by $
85million in settlements.
Estimated future benefit payments
The following table presents benefit payments
expected to be paid for the U.S. defined benefit
pension plans for the years indicated.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) U.S. defined benefit pension plans 
 2021 912 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2022 918 
 2023 897 
 2024 847 
 2025 829 
 Years 2026–2030 3,843 
 220 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 9 – Employee share-based incentives 
Employee share-based awards In 2020, 2019 and 2018, JPMorgan Chase granted long-term share-based
awards to certain employees under its LTIP, as amended and restated effective May 15, 2018. Under the
terms of the LTIP, as of December 31, 2020, 67million shares of common stock were available for
issuance through May 2022. The LTIP is the only active plan under which the Firm is currently
granting share-based incentive awards. In the following discussion, the LTIP, plus prior Firm plans
and plans assumed as the result of acquisitions, are referred to collectively as the “LTI Plans,” and
such plans constitute the Firm’s share-based incentive plans. RSUs are awarded at no cost to the
recipient upon their grant. Generally, RSUs are granted annually and vest at a rate of 50% after two
yearsand 50% after three yearsand are converted into shares of common stock as of the vesting date.
In addition, RSUs typically include full-career eligibility provisions, which allow employees to
continue to vest upon voluntary termination based on age or service-related requirements, subject to
post-employment and other restrictions. All RSU awards are subject to forfeiture until vested and
contain clawback provisions that may result in cancellation under certain specified circumstances.
Predominantly all RSUs entitle the recipient to receive cash payments equivalent to any dividends
paid on the underlying common stock during the period the RSUs are outstanding. Performance share
units (“PSUs”) are granted annually, and approved by the Firm’s Board of Directors, to members of the
Firm’s Operating Committee under the variable compensation program. PSUs are subject to the Firm’s
achievement of specified performance criteria over a three-year period. The number of awards that
vest can range from zeroto 150% of the grant amount. In addition, dividends that accrue during the
vesting period are reinvested in dividend equivalent share units. PSUs and the related dividend
equivalent share units are converted into shares of common stock after vesting. Once the PSUs and
dividend equivalent share units have vested, the shares of common stock that are delivered, after
applicable tax withholding, must be held for an additional two-year period, for a total combined
vesting and holding period of approximately fiveto eightyears from the grant date depending on
regulations in certain countries. Under the LTI Plans, stock appreciation rights (“SARs”) and stock
options have generally been granted with an exercise price equal to the fair value of JPMorgan
Chase’s common stock on the grant date. SARs and stock options generally expire ten yearsafter the
grant date. There were no material grants of SARs or stock options in 2020, 2019 and 2018. The Firm
separately recognizes compensation expense for each tranche of each award, net of estimated
forfeitures, as if it were a separate award with its own vesting date. Generally, for each tranche
granted, compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis from the grant date until the
vesting date of the respective tranche, provided that the employees will not become full-career
eligible during the vesting period. For awards with full-career eligibility provisions and awards
granted with no future substantive service requirement, the Firm accrues the estimated value of
awards expected to be awarded to employees as of the grant date without giving consideration to the
impact of post-employment restrictions. For each tranche granted to employees who will become full-
career eligible during the vesting period, compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line
basis from the grant date until the earlier of the employee’s full-career eligibility date or the
vesting date of the respective tranche. The Firm’s policy for issuing shares upon settlement of
employee share-based incentive awards is to issue either new shares of common stock or treasury
shares. During 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Firm settled all of its employee share-based awards by
issuing treasury shares. Refer to Note 23 for further information on the classification of share-
based awards for purposes of calculating earnings per share.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 221 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
RSUs, PSUs, SARs and stock options activity
Generally, compensation expense for RSUs and PSUs is measured based on the number of units granted
multiplied by the stock price at the grant date, and for SARs and stock options, is measured at the
grant date using the Black-Scholes valuation model. Compensation expense for these awards is
recognized in net income as described previously. The following table summarizes JPMorgan Chase’s
RSUs, PSUs, SARs and stock options activity for 2020.
 Weighte… 
 Year Weighte… remaini… 
 ended RSUs/PS… grant SARs/Op… contrac… 
 Decemb… Number date Number Weighte… life Aggrega… 
 31, of fair of exercise (in intrins… 
 2020 units value awards price years) value 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (in 
 thousa… 
 except 
 weight… 
 data, 
 and 
 where 
 otherw… 
 stated) 
 Outsta… 
 January 52,239 $ 99.62 5,527 $ 41.36 
 1 
 Granted 17,891 132.17 1 137.80 
 Exerci… 
 or -21,502 96.64 -2,389 41.40 
 vested 
 Forfei… -1,118 111.59 -4 122.59 
 Cancel… NA NA -11 39.33 
 Outsta… 
 Decemb… 47,510 $ 112.85 3,124 $ 41.25 1.4 $ 265,059 
 31 
 Exerci… 
 Decemb… NA NA 3,124 41.25 1.4 265,059 
 31 
The total fair value of RSUs that vested during
the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and
2018, was $ 2.8billion, $ 2.9billion and $
3.6billion, respectively. The total intrinsic
value of options exercised during the years
ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, was $
182million, $ 503million and $ 370million,
respectively.
Compensation expense
The Firm recognized the following noncash
compensation expense related to its various
employee share-based incentive plans in its
Consolidated statements of income.
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cost of prior grants of RSUs, PSUs, SARs 
 and stock options that are amortized $ 1,101 $ 1,141 $ 1,241 
 over their applicable vesting periods 
 Accrual of estimated costs of 
 share-based awards to be granted in 1,350 1,115 1,081 
 future periods including those to 
 full-career eligible employees 
 Total noncash compensation expense 
 related to employee share-based $ 2,451 $ 2,256 $ 2,322 
 incentive plans 
At December 31, 2020, approximately $ 664million (pretax) of compensation expense related to unvested
awards had not yet been charged to net income. That cost is expected to be amortized into
compensation expense over a weighted-average period of 1.6years. The Firm does not capitalize any
compensation expense related to share-based compensation awards to employees.
Tax benefits Income tax benefits (including tax benefits from dividends or d ividend equivalents)
related to share-based incentive arrangements recognized in the Firm’s Consolidated statements of
income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, were $ 837million, $ 895million and $
1.1billion, respectively.
 222 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 10 – Investment securities 
Investment securities consist of debt securities that are classified as AFS or HTM. Debt securities
classified as trading assets are discussed in Note 2. Predominantly all of the Firm’s AFS and HTM
securities are held by Treasury and CIO in connection with its asset-liability management activities.
AFS securities are carried at fair value on the Consolidated balance sheets. Unrealized gains and
losses, after any applicable hedge accounting adjustments or allowance for credit losses, are
reported in AOCI. The specific identification method is used to determine realized gains and losses
on AFS securities, which are included in investment securities gains/(losses) on the Consolidated
statements of income. HTM securities, which the Firm has the intent and ability to hold until
maturity, are carried at amortized cost, net of allowance for credit losses, on the Consolidated
balance sheets. For both AFS and HTM securities, purchase discounts or premiums are generally
amortized into interest income on a level-yield basis over the contractual life of the security.
However, premiums on certain callable debt securities are amortized to the earliest call date.
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the CECL accounting guidance, which also amended the AFS
securities impairment guidance. Refer to Note 1 for further information. During 2020, the Firm
transferred $ 164.2billion of investment securities from AFS to HTM for capital management purposes.
AOCI included pretax unrealized gains of $ 5.0billion on the securities at the dates of transfer.
Unrealized gains or losses at the date of transfer of these securities continue to be reported in
AOCI and are amortized into interest income on a level-yield basis over the remaining life of the
securities. This amortization will offset the effect on interest income of the amortization of the
premium or discount resulting from the transfer recorded at fair value. Transfers of securities from
AFS to HTM are non-cash transactions and are recorded at fair value.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 223 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
The amortized costs and estimated fair values of the investment securities portfolio were as follows
for the dates indicated.
 Dec… 
 31, 
 (in 
 mil… 
 Ava… 
 sec… 2020 Gross Gross 2019 Gro… Gross 
 Mor… Amor… unre… unre… Fair Amor… unr… unre… Fair 
 sec… cost… gains loss… val… cost… gai… loss… val… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. 
 GSEs 
 and $ 110,… $ 2,372 $ 50 $ 113… $ 107,… $ 2,3… $ 89 $ 110… 
 gov… 
 age… 
 Res… 
 U.S. 6,246 224 3 6,4… 10,2… 233 6 10,… 
 Non… 3,751 20 5 3,7… 2,477 64 1 2,5… 
 Com… 2,819 71 34 2,8… 5,137 64 13 5,1… 
 Tot… 
 mor… 123,… 2,687 92 126… 125,… 2,7… 109 128… 
 sec… 
 U.S. 
 Tre… 
 and 199,… 2,141 100 201… 139,… 449 175 139… 
 gov… 
 age… 
 Obl… 
 of 
 U.S. 18,9… 1,404 1 20,… 27,6… 2,1… 1 29,… 
 sta… 
 and 
 mun… 
 Cer… 
 of — — — — 77 — — 77 
 dep… 
 Non… 
 gov… 22,5… 354 13 22,… 21,4… 377 17 21,… 
 debt 
 sec… 
 Cor… 
 debt 215 4 3 216 823 22 — 845 
 sec… 
 Ass… 
 sec… 
 Col… 
 loan 10,0… 24 31 10,… 25,0… 9 56 24,… 
 obl… 
 Oth… 6,174 91 16 6,2… 5,438 40 20 5,4… 
 Tot… 
 ava… 381,… 6,705 256 388… 345,… 5,7… 378 350… 
 sec… 
 Hel… 
 sec… 
 Mor… 
 sec… 
 U.S. 
 GSEs 
 and 107,… 2,968 29 110… 36,5… 1,1… 62 37,… 
 gov… 
 age… 
 U.S. 4,345 8 30 4,3… — — — — 
 Res… 
 Com… 2,602 77 — 2,6… — — — — 
 Tot… 
 mor… 114,… 3,053 59 117… 36,5… 1,1… 62 37,… 
 sec… 
 U.S. 
 Tre… 
 and 53,1… 50 — 53,… 51 — 1 50 
 gov… 
 age… 
 Obl… 
 of 
 U.S. 12,7… 519 — 13,… 4,797 299 — 5,0… 
 sta… 
 and 
 mun… 
 Ass… 
 sec… 
 Col… 
 loan 21,0… 90 2 21,… 6,169 — — 6,1… 
 obl… 
 Tot… 
 hel… 
 sec… 
 net 
 of 201,… 3,712 61 205… 47,5… 1,4… 63 48,… 
 all… 
 for 
 cre… 
 los… 
 Tot… 
 inv… 
 sec… 
 net 
 of $ 583,… $ 10,4… $ 317 $ 593… $ 392,… $ 7,2… $ 441 $ 399… 
 all… 
 for 
 cre… 
 los… 
(a) Includes AFS U.S. GSE obligations with fair values of $ 65.8billion and $ 78.5billion, and HTM
U.S. GSE obligations with amortized cost of $ 86.3billion and $ 31.6billion, at December 31, 2020 and
2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, mortgage-backed securities issued by Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac each exceeded 10% of JPMorgan Chase’s total stockholders’ equity; the amortized cost and
fair value of such securities were $ 95.7billion and $ 98.8billion, and $ 54.7billion and $
55.8billion, respectively.
(b) There was noallowance for credit losses on AFS securities at December 31, 2020.
(c) The Firm purchased $ 12.4billion, $ 13.4billion and $ 9.4billion of HTM securities for the years
ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(d) HTM securities measured at amortized cost are reported net of allowance for credit losses of $
78million at December 31, 2020.
(e) Excludes $ 2.1billion and $ 1.9billion of accrued interest receivables at December 31, 2020 and
2019, respectively. The Firm did not reverse through interest income any accrued interest receivables
for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
At December 31, 2020 , the investment securities portfolio consisted of debt securities with an
average credit rating of AA+ (based upon external ratings where available, and where not available,
based primarily upon internal risk ratings). Risk ratings are used to identify the credit quality of
securities and differentiate risk within the portfolio. The Firm’s internal risk ratings generally
align with the qualitative characteristics (e.g., borrower capacity to meet financial commitments and
vulnerability to changes in the economic environment) defined by S&P and Moody’s, however the
quantitative characteristics (e.g., probability of default (“PD”) and loss given default (“LGD”)) may
differ as they reflect internal historical experiences and assumptions. Risk ratings are assigned at
acquisition, are reviewed on a regular and ongoing basis by Credit Risk Management and are adjusted
as necessary over the life of the investment for updated information affecting the issuer’s ability
to fulfill its obligations.
 224 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
AFS securities impairment
The following tables present the fair value and gross unrealized losses by aging category for AFS
securities at December 31, 2020 and 2019. The tables exclude U.S. Treasury and government agency
securities and U.S. GSE and government agency MBS with unrealized losses of $ 150million and $
264million, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively; changes in the value of these securities are
generally driven by changes in interest rates rather than changes in their credit profile given the
explicit or implicit guarantees provided by the U.S. government.
 Availab… 
 securit… 
 with 
 gross 
 unreali… 
 losses 
 Decemb… Less 12 
 31, than 12 months Total 
 2020 months Gross or more Gross Total gross 
 (in Fair unreali… Fair unreali… fair unreali… 
 millio… value losses value losses value losses 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Availa… 
 securi… 
 Mortga… 
 securi… 
 Reside… 
 U.S. $ 562 $ 3 $ 32 $ — $ 594 $ 3 
 Non-U.… 2,507 4 235 1 2,742 5 
 Commer… 699 18 124 16 823 34 
 Total 
 mortga… 3,768 25 391 17 4,159 42 
 securi… 
 Obliga… 
 of U.S. 
 states 49 1 — — 49 1 
 and 
 munici… 
 Certif… 
 of — — — — — — 
 deposit 
 Non-U.… 
 govern… 2,709 9 968 4 3,677 13 
 debt 
 securi… 
 Corpor… 
 debt 91 3 5 — 96 3 
 securi… 
 Asset-… 
 securi… 
 Collat… 
 loan 5,248 18 2,645 13 7,893 31 
 obliga… 
 Other 268 1 685 15 953 16 
 Total 
 availa… 
 securi… 
 with $ 12,133 $ 57 $ 4,694 $ 49 $ 16,827 $ 106 
 gross 
 unreal… 
 losses 
 Availab… 
 securit… 
 with 
 gross 
 unreali… 
 losses 
 Decemb… Less 12 
 31, than 12 months Total 
 2019 months Gross or more Gross Total gross 
 (in Fair unreali… Fair unreali… fair unreali… 
 millio… value losses value losses value losses 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Availa… 
 securi… 
 Mortga… 
 securi… 
 Reside… 
 U.S. $ 1,072 $ 3 $ 423 $ 3 $ 1,495 $ 6 
 Non-U.… 13 — 420 1 433 1 
 Commer… 1,287 12 199 1 1,486 13 
 Total 
 mortga… 2,372 15 1,042 5 3,414 20 
 securi… 
 Obliga… 
 of U.S. 
 states 186 1 — — 186 1 
 and 
 munici… 
 Certif… 
 of 77 — — — 77 — 
 deposit 
 Non-U.… 
 govern… 3,970 13 1,406 4 5,376 17 
 debt 
 securi… 
 Corpor… 
 debt — — — — — — 
 securi… 
 Asset-… 
 securi… 
 Collat… 
 loan 10,364 11 7,756 45 18,120 56 
 obliga… 
 Other 1,639 9 753 11 2,392 20 
 Total 
 availa… 
 securi… 
 with $ 18,608 $ 49 $ 10,957 $ 65 $ 29,565 $ 114 
 gross 
 unreal… 
 losses 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 225 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
As a result of the adoption of the amended AFS
securities impairment guidance, an allowance for
credit losses on AFS securities is required for
impaired securities if a credit loss exists. AFS
securities are considered impaired if the fair
value is less than the amortized cost. The Firm
recognizes impairment losses in earnings if the
Firm has the intent to sell the debt security,
or if it is more likely than not that the Firm
will be required to sell the debt security
before recovery of its amortized cost. In these
circumstances the impairment loss recognized in
investment securities gains/(losses) is equal to
the full difference between the amortized cost
(net of allowance if applicable) and the fair
value of the securities. For impaired debt
securities that the Firm has the intent and
ability to hold, the securities are evaluated to
determine if a credit loss exists. If it is
determined that a credit loss exists, that loss
is recognized as an allowance for credit losses
through the provision for credit losses in the
Consolidated Statements of Income, limited by
the amount of impairment. Any impairment not due
to credit losses is recorded in OCI. Factors
considered in evaluating credit losses include
adverse conditions specifically related to the
industry, geographic area or financial condition
of the issuer or underlying collateral of a
security; and payment structure of the security.
When assessing securities issued in a
securitization for credit losses, the Firm
estimates cash flows considering relevant market
and economic data, underlying loan-level data,
and structural features of the securitization,
such as subordination, excess spread,
overcollateralization or other forms of credit
enhancement, and compares the losses projected
for the underlying collateral (“pool losses”)
against the level of credit enhancement in the
securitization structure to determine whether
these features are sufficient to absorb the pool
losses, or whether a credit loss exists. For
beneficial interests in securitizations that are
rated below “AA” at their acquisition, or that
can be contractually prepaid or otherwise
settled in such a way that the Firm would not
recover substantially all of its recorded
investment, the Firm evaluates impairment for
credit losses when there is an adverse change in
expected cash flows. Allowance for credit losses
Based on its assessment, the Firm did not
recognize an allowance for credit losses on
impaired AFS securities as of January 1, 2020 or
December 31, 2020.
 226 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
HTM securities – credit risk The adoption of the
CECL accounting guidance requires management to
estimate expected credit losses on HTM
securities over the remaining expected life and
recognize this estimate as an allowance for
credit losses. As a result of the adoption of
this guidance, the Firm recognized an allowance
for credit losses on HTM obligations of U.S.
states and municipalities of $ 10million as a
cumulative-effect adjustment to retained
earnings as of January 1, 2020. Credit quality
indicator The primary credit quality indicator
for HTM securities is the risk rating assigned
to each security. At December 31, 2020, all HTM
securities were rated investment grade and were
current and accruing, with approximately 98%
rated at least AA+. Allowance for credit losses
The allowance for credit losses on HTM
obligations of U.S. states and municipalities
and commercial mortgage-backed securities is
calculated by applying statistical credit loss
factors (estimated PD and LGD) to the amortized
cost. The credit loss factors are derived using
a weighted average of five internally developed
eight-quarter macroeconomic scenarios, followed
by a single year straight-line interpolation to
revert to long run historical information for
periods beyond the forecast period. Refer to
Note 13 for further information on the eight-
quarter macroeconomic forecast. The allowance
for credit losses on HTM collateralized loan
obligations and U.S. residential mortgage-backed
securities is calculated as the difference
between the amortized cost and the present value
of the cash flows expected to be collected,
discounted at the security’s effective interest
rate. These cash flow estimates are developed
based on expectations of underlying collateral
performance derived using the eight-quarter
macroeconomic forecast and the single year
straight-line interpolation, as well as
considering the structural features of the
security. The application of different inputs
and assumptions into the calculation of the
allowance for credit losses is subject to
significant management judgment, and emphasizing
one input or assumption over another, or
considering other inputs or assumptions, could
affect the estimate of the allowance for credit
losses on HTM securities. The allowance for
credit losses on HTM securities was $ 78million
as of December 31, 2020, reflecting $ 68million
recognized in the provision for credit losses
for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Selected impacts of investment securities on the
Consolidated statements of income
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Realized gains $ 3,080 $ 650 $ 211 
 Realized losses -2,278 -392 -606 
 Net investment securities gains/(losses) $ 802 $ 258 $ -395 
 Provision for credit losses $ 68 NA NA 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 227 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Contractual maturities and yields
The following table presents the amortized cost and estimated fair value at December 31, 2020, of
JPMorgan Chase’s investment securities portfolio by contractual maturity.
 By 
 remain… 
 maturi… Due 
 Decemb… after Due after 
 31, Due in one year five Due 
 2020 one through years after 
 (in year or five through 10 
 millio… less years 10 years years(b) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Availa… 
 securi… 
 Mortga… 
 securi… 
 Amorti… $ — $ 741 $ 7,797 $ 115,257 $ 123,795 
 cost 
 Fair — 756 8,139 117,495 126,390 
 value 
 Average — % 1.66 % 1.67 % 2.57 % 2.51 % 
 yield(… 
 U.S. 
 Treasu… 
 and 
 govern… 
 agenci… 
 Amorti… $ 33,633 $ 110,033 $ 46,827 $ 9,417 $ 199,910 
 cost 
 Fair 33,678 111,014 47,675 9,584 201,951 
 value 
 Average 0.42 % 0.53 % 0.79 % 0.48 % 0.57 % 
 yield(… 
 Obliga… 
 of U.S. 
 states 
 and 
 munici… 
 Amorti… $ 33 $ 203 $ 1,047 $ 17,710 $ 18,993 
 cost 
 Fair 33 211 1,111 19,041 20,396 
 value 
 Average 4.11 % 4.59 % 4.84 % 4.80 % 4.80 % 
 yield(… 
 Non-U.… 
 govern… 
 debt 
 securi… 
 Amorti… $ 8,282 $ 8,011 $ 5,615 $ 679 $ 22,587 
 cost 
 Fair 8,297 8,225 5,726 680 22,928 
 value 
 Average 1.25 % 1.70 % 0.68 % 0.17 % 1.24 % 
 yield(… 
 Corpor… 
 debt 
 securi… 
 Amorti… $ — $ 141 $ 74 $ — $ 215 
 cost 
 Fair — 139 77 — 216 
 value 
 Average — % 1.21 % 1.92 % — % 1.45 % 
 yield(… 
 Asset-… 
 securi… 
 Amorti… $ 554 $ 2,569 $ 5,987 $ 7,119 $ 16,229 
 cost 
 Fair 554 2,591 5,990 7,162 16,297 
 value 
 Average 1.31 % 2.00 % 1.33 % 1.48 % 1.50 % 
 yield(… 
 Total 
 availa… 
 securi… 
 Amorti… $ 42,502 $ 121,698 $ 67,347 $ 150,182 $ 381,729 
 cost 
 Fair 42,562 122,936 68,718 153,962 388,178 
 value 
 Average 0.59 % 0.65 % 1.00 % 2.64 % 1.49 % 
 yield(… 
 Held-t… 
 securi… 
 Mortga… 
 securi… 
 Amorti… $ — $ 158 $ 11,908 $ 102,791 $ 114,857 
 cost 
 Fair — 160 12,707 104,963 117,830 
 value 
 Average — % 1.56 % 2.42 % 2.94 % 2.88 % 
 yield(… 
 U.S. 
 Treasu… 
 and 
 govern… 
 agenci… 
 Amorti… $ 501 $ 42,477 $ 10,206 $ — $ 53,184 
 cost 
 Fair 501 42,511 10,222 — 53,234 
 value 
 Average 1.86 % 0.60 % 0.94 % — % 0.67 % 
 yield(… 
 Obliga… 
 of U.S. 
 states 
 and 
 munici… 
 Amorti… $ — $ 65 $ 532 $ 12,211 $ 12,808 
 cost 
 Fair — 67 565 12,638 13,270 
 value 
 Average — % 3.09 % 3.57 % 3.62 % 3.62 % 
 yield(… 
 Asset-… 
 securi… 
 Amorti… $ — $ — $ 11,617 $ 9,433 $ 21,050 
 cost 
 Fair — — 11,658 9,480 21,138 
 value 
 Average — % — % 1.40 % 1.33 % 1.37 % 
 yield(… 
 Total 
 held-t… 
 securi… 
 Amorti… $ 501 $ 42,700 $ 34,263 $ 124,435 $ 201,899 
 cost 
 Fair 501 42,738 35,152 127,081 205,472 
 value 
 Average 1.86 % 0.60 % 1.65 % 2.88 % 2.19 % 
 yield(… 
(a) Average yield is computed using the effective yield of each security owned at the end of the
period, weighted based on the amortized cost of each security. The effective yield considers the
contractual coupon, amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts, and the effect of related
hedging derivatives. Taxable-equivalent amounts are used where applicable. The effective yield
excludes unscheduled principal prepayments; and accordingly, actual maturities of securities may
differ from their contractual or expected maturities as certain securities may be prepaid. However,
for certain callable debt securities, the average yield is calculated to the earliest call date.
(b) Substantially all of the Firm’s U.S. residential MBS and collateralized mortgage obligations are
due in 10years or more, based on contractual maturity. The estimated weighted-average life, which
reflects anticipated future prepayments, is approximately 5years for agency residential MBS, 4years
for agency residential collateralized mortgage obligations and 3years for nonagency residential
collateralized mortgage obligations.
 228 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 11 – Securities financing activities 
JPMorgan Chase enters into resale, repurchase, securities borrowed and securities loaned agreements
(collectively, “securities financing agreements”) primarily to finance the Firm’s inventory
positions, acquire securities to cover short sales, accommodate customers’ financing needs, settle
other securities obligations and to deploy the Firm’s excess cash. Securities financing agreements
are treated as collateralized financings on the Firm’s Consolidated balance sheets. Where appropriate
under applicable accounting guidance, securities financing agreements with the same counterparty are
reported on a net basis. Refer to Note 1 for further discussion of the offsetting of assets and
liabilities. Fees received and paid in connection with securities financing agreements are recorded
over the life of the agreement in interest income and interest expense on the Consolidated statements
of income. The Firm has elected the fair value option for certain securities financing agreements.
Refer to Note 3 for further information regarding the fair value option. The securities financing
agreements for which the fair value option has been elected are reported within securities purchased
under resale agreements, securities loaned or sold under repurchase agreements, and securities
borrowed on the Consolidated balance sheets. Generally, for agreements carried at fair value,
current-period interest accruals are recorded within interest income and interest expense, with
changes in fair value reported in principal transactions revenue. However, for financial instruments
containing embedded derivatives that would be separately accounted for in accordance with accounting
guidance for hybrid instruments, all changes in fair value, including any interest elements, are
reported in principal transactions revenue. Securities financing agreements not elected under the
fair value option are measured at amortized cost. As a result of the Firm’s credit risk mitigation
practices described below, the Firm did not hold any allowance for credit losses with respect to
resale and securities borrowed arrangements as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Credit risk mitigation
practices Securities financing agreements expose the Firm primarily to credit and liquidity risk. To
manage these risks, the Firm monitors the value of the underlying securities (predominantly high-
quality securities collateral, including government-issued debt and U.S. GSEs and government agencies
MBS) that it has received from or provided to its counterparties compared to the value of cash
proceeds and exchanged collateral, and either requests additional collateral or returns securities or
collateral when appropriate. Margin levels are initially established based upon the counterparty, the
type of underlying securities, and the permissible collateral, and are monitored on an ongoing basis.
In resale and securities borrowed agreements, the Firm is exposed to credit risk to the extent that
the value of the securities received is less than initial cash principal advanced and any collateral
amounts exchanged. In repurchase and securities loaned agreements, credit risk exposure arises to the
extent that the value of underlying securities advanced exceeds the value of the initial cash
principal received, and any collateral amounts exchanged. Additionally, the Firm typically enters
into master netting agreements and other similar arrangements with its counterparties, which provide
for the right to liquidate the underlying securities and any collateral amounts exchanged in the
event of a counterparty default. It is also the Firm’s policy to take possession, where possible, of
the securities underlying resale and securities borrowed agreements. Refer to Note 29 for further
information regarding assets pledged and collateral received in securities financing agreements.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 229 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
The table below summarizes the gross and net amounts of the Firm’s securities financing agreements,
as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. When the Firm has obtained an appropriate legal opinion with
respect to a master netting agreement with a counterparty and where other relevant netting criteria
under U.S. GAAP are met, the Firm nets, on the Consolidated balance sheets, the balances outstanding
under its securities financing agreements with the same counterparty. In addition, the Firm exchanges
securities and/or cash collateral with its counterparty to reduce the economic exposure with the
counterparty, but such collateral is not eligible for net Consolidated balance sheet presentation.
Where the Firm has obtained an appropriate legal opinion with respect to the counterparty master
netting agreement, such collateral, along with securities financing balances that do not meet all
these relevant netting criteria under U.S. GAAP, is presented in the table below as “Amounts not
nettable on the Consolidated balance sheets,” and reduces the “Net amounts” presented. Where a legal
opinion has not been either sought or obtained, the securities financing balances are presented gross
in the “Net amounts” below.
 Amounts Amounts Amounts not 
 netted on presented nettable on 
 December the on the the 
 31, (in 2020 Consolidat… Consolida… Consolidat… 
 millions) Gross balance balance balance Net 
 Assets amounts sheets sheets sheets(b) amounts(c) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Securities 
 purchased 
 under $ 666,467 $ -370,183 $ 296,284 $ -273,206 $ 23,078 
 resale 
 agreements 
 Securities 193,700 -33,065 160,635 -115,219 45,416 
 borrowed 
 Liabiliti… 
 Securities 
 sold under $ 578,060 $ -370,183 $ 207,877 $ -191,980 $ 15,897 
 repurchase 
 agreements 
 Securities 
 loaned and 41,366 -33,065 8,301 -8,257 44 
 other(a) 
 Amounts 
 Amounts Amounts not 
 netted on present… nettable 
 December the on the on the 
 31, (in 2019 Consolid… Consoli… Consolid… 
 million… Gross balance balance balance Net 
 Assets amounts sheets sheets sheets(b) amounts… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Securit… 
 purchas… 
 under $ 628,609 $ -379,463 $ 249,146 $ -231,147 -d $ 17,999 -d 
 resale 
 agreeme… 
 Securit… 166,718 -26,960 139,758 -104,990 34,768 
 borrowed 
 Liabili… 
 Securit… 
 sold 
 under $ 555,172 $ -379,463 $ 175,709 $ -151,566 $ 24,143 
 repurch… 
 agreeme… 
 Securit… 
 loaned 36,649 -26,960 9,689 -9,654 35 
 and 
 other(a) 
(a) Includes securities-for-securities lending agreements of $ 3.4billion and $ 3.7billion at
December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, accounted for at fair value, where the Firm is acting as
lender. In the Consolidated balance sheets, the Firm recognizes the securities received at fair value
within other assets and the obligation to return those securities within accounts payable and other
liabilities.
(b) In some cases, collateral exchanged with a counterparty exceeds the net asset or liability
balance with that counterparty. In such cases, the amounts reported in this column are limited to the
related net asset or liability with that counterparty.
(c) Includes securities financing agreements that provide collateral rights, but where an appropriate
legal opinion with respect to the master netting agreement has not been either sought or obtained. At
December 31, 2020 and 2019, included $ 17.0billion and $ 11.0billion, respectively, of securities
purchased under resale agreements; $ 42.1billion and $ 31.9billion, respectively, of securities
borrowed; $ 14.5billion and $ 22.7billion, respectively, of securities sold under repurchase
agreements; and $ 8million and $ 7million, respectively, of securities loaned and other.
(d) The prior period amounts have been revised to conform with the current period presentation.
 230 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
The tables below present as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 the types of financial assets pledged in
securities financing agreements and the remaining contractual maturity of the securities financing
agreements.
 Gross 
 liability 
 balance 
 2020 2019 
 December 31, Securities Securities 
 (in millions) sold under Securities sold under Securities 
 Mortgage-bac… repurchase loaned and repurchase loaned and 
 securities: agreements other agreements other 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. GSEs and 
 government $ 56,744 $ — $ 34,119 $ — 
 agencies 
 Residential - 1,016 — 1,239 — 
 nonagency 
 Commercial - 855 — 1,612 — 
 nonagency 
 U.S. 
 Treasury, 
 GSEs and 315,834 143 334,398 29 
 government 
 agencies 
 Obligations 
 of U.S. 1,525 2 1,181 — 
 states and 
 municipaliti… 
 Non-U.S. 
 government 157,563 1,730 145,548 1,528 
 debt 
 Corporate 
 debt 22,849 1,864 13,826 1,580 
 securities 
 Asset-backed 694 — 1,794 — 
 securities 
 Equity 20,980 37,627 21,455 33,512 
 securities 
 Total $ 578,060 $ 41,366 $ 555,172 $ 36,649 
 Remain… 
 contra… 
 maturi… 
 of the 
 agreem… Greater 
 Overni… than 
 2020(… and Up to 30 – 90 90 days 
 milli… contin… 30 days days Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total 
 secur… 
 sold $ 238,667 $ 230,980 $ 70,777 $ 37,636 $ 578,060 
 under 
 repur… 
 agree… 
 Total 
 secur… 
 loaned 37,887 1,647 500 1,332 41,366 
 and 
 other 
 Rema… 
 cont… 
 matu… 
 of 
 the Great… 
 agre… than 
 2019 Over… Up to 30 – 90 
 (in and 30 90 days 
 mil… cont… days days Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Tot… 
 sec… 
 sold $ 225,… $ 195,… -a $ 56,0… -a $ 78,202 -a $ 555,… 
 und… 
 rep… 
 agr… 
 Tot… 
 sec… 
 loa… 32,0… 1,706 937 1,978 36,6… 
 and 
 oth… 
(a) The prior period amounts have been revised to conform with the current period presentation.
Transfers not qualifying for sale accounting
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Firm held $ 598million and $ 743million, respectively, of
financial assets for which the rights have been transferred to third parties; however, the transfers
did not qualify as a sale in accordance with U.S. GAAP. These transfers have been recognized as
collateralized financing transactions. The transferred assets are recorded in trading assets and
loans, and the corresponding liabilities are recorded predominantly in short-term borrowings on the
Consolidated balance sheets.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 231 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
 Note 12 – Loans 
Loan accounting framework The accounting for a loan depends on management’s strategy for the loan.
The Firm accounts for loans based on the following categories: • Originated or purchased loans held-
for-investment (i.e., “retained”) • Loans held-for-sale • Loans at fair value Effective January 1,
2020, the Firm adopted the CECL accounting guidance. Refer to Note 1 for further information. The
following provides a detailed accounting discussion of the Firm’s loans by category: Loans held-for-
investment Originated or purchased loans held-for-investment are recorded at the principal amount
outstanding, net of the following: charge-offs; interest applied to principal (for loans accounted
for on the cost recovery method); unamortized discounts and premiums; and net deferred loan fees or
costs. Credit card loans also include billed finance charges and fees. Interest income Interest
income on performing loans held-for-investment is accrued and recognized as interest income at the
contractual rate of interest. Purchase price discounts or premiums, as well as net deferred loan fees
or costs, are amortized into interest income over the contractual life of the loan as an adjustment
of yield. The Firm classifies accrued interest on loans, including accrued but unbilled interest on
credit card loans, in accrued interest and accounts receivables on the Consolidated balance sheets.
For credit card loans, accrued interest once billed is then recognized in the loan balances, with the
related allowance recorded in the allowance for credit losses. Changes in the allowance for credit
losses on accrued interest on credit card loans are recognized in the provision for credit losses and
charge-offs are recognized by reversing interest income. Expected losses related to accrued interest
on certain performing, modified loans to borrowers impacted by COVID-19 are considered in the Firm’s
allowance for loan losses. For other loans, the Firm generally does not recognize an allowance for
credit losses on accrued interest receivables, consistent with its policy to write them off no later
than 90 days past due by reversing interest income. Nonaccrual loans Nonaccrual loans are those on
which the accrual of interest has been suspended. Loans (other than credit card loans and certain
consumer loans insured by U.S. government agencies) are placed on nonaccrual status and considered
nonperforming when full payment of principal and interest is not expected, regardless of delinquency
status, or when principal and interest has been in default for a period of 90 days or more, unless
the loan is both well-secured and in the process of collection. A loan is determined to be past due
when the minimum payment is not received from the borrower by the contractually specified due date or
for certain loans (e.g., residential real estate loans), when a monthly payment is due and unpaid for
30days or more. Finally, collateral-dependent loans are typically maintained on nonaccrual status. On
the date a loan is placed on nonaccrual status, all interest accrued but not collected is reversed
against interest income. In addition, the amortization of deferred amounts is suspended. Interest
income on nonaccrual loans may be recognized as cash interest payments are received (i.e., on a cash
basis) if the recorded loan balance is deemed fully collectible; however, if there is doubt regarding
the ultimate collectibility of the recorded loan balance, all interest cash receipts are applied to
reduce the carrying value of the loan (the cost recovery method). For consumer loans, application of
this policy typically results in the Firm recognizing interest income on nonaccrual consumer loans on
a cash basis. A loan may be returned to accrual status when repayment is reasonably assured and there
has been demonstrated performance under the terms of the loan or, if applicable, the terms of the
restructured loan. As permitted by regulatory guidance, credit card loans are generally exempt from
being placed on nonaccrual status; accordingly, interest and fees related to credit card loans
continue to accrue until the loan is charged off or paid in full. Allowance for loan losses The
allowance for loan losses represents the estimated expected credit losses in the held-for-investment
loan portfolio at the balance sheet date and is recognized on the balance sheet as a contra asset,
which brings the amortized cost to the net carrying value. Changes in the allowance for loan losses
are recorded in the provision for credit losses on the Firm’s Consolidated statements of income.
Refer to Note 13 for further information on the Firm’s accounting policies for the allowance for loan
losses. Charge-offs Consumer loans are generally charged off or charged down to the lower of the
amortized cost or the net realizable value of the underlying collateral (i.e., fair value less
estimated costs to sell), with an offset to the allowance for loan losses, upon reaching specified
stages of delinquency in accordance with standards established by the FFIEC. Residential real estate
loans, unmodified credit card loans and scored business banking loans are generally charged off no
later than 180days past due. Scored auto and modified credit card loans are charged off no later than
120days past due.
 232 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Certain consumer loans are charged off or charged down to their net realizable value earlier than the
FFIEC charge-off standards in certain circumstances as follows: • Loans modified in a TDR that are
determined to be collateral-dependent. • Loans to borrowers who have experienced an event that
suggests a loss is either known or highly certain are subject to accelerated charge-off standards
(e.g., residential real estate and auto loans are charged off or charged down within 60days of
receiving notification of a bankruptcy filing). • Auto loans upon repossession of the automobile.
Other than in certain limited circumstances, the Firm typically does not recognize charge-offs on the
government-guaranteed portion of loans. Wholesale loans are charged off when it is highly certain
that a loss has been realized. The determination of whether to recognize a charge-off includes many
factors, including the prioritization of the Firm’s claim in bankruptcy, expectations of the
workout/restructuring of the loan and valuation of the borrower’s equity or the loan collateral. When
a loan is charged down to the lower of its amortized cost or the estimated net realizable value of
the underlying collateral, the determination of the fair value of the collateral depends on the type
of collateral (e.g., securities, real estate). In cases where the collateral is in the form of liquid
securities, the fair value is based on quoted market prices or broker quotes. For illiquid securities
or other financial assets, the fair value of the collateral is generally estimated using a discounted
cash flow model. For residential real estate loans, collateral values are based upon external
valuation sources. When it becomes likely that a borrower is either unable or unwilling to pay, the
Firm utilizes a broker’s price opinion, appraisal and/or an automated valuation model of the home
based on an exterior-only valuation (“exterior opinions”), which is then updated at least every
twelve months, or more frequently depending on various market factors. As soon as practicable after
the Firm receives the property in satisfaction of a debt (e.g., by taking legal title or physical
possession), the Firm generally obtains an appraisal based on an inspection that includes the
interior of the home (“interior appraisals”). Exterior opinions and interior appraisals are
discounted based upon the Firm’s experience with actual liquidation values as compared with the
estimated values provided by exterior opinions and interior appraisals, considering state-specific
factors. For commercial real estate loans, collateral values are generally based on appraisals from
internal and external valuation sources. Collateral values are typically updated every sixto twelve
months, either by obtaining a new appraisal or by performing an internal analysis, in accordance with
the Firm’s policies. The Firm also considers both borrower- and market-specific factors, which may
result in obtaining appraisal updates or broker price opinions at more frequent intervals. Loans
held-for-sale Loans held-for-sale are measured at the lower of cost or fair value, with valuation
changes recorded in noninterest revenue. For consumer loans, the valuation is performed on a
portfolio basis. For wholesale loans, the valuation is performed on an individual loan basis.
Interest income on loans held-for-sale is accrued and recognized based on the contractual rate of
interest. Loan origination fees or costs and purchase price discounts or premiums are deferred in a
contra loan account until the related loan is sold. The deferred fees or costs and discounts or
premiums are an adjustment to the basis of the loan and therefore are included in the periodic
determination of the lower of cost or fair value adjustments and/or the gain or loss recognized at
the time of sale. Because these loans are recognized at the lower of cost or fair value, the Firm’s
allowance for loan losses and charge-off policies do not apply to these loans. However, loans held-
for-sale are subject to the nonaccrual policies described above. Loans at fair value Loans for which
the fair value option has been elected are measured at fair value, with changes in fair value
recorded in noninterest revenue. Interest income on these loans is accrued and recognized based on
the contractual rate of interest. Changes in fair value are recognized in noninterest revenue. Loan
origination fees are recognized upfront in noninterest revenue. Loan origination costs are recognized
in the associated expense category as incurred. Because these loans are recognized at fair value, the
Firm’s allowance for loan losses and charge-off policies do not apply to these loans. However, loans
at fair value are subject to the nonaccrual policies described above. Refer to Note 3 for further
information on the Firm’s elections of fair value accounting under the fair value option. Refer to
Note 2 and Note 3 for further information on loans carried at fair value and classified as trading
assets.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 233 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Loan classification changes Loans in the held-for-investment portfolio that management decides to
sell are transferred to the held-for-sale portfolio at the lower of cost or fair value on the date of
transfer. Credit-related losses are charged against the allowance for loan losses; non-credit related
losses such as those due to changes in interest rates or foreign currency exchange rates are
recognized in noninterest revenue. In the event that management decides to retain a loan in the held-
for-sale portfolio, the loan is transferred to the held-for-investment portfolio at amortized cost on
the date of transfer. These loans are subsequently assessed for impairment based on the Firm’s
allowance methodology. Refer to Note 13 for a further discussion of the methodologies used in
establishing the Firm’s allowance for loan losses. Loan modifications The Firm seeks to modify
certain loans in conjunction with its loss mitigation activities. Through the modification, JPMorgan
Chase grants one or more concessions to a borrower who is experiencing financial difficulty in order
to minimize the Firm’s economic loss and avoid foreclosure or repossession of the collateral, and to
ultimately maximize payments received by the Firm from the borrower. The concessions granted vary by
program and by borrower-specific characteristics, and may include interest rate reductions, term
extensions, payment delays, principal forgiveness, or the acceptance of equity or other assets in
lieu of payments. Such modifications are accounted for and reported as TDRs. Loans with short-term
and other insignificant modifications that are not considered concessions are not TDRs. Loans, except
for credit card loans, modified in a TDR are generally placed on nonaccrual status, although in many
cases such loans were already on nonaccrual status prior to modification. These loans may be returned
to performing status (the accrual of interest is resumed) if the following criteria are met: (i) the
borrower has performed under the modified terms for a minimum of six monthsand/or sixpayments, and
(ii) the Firm has an expectation that repayment of the modified loan is reasonably assured based on,
for example, the borrower’s debt capacity and level of future earnings, collateral values, LTV
ratios, and other current market considerations. In certain limited and well-defined circumstances in
which the loan is current at the modification date, such loans are not placed on nonaccrual status at
the time of modification. Loans modified in TDRs are generally measured for impairment using the
Firm’s established asset-specific allowance methodology, which considers the expected re-default
rates for the modified loans. A loan modified in a TDR generally remains subject to the asset-
specific component of the allowance throughout its remaining life, regardless of whether the loan is
performing and has been returned to accrual status. Refer to Note 13 for further discussion of the
methodology used to estimate the Firm’s asset-specific allowance. The Firm has granted various forms
of assistance to customers and clients impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including payment deferrals
and covenant modifications. The majority of the Firm’s COVID-19 related loan modifications have not
been considered TDRs because: • they represent short-term or other insignificant modifications,
whether under the Firm’s regular loan modification assessments or as permitted by regulatory
guidance, or • the Firm has elected to apply the option to suspend the application of accounting
guidance for TDRs as provided by the CARES Act and extended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act.
To the extent that certain modifications do not meet any of the above criteria, the Firm accounts for
them as TDRs. As permitted by regulatory guidance, the Firm does not place loans with deferrals
granted due to COVID-19 on nonaccrual status where such loans are not otherwise reportable as
nonaccrual. The Firm considers expected losses of principal and accrued interest associated with all
COVID-19 related loan modifications in its allowance for credit losses. Assistance provided in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic could delay the recognition of delinquencies, nonaccrual status,
and net charge-offs for those customers who would have otherwise moved into past due or nonaccrual
status. Foreclosed property The Firm acquires property from borrowers through loan restructurings,
workouts, and foreclosures. Property acquired may include real property (e.g., residential real
estate, land, and buildings) and commercial and personal property (e.g., automobiles, aircraft,
railcars, and ships). The Firm recognizes foreclosed property upon receiving assets in satisfaction
of a loan (e.g., by taking legal title or physical possession). For loans collateralized by real
property, the Firm generally recognizes the asset received at foreclosure sale or upon the execution
of a deed in lieu of foreclosure transaction with the borrower. Foreclosed assets are reported in
other assets on the Consolidated balance sheets and initially recognized at fair value less estimated
costs to sell. Each quarter the fair value of the acquired property is reviewed and adjusted, if
necessary, to the lower of cost or fair value. Subsequent adjustments to fair value are
charged/credited to noninterest revenue. Operating expense, such as real estate taxes and
maintenance, are charged to other expense. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Firm has
temporarily suspended certain foreclosure activities. This could delay recognition of foreclosed
properties until the foreclosure moratoriums are lifted.
 234 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Loan portfolio
The Firm’s loan portfolio is divided into threeportfolio segments, which are the same segments used
by the Firm to determine the allowance for loan losses: Consumer, excluding credit card; Credit card;
and Wholesale. Within each portfolio segment the Firm monitors and assesses the credit risk in the
following classes of loans, based on the risk characteristics of each loan class.
In conjunction with the adoption of CECL, the Firm revised its loan classes. Prior-period amounts
have been revised to conform with the current presentation:
• The consumer, excluding credit card portfolio segment’s residential mortgage and home equity loans
and lending-related commitments have been combined into a residential real estate class.
• Upon adoption of CECL, the Firm elected to discontinue the pool-level accounting for PCI loans and
to account for these loans on an individual loan basis. PCI loans are considered PCD loans under CECL
and are subject to the Firm’s nonaccrual and charge-off policies. PCD loans are now reported in the
consumer, excluding credit card portfolio segment’s residential real estate class.
• Risk-rated business banking and auto dealer loans and lending-related commitments held in CCB were
reclassified from the consumer, excluding credit card portfolio segment, to the wholesale portfolio
segment, to align with the methodology applied when determining the allowance. The remaining scored
auto and business banking loans and lending-related commitments have been combined into an auto and
other class.
• The wholesale portfolio segment’s classes, previously based on the borrower’s primary business
activity, have been revised to align with the loan classifications as defined by the bank regulatory
agencies, based on the loan’s collateral, purpose, and type of borrower.
 Consumer, excluding Credit card Wholesale(c) 
 credit card 
 • Residential real estate(a) • Secured by real estate 
 • Auto and other(b) • Credit card loans • Commercial and industrial 
 • Other(d) 
(a) Includes scored mortgage and home equity loans held in CCB and AWM, and scored mortgage loans
held in CIB and Corporate.
(b) Includes scored auto and business banking loans and overdrafts.
(c) Includes loans held in CIB, CB, AWM, Corporate as well as risk-rated business banking and auto
dealer loans held in CCB for which the wholesale methodology is applied when determining the
allowance for loan losses.
(d) Includes loans to financial institutions, states and political subdivisions, SPEs, nonprofits,
personal investment companies and trusts, as well as loans to individuals and individual entities
(predominantly Wealth Management clients within AWM). Refer to Note 14 for more information on SPEs.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 235 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
The following tables summarize the Firm’s loan balances by portfolio segment.
 Consu… 
 Dece… exclu… 
 31, credit Credit 
 2020 card card Whole… Total… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (in 
 mill… 
 Reta… $ 302,1… $ 143,4… $ 514,9… $ 960,5… 
 Held… 1,305 784 5,784 7,873 
 At 
 fair 15,147 — 29,327 44,474 
 valu… 
 Total $ 318,5… $ 144,2… $ 550,0… $ 1,012… 
 Dece… Consu… 
 31, exclu… Credit Whole… Total… 
 2019 credit card 
 card 
 (in 
 mill… 
 Reta… $ 294,9… $ 168,9… $ 481,6… $ 945,6… 
 Held… 3,002 — 4,062 7,064 
 At 
 fair 19,816 — 25,139 44,955 
 valu… 
 Total $ 317,8… $ 168,9… $ 510,8… $ 997,6… 
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform
with the current presentation.
(b) Excludes $ 2.9billion of accrued interest receivables at both December 31, 2020 and 2019. The
Firm wrote off accrued interest receivables of $ 121million and $ 50million for the years ended
December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(c) Loans (other than those for which the fair value option has been elected) are presented net of
unamortized discounts and premiums and net deferred loan fees or costs. These amounts were not
material as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following tables provide information about the carrying value of retained loans purchased, sold
and reclassified to held-for-sale during the periods indicated. Loans that were reclassified to held-
for-sale and sold in a subsequent period are excluded from the sales line of this table.
 Year 
 end… 
 Dec… Cons… 
 31, excl… 
 (in cred… Credit 
 mil… card 2020 card Whol… Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Pur… $ 3,474 -b)(c $ — $ 1,159 $ 4,633 
 Sal… 352 — 17,916 18,2… 
 Ret… 
 loa… 
 rec… 2,084 787 1,580 4,451 
 to 
 hel… 
 Year 
 ended 
 Dece… Consu… 
 31, exclu… 
 (in credit Credit 
 mill… card 2019 card Whol… Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Purc… $ 1,282 -b)(c $ — $ 1,291 $ 2,573 
 Sales 30,4… — 23,445 53,9… 
 Reta… 
 loans 
 recl… 9,188 — 2,371 11,5… 
 to 
 held… 
 Year 
 ended 
 Dece… Consu… 
 31, exclu… 
 (in credit Credit 
 mill… card 2018 card Whol… Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Purc… $ 2,543 -b)(c $ — $ 2,354 $ 4,897 
 Sales 9,984 — 16,741 26,7… 
 Reta… 
 loans 
 recl… 36 — 2,276 2,312 
 to 
 held… 
(a) Reclassifications of loans to held-for-sale are non-cash transactions.
(b) Predominantly includes purchases of residential real estate loans, including the Firm’s voluntary
repurchases of certain delinquent loans from loan pools as permitted by Government National Mortgage
Association (“Ginnie Mae”) guidelines for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. The Firm
typically elects to repurchase these delinquent loans as it continues to service them and/or manage
the foreclosure process in accordance with applicable requirements of Ginnie Mae, FHA, RHS, and/or
VA.
(c) Excludes purchases of retained loans sourced through the correspondent origination channel and
underwritten in accordance with the Firm’s standards. Such purchases were $ 15.3billion, $
16.6billion and $ 18.6billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Gains and losses on sales of loans
Net gains/(losses) on sales of loans and lending-related commitments (including adjustments to record
loans and lending-related commitments held-for-sale at the lower of cost or fair value) recognized in
noninterest revenue was $( 43) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 of which $( 36) million
was related to loans. Net gains on sales of loans was $ 394million for the year ended December 31,
2019. Gains and losses on sales of loans was not material for the year ended December 31, 2018. In
addition, the sale of loans may also result in write downs, recoveries or changes in the allowance
recognized in the provision for credit losses.
 236 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Consumer, excluding credit card loan portfolio
Consumer loans, excluding credit card loans,
consist primarily of scored residential
mortgages, home equity loans and lines of
credit, auto and business banking loans, with a
focus on serving the prime consumer credit
market. The portfolio also includes home equity
loans secured by junior liens, prime mortgage
loans with an interest-only payment period, and
certain payment-option loans that may result in
negative amortization.
The following table provides information about
retained consumer loans, excluding credit card,
by class.
 December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Residential real estate $ 225,302 $ 243,317 
 Auto and other(a) 76,825 51,682 
 Total retained loans $ 302,127 $ 294,999 
(a) At December 31, 2020, included $ 19.2billion of loans in Business Banking under the PPP.
Delinquency rates are the primary credit quality indicator for consumer loans. Loans that are more
than 30 days past due provide an early warning of borrowers who may be experiencing financial
difficulties and/or who may be unable or unwilling to repay the loan. As the loan continues to age,
it becomes more clear whether the borrower is likely to be unable or unwilling to pay. In the case of
residential real estate loans, late-stage delinquencies (greater than 150 days past due) are a strong
indicator of loans that will ultimately result in a foreclosure or similar liquidation transaction.
In addition to delinquency rates, other credit quality indicators for consumer loans vary based on
the class of loan, as follows: • For residential real estate loans, the current estimated LTV ratio,
or the combined LTV ratio in the case of junior lien loans, is an indicator of the potential loss
severity in the event of default. Additionally, LTV or combined LTV ratios can provide insight into a
borrower’s continued willingness to pay, as the delinquency rate of high-LTV loans tends to be
greater than that for loans where the borrower has equity in the collateral. The geographic
distribution of the loan collateral also provides insight as to the credit quality of the portfolio,
as factors such as the regional economy, home price changes and specific events such as natural
disasters, will affect credit quality. The borrower’s current or “refreshed” FICO score is a
secondary credit quality indicator for certain loans, as FICO scores are an indication of the
borrower’s credit payment history. Thus, a loan to a borrower with a low FICO score (less than 660)
is considered to be of higher risk than a loan to a borrower with a higher FICO score. Further, a
loan to a borrower with a high LTV ratio and a low FICO score is at greater risk of default than a
loan to a borrower that has both a high LTV ratio and a high FICO score. • For scored auto and
business banking loans, geographic distribution is an indicator of the credit performance of the
portfolio. Similar to residential real estate loans, geographic distribution provides insights into
the portfolio performance based on regional economic activity and events.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 237 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Residential real estate
The following table provides information on delinquency, which is the primary credit quality
indicator for retained residential real estate loans.
 … 
 … 
 … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … … 
 … 
 … … … 
 … 
 $ … $ … $ … $ $ … … … 
 9 … … … … … 
 3 … … … … … 
 $ … $ … $ … $ $ … … … 
 … % … % … % % … … … 
(a) Individual delinquency classifications include mortgage loans insured by U.S. government agencies
as follows: current included $ 36million and $ 17million; 30–149 days past due included $ 16million
and $ 20million; and 150 or more days past due included $ 24million and $ 26million at December 31,
2020 and 2019, respectively.
(b) At December 31, 2020, loans under payment deferral programs offered in response to the COVID-19
pandemic which are still within their deferral period and performing according to their modified
terms are generally not considered delinquent.
(c) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, residential real estate loans excluded mortgage loans insured by
U.S. government agencies of $ 40million and $ 46million, respectively, that are 30 or more days past
due. These amounts have been excluded based upon the government guarantee.
Approximately 35% of the total revolving loans are senior lien loans; the remaining balance are
junior lien loans. The lien position the Firm holds is considered in the Firm’s allowance for credit
losses. Revolving loans that have been converted to term loans have higher delinquency rates than
those that are still within the revolving period. That is primarily because the fully-amortizing
payment that is generally required for those products is higher than the minimum payment options
available for revolving loans within the revolving period.
 238 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Nonaccrual loans and other credit quality indicators
The following table provides information on nonaccrual and other credit quality indicators for
retained residential real estate loans.
 (in millions, except 
 weighted-average 
 data) December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Nonaccrual loans(a)(b)(c)(d)(e) $ 5,313 $ 2,780 
 90 or more days past due and 
 government 33 38 
 guaranteed(f) 
 Current estimated LTV 
 ratios(g)(h) 
 Greater than 125% and refreshed 
 FICO 
 scores: 
 Equal to or greater than 660 $ 10 $ 31 
 Less than 660 18 38 
 101% to 125% and refreshed FICO 
 scores: 
 Equal to or greater than 660 72 134 
 Less than 660 65 132 
 80% to 100% and refreshed FICO 
 scores: 
 Equal to or greater than 660 2,365 5,953 
 Less than 660 435 764 
 Less than 80% and refreshed FICO 
 scores: 
 Equal to or greater than 660 208,457 219,469 
 Less than 660 12,072 14,681 
 No FICO/LTV available 1,732 2,052 
 U.S. government-guaranteed 76 63 
 Total retained loans $ 225,302 $ 243,317 
 Weighted average LTV ratio(g)(i) 54 % 55 % 
 Weighted average FICO(h)(i) 763 758 
 Geographic region(j) 
 California $ 73,444 $ 82,147 
 New York 32,287 31,996 
 Florida 13,981 13,668 
 Texas 13,773 14,474 
 Illinois 13,130 15,587 
 Colorado 8,235 8,447 
 Washington 7,917 8,990 
 New Jersey 7,227 7,752 
 Massachusetts 5,784 6,210 
 Connecticut 5,024 4,954 
 All other(k) 44,500 49,092 
 Total retained loans $ 225,302 $ 243,317 
(a) Includes collateral-dependent residential real estate loans that are charged down to the lower of
amortized cost or the fair value of the underlying collateral less costs to sell. The Firm reports,
in accordance with regulatory guidance, residential real estate loans that have been discharged under
Chapter 7 bankruptcy and not reaffirmed by the borrower (“Chapter 7 loans”) as collateral-dependent
nonaccrual TDRs, regardless of their delinquency status. At December 31, 2020, approximately 7% of
Chapter 7 residential real estate loans were 30 days or more past due, respectively.
(b) At December 31, 2020, nonaccrual loans included $ 1.6billion of PCD loans. Prior to the adoption
of CECL, nonaccrual loans excluded PCI loans as the Firm recognized interest income on each pool of
PCI loans as each of the pools was performing.
(c) Generally, all consumer nonaccrual loans have an allowance. In accordance with regulatory
guidance, certain nonaccrual loans that are considered collateral-dependent have been charged down to
the lower of amortized cost or the fair value of their underlying collateral less costs to sell. If
the value of the underlying collateral improves subsequent to the charge down, the related allowance
may be negative.
(d) Interest income on nonaccrual loans recognized on a cash basis was $ 161million and $ 166million
for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(e) Generally excludes loans under payment deferral programs offered in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. Includes loans to customers that have exited COVID-19 payment deferral programs and are 90
or more days past due, predominantly all of which were also at least 150 days past due and therefore
considered collateral-dependent. Collateral-dependent loans are charged down to the lower of
amortized cost or fair value of the underlying collateral less costs to sell.
(f) These balances are excluded from nonaccrual loans as the loans are guaranteed by U.S government
agencies. Typically the principal balance of the loans is insured and interest is guaranteed at a
specified reimbursement rate subject to meeting agreed-upon servicing guidelines. At December 31,
2020 and 2019, these balances included $ 33million and $ 34million, respectively, of loans that are
no longer accruing interest based on the agreed-upon servicing guidelines. For the remaining balance,
interest is being accrued at the guaranteed reimbursement rate. There were noloans that were not
guaranteed by U.S. government agencies that are 90 or more days past due and still accruing interest
at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(g) Represents the aggregate unpaid principal balance of loans divided by the estimated current
property value. Current property values are estimated, at a minimum, quarterly, based on home
valuation models using nationally recognized home price index valuation estimates incorporating
actual data to the extent available and forecasted data where actual data is not available. Current
estimated combined LTV for junior lien home equity loans considers all available lien positions, as
well as unused lines, related to the property.
(h) Refreshed FICO scores represent each borrower’s most recent credit score, which is obtained by
the Firm on at least a quarterly basis.
(i) Excludes loans with no FICO and/or LTV data available.
(j) The geographic regions presented in the table are ordered based on the magnitude of the
corresponding loan balances at December 31, 2020.
(k) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, included mortgage loans insured by U.S. government agencies of $
76million and $ 63million, respectively. These amounts have been excluded from the geographic regions
presented based upon the government guarantee.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 239 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Loan modifications
Modifications of residential real estate loans, where the Firm grants concessions to borrowers who
are experiencing financial difficulty are generally accounted for and reported as TDRs. Loans with
short-term or other insignificant modifications that are not considered concessions are not TDRs nor
are loans for which the Firm has elected to apply the option to suspend the application of accounting
guidance for TDRs as provided by the CARES Act and extended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act.
The carrying value of new TDRs was $ 819million, $ 490million and $ 736million for the years ended
December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 , respectively. There were no additional commitments to lend to
borrowers whose residential real estate loans have been modified in TDRs. Nature and extent of
modifications The Firm’s proprietary modification programs as well as government programs, including
U.S. GSE programs, generally provide various concessions to financially troubled borrowers including,
but not limited to, interest rate reductions, term or payment extensions and delays of principal
and/or interest payments that would otherwise have been required under the terms of the original
agreement.
The following table provides information about how residential real estate loans were modified in
TDRs under the Firm’s loss mitigation programs described above during the periods presented. This
table excludes Chapter 7 loans where the sole concession granted is the discharge of debt, loans with
short-term or other insignificant modifications that are not considered concessions, and loans for
which the Firm has elected to apply the option to suspend the application of accounting guidance for
TDRs as provided by the CARES Act and extended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act.
 Year ended December 31, 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Number of loans approved for a trial 5,522 5,872 7,175 
 modification 
 Number of loans permanently modified 6,850 4,918 7,853 
 Concession granted:(a) 
 Interest rate reduction 50 % 77 % 54 % 
 Term or payment extension 49 71 62 
 Principal and/or interest deferred 14 13 29 
 Principal forgiveness 2 5 7 
 Other(b) 66 63 51 
(a) Represents concessions granted in permanent modifications as a percentage of the number of loans
permanently modified. The sum of the percentages exceeds 100% because predominantly all of the
modifications include more than one type of concession. Concessions offered on trial modifications
are generally consistent with those granted on permanent modifications.
(b) Includes variable interest rate to fixed interest rate modifications and payment delays that meet
the definition of a TDR for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
 240 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Financial effects of modifications and redefaults
The following table provides information about the financial effects of the various concessions
granted in modifications of residential real estate loans under the loss mitigation programs
described above and about redefaults of certain loans modified in TDRs for the periods presented. The
following table presents only the financial effects of permanent modifications and do not include
temporary concessions offered through trial modifications. This table also excludes Chapter 7 loans
where the sole concession granted is the discharge of debt, loans with short-term or other
insignificant modifications that are not considered concessions, and loans for which the Firm has
elected to apply the option to suspend the application of accounting guidance for TDRs as provided by
the CARES Act and extended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except weighted - average data) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted-average interest rate of loans 
 with interest rate reductions – before 5.09 % 5.68 % 5.50 % 
 TDR 
 Weighted-average interest rate of loans 
 with interest rate reductions – after 3.28 3.81 3.60 
 TDR 
 Weighted-average remaining contractual 
 term (in years) of loans with term or 22 20 21 
 payment extensions – before TDR 
 Weighted-average remaining contractual 
 term (in years) of loans with term or 39 39 38 
 payment extensions – after TDR 
 Charge-offs recognized upon permanent $ 5 $ 1 $ 2 
 modification 
 Principal deferred 16 19 30 
 Principal forgiven 5 7 17 
 Balance of loans that redefaulted within $ 199 $ 166 $ 161 
 one year of permanent modification(a) 
(a) Represents loans permanently modified in TDRs that experienced a payment default in the periods
presented, and for which the payment default occurred within one yearof the modification. The dollar
amounts presented represent the balance of such loans at the end of the reporting period in which
such loans defaulted. For residential real estate loans modified in TDRs, payment default is deemed
to occur when the loan becomes twocontractual payments past due. In the event that a modified loan
redefaults, it will generally be liquidated through foreclosure or another similar type of
liquidation transaction. Redefaults of loans modified within the last twelve monthsmay not be
representative of ultimate redefault levels.
At December 31, 2020, the weighted-average estimated remaining lives of residential real estate loans
permanently modified in TDRs were 6years. The estimated remaining lives of these loans reflect
estimated prepayments, both voluntary and involuntary (i.e., foreclosures and other forced
liquidations).
Active and suspended foreclosure
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Firm had residential real estate loans, excluding those insured by
U.S. government agencies, with a carrying value of $ 846million and $ 1.2billion, respectively, that
were not included in REO, but were in the process of active or suspended foreclosure.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 241 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Auto and other
The following table provides information on delinquency, which is the primary credit quality
indicator for retained auto and other consumer loans.
 … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … 
 … 
 … … 
 … … … … … … 
 … … 
 … … 
 $ … … … $ … $ … … $ … … 
 … … … … … … … 
 — — 1 1 8 … … 
 $ … … $ … $ … … $ … … 
 … … % … % … … % … … 
(a) At December 31, 2020 , loans under payment deferral programs offered in response to the COVID-19
pandemic which are still within their deferral period and performing according to their modified
terms are generally not considered delinquent.
(b) At December 31, 2020 , included $ 19.2billion of loans in Business Banking under the PPP. PPP
loans are guaranteed by the SBA. Other than in certain limited circumstances, the Firm typically does
not recognize charge-offs, classify as nonaccrual nor record an allowance for loan losses on these
loans.
Nonaccrual and other credit quality indicators
The following table provides information on nonaccrual and other credit quality indicators for
retained auto and other consumer loans.
 Total Auto and 
 (in millions, except ratios) December 31, 2020 other December 31, 2019 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Nonaccrual loans(a)(b)(c) 151 146 
 Geographic region(d) 
 California $ 12,302 $ 7,795 
 New York 8,824 3,706 
 Texas 8,235 5,457 
 Florida 4,668 3,025 
 Illinois 3,768 2,443 
 New Jersey 2,646 1,798 
 Arizona 2,465 1,347 
 Ohio 2,163 1,490 
 Pennsylvania 1,924 1,721 
 Colorado 1,910 1,247 
 All other 27,920 21,653 
 Total retained loans $ 76,825 $ 51,682 
(a) There were noloans that were 90 or more days past due and still accruing interest at December 31,
2020 and 2019.
(b) All nonaccrual auto and other consumer loans generally have an allowance. Certain nonaccrual
loans that are considered collateral-dependent have been charged down to the lower of amortized cost
or the fair value of their underlying collateral less costs to sell. If the value of the underlying
collateral improves subsequent to the charge down, the related allowance may be negative.
(c) Interest income on nonaccrual loans recognized on a cash basis was not material for the years
ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 .
(d) The geographic regions presented in this table are ordered based on the magnitude of the
corresponding loan balances at December 31, 2020 .
Loan modifications
Certain other consumer loan modifications are considered to be TDRs as they provide various
concessions to borrowers who are experiencing financial difficulty. Loans with short-term or other
insignificant modifications that are not considered concessions are not TDRs.
The impact of these modifications, as well as new TDRs, were not material to the Firm for the years
ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Additional commitments to lend to borrowers whose loans have
been modified in TDRs as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were not material.
 242 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Credit card loan portfolio
The credit card portfolio segment includes credit card loans originated and purchased by the Firm.
Delinquency rates are the primary credit quality indicator for credit card loans as they provide an
early warning that borrowers may be experiencing difficulties (30 days past due); information on
those borrowers that have been delinquent for a longer period of time (90 days past due) is also
considered. In addition to delinquency rates, the geographic distribution of the loans provides
insight as to the credit quality of the portfolio based on the regional economy. While the borrower’s
credit score is another general indicator of credit quality, the Firm does not view credit scores as
a primary indicator of credit quality because the borrower’s credit score tends to be a lagging
indicator. The distribution of such scores provides a general indicator of credit quality trends
within the portfolio; however, the score does not capture all factors that would be predictive of
future credit performance. Refreshed FICO score information, which is obtained at least quarterly,
for a statistically significant random sample of the credit card portfolio is indicated in the
following table. FICO is considered to be the industry benchmark for credit scores. The Firm
generally originates new card accounts to prime consumer borrowers. However, certain cardholders’
FICO scores may decrease over time, depending on the performance of the cardholder and changes in the
credit score calculation.
The following table provides information on delinquency, which is the primary credit quality
indicator for retained credit card loans.
 (in 
 millions, 
 except December December 31, 
 ratios) 31, 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Within the Converted 
 revolving to term Total Total 
 period loans(b) 
 Loan 
 delinquenc… 
 Current and 
 less than 
 30 days 
 past $ 139,783 $ 1,239 $ 141,022 $ 165,767 
 dueand 
 still 
 accruing 
 30–89 days 
 past due 997 94 1,091 1,550 
 and still 
 accruing 
 90 or more 
 days past 
 due and 1,277 42 1,319 1,607 
 still 
 accruing 
 Total 
 retained $ 142,057 $ 1,375 $ 143,432 $ 168,924 
 loans 
 Loan 
 delinquency 
 ratios 
 % of 30+ 
 days past 
 due to 1.60 % 9.89 % 1.68 % 1.87 % 
 total 
 retained 
 loans 
 % of 90+ 
 days past 
 due to 0.90 3.05 0.92 0.95 
 total 
 retained 
 loans 
(a) At December 31, 2020, loans under payment deferral programs offered in response to the COVID-19
pandemic which are still within their deferral period and performing according to their modified
terms are generally not considered delinquent.
(b) Represents TDRs.
Other credit quality indicators
The following table provides information on other credit quality indicators for retained credit card
loans.
 (in millions, except ratios) December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Geographic region(a) 
 California $ 20,921 $ 25,783 
 Texas 14,544 16,728 
 New York 11,919 14,544 
 Florida 9,562 10,830 
 Illinois 8,006 9,579 
 New Jersey 5,927 7,165 
 Ohio 4,673 5,406 
 Pennsylvania 4,476 5,245 
 Colorado 4,092 4,763 
 Michigan 3,553 4,164 
 All other 55,759 64,717 
 Total retained loans $ 143,432 $ 168,924 
 Percentage of portfolio based on 
 carrying value with estimated 
 refreshed 
 FICO scores 
 Equal to or greater than 660 85.9 % 84.0 % 
 Less than 660 13.9 15.4 
 No FICO available 0.2 0.6 
(a) The geographic regions presented in the table are ordered based on the magnitude of the
corresponding loan balances at December 31, 2020.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 243 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Loan modifications
The Firm may offer one of a number of loan
modification programs granting concessions to
credit card borrowers who are experiencing
financial difficulty. The Firm grants
concessions for most of the credit card loans
under long-term programs. These modifications
involve placing the customer on a fixed payment
plan, generally for 60months, and typically
include reducing the interest rate on the credit
card. Substantially all modifications under the
Firm’s long-term programs are considered to be
TDRs. Loans with short-term or other
insignificant modifications that are not
considered concessions are not TDRs. If the
cardholder does not comply with the modified
payment terms, then the credit card loan
continues to age and will ultimately be charged-
off in accordance with the Firm’s standard
charge-off policy. In most cases, the Firm does
not reinstate the borrower’s line of credit.
Financial effects of modifications and
redefaults
The following table provides information about
the financial effects of the concessions granted
on credit card loans modified in TDRs and
redefaults for the periods presented. For all
periods disclosed, new enrollments were less
than 1% of total retained credit card loans.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, except 
 weighted-average data) 2020 2019 2018 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance of new TDRs(a) $ 818 $ 961 $ 866 
 Weighted-average interest rate of loans 18.04 % 19.07 % 17.98 % 
 – before TDR 
 Weighted-average interest rate of loans 4.64 4.70 5.16 
 – after TDR 
 Balance of loans that redefaulted within $ 110 $ 148 $ 116 
 one year of modification(b) 
(a) Represents the outstanding balance prior to
modification.
(b) Represents loans modified in TDRs that
experienced a payment default in the periods
presented, and for which the payment default
occurred within one yearof the modification. The
amounts presented represent the balance of such
loans as of the end of the quarter in which they
defaulted.
For credit card loans modified in TDRs, payment
default is deemed to have occurred when the
borrower misses twoconsecutive contractual
payments. Defaulted modified credit card loans
remain in the modification program and continue
to be charged off in accordance with the Firm’s
standard charge-off policy.
 244 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Wholesale loan portfolio
Wholesale loans include loans made to a variety of clients, ranging from large corporate and
institutional clients to high-net-worth individuals. The primary credit quality indicator for
wholesale loans is the internal risk rating assigned to each loan. Risk ratings are used to identify
the credit quality of loans and differentiate risk within the portfolio. Risk ratings on loans
consider the PD and the LGD. The PD is the likelihood that a loan will default. The LGD is the
estimated loss on the loan that would be realized upon the default of the borrower and takes into
consideration collateral and structural support for each credit facility. Management considers
several factors to determine an appropriate internal risk rating, including the obligor’s debt
capacity and financial flexibility, the level of the obligor’s earnings, the amount and sources for
repayment, the level and nature of contingencies, management strength, and the industry and geography
in which the obligor operates. The Firm’s internal risk ratings generally align with the qualitative
characteristics (e.g., borrower capacity to meet financial commitments and vulnerability to changes
in the economic environment) defined by S&P and Moody’s, however the quantitative characteristics
(e.g., PD and LGD) may differ as they reflect internal historical experiences and assumptions. The
Firm generally considers internal ratings with qualitative characteristics equivalent to BBB-/Baa3 or
higher as investment grade, and these ratings have a lower PD and/or lower LGD than non-investment
grade ratings. Noninvestment-grade ratings are further classified as noncriticized and criticized,
and the criticized portion is further subdivided into performing and nonaccrual loans, representing
management’s assessment of the collectibility of principal and interest. Criticized loans have a
higher PD than noncriticized loans. The Firm’s definition of criticized aligns with the U.S. banking
regulatory definition of criticized exposures, which consist of special mention, substandard and
doubtful categories. Risk ratings are reviewed on a regular and ongoing basis by Credit Risk
Management and are adjusted as necessary for updated information affecting the obligor’s ability to
fulfill its obligations. As noted above, the risk rating of a loan considers the industry in which
the obligor conducts its operations. As part of the overall credit risk management framework, the
Firm focuses on the management and diversification of its industry and client exposures, with
particular attention paid to industries with actual or potential credit concern. Refer to Note 4 for
further detail on industry concentrations.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 245 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
The following tables provide information on internal risk rating, which is the primary credit quality
indicator for retained wholesale loans.
 … 
 … 
 … … 
 … … 
 … … … … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 $ … $ … $ $ $ … … … … 
 … … … … … 
 … … … … … 
 … … … … … 
 … … … … … 
 $ … $ … $ $ $ … … … 
 … % … % % % % … … … 
 … … … … … 
 … … … … … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … D… 
 … 3… 
 … 2… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … 
 … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … … … 
 … … 
 $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ — $ 9… $ 9… 
 … … … … … … … 1 2… 2… 
 $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ 1 $ 1… $ 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … 
 … … … 
 … … … … … … … … 
 … … … 
 … … 
 $ … … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ 1 … $ 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … … $ 
 … 
 … D… 
 … 3… 
 … 2… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … 
 … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … 
 … … … 
 … … 
 $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ 2… $ 1… 
 … … … … … … … … 3… 2… 
 $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ 2… $ 2… 
(a) At December 31, 2020, included $ 8.0billion of loans under the PPP, of which $ 7.4billion is
included in commercial and industrial. PPP loans are guaranteed by the SBA and considered investment-
grade. Other than in certain limited circumstances, the Firm typically does not recognize charge-
offs, classify as nonaccrual nor record an allowance for loan losses on these loans.
(b) Includes loans to financial institutions, states and political subdivisions, SPEs, nonprofits,
personal investment companies and trusts, as well as loans to individuals and individual entities
(predominantly Wealth Management clients within AWM). Refer to Note 14 for more information on SPEs.
 246 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
The following table presents additional information on retained loans secured by real estate within
the Wholesale portfolio, which consists of loans secured wholly or substantially by a lien or liens
on real property at origination. Multifamily lending includes financing for acquisition, leasing and
construction of apartment buildings. Other commercial lending largely includes financing for
acquisition, leasing and construction, largely for office, retail and industrial real estate.
Included in secured by real estate loans is $ 6.4billion and $ 6.3billion as of December 31, 2020 and
2019, respectively, of construction and development loans made to finance land development and on-
site construction of commercial, industrial, residential, or farm buildings.
 Tot… 
 De… ret… 
 31, loa… 
 (in sec… 
 mi… by 
 ex… Oth… real 
 ra… Mul… Com… est… 
 20… 2019 2020 2019 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Re… 
 lo… 
 se… $ 73,… $ 73,… $ 46,… $ 46,… $ 119… $ 120… 
 by 
 re… 
 es… 
 Cr… 1,1… 340 2,5… 974 3,7… 1,3… 
 % 
 of 
 to… 
 cr… 
 to 
 to… 1.57 % 0.46 % 5.48 % 2.09 % 3.10 % 1.09 % 
 re… 
 lo… 
 se… 
 by 
 re… 
 es… 
 Cr… $ 56 $ 28 $ 427 $ 155 $ 483 $ 183 
 no… 
 % 
 of 
 cr… 
 no… 
 lo… 
 to 
 to… 0.08 % 0.04 % 0.91 % 0.33 % 0.40 % 0.15 % 
 re… 
 lo… 
 se… 
 by 
 re… 
 es… 
The following table provides additional information about retained wholesale loans, including
geographic distribution, delinquency and net charge-offs.
 D… 
 3… 
 (… 
 m… Se… 
 L… by Co… To… 
 by re… and re… 
 g… es… in… Ot… lo… 
 d… 20… 20… 20… 20… 20… 20… 20… 2… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 T… $ 11… $ 11… $ 10… $ 11… $ 18… $ 15… $ 40… $ 3… 
 U… 
 T… 3,… 2,… 33… 34… 71… 64… 10… 1… 
 n… 
 T… 
 r… $ 11… $ 12… $ 14… $ 14… $ 25… $ 21… $ 51… $ 4… 
 l… 
 L… 
 d… 
 C… 
 a… 
 l… 
 t… 
 30 
 d… $ 11… $ 12… $ 14… $ 14… $ 24… $ 21… $ 50… $ 4… 
 p… 
 d… 
 a… 
 s… 
 a… 
 3… 
 d… 
 p… 
 d… 601 115 658 449 1,… 415 2,… 9… 
 a… 
 s… 
 a… 
 90 
 or 
 m… 
 d… 
 p… 15 1 20 37 22 5 57 43 
 d… 
 a… 
 s… 
 a… 
 C… 483 183 1,… 844 904 30 3,… 1… 
 n… 
 T… 
 r… $ 11… $ 12… $ 14… $ 14… $ 25… $ 21… $ 51… $ 4… 
 l… 
 N… $ 10 $ 44 $ 737 $ 335 $ 52 $ 36 $ 799 $ 4… 
 c… 
 % 
 of 
 n… 
 c… 0.… % 0.… % 0.… % 0.… % 0.… % 0.… % 0.… % 0… % 
 to 
 e… 
 r… 
 l… 
(a) The U.S. and non-U.S. distribution is determined based predominantly on the domicile of the
borrower.
(b) The credit quality of wholesale loans is assessed primarily through ongoing review and monitoring
of an obligor’s ability to meet contractual obligations rather than relying on the past due status,
which is generally a lagging indicator of credit quality. Generally excludes loans under payment
deferral programs offered in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
(c) Represents loans that are considered well-collateralized and therefore still accruing interest.
Nonaccrual loans
The following table provides information on retained wholesale nonaccrual loans.
 … 
 … 
 … S… 
 … by C… 
 … r… a… T… 
 … e… i… O… r… 
 … 2… 2… 2… 2… 2… 2… l… 2… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … $ 3… $ 1… $ 1… $ 6… $ 8… $ 28 $ 2… $ 8… 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… 14 2… 1… 1… 2 5… 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 4… $ 1… $ 1… $ 8… $ 9… $ 30 $ 3… $ 1… 
 … 
(a) Loans that were modified in response to the COVID-19 pandemic continue to be risk-rated in
accordance with the Firm’s overall credit risk management framework. As of December 31, 2020,
predominantly all of these loans were considered performing.
(b) When the discounted cash flows, collateral value or market price equals or exceeds the amortized
cost of the loan, the loan does not require an allowance. This typically occurs when the loans have
been partially charged off and/or there have been interest payments received and applied to the loan
balance.
(c) Interest income on nonaccrual loans recognized on a cash basis were not material for the years
ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Loan modifications
Certain loan modifications are considered to be TDRs as they provide various concessions to borrowers
who are experiencing financial difficulty. Loans with short-term or other insignificant modifications
that are not considered concessions are not TDRs nor are loans for which the Firm has elected to
apply the option to suspend the application of accounting guidance for TDRs as provided by the CARES
Act and extended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act. The carrying value of TDRs was $ 954million
and $ 501million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The carrying value of new TDRs was $
734million, $ 407million and $ 718million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018,
respectively. The impact of these modifications, as well as new TDRs, were not material to the Firm
for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 247 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
 Note 13 – Allowance for credit losses 
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the CECL accounting guidance. The adoption of this
guidance established a single allowance framework for all financial assets measured at amortized cost
and certain off-balance sheet credit exposures. This framework requires that management’s estimate
reflects credit losses over the instrument’s remaining expected life and considers expected future
changes in macroeconomic conditions. Refer to Note 1 for further information. JPMorgan Chase’s
allowance for credit losses comprises: • the allowance for loan losses, which covers the Firm’s
retained loan portfolios (scored and risk-rated) and is presented separately on the Consolidated
balance sheets, • the allowance for lending-related commitments, which is presented on the
Consolidated balance sheets in accounts payable and other liabilities, and • the allowance for credit
losses on investment securities, which covers the Firm’s HTM and AFS securities and is recognized
within Investment Securities on the Consolidated balance sheets. The income statement effect of all
changes in the allowance for credit losses is recognized in the provision for credit losses.
Determining the appropriateness of the allowance for credit losses is complex and requires
significant judgment by management about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. At
least quarterly, the allowance for credit losses is reviewed by the CRO, the CFO and the Controller
of the Firm. Subsequent evaluations of credit exposures, considering the macroeconomic conditions,
forecasts and other factors then prevailing, may result in significant changes in the allowance for
credit losses in future periods. The Firm’s policies used to determine its allowance for loan losses
and its allowance for lending-related commitments are described in the following paragraphs. Refer to
Note 10 for a description of the policies used to determine the allowance for credit losses on
investment securities. Methodology for allowances for loan losses and lending-related commitments The
allowance for loan losses and allowance for lending-related commitments represents expected credit
losses over the remaining expected life of retained loans and lending-related commitments that are
not unconditionally cancellable. The Firm does not record an allowance for future draws on
unconditionally cancellable lending-related commitments (e.g., credit cards). Expected losses related
to accrued interest on credit card loans and certain performing, modified loans to borrowers impacted
by COVID-19 are considered in the Firm’s allowance for loan losses. However, the Firm does not record
an allowance on other accrued interest receivables, due to its policy to write these receivables off
no later than 90 days past due by reversing interest income. The expected life of each instrument is
determined by considering its contractual term, expected prepayments, cancellation features, and
certain extension and call options. The expected life of funded credit card loans is generally
estimated by considering expected future payments on the credit card account, and determining how
much of those amounts should be allocated to repayments of the funded loan balance (as of the balance
sheet date) versus other account activity. This allocation is made using an approach that
incorporates the payment application requirements of the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility
and Disclosure Act of 2009, generally paying down the highest interest rate balances first. The
estimate of expected credit losses includes expected recoveries of amounts previously charged off or
expected to be charged off, even if such recoveries result in a negative allowance. Collective and
Individual Assessments When calculating the allowance for loan losses and the allowance for lending-
related commitments, the Firm assesses whether exposures share similar risk characteristics. If
similar risk characteristics exist, the Firm estimates expected credit losses collectively,
considering the risk associated with a particular pool and the probability that the exposures within
the pool will deteriorate or default. The assessment of risk characteristics is subject to
significant management judgment. Emphasizing one characteristic over another or considering
additional characteristics could affect the allowance. • Relevant risk characteristics for the
consumer portfolio include product type, delinquency status, current FICO scores, geographic
distribution, and, for collateralized loans, current LTV ratios. • Relevant risk characteristics for
the wholesale portfolio include LOB, geography, risk rating, delinquency status, level and type of
collateral, industry, credit enhancement, product type, facility purpose, tenor, and payment terms.
The majority of the Firm’s credit exposures share risk characteristics with other similar exposures,
and as a result are collectively assessed for impairment (“portfolio-based component”). The
portfolio-based component covers consumer loans, performing risk-rated loans and certain lending-
related commitments. If an exposure does not share risk characteristics with other exposures, the
Firm generally estimates expected credit losses on an individual basis, considering expected
repayment and conditions impacting that individual exposure (“asset-specific component”). The asset-
specific component covers modified PCD loans, loans modified or reasonably expected to be modified in
a TDR, collateral-dependent loans, as well as, risk-rated loans that have been placed on nonaccrual
status. Portfolio-based component The portfolio-based component begins with a quantitative
calculation that considers the likelihood of the borrower changing delinquency status or moving from
one risk rating to another. The quantitative calculation covers expected credit losses over an
instrument’s expected life and is estimated by applying credit loss factors to the Firm’s
 248 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
estimated exposure at default. The credit loss factors incorporate the probability of borrower
default as well as loss severity in the event of default. They are derived using a weighted average
of five internally developed macroeconomic scenarios over an eight-quarter forecast period, followed
by a single year straight-line interpolation to revert to long run historical information for periods
beyond the eight-quarter forecast period. The five macroeconomic scenarios consist of a central,
relative adverse, extreme adverse, relative upside and extreme upside scenario, and are updated by
the Firm’s central forecasting team. The scenarios take into consideration the Firm’s overarching
economic outlook, internal perspectives from subject matter experts across the Firm, and market
consensus and involve a governed process that incorporates feedback from senior management across
LOBs, Corporate Finance and Risk Management. The COVID-19 pandemic has stressed many MEVs to degrees
not experienced in recent history, which has created additional challenges in the use of modeled
credit loss estimates and increased the reliance on management judgment. In periods where certain
MEVs are outside the range of historical experience on which the Firm’s models have been trained, the
Firm makes adjustments to appropriately address these economic circumstances. The Firm also considers
the impact of other events, such as government unemployment benefits or other stimulus programs, when
determining whether adjustments are necessary. The quantitative calculation is adjusted to take into
consideration model imprecision, emerging risk assessments, trends and other subjective factors that
are not yet reflected in the calculation. These adjustments are accomplished in part by analyzing the
historical loss experience, including during stressed periods, for each major product or model.
Management applies judgment in making this adjustment, including taking into account uncertainties
associated with the economic and political conditions, quality of underwriting standards, borrower
behavior, credit concentrations or deterioration within an industry, product or portfolio, as well as
other relevant internal and external factors affecting the credit quality of the portfolio. In
certain instances, the interrelationships between these factors create further uncertainties.
Throughout 2020, the Firm made adjustments to its quantitative calculation which placed significant
weighting on its adverse scenarios, as a result of continued uncertainty related to the COVID-19
pandemic. The application of different inputs into the quantitative calculation, and the assumptions
used by management to adjust the quantitative calculation, are subject to significant management
judgment, and emphasizing one input or assumption over another, or considering other inputs or
assumptions, could affect the estimate of the allowance for loan losses and the allowance for
lending-related commitments. Asset-specific component To determine the asset-specific component of
the allowance, collateral-dependent loans (including those loans for which foreclosure is probable)
and larger, nonaccrual risk-rated loans in the wholesale portfolio segment are generally evaluated
individually, while smaller loans (both scored and risk-rated) are aggregated for evaluation using
factors relevant for the respective class of assets. The Firm generally measures the asset-specific
allowance as the difference between the amortized cost of the loan and the present value of the cash
flows expected to be collected, discounted at the loan’s original effective interest rate. Subsequent
changes in impairment are generally recognized as an adjustment to the allowance for loan losses. For
collateral-dependent loans, the fair value of collateral less estimated costs to sell is used to
determine the charge-off amount for declines in value (to reduce the amortized cost of the loan to
the fair value of collateral) or the amount of negative allowance that should be recognized (for
recoveries of prior charge-offs associated with improvements in the fair value of collateral). The
asset-specific component of the allowance for loan losses for loans that have been or are expected to
be modified in TDRs incorporates the effect of the modification on the loan’s expected cash flows
(including forgone interest, principal forgiveness, as well as other concessions), and also the
potential for redefault. For residential real estate loans modified in or expected to be modified in
TDRs, the Firm develops product-specific probability of default estimates, which are applied at a
loan level to compute expected losses. In developing these probabilities of default, the Firm
considers the relationship between the credit quality characteristics of the underlying loans and
certain assumptions about housing prices and unemployment, based upon industry-wide data. The Firm
also considers its own historical loss experience to-date based on actual redefaulted modified loans.
For credit card loans modified in or expected to be modified in TDRs, expected losses incorporate
projected delinquencies and charge-offs based on the Firm’s historical experience by type of
modification program. For wholesale loans modified or expected to be modified in TDRs, expected
losses incorporate management’s expectation of the borrower’s ability to repay under the modified
terms. Estimating the timing and amounts of future cash flows is highly judgmental as these cash flow
projections rely upon estimates such as loss severities, asset valuations, default rates (including
redefault rates on modified loans), the amounts and timing of interest or principal payments
(including any expected prepayments) or other factors that are reflective of current and expected
market conditions. These estimates are, in turn, dependent on factors such as the duration of current
overall economic conditions, industry-, portfolio-, or borrower-specific factors, the expected
outcome of insolvency proceedings as well as, in certain circumstances, other economic factors. All
of these estimates and assumptions require significant management judgment and certain assumptions
are highly subjective.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 249 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Allowance for credit losses and related information
The table below summarizes information about the allowances for loan losses and lending-related
commitments, and includes a breakdown of loans and lending-related commitments by impairment
methodology. Refer to Note 10 for further information on the allowance for credit losses on
investment securities.
The adoption of the CECL accounting guidance resulted in a change in the accounting for PCI loans,
which are considered PCD loans. In conjunction with the adoption of CECL, the Firm reclassified risk-
rated loans and lending-related commitments from the consumer, excluding credit card portfolio
segment to the wholesale portfolio segment, to align with the methodology applied when determining
the allowance. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation. Refer
to Note 1 for further information.
 (Table 
 continued on 
 next page) 2020(e) 
 Year ended Consumer, 
 December 31, excluding 
 (in millions) credit card Credit card Wholesale Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Allowance for 
 loan losses 
 Beginning 
 balance at $ 2,538 $ 5,683 $ 4,902 $ 13,123 
 January 1, 
 Cumulative 
 effect of a 
 change in 297 5,517 -1,642 4,172 
 accounting 
 principle 
 Gross 805 5,077 954 6,836 
 charge-offs 
 Gross 
 recoveries -631 -791 -155 -1,577 
 collected 
 Net charge-offs 174 4,286 799 5,259 
 Write-offs of NA NA NA NA 
 PCI loans(a) 
 Provision for 974 10,886 4,431 16,291 
 loan losses 
 Other 1 — — 1 
 Ending balance $ 3,636 $ 17,800 $ 6,892 $ 28,328 
 at December 31, 
 Allowance for 
 lending-related 
 commitments 
 Beginning 
 balance at $ 12 $ — $ 1,179 $ 1,191 
 January 1, 
 Cumulative 
 effect of a 
 change in 133 — -35 98 
 accounting 
 principle 
 Provision for 
 lending-related 42 — 1,079 1,121 
 commitments 
 Other — — -1 -1 
 Ending balance $ 187 $ — $ 2,222 $ 2,409 
 at December 31, 
 Total allowance 
 for credit $ 3,823 $ 17,800 $ 9,114 $ 30,737 
 losses 
 Allowance for 
 loan losses by 
 impairment 
 methodology 
 Asset-specific… $ -7 $ 633 $ 682 $ 1,308 
 Portfolio-based 3,643 17,167 6,210 27,020 
 PCI NA NA NA NA 
 Total allowance $ 3,636 $ 17,800 $ 6,892 $ 28,328 
 for loan losses 
 Loans by 
 impairment 
 methodology 
 Asset-specific… $ 16,648 $ 1,375 $ 3,606 $ 21,629 
 Portfolio-based 285,479 142,057 511,341 938,877 
 PCI NA NA NA NA 
 Total retained $ 302,127 $ 143,432 $ 514,947 $ 960,506 
 loans 
 Collateral-dep… 
 loans 
 Net charge-offs $ 133 $ — $ 76 $ 209 
 Loans measured 
 at fair value 
 of 4,956 — 188 5,144 
 collateral less 
 cost to sell 
 Allowance for 
 lending-related 
 commitments by 
 impairment 
 methodology 
 Asset-specific $ — $ — $ 114 $ 114 
 Portfolio-based 187 — 2,108 2,295 
 Total allowance 
 for $ 187 $ — $ 2,222 $ 2,409 
 lending-related 
 commitments(c) 
 Lending-related 
 commitments by 
 impairment 
 methodology 
 Asset-specific $ — $ — $ 577 $ 577 
 Portfolio-base… 37,783 — 426,871 464,654 
 Total 
 lending-related $ 37,783 $ — $ 427,448 $ 465,231 
 commitments 
 250 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
(a) Prior to the adoption of CECL, write-offs of PCI loans were recorded against the allowance for
loan losses when actual losses for a pool exceeded estimated losses that were recorded as purchase
accounting adjustments at the time of acquisition. A write-off of a PCI loan was recognized when the
underlying loan was removed from a pool.
(b) Includes modified PCD loans and loans that have been modified or are reasonably expected to be
modified in a TDR. Also includes risk-rated loans that have been placed on nonaccrual status for the
wholesale portfolio segment. The asset-specific credit card allowance for loans modified, or
reasonably expected to be modified, in a TDR is calculated based on the loans’ original contractual
interest rates and does not consider any incremental penalty rates.
(c) The allowance for lending-related commitments is reported in accounts payable and other
liabilities on the Consolidated balance sheets.
(d) At December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, lending-related commitments excluded $ 19.5billion, $
9.8billion and $ 8.7billion, respectively, for the consumer, excluding credit card portfolio segment;
$ 658.5billion, $ 650.7billion and $ 605.4billion, respectively, for the credit card portfolio
segment; and $ 22.4billion, $ 24.1billion and $ 24.8billion, respectively, for the wholesale
portfolio segment, which were not subject to the allowance for lending-related commitments.
(e) Excludes HTM securities, which had an allowance for credit losses of $ 78million and a provision
for credit losses of $ 68million as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020.
 (… 
 c… 
 f… 
 p… 
 p… 
 2… 2… 
 C… C… 
 e… e… 
 c… C… c… C… 
 c… c… W… T… c… c… W… T… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 $ 3… $ 5… $ 4… $ 1… $ 3… $ 4… $ 4… $ 1… 
 NA NA NA NA NA … … … 
 9… 5… 4… 6… 9… 5… 3… 6… 
 -… -… -… -… -… -… -… -… 
 3… 4… 4… 5… 1… 4… 1… 4… 
 1… — — 1… 1… — — 1… 
 -… 5… 4… 5… -… 4… 1… 4… 
 -1 -1 11 9 — — -1 -1 
 $ 2… $ 5… $ 4… $ 1… $ 3… $ 5… $ 4… $ 1… 
 $ 12 $ — $ 1… $ 1… $ 12 $ — $ 1… $ 1… 
 NA NA NA NA NA … … … 
 — — 1… 1… — — -… -… 
 — — — — — — 1 1 
 $ 12 $ — $ 1… $ 1… $ 12 $ — $ 1… $ 1… 
 $ 2… $ 5… $ 6… $ 1… $ 3… $ 5… $ 5… $ 1… 
 $ 75 $ 4… $ 2… $ 8… $ 1… $ 4… $ 3… $ 9… 
 1… 5… 4… 1… 1… 4… 4… 1… 
 9… — — 9… 1… — — 1… 
 $ 2… $ 5… $ 4… $ 1… $ 3… $ 5… $ 4… $ 1… 
 $ 5… $ 1… $ 1… $ 8… $ 6… $ 1… $ 1… $ 9… 
 2… 1… 4… 9… 3… 1… 4… 9… 
 2… — — 2… 2… — 3 2… 
 $ 2… $ 1… $ 4… $ 9… $ 3… $ 1… $ 4… $ 9… 
 $ 46 $ — $ 36 $ 82 $ 16 $ — $ 29 $ 45 
 2… — 87 2… 2… — 2… 2… 
 $ — $ — $ 1… $ 1… $ — $ — $ 99 $ 99 
 12 — 1… 1… 12 — 9… 9… 
 $ 12 $ — $ 1… $ 1… $ 12 $ — $ 1… $ 1… 
 $ — $ — $ 4… $ 4… $ — $ — $ 4… $ 4… 
 3… — 3… 4… 2… — 3… 4… 
 $ 3… $ — $ 3… $ 4… $ 2… $ — $ 3… $ 4… 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 251 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Discussion of changes in the allowance during
2020 The increase in the allowance for loan
losses and lending-related commitments was
primarily driven by an increase in the provision
for credit losses, reflecting the deterioration
in and uncertainty around the future
macroeconomic environment as a result of the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December
31, 2020, the Firm’s central case reflected U.S.
unemployment rates of approximately 7% through
the second quarter of 2021 and remaining above
5% until the second half of 2022. This compared
with relatively low levels of unemployment of
approximately 4% throughout 2020 and 2021 in the
Firm’s January 1, 2020 central case. Further,
while the Firm’s January 1, 2020 central case
U.S. GDP forecast reflected a 1.7% expansion in
2020, actual U.S. GDP contracted approximately
2.5% in 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the
Firm’s central case assumptions reflect a return
to pre-pandemic GDP levels in the fourth quarter
of 2021. Due to elevated uncertainty in the near
term outlook, driven by the potential for
increased infection rates and related lock downs
resulting from the pandemic, as well as the
prospect that government and other consumer
relief measures set to expire may not be
extended, the Firm has placed significant
weighting on its adverse scenarios. These
scenarios incorporate more punitive
macroeconomic factors than the central case
assumptions, resulting in weighted average U.S.
unemployment rates remaining elevated throughout
2021 and 2022, ending the fourth quarter of 2022
at approximately 6%, and in U.S. GDP ending 2022
approximately 0.9% higher than fourth quarter
2019 actual pre-pandemic levels.
The Firm’s central case assumptions reflected U.S. unemployment rates and U.S. real GDP as follows:
 Assumptions at January 1, 2020 
 2Q20 4Q20(b) 2Q21 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. unemployment rate(a) 3.7% 3.8% 4.0% 
 Cumulative change in U.S. real GDP from 0.9% 1.7% 2.4% 
 12/31/2019 
 Assumptions at December 31, 2020 
 2Q21 4Q21 2Q22 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. unemployment rate(a) 6.8% 5.7% 5.1% 
 Cumulative change in U.S. real GDP from (1.9)% 0.6% 2.0% 
 12/31/2019 
(a) Reflects quarterly average of forecasted U.S. unemployment rate.
(b) 4Q20 actual U.S. unemployment rate (quarterly average) was 6.8%. 4Q20 actual cumulative change in
U.S. real GDP from 4Q19 was (2.5%).
Subsequent changes to this forecast and related
estimates will be reflected in the provision for
credit losses in future periods.
 252 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 14 – Variable interest entities 
Refer to Note 1 on page 167 for a further description of JPMorgan Chase’s accounting policies
regarding consolidation of VIEs.
The following table summarizes the most significant types of Firm-sponsored VIEs by business segment.
The Firm considers a “sponsored” VIE to include any entity where: (1) JPMorgan Chase is the primary
beneficiary of the structure; (2) the VIE is used by JPMorgan Chase to securitize Firm assets; (3)
the VIE issues financial instruments with the JPMorgan Chase name; or (4) the entity is a JPMorgan
Chase–administered asset-backed commercial paper conduit.
 Line of Business Transaction Type Activity 2020 Form 10-K 
 page references 
 Credit card Securitization of 
 CCB securitization trusts originated credit card 253-254 
 receivables 
 Servicing and 
 Mortgage securitization securitization of both 
 trusts originated and 254-256 
 purchased residential 
 mortgages 
 Securitization of both 
 Mortgage and other originated and purchased 
 CIB securitization trusts residential and 254-256 
 commercial mortgages, 
 and other consumer loans 
 Assist clients in 
 accessing the financial 
 markets in a 
 Multi-seller conduits cost-efficient manner 256 
 and structures 
 transactions to meet 
 investor needs 
 Municipal bond vehicles Financing of municipal 256-257 
 bond investments 
The Firm’s other business segments are also involved with VIEs (both third-party and Firm-sponsored),
but to a lesser extent, as follows:
• Asset & Wealth Management: AWM sponsors and manages certain funds that are deemed VIEs. As asset
manager of the funds, AWM earns a fee based on assets managed; the fee varies with each fund’s
investment objective and is competitively priced. For fund entities that qualify as VIEs, AWM’s
interests are, in certain cases, considered to be significant variable interests that result in
consolidation of the financial results of these entities.
• Commercial Banking: CB provides financing and lending-related services to a wide spectrum of
clients, including certain third-party-sponsored entities that may meet the definition of a VIE. CB
does not control the activities of these entities and does not consolidate these entities. CB’s
maximum loss exposure, regardless of whether the entity is a VIE, is generally limited to loans and
lending-related commitments which are reported and disclosed in the same manner as any other third-
party transaction.
• Corporate : Corporate is involved with entities that may meet the definition of VIEs; however these
entities are generally subject to specialized investment company accounting, which does not require
the consolidation of investments, including VIEs. In addition, Treasury and CIO invest in securities
generally issued by third parties which may meet the definition of VIEs (e.g., issuers of asset-
backed securities). In general, the Firm does not have the power to direct the significant activities
of these entities and therefore does not consolidate these entities. Refer to Note 10 for further
information on the Firm’s investment securities portfolio.
In addition, CIB also invests in and provides financing and other services to VIEs sponsored by third
parties. Refer to page 258 of this Note for more information on the VIEs sponsored by third parties.
Significant Firm-sponsored variable interest entities
Credit card securitizations CCB’s Card business may securitize originated credit card loans,
primarily through the Chase Issuance Trust (the “Trust”). The Firm’s continuing involvement in credit
card securitizations includes servicing the receivables, retaining an undivided seller’s interest in
the receivables, retaining certain senior and subordinated securities and maintaining escrow
accounts. The Firm consolidates the assets and liabilities of its sponsored credit card trusts as it
is considered to be the primary beneficiary of these securitization trusts based on the Firm’s
ability to direct the activities of these VIEs through its servicing responsibilities and other
duties, including making decisions as to the receivables that are transferred into those trusts and
as to any related modifications and workouts. Additionally, the nature and extent of the Firm’s other
continuing involvement with the trusts, as indicated above, obligates the Firm to absorb losses and
gives the Firm the right to receive certain benefits from these VIEs that could potentially be
significant. The underlying securitized credit card receivables and other assets of the
securitization trusts are available only for payment of the beneficial interests issued by the
securitization trusts; they are not available to pay the Firm’s other obligations or the claims of
the Firm’s creditors. The agreements with the credit card securitization trusts require the Firm to
maintain a minimum undivided interest in the credit card trusts (generally 5%). As of December 31,
2020 and 2019, the Firm held undivided interests in Firm-sponsored credit card securitization trusts
of $ 5.4billion and $ 5.3billion, respectively. The Firm maintained an average undivided interest in
principal receivables owned by those trusts of approximately 39% and 50% for the years ended December
31, 2020 and
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 253 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
2019. The Firm did not retain any senior securities and retained $ 1.5billion and $ 3.0billion of
subordinated securities in certain of its credit card securitization trusts as of December 31, 2020
and 2019, respectively. The Firm’s undivided interests in the credit card trusts and securities
retained are eliminated in consolidation. Firm-sponsored mortgage and other securitization trusts The
Firm securitizes (or has securitized) originated and purchased residential mortgages, commercial
mortgages and other consumer loans primarily in its CCB and CIB businesses. Depending on the
particular transaction, as well as the respective business involved, the Firm may act as the servicer
of the loans and/or retain certain beneficial interests in the securitization trusts.
The following table presents the total unpaid principal amount of assets held in Firm-sponsored
private-label securitization entities, including those in which the Firm has continuing involvement,
and those that are consolidated by the Firm. Continuing involvement includes servicing the loans,
holding senior interests or subordinated interests (including amounts required to be held pursuant to
credit risk retention rules), recourse or guarantee arrangements, and derivative contracts. In
certain instances, the Firm’s only continuing involvement is servicing the loans. The Firm’s maximum
loss exposure from retained and purchased interests is the carrying value of these interests. Refer
to Securitization activity on page 259 of this Note for further information regarding the Firm’s cash
flows associated with and interests retained in nonconsolidated VIEs, and pages 259-260 of this Note
for information on the Firm’s loan sales and securitization activity related to U.S. GSEs and
government agencies.
 JPMor… 
 Chase 
 Princ… Assets inter… 
 amount held in 
 outst… in secur… 
 Total Assets nonco… assets 
 Dece… assets held secur… in Total 
 31, held in VIEs nonco… intere… 
 2020 by conso… with VIEs(… Other held by 
 (in secur… secur… conti… Tradi… Inves… finan… JPMorg… 
 mill… VIEs VIEs invol… assets secur… assets Chase 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Secu… 
 Resi… 
 mort… 
 Prim… 
 and $ 49,644 $ 1,693 $ 41,265 $ 574 $ 724 $ — $ 1,298 
 opti… 
 ARMs 
 Subp… 12,896 46 12,154 9 — — 9 
 Comm… 
 and 119,7… — 92,351 955 1,549 262 2,766 
 othe… 
 Total $ 182,2… $ 1,739 $ 145,7… $ 1,538 $ 2,273 $ 262 $ 4,073 
 JPMor… 
 Chase 
 Princ… Assets inter… 
 amount held in 
 outst… in secur… 
 Total Assets nonco… assets 
 Dece… assets held secur… in Total 
 31, held in VIEs nonco… intere… 
 2019 by conso… with VIEs(… Other held by 
 (in secur… secur… conti… Tradi… Inves… finan… JPMorg… 
 mill… VIEs VIEs invol… assets secur… assets Chase 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Secu… 
 Resi… 
 mort… 
 Prim… 
 and $ 60,348 $ 2,796 $ 48,734 $ 535 $ 625 $ — $ 1,160 
 opti… 
 ARMs 
 Subp… 14,661 — 13,490 7 — — 7 
 Comm… 
 and 111,9… — 80,878 785 773 241 1,799 
 othe… 
 Total $ 186,9… $ 2,796 $ 143,1… $ 1,327 $ 1,398 $ 241 $ 2,966 
(a) Excludes U.S. GSEs and government agency securitizations and re-securitizations, which are not
Firm-sponsored. Refer to pages 259-260 of this Note for information on the Firm’s loan sales and
securitization activity related to U.S. GSEs and government agencies.
(b) Consists of securities backed by commercial real estate loans and non-mortgage-related consumer
receivables purchased from third parties.
(c) Excludes the following: retained servicing (refer to Note 15 for a discussion of MSRs);
securities retained from loan sales and securitization activity related to U.S. GSEs and government
agencies; interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives primarily used to manage interest rate and
foreign exchange risks of securitization entities (refer to Note 5 for further information on
derivatives); senior and subordinated securities of $ 105million and $ 40million, respectively, at
December 31, 2020, and $ 106million and $ 94million, respectively, at December 31, 2019, which the
Firm purchased in connection with CIB’s secondary market-making activities.
(d) Includes interests held in re-securitization transactions.
(e) As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, 73% and 63%, respectively, of the Firm’s retained
securitization interests, which are predominantly carried at fair value and include amounts required
to be held pursuant to credit risk retention rules, were risk-rated “A” or better, on an
S&P-equivalent basis. The retained interests in prime residential mortgages consisted of $ 1.3billion
and $ 1.1billion of investment-grade retained interests, and $ 41million and $ 72million of
noninvestment-grade retained interests at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The retained
interests in commercial and other securitization trusts consisted of $ 2.0billion and $ 1.2billion of
investment-grade retained interests, and $ 753million and $ 575million of noninvestment-grade
retained interests at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
 254 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Residential mortgage The Firm securitizes
residential mortgage loans originated by CCB, as
well as residential mortgage loans purchased
from third parties by either CCB or CIB. CCB
generally retains servicing for all residential
mortgage loans it originated or purchased, and
for certain mortgage loans purchased by CIB. For
securitizations of loans serviced by CCB, the
Firm has the power to direct the significant
activities of the VIE because it is responsible
for decisions related to loan modifications and
workouts. CCB may also retain an interest upon
securitization. In addition, CIB engages in
underwriting and trading activities involving
securities issued by Firm-sponsored
securitization trusts. As a result, CIB at times
retains senior and/or subordinated interests
(including residual interests and amounts
required to be held pursuant to credit risk
retention rules) in residential mortgage
securitizations at the time of securitization,
and/or reacquires positions in the secondary
market in the normal course of business. In
certain instances, as a result of the positions
retained or reacquired by CIB or held by
Treasury and CIO or CCB, when considered
together with the servicing arrangements entered
into by CCB, the Firm is deemed to be the
primary beneficiary of certain securitization
trusts. Refer to the table on page 257 of this
Note for more information on consolidated
residential mortgage securitizations. The Firm
does not consolidate residential mortgage
securitizations (Firm-sponsored or third-party-
sponsored) when it is not the servicer (and
therefore does not have the power to direct the
most significant activities of the trust) or
does not hold a beneficial interest in the trust
that could potentially be significant to the
trust. Refer to the table on page 257 of this
Note for more information on the consolidated
residential mortgage securitizations, and the
table on the previous page of this Note for
further information on interests held in
nonconsolidated residential mortgage
securitizations. Commercial mortgages and other
consumer securitizations CIB originates and
securitizes commercial mortgage loans, and
engages in underwriting and trading activities
involving the securities issued by
securitization trusts. CIB may retain unsold
senior and/or subordinated interests (including
amounts required to be held pursuant to credit
risk retention rules) in commercial mortgage
securitizations at the time of securitization
but, generally, the Firm does not service
commercial loan securitizations. Treasury and
CIO may choose to invest in these
securitizations as well. For commercial mortgage
securitizations the power to direct the
significant activities of the VIE generally is
held by the servicer or investors in a specified
class of securities (“controlling class”). The
Firm generally does not retain an interest in
the controlling class in its sponsored
commercial mortgage securitization transactions.
Refer to the table on page 257 of this Note for
more information on the consolidated commercial
mortgage securitizations, and the table on the
previous page of this Note for further
information on interests held in nonconsolidated
securitizations. Re-securitizations The Firm
engages in certain re-securitization
transactions in which debt securities are
transferred to a VIE in exchange for new
beneficial interests. These transfers occur in
connection with both U.S. GSEs and government
agency sponsored VIEs, which are backed by
residential mortgages. The Firm’s consolidation
analysis is largely dependent on the Firm’s role
and interest in the re-securitization trusts.
The following table presents the principal amount of securities transferred to re-securitization
VIEs.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Transfers of securities to VIEs 
 U.S. GSEs and government agencies $ 46,123 $ 25,852 $ 15,532 
Most re-securitizations with which the Firm is
involved are client-driven transactions in which
a specific client or group of clients is seeking
a specific return or risk profile. For these
transactions, the Firm has concluded that the
decision-making power of the entity is shared
between the Firm and its clients, considering
the joint effort and decisions in establishing
the re-securitization trust and its assets, as
well as the significant economic interest the
client holds in the re-securitization trust;
therefore the Firm does not consolidate the re-
securitization VIE. The Firm did not transfer
any private label securities to re-
securitization VIEs during 2020, 2019 and 2018,
respectively, and retained interests in any such
Firm-sponsored VIEs as of December 31, 2020 and
2019 were immaterial. Additionally, the Firm may
invest in beneficial interests of third-party-
sponsored re-securitizations and generally
purchases these interests in the secondary
market. In these circumstances, the Firm does
not have the unilateral ability to direct the
most significant activities of the re-
securitization trust, either because it was not
involved in the initial design of the trust, or
the Firm is involved with an independent third-
party sponsor and demonstrates shared power over
the creation of the trust; therefore, the Firm
does not consolidate the re-securitization VIE.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 255 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
The following table presents information on the Firm's interests in nonconsolidated re-securitization
VIEs.
 December 31, Nonconsolidated 
 (in millions) re-securitization VIEs 
 U.S. GSEs and government agencies 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest in VIEs $ 2,631 $ 2,928 
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Firm did
not consolidate any U.S. GSE and government
agency re-securitization VIEs or any Firm-
sponsored private-label re-securitization VIEs.
Multi-seller conduits Multi-seller conduit
entities are separate bankruptcy remote entities
that provide secured financing, collateralized
by pools of receivables and other financial
assets, to customers of the Firm. The conduits
fund their financing facilities through the
issuance of highly rated commercial paper. The
primary source of repayment of the commercial
paper is the cash flows from the pools of
assets. In most instances, the assets are
structured with deal-specific credit
enhancements provided to the conduits by the
customers (i.e., sellers) or other third
parties. Deal-specific credit enhancements are
generally structured to cover a multiple of
historical losses expected on the pool of
assets, and are typically in the form of
overcollateralization provided by the seller.
The deal-specific credit enhancements mitigate
the Firm’s potential losses on its agreements
with the conduits. To ensure timely repayment of
the commercial paper, and to provide the
conduits with funding to provide financing to
customers in the event that the conduits do not
obtain funding in the commercial paper market,
each asset pool financed by the conduits has a
minimum 100% deal-specific liquidity facility
associated with it provided by JPMorgan Chase
Bank, N.A. JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. also
provides the multi-seller conduit vehicles with
uncommitted program-wide liquidity facilities
and program-wide credit enhancement in the form
of standby letters of credit. The amount of
program-wide credit enhancement required is
based upon commercial paper issuance and
approximates 10% of the outstanding balance of
commercial paper. The Firm consolidates its
Firm-administered multi-seller conduits, as the
Firm has both the power to direct the
significant activities of the conduits and a
potentially significant economic interest in the
conduits. As administrative agent and in its
role in structuring transactions, the Firm makes
decisions regarding asset types and credit
quality, and manages the commercial paper
funding needs of the conduits. The Firm’s
interests that could potentially be significant
to the VIEs include the fees received as
administrative agent and liquidity and program-
wide credit enhancement provider, as well as the
potential exposure created by the liquidity and
credit enhancement facilities provided to the
conduits. Refer to page 257 of this Note for
further information on consolidated VIE assets
and liabilities.
In the normal course of business, JPMorgan Chase
makes markets in and invests in commercial paper
issued by the Firm-administered multi-seller
conduits. The Firm held $ 13.5billion and $
16.3billion of the commercial paper issued by
the Firm-administered multi-seller conduits at
December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which
have been eliminated in consolidation. The
Firm’s investments reflect the Firm’s funding
needs and capacity and were not driven by market
illiquidity. Other than the amounts required to
be held pursuant to credit risk retention rules,
the Firm is not obligated under any agreement to
purchase the commercial paper issued by the
Firm-administered multi-seller conduits. Deal-
specific liquidity facilities, program-wide
liquidity and credit enhancement provided by the
Firm have been eliminated in consolidation. The
Firm or the Firm-administered multi-seller
conduits provide lending-related commitments to
certain clients of the Firm-administered multi-
seller conduits. The unfunded commitments were $
12.2billion and $ 8.9billion at December 31,
2020 and 2019, respectively, and are reported as
off-balance sheet lending-related commitments in
other unfunded commitments to extend credit.
Refer to Note 28 for more information on off-
balance sheet lending-related commitments.
Municipal bond vehicles Municipal bond vehicles
or tender option bond (“TOB”) trusts allow
institutions to finance their municipal bond
investments at short-term rates. In a typical
TOB transaction, the trust purchases highly
rated municipal bond(s) of a single issuer and
funds the purchase by issuing two types of
securities: (1) puttable floating-rate
certificates (“floaters”) and (2) inverse
floating-rate residual interests (“residuals”).
The floaters are typically purchased by money
market funds or other short-term investors and
may be tendered, with requisite notice, to the
TOB trust. The residuals are retained by the
investor seeking to finance its municipal bond
investment. TOB transactions where the residual
is held by a third-party investor are typically
known as customer TOB trusts, and non-customer
TOB trusts are transactions where the Residual
is retained by the Firm. Customer TOB trusts are
sponsored by a third party; refer to page 258 of
this Note for further information. The Firm
serves as sponsor for all non-customer TOB
transactions. The Firm may provide various
services to a TOB trust, including remarketing
agent, liquidity or tender option provider,
and/or sponsor. J.P. Morgan Securities LLC may
serve as a remarketing agent on the floaters for
TOB trusts. The remarketing agent is responsible
for establishing the periodic variable rate on
the floaters, conducting the initial placement
and remarketing tendered floaters. The
remarketing agent may, but is not obligated to,
make markets in floaters. Floaters held by the
Firm were not material during 2020 and 2019.
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. or J.P. Morgan
Securities LLC often serves as the sole
liquidity or tender option provider for the TOB
trusts. The liquidity provider’s obligation to
 256 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
perform is conditional and is limited by certain events (“Termination Events”), which include
bankruptcy or failure to pay by the municipal bond issuer or credit enhancement provider, an event of
taxability on the municipal bonds or the immediate downgrade of the municipal bond to below
investment grade. In addition, the liquidity provider’s exposure is typically further limited by the
high credit quality of the underlying municipal bonds, the excess collateralization in the vehicle,
or, in certain transactions, the reimbursement agreements with the Residual holders. Holders of the
floaters may “put,” or tender, their floaters to the TOB trust. If the remarketing agent cannot
successfully remarket the floaters to another investor, the liquidity provider either provides a loan
to the TOB trust for the TOB trust’s purchase of the floaters, or it directly purchases the tendered
floaters. TOB trusts are considered to be variable interest entities. The Firm consolidates non-
customer TOB trusts because as the Residual holder, the Firm has the right to make decisions that
significantly impact the economic performance of the municipal bond vehicle, and it has the right to
receive benefits and bear losses that could potentially be significant to the municipal bond vehicle.
Consolidated VIE assets and liabilities
The following table presents information on assets and liabilities related to VIEs consolidated by
the Firm as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 Liabi… 
 Dece… Benef… 
 31, inter… 
 2020 Assets in 
 (in Tradi… Total VIE Total 
 mill… assets Loans Other… asset… asset… Other… liabil… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 VIE 
 prog… 
 type 
 Firm… 
 cred… $ — $ 11,962 $ 148 $ 12,110 $ 4,943 $ 3 $ 4,946 
 card 
 trus… 
 Firm… 
 mult… 2 23,787 188 23,977 10,523 33 10,556 
 cond… 
 Muni… 
 bond 1,930 — 2 1,932 1,902 — 1,902 
 vehi… 
 Mort… 
 secu… — 1,694 94 1,788 210 108 318 
 enti… 
 Other 2 176 249 427 — 89 89 
 Total $ 1,934 $ 37,619 $ 681 $ 40,234 $ 17,578 $ 233 $ 17,811 
 Assets Liabi… 
 Dece… Benef… 
 31, Tradi… Total inter… Total 
 2019 assets Loans Other… asset… in Other… liabil… 
 (in VIE 
 mill… asset… 
 VIE 
 prog… 
 type 
 Firm… 
 cred… $ — $ 14,986 $ 266 $ 15,252 $ 6,461 $ 6 $ 6,467 
 card 
 trus… 
 Firm… 
 mult… 1 25,183 355 25,539 9,223 36 9,259 
 cond… 
 Muni… 
 bond 1,903 — 4 1,907 1,881 3 1,884 
 vehi… 
 Mort… 
 secu… 66 2,762 64 2,892 276 130 406 
 enti… 
 Other 663 — 192 855 — 272 272 
 Total $ 2,633 $ 42,931 $ 881 $ 46,445 $ 17,841 $ 447 $ 18,288 
(a) Includes residential and commercial mortgage securitizations.
(b) Includes assets classified as cash and other assets on the Consolidated balance sheets.
(c) The assets of the consolidated VIEs included in the program types above are used to settle the
liabilities of those entities. The assets and liabilities include third-party assets and liabilities
of consolidated VIEs and exclude intercompany balances that eliminate in consolidation.
(d) The interest-bearing beneficial interest liabilities issued by consolidated VIEs are classified
in the line item on the Consolidated balance sheets titled, “Beneficial interests issued by
consolidated variable interest entities.” The holders of these beneficial interests generally do not
have recourse to the general credit of JPMorgan Chase. Included in beneficial interests in VIE assets
are long-term beneficial interests of $ 5.2billion and $ 6.7billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019,
respectively. Refer to Note 20 for additional information on interest-bearing long-term beneficial
interests.
(e) Includes liabilities classified as accounts payable and other liabilities on the Consolidated
balance sheets.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 257 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
VIEs sponsored by third parties The Firm enters into transactions with VIEs structured by other
parties. These include, for example, acting as a derivative counterparty, liquidity provider,
investor, underwriter, placement agent, remarketing agent, trustee or custodian. These transactions
are conducted at arm’s-length, and individual credit decisions are based on the analysis of the
specific VIE, taking into consideration the quality of the underlying assets. Where the Firm does not
have the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic
performance, or a variable interest that could potentially be significant, the Firm generally does
not consolidate the VIE, but it records and reports these positions on its Consolidated balance
sheets in the same manner it would record and report positions in respect of any other third-party
transaction. Tax credit vehicles The Firm holds investments in unconsolidated tax credit vehicles,
which are limited partnerships and similar entities that own and operate affordable housing, energy,
and other projects. These entities are primarily considered VIEs. A third party is typically the
general partner or managing member and has control over the significant activities of the tax credit
vehicles, and accordingly the Firm does not consolidate tax credit vehicles. The Firm generally
invests in these partnerships as a limited partner and earns a return primarily through the receipt
of tax credits allocated to the projects. The maximum loss exposure, represented by equity
investments and funding commitments, was $ 24.9billion and $ 19.1billion, of which $ 8.7billion and $
5.5billion was unfunded at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In order to reduce the risk of
loss, the Firm assesses each project and withholds varying amounts of its capital investment until
the project qualifies for tax credits. Refer to Note 25 for further information on affordable housing
tax credits. Refer to Note 28 for more information on off-balance sheet lending-related commitments.
Customer municipal bond vehicles (TOB trusts) The Firm may provide various services to customer TOB
trusts, including remarketing agent, liquidity or tender option provider. In certain customer TOB
transactions, the Firm, as liquidity provider, has entered into a reimbursement agreement with the
Residual holder. In those transactions, upon the termination of the vehicle, the Firm has recourse to
the third-party Residual holders for any shortfall. The Firm does not have any intent to protect
Residual holders from potential losses on any of the underlying municipal bonds. The Firm does not
consolidate customer TOB trusts, since the Firm does not have the power to make decisions that
significantly impact the economic performance of the municipal bond vehicle. The Firm’s maximum
exposure as a liquidity provider to customer TOB trusts at December 31, 2020 and 2019, was $
6.7billion and $ 5.5billion, respectively. The fair value of assets held by such VIEs at December 31,
2020 and 2019 was $ 10.5billion and $ 8.6billion, respectively. Refer to Note 28 for more information
on off-balance sheet lending-related commitments. Loan securitizations The Firm has securitized and
sold a variety of loans, including residential mortgage, credit card, and commercial mortgage. The
purposes of these securitization transactions were to satisfy investor demand and to generate
liquidity for the Firm. For loan securitizations in which the Firm is not required to consolidate the
trust, the Firm records the transfer of the loan receivable to the trust as a sale when all of the
following accounting criteria for a sale are met: (1) the transferred financial assets are legally
isolated from the Firm’s creditors; (2) the transferee or beneficial interest holder can pledge or
exchange the transferred financial assets; and (3) the Firm does not maintain effective control over
the transferred financial assets (e.g., the Firm cannot repurchase the transferred assets before
their maturity and it does not have the ability to unilaterally cause the holder to return the
transferred assets). For loan securitizations accounted for as a sale, the Firm recognizes a gain or
loss based on the difference between the value of proceeds received (including cash, beneficial
interests, or servicing assets received) and the carrying value of the assets sold. Gains and losses
on securitizations are reported in noninterest revenue.
 258 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Securitization activity
The following table provides information related to the Firm’s securitization activities for the
years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, related to assets held in Firm-sponsored securitization
entities that were not consolidated by the Firm, and where sale accounting was achieved at the time
of the securitization.
 Year 
 ended 
 Decemb… 
 31, 2020 Commerc… 2019 Commerc… 2018 Commerc… 
 (in Residen… and Residen… and Residen… and 
 millio… mortgag… other(e) mortgag… other(e) mortgag… other(e) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Princi… $ 7,103 $ 6,624 $ 9,957 $ 9,390 $ 6,431 $ 10,159 
 securi… 
 All 
 cash 
 flows 
 during 
 the 
 period… 
 Procee… 
 receiv… 
 from 
 loan $ 7,321 $ 6,865 $ 10,238 $ 9,544 $ 6,449 $ 10,218 
 sales 
 as 
 financ… 
 instru… 
 Servic… 
 fees 211 1 287 2 319 2 
 collec… 
 Cash 
 flows 
 receiv… 801 239 507 237 411 301 
 on 
 intere… 
(a) Excludes re-securitization transactions.
(b) Predominantly includes Level 2 assets.
(c) The carrying value of the loans accounted for at fair value approximated the proceeds received
upon loan sale.
(d) Represents prime mortgages. Excludes loan securitization activity related to U.S. GSEs and
government agencies.
(e) Includes commercial mortgage and other consumer loans.
Key assumptions used to value retained interests
originated during the year are shown in the
table below.
 Year ended December 31, 2020 2019 2018 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Residential mortgage retained interest: 
 Weighted-average life (in years) 4.7 4.8 7.6 
 Weighted-average discount rate 8.2 % 7.4 % 3.6 % 
 Commercial mortgage retained interest: 
 Weighted-average life (in years) 6.9 6.4 5.3 
 Weighted-average discount rate 3.0 % 4.1 % 4.0 % 
Loans and excess MSRs sold to U.S. government-sponsored enterprises and loans in securitization
transactions pursuant to Ginnie Mae guidelines In addition to the amounts reported in the
securitization activity tables above, the Firm, in the normal course of business, sells originated
and purchased mortgage loans and certain originated excess MSRs on a nonrecourse basis, predominantly
to U.S. GSEs. These loans and excess MSRs are sold primarily for the purpose of securitization by the
U.S. GSEs, who provide certain guarantee provisions (e.g., credit enhancement of the loans). The Firm
also sells loans into securitization transactions pursuant to Ginnie Mae guidelines; these loans are
typically insured or guaranteed by another U.S. government agency. The Firm does not consolidate the
securitization vehicles underlying these transactions as it is not the primary beneficiary. For a
limited number of loan sales, the Firm is obligated to share a portion of the credit risk associated
with the sold loans with the purchaser. Refer to Note 28 for additional information about the Firm’s
loan sales- and securitization-related indemnifications. Refer to Note 15 for additional information
about the impact of the Firm’s sale of certain excess MSRs.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 259 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
The following table summarizes the activities
related to loans sold to the U.S. GSEs, and
loans in securitization transactions pursuant to
Ginnie Mae guidelines.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Carrying value of loans sold $ 81,153 $ 92,349 $ 44,609 
 Proceeds received from loan sales as $ 45 $ 73 $ 9 
 cash 
 Proceeds from loan sales as 80,186 91,422 43,671 
 securities(a)(b) 
 Total proceeds received from loan $ 80,231 $ 91,495 $ 43,680 
 sales(c) 
 Gains/(losses) on loan sales(d)(e) $ 6 $ 499 $ -93 
(a) Includes securities from U.S. GSEs and
Ginnie Mae that are generally sold shortly after
receipt or retained as part of the Firm’s
investment securities portfolio.
(b) Included in level 2 assets.
(c) Excludes the value of MSRs retained upon the
sale of loans.
(d) Gains/(losses) on loan sales include the
value of MSRs.
(e) The carrying value of the loans accounted
for at fair value approximated the proceeds
received upon loan sale.
Options to repurchase delinquent loans In
addition to the Firm’s obligation to repurchase
certain loans due to material breaches of
representations and warranties as discussed in
Note 28, the Firm also has the option to
repurchase delinquent loans that it services for
Ginnie Mae loan pools, as well as for other U.S.
government agencies under certain arrangements.
The Firm typically elects to repurchase
delinquent loans from Ginnie Mae loan
pools as it continues to service them and/or
manage the foreclosure process in accordance
with the applicable requirements, and such loans
continue to be insured or guaranteed. When the
Firm’s repurchase option becomes exercisable,
such loans must be reported on the Consolidated
balance sheets as a loan with a corresponding
liability. Refer to Note 12 for additional
information.
The following table presents loans the Firm
repurchased or had an option to repurchase, real
estate owned, and foreclosed government-
guaranteed residential mortgage loans recognized
on the Firm’s Consolidated balance sheets as of
December 31, 2020 and 2019. Substantially all of
these loans and real estate are insured or
guaranteed by U.S. government agencies.
 December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Loans repurchased or option to $ 1,413 $ 2,941 
 repurchase(a) 
 Real estate owned 9 41 
 Foreclosed government-guaranteed 64 198 
 residential mortgage loans(b) 
(a) Predominantly all of these amounts relate to
loans that have been repurchased from Ginnie Mae
loan pools.
(b) Relates to voluntary repurchases of loans,
which are included in accrued interest and
accounts receivable.
Loan delinquencies and liquidation losses
The table below includes information about components of and delinquencies related to nonconsolidated
securitized financial assets held in Firm-sponsored private-label securitization entities, in which
the Firm has continuing involvement as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 As of or 
 for the 
 year 
 ended 
 December Net 
 31, Securitiz… 90 days liquidat… 
 (in assets past due losses 
 millions) 2020 2019 2020 2019 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Securiti… 
 loans 
 Resident… 
 mortgage: 
 Prime/ 
 Alt-A & $ 41,265 $ 48,734 $ 4,988 $ 2,449 $ 212 $ 579 
 option 
 ARMs 
 Subprime 12,154 13,490 2,406 1,813 179 532 
 Commerci… 92,351 80,878 5,958 187 30 445 
 and other 
 Total 
 loans $ 145,770 $ 143,102 $ 13,352 $ 4,449 $ 421 $ 1,556 
 securiti… 
 260 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 15 – Goodwill and Mortgage servicing rights 
Goodwill Goodwill is recorded upon completion of
a business combination as the difference between
the purchase price and the fair value of the net
assets acquired, and can be adjusted up to one
year from the acquisition date as more
information is obtained about the fair value of
assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
Subsequent to initial recognition, goodwill is
not amortized but is tested for impairment
during the fourth quarter of each fiscal year,
or more often if events or circumstances, such
as adverse changes in the business climate,
indicate that there may be an impairment. The
goodwill associated with each business
combination is allocated to the related
reporting units, which are determined based on
how the Firm’s businesses are managed and how
they are reviewed. The following table presents
goodwill attributed to the business segments.
 December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer & Community Banking(a) $ 31,311 $ 30,133 $ 30,084 
 Corporate & Investment Bank(a) 7,913 7,901 7,721 
 Commercial Banking 2,985 2,982 2,860 
 Asset & Wealth Management(a) 7,039 6,807 6,806 
 Total goodwill $ 49,248 $ 47,823 $ 47,471 
(a) In 2020, goodwill of $ 959million was transferred from CCB to CIB and $ 51million from AWM to CCB
related to business realignments. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current
presentation. Refer to Note 32 for additional information on these realignments.
The following table presents changes in the carrying amount of goodwill.
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at beginning of period $ 47,823 $ 47,471 $ 47,507 
 Changes during the period from: 
 Business combinations(a) 1,412 349 — 
 Other(b) 13 3 -36 
 Balance at December 31, $ 49,248 $ 47,823 $ 47,471 
(a) For 2020, represents estimated goodwill
associated with the acquisitions of cxLoyalty in
CCB and 55ip in AWM. For 2019, represents
goodwill associated with the acquisition of
InstaMed. This goodwill was allocated to CIB, CB
and CCB.
(b) Primarily relates to foreign currency
adjustments.
Goodwill impairment testing The Firm’s goodwill
was not impaired at December 31, 2020, 2019 and
2018. Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm
adopted new accounting guidance related to
goodwill impairment testing. The adoption of the
guidance requires recognition of an impairment
loss when the estimated fair value of a
reporting unit falls below its carrying value.
It eliminated the requirement that an impairment
loss be recognized only if the estimated implied
fair value of the goodwill is below its carrying
value. The goodwill impairment test is performed
by comparing the current fair value of each
reporting unit with its
carrying value. If the fair value is in excess
of the carrying value, then the reporting unit’s
goodwill is considered not to be impaired. If
the fair value is less than the carrying value,
then an impairment charge is recognized for the
amount by which the reporting unit’s carrying
value exceeds its fair value, up to the amount
of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
The Firm uses the reporting units’ allocated
capital plus goodwill and other intangible
assets as a proxy for the carrying values of
equity for the reporting units in the goodwill
impairment testing. Reporting unit equity is
determined on a similar basis as the allocation
of capital to the LOBs which takes into
consideration a variety of factors including
capital levels of similarly rated peers and
applicable regulatory capital requirements.
Proposed LOB capital levels are incorporated
into the Firm’s annual budget process, which is
reviewed by the Firm’s Board of Directors.
Allocated capital is further reviewed
periodically and updated as needed. The primary
method the Firm uses to estimate the fair value
of its reporting units is the income approach.
This approach projects cash flows for the
forecast period and uses the perpetuity growth
method to calculate terminal values. These cash
flows and terminal values are then discounted
using an appropriate discount rate. Projections
of cash flows are based on the reporting units’
earnings forecasts which are reviewed with
senior management of the Firm. The discount rate
used for each reporting unit represents an
estimate of the cost of equity for that
reporting unit and is determined considering the
Firm’s overall estimated cost of equity
(estimated using the Capital Asset Pricing
Model), as adjusted for the risk characteristics
specific to each reporting unit (for example,
for higher levels of risk or uncertainty
associated with the business or management’s
forecasts and assumptions). To assess the
reasonableness of the discount rates used for
each reporting unit, management compares the
discount rate to the estimated cost of equity
for publicly traded institutions with similar
businesses and risk characteristics. In
addition, the weighted average cost of equity
(aggregating the various reporting units) is
compared with the Firm’s overall estimated cost
of equity to ensure reasonableness. The
valuations derived from the discounted cash flow
analysis are then compared with market-based
trading and transaction multiples for relevant
competitors. Trading and transaction comparables
are used as general indicators to assess the
overall reasonableness of the estimated fair
values, although precise conclusions generally
cannot be drawn due to the differences that
naturally exist between the Firm’s businesses
and competitor institutions. Management also
takes into consideration a comparison between
the aggregate fair values of the Firm’s
reporting units and JPMorgan Chase’s market
capitalization. In evaluating this comparison,
management considers several factors, including
(i) a control premium that would exist in a
market transaction, (ii) factors related to the
level of
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 261 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
execution risk that would exist at the Firmwide level that do not exist at the reporting unit level
and (iii) short-term market volatility and other factors that do not directly affect the value of
individual reporting units. Unanticipated declines in business performance, increases in credit
losses, increases in capital requirements, as well as deterioration in economic or market conditions,
adverse regulatory or legislative changes or increases in the estimated market cost of equity, could
cause the estimated fair values of the Firm’s reporting units to decline in the future, which could
result in a material impairment charge to earnings in a future period related to some portion of the
associated goodwill. Mortgage servicing rights MSRs represent the fair value of expected future cash
flows for performing servicing activities for others. The fair value considers estimated future
servicing fees and ancillary revenue, offset by estimated costs to service the loans, and generally
declines over time as net servicing cash flows are received, effectively amortizing the MSR asset
against contractual servicing and ancillary fee income. MSRs are either purchased from third parties
or recognized upon sale or securitization of mortgage loans if servicing is retained. As permitted by
U.S. GAAP, the Firm has elected to account for its MSRs at fair value. The Firm treats its MSRs as a
single class of servicing assets based on the availability of market inputs used to measure the fair
value of its MSR asset and its treatment of MSRs as one aggregate pool for risk management purposes.
The Firm estimates the fair value of MSRs using an option-adjusted spread (“OAS”) model, which
projects MSR cash flows over multiple interest rate scenarios in conjunction with the Firm’s
prepayment model, and then discounts these cash flows at risk-adjusted rates. The model considers
portfolio characteristics, contractually specified servicing fees, prepayment assumptions,
delinquency rates, costs to service, late charges and other ancillary revenue, and other economic
factors. The Firm compares fair value estimates and assumptions to observable market data where
available, and also considers recent market activity and actual portfolio experience.
 262 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
The fair value of MSRs is sensitive to changes in interest rates, including their effect on
prepayment speeds. MSRs typically decrease in value when interest rates decline because declining
interest rates tend to increase prepayments and therefore reduce the expected life of the net
servicing cash flows that comprise the MSR asset. Conversely, securities (e.g., mortgage-backed
securities), and certain derivatives (e.g., those for which the Firm receives fixed-rate interest
payments) increase in value when interest rates decline. JPMorgan Chase uses combinations of
derivatives and securities to manage the risk of changes in the fair value of MSRs. The intent is to
offset any interest-rate related changes in the fair value of MSRs with changes in the fair value of
the related risk management instruments.
The following table summarizes MSR activity for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
 As of or for the year ended 
 December 31, 
 (in millions, except where 
 otherwise 
 noted) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fair value at beginning of period $ 4,699 $ 6,130 $ 6,030 
 MSR activity: 
 Originations of MSRs 944 1,384 931 
 Purchase of MSRs 248 105 315 
 Disposition of MSRs(a) -176 -789 -636 
 Net additions/(Dispositions) 1,016 700 610 
 Changes due to 
 collection/realization of -899 -951 -740 
 expected cash flows 
 Changes in valuation due to inputs 
 and 
 assumptions: 
 Changes due to market interest 
 rates and -1,568 -893 300 
 other(b) 
 Changes in valuation due to other 
 inputs 
 and assumptions: 
 Projected cash flows (e.g., cost to -54 -333 -e 15 
 service) 
 Discount rates 199 153 24 
 Prepayment model changes and -117 -107 -109 
 other(c) 
 Total changes in valuation due to 
 other 28 -287 -70 
 inputs and assumptions 
 Total changes in valuation due to 
 inputs -1,540 -1,180 230 
 and assumptions 
 Fair value at December 31, $ 3,276 $ 4,699 $ 6,130 
 Change in unrealized gains/(losses) 
 included in income related to MSRs $ -1,540 $ -1,180 $ 230 
 held 
 at December 31, 
 Contractual service fees, late fees 
 and 1,325 1,639 1,778 
 other ancillary fees included in 
 income 
 Third-party mortgage loans serviced 
 at 448.0 522.0 521.0 
 December 31, (in billions) 
 Servicer advances, net of an 
 allowance 
 for uncollectible amounts, at 1.8 2.0 3.0 
 December 
 31, (in billions)(d) 
(a) Includes excess MSRs transferred to agency-sponsored trusts in exchange for stripped mortgage
backed securities (“SMBS”). In each transaction, a portion of the SMBS was acquired by third parties
at the transaction date; the Firm acquired the remaining balance of those SMBS as trading securities.
(b) Represents both the impact of changes in estimated future prepayments due to changes in market
interest rates, and the difference between actual and expected prepayments.
(c) Represents changes in prepayments other than those attributable to changes in market interest
rates.
(d) Represents amounts the Firm pays as the servicer (e.g., scheduled principal and interest, taxes
and insurance), which will generally be reimbursed within a short period of time after the advance
from future cash flows from the trust or the underlying loans. The Firm’s credit risk associated with
these servicer advances is minimal because reimbursement of the advances is typically senior to all
cash payments to investors. In addition, the Firm maintains the right to stop payment to investors if
the collateral is insufficient to cover the advance. However, certain of these servicer advances may
not be recoverable if they were not made in accordance with applicable rules and agreements.
(e) The decrease in projected cash flows was largely related to default servicing assumption updates.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 263 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
The following table presents the components of mortgage fees and related income (including the impact
of MSR risk management activities) for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 CCB mortgage fees and related income 
 Net production revenue $ 2,629 $ 1,618 $ 268 
 Net mortgage servicing revenue: 
 Operating revenue: 
 Loan servicing revenue 1,367 1,533 1,835 
 Changes in MSR asset fair value due to 
 collection/realization of expected cash -899 -951 -740 
 flows 
 Total operating revenue 468 582 1,095 
 Risk management: 
 Changes in MSR asset fair value due to -1,568 -893 300 
 market interest rates and other(a) 
 Other changes in MSR asset fair value 
 due to other inputs and assumptions in 28 -287 -70 
 model(b) 
 Change in derivative fair value and 1,522 1,015 -341 
 other 
 Total risk management -18 -165 -111 
 Total net mortgage servicing revenue 450 417 984 
 Total CCB mortgage fees and related 3,079 2,035 1,252 
 income 
 All other 12 1 2 
 Mortgage fees and related income $ 3,091 $ 2,036 $ 1,254 
(a) Represents both the impact of changes in estimated future prepayments due to changes in market
interest rates, and the difference between actual and expected prepayments.
(b) Represents the aggregate impact of changes in model inputs and assumptions such as projected cash
flows (e.g., cost to service), discount rates and changes in prepayments other than those
attributable to changes in market interest rates (e.g., changes in prepayments due to changes in home
prices).
The table below outlines the key economic assumptions used to determine the fair value of the Firm’s
MSRs at December 31, 2020 and 2019, and outlines the sensitivities of those fair values to immediate
adverse changes in those assumptions, as defined below.
 December 31, 
 (in millions, except rates) 
 Weighted-average prepayment speed assumption (constant 2020 2019 
 prepayment rate) 14.90 % 11.67 % 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Impact on fair value of 10% adverse $ -206 $ -200 
 change 
 Impact on fair value of 20% adverse -392 -384 
 change 
 Weighted-average option adjusted 7.19 % 7.93 % 
 spread(a) 
 Impact on fair value of 100 basis points $ -134 $ -169 
 adverse change 
 Impact on fair value of 200 basis points -258 -326 
 adverse change 
(a) Includes the impact of operational risk and regulatory capital.
Changes in fair value based on variations in
assumptions generally cannot be easily
extrapolated, because the relationship of the
change in the assumptions to the change in fair
value are often highly interrelated and may not
be linear. In this table, the effect that a
change in a particular assumption may have on
the fair value is calculated without changing
any other assumption. In reality, changes in one
factor may result in changes in another, which
would either magnify or counteract the impact of
the initial change.
 264 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Note 16 – Premises and equipment Premises and
equipment, including leasehold improvements, are
carried at cost less accumulated depreciation
and amortization. JPMorgan Chase computes
depreciation using the straight-line method over
the estimated useful life of an asset. For
leasehold improvements, the Firm uses the
straight-line method computed over the lesser of
the remainder of the lease term, or estimated
useful life of the improvements. JPMorgan Chase
capitalizes certain costs associated with the
acquisition or development of internal-use
software. Once the software is ready for its
intended use, these costs are amortized on a
straight-line basis over the software’s expected
useful life and reviewed for impairment on an
ongoing basis.
Note 17 – Deposits
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, noninterest-
bearing and interest-bearing deposits were as
follows.
 December 31, (in millions) 
 U.S. offices 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Noninterest-bearing (included$9,873and $ 572,711 $ 395,667 
 $22,637at fair value)(a) 
 Interest-bearing (included$2,567and 1,197,032 876,156 
 $2,534at fair value)(a) 
 Total deposits in U.S. offices 1,769,743 1,271,823 
 Non-U.S. offices 
 Noninterest-bearing (included$1,486and 23,435 20,087 
 $1,980at fair value)(a) 
 Interest-bearing (included$558and 351,079 270,521 
 $1,438at fair value)(a) 
 Total deposits in non-U.S. offices 374,514 290,608 
 Total deposits $ 2,144,257 $ 1,562,431 
(a) Includes structured notes classified as
deposits for which the fair value option has
been elected. Refer to Note 3 for further
discussion.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, time deposits in
denominations of $250,000 or more were as
follows.
 December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. offices $ 33,812 $ 44,127 
 Non-U.S. offices 50,523 50,840 
 Total $ 84,335 $ 94,967 
At December 31, 2020, the maturities of
interest-bearing time deposits were as follows.
 December 31, 2020 
 (in millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. Non-U.S. Total 
 2021 $ 44,785 $ 48,142 $ 92,927 
 2022 1,451 175 1,626 
 2023 259 7 266 
 2024 210 36 246 
 2025 197 633 830 
 After 5 years 451 298 749 
 Total $ 47,353 $ 49,291 $ 96,644 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 265 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Note 18 - Leases Firm as lessee At December 31, 2020, JPMorgan Chase and its subsidiaries were
obligated under a number of noncancelable leases, predominantly operating leases for premises and
equipment used primarily for business purposes. These leases generally have terms of 20years or less,
determined based on the contractual maturity of the lease, and include periods covered by options to
extend or terminate the lease when the Firm is reasonably certain that it will exercise those
options. All leases with lease terms greater than twelve months are reported as a lease liability
with a corresponding right-of-use (“ROU”) asset. None of these lease agreements impose restrictions
on the Firm’s ability to pay dividends, engage in debt or equity financing transactions or enter into
further lease agreements. Certain of these leases contain escalation clauses that will increase
rental payments based on maintenance, utility and tax increases, which are non-lease components. The
Firm elected not to separate lease and non-lease components of a contract for its real estate leases.
As such, real estate lease payments represent payments on both lease and non-lease components.
Operating lease liabilities and ROU assets are recognized at the lease commencement date based on the
present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term. The future lease payments are
discounted at a rate that represents the Firm’s collateralized borrowing rate for financing
instruments of a similar term and are included in accounts payable and other liabilities. The
operating lease ROU asset, included in premises and equipment, also includes any lease prepayments
made, plus initial direct costs incurred, less any lease incentives received. Rental expense
associated with operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term, and
generally included in occupancy expense in the Consolidated statements of income.
The following tables provide information related
to the Firm’s operating leases:
 December 31, 
 (in millions, except where otherwise noted) 
 2020 2019 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Right-of-use assets $ 8,006 $ 8,190 
 Lease liabilities 8,508 8,505 
 Weighted average remaining lease term 8.7 8.8 
 (in years) 
 Weighted average discount rate 3.48 % 3.68 % 
 Supplemental cash flow information 
 Cash paid for amounts included in the 
 measurement of lease liabilities - $ 1,626 $ 1,572 
 operating cash flows 
 Supplemental non-cash information 
 Right-of-use assets obtained in exchange $ 1,350 $ 1,413 
 for operating lease obligations 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Rental expense 
 Gross rental expense $ 2,094 $ 2,057 
 Sublease rental income -166 -184 
 Net rental expense $ 1,928 $ 1,873 
The following table presents future payments
under operating leases as of December 31, 2020:
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 
 2021 1,606 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2022 1,435 
 2023 1,270 
 2024 1,123 
 2025 947 
 After 2025 3,602 
 Total future minimum lease payments 9,983 
 Less: Imputed interest -1,475 
 Total $ 8,508 
In addition to the table above, as of December
31, 2020, the Firm had additional future
operating lease commitments of $ 1.2billion that
were signed but had not yet commenced. These
operating leases will commence between 2021 and
2023 with lease terms up to 25years.
 266 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Firm as lessor
The Firm provides auto and equipment lease
financing to its customers through lease
arrangements with lease terms that may contain
renewal, termination and/or purchase options.
Generally, the Firm’s lease financings are
operating leases. These assets subject to
operating leases are recognized in other assets
on the Firm’s Consolidated balance sheets and
are depreciated on a straight-line basis over
the lease term to reduce the asset to its
estimated residual value. Depreciation expense
is included in technology, communications and
equipment expense in the Consolidated statements
of income. The Firm’s lease income is generally
recognized on a straight-line basis over the
lease term and is included in other income in
the Consolidated statements of income.
On a periodic basis, the Firm assesses leased
assets for impairment, and if the carrying
amount of the leased asset exceeds the
undiscounted cash flows from the lease payments
and the estimated residual value upon
disposition of the leased asset, an impairment
loss is recognized.
The risk of loss on auto and equipment leased
assets relating to the residual value of the
leased assets is monitored through projections
of the asset residual values at lease
origination and periodic review of residual
values, and is mitigated through arrangements
with certain manufacturers or lessees.
The following table presents the carrying value
of assets subject to leases reported on the
Consolidated balance sheets:
 December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Carrying value of assets subject to 
 operating leases, net of accumulated $ 21,155 $ 23,587 
 depreciation 
 Accumulated depreciation 6,388 6,121 
The following table presents the Firm’s
operating lease income and the related
depreciation expense on the Consolidated
statements of income:
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating lease income $ 5,539 $ 5,455 $ 4,540 
 Depreciation expense 4,257 4,157 3,522 
The following table presents future receipts
under operating leases as of December 31, 2020:
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 
 2021 3,686 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2022 2,084 
 2023 613 
 2024 52 
 2025 24 
 After 2025 34 
 Total future minimum lease receipts $ 6,493 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 267 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Note 19 – Accounts payable and other liabilities
Accounts payable and other liabilities consist
of brokerage payables, which include payables to
customers and payables related to security
purchases that did not settle, as well as other
accrued expenses, such as income tax payables,
operating lease liabilities, credit card rewards
liability, and litigation reserves.
The following table details the components of
accounts payable and other liabilities.
 December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Brokerage payables $ 140,291 $ 118,375 
 Other payables and liabilities(a) 92,308 92,032 
 Total accounts payable and other $ 232,599 $ 210,407 
 liabilities 
(a) Includes credit card rewards liability of $
7.7billion and $ 6.4billion at December 31, 2020
and 2019, respectively.
 268 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 20 – Long-term debt 
JPMorgan Chase issues long-term debt denominated in various currencies, predominantly U.S. dollars,
with both fixed and variable interest rates. Included in senior and subordinated debt below are
various equity-linked or other indexed instruments, which the Firm has elected to measure at fair
value. Changes in fair value are recorded in principal transactions revenue in the Consolidated
statements of income, except for unrealized gains/(losses) due to DVA which are recorded in OCI. The
following table is a summary of long-term debt carrying values (including unamortized premiums and
discounts, issuance costs, valuation adjustments and fair value adjustments, where applicable) by
remaining contractual maturity as of December 31, 2020.
 … … 
 1 … 5 
 … … … … … … 2… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ 1… $ 1… 
 … 
 … … … … 1… 1… 
 … 
 … … … … 0… 0… 
 … 
 … $ — $ … $ … $ 1… $ 1… 
 … 
 … — — 9 9 9 
 … 
 … … … … 2… 3… 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ 2… $ 1… 
 … $ 7 $ … $ … $ 1… $ 1… 
 … 
 … … … — 1… 2… 
 … 
 … … … … 0… 1… … 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ 1… $ 1… 
 … 
 … … … … 3… 4… 
 … 
 … … … … 1… 1… 
 … 
 … $ — $ … $ — $ 3… $ 3… 
 … 
 … — — — — — 
 … 
 … — % … % — % 8… % 8… % 
 … 
 … $ … $ … $ … $ 6… $ 9… 
 … $ — $ — $ … $ 7… $ 6… 
 … 
 … — — … 1… 1… 
 … 
 … … … … 0… 2… 
 … 
 … $ — $ — $ … $ 2… $ 2… 
 $ … $ … $ … $ 2… … $ 2… 
 $ … $ … $ — $ … $ … 
 … … … … 2… 3… 
 … 
 … … … … 0… 0… 
 … 
 $ … $ … $ … $ 5… $ 6… 
(a) The interest rates shown are the range of contractual rates in effect at December 31, 2020 and
2019, respectively, including non-U.S. dollar fixed- and variable-rate issuances, which excludes the
effects of the associated derivative instruments used in hedge accounting relationships, if
applicable. The use of these derivative instruments modifies the Firm’s exposure to the contractual
interest rates disclosed in the table above. Including the effects of the hedge accounting
derivatives, the range of modified rates in effect at December 31, 2020, for total long-term debt was
( 0.40)% to 7.28%, versus the contractual range of 0.17% to 8.75% presented in the table above. The
interest rate ranges shown exclude structured notes accounted for at fair value.
(b) Included long-term debt of $ 17.2billion and $ 32.0billion secured by assets totaling $
166.4billion and $ 186.1billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The amount of long-term
debt secured by assets does not include amounts related to hybrid instruments.
(c) Included $ 76.8billion and $ 75.7billion of long-term debt accounted for at fair value at
December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(d) Included $ 16.1billion and $ 14.0billion of outstanding zero-coupon notes at December 31, 2020
and 2019, respectively. The aggregate principal amount of these notes at their respective maturities
is $ 45.3billion and $ 39.7billion, respectively. The aggregate principal amount reflects the
contractual principal payment at maturity, which may exceed the contractual principal payment at the
Firm’s next call date, if applicable.
(e) Included on the Consolidated balance sheets in beneficial interests issued by consolidated VIEs.
Also included $ 41million and $ 36million accounted for at fair value at December 31, 2020 and 2019,
respectively. Excluded short-term commercial paper and other short-term beneficial interests of $
12.4billion and $ 11.1billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(f) At December 31, 2020, long-term debt in the aggregate of $ 151.3billion was redeemable at the
option of JPMorgan Chase, in whole or in part, prior to maturity, based on the terms specified in the
respective instruments.
(g) The aggregate carrying values of debt that matures in each of the five years subsequent to 2020
is $ 26.9billion in 2021, $ 18.4billion in 2022, $ 32.2billion in 2023, $ 29.6billion in 2024 and $
17.1billion in 2025.
(h) Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 269 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
The weighted-average contractual interest rates
for total long-term debt excluding structured
notes accounted for at fair value were 2.89% and
3.13% as of December 31, 2020 and 2019,
respectively. In order to modify exposure to
interest rate and currency exchange rate
movements, JPMorgan Chase utilizes derivative
instruments, primarily interest rate and cross-
currency interest rate swaps, in conjunction
with some of its debt issuances. The use of
these instruments modifies the Firm’s interest
expense on the associated debt. The modified
weighted-average interest rates for total long-
term debt, including the effects of related
derivative instruments, were 1.58% and 3.19% as
of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
JPMorgan Chase & Co. has guaranteed certain
long-term debt of its subsidiaries, including
structured notes. These guarantees rank on
parity with the Firm’s other unsecured and
unsubordinated indebtedness. The amount of such
guaranteed long-term debt and structured notes
was $ 13.8billion and $ 14.4billion at December
31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Firm’s
unsecured debt does not contain requirements
that would call for an acceleration of payments,
maturities or changes in the structure of the
existing debt, provide any limitations on future
borrowings or require additional collateral,
based on unfavorable changes in the Firm’s
credit ratings, financial ratios, earnings or
stock price.
 270 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 21 – Preferred stock 
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, JPMorgan Chase was authorized to issue 200million shares of preferred
stock, in one or more series, with a par value of $ 1per share. In the event of a liquidation or
dissolution of the Firm, JPMorgan Chase’s preferred stock then outstanding takes precedence over the
Firm’s common stock with respect to the payment of dividends and the distribution of assets.
The following is a summary of JPMorgan Chase’s non-cumulative preferred stock outstanding as of
December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 C… 
 r… F… 
 in a… 
 e… r… 
 Ca… at of Di… 
 va… D… Ea… t… de… 
 (in Is… 3… re… L… per 
 Sh… mi… da… 2… da… S… sh… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Ye… 
 De… De… en… 
 31, 31, De… 
 31, 
 20… 20… 20… 20… 2… 20… 2… 
 F… 
 S… — — $ — $ — 2/… — % 3/… NA $— $… $5… 
 P 
 S… — — — — 1/… — 3/… NA — 1… 67… 
 T 
 S… — — — — 6/… — 9/… NA — 4… 63… 
 W 
 S… — 14… — 1,… 2/… — 3/… NA 15… 6… 61… 
 Y 
 S… 14… 14… 1,… 1,… 6/… 6… 9/… NA 61… 6… 61… 
 AA 
 S… 11… 11… 1,… 1,… 7/… 6… 9/… NA 61… 6… 61… 
 BB 
 S… 16… 16… 1,… 1,… 9/… 5… 12… NA 57… 5… 11… -d 
 DD 
 S… 18… 18… 1,… 1,… 1/… 6… 3/… NA 60… 5… NA -e 
 EE 
 S… 90… 90… 900 900 11… 4… 12… NA 50… NA NA -f 
 GG 
 F… 
 S… 29… 29… $ 2,… $ 2,… 4/… L… 4/… L… $4… $… $6… -g 
 I +… +… 
 S… 15… 15… 1,… 1,… 4/… 5… 5/… L… 51… 5… 51… 
 Q +… 
 S… 15… 15… 1,… 1,… 7/… 6… 8/… L… 60… 6… 60… 
 R +… 
 S… 20… 20… 2,… 2,… 1/… 6… 2/… L… 67… 6… 67… 
 S +… 
 S… 10… 10… 1,… 1,… 3/… 6… 4/… L… 61… 6… 61… 
 U +… 
 S… 25… 25… 2,… 2,… 6/… L… 7/… L… 43… 5… 50… -h 
 V +… +… 
 S… 16… 16… 1,… 1,… 9/… 6… 10… L… 61… 6… 61… 
 X +… 
 S… 20… 20… 2,… 2,… 4/… L… 5/… L… 45… 5… 53… -i 
 Z +… +… 
 S… 12… 12… 1,… 1,… 10… 4… 11… L… 46… 4… 46… 
 CC +… 
 S… 22… 22… 2,… 2,… 7/… 5… 8/… S… 50… 2… NA -j 
 FF +… 
 S… 30… — 3,… — 1/… 4… 2/… S… 47… NA NA -k 
 HH +… 
 S… 15… — 1,… — 2/… 4… 4/… S… 34… NA NA -l 
 II +… 
 T… 
 p… 3,… 2,… $ 30… $ 26… 
 s… 
(a) Represented by depositary shares.
(b) Fixed-to-floating rate notes convert to a floating rate at the earliest redemption date.
(c) Dividends are declared quarterly. Dividends are payable quarterly on fixed-rate preferred stock.
Dividends are payable semiannually on fixed-to-floating-rate preferred stock while at a fixed rate,
and payable quarterly after converting to a floating rate.
(d) Dividends in the amount of $ 111.81per share were declared on December 1, 2018 and include
dividends from the original issue date of September 21, 2018 through November 30, 2018.
(e) Dividends in the amount of $ 211.67per share were declared on April 12,2019 and include dividends
from the original issue date of January 24, 2019 through May 31, 2019. Dividends in the amount of $
150.00per share were declared thereafter on July 10, 2019 and October 9, 2019.
(f) Nodividends were declared for Series GG from the original issue date of November 7, 2019 through
December 31, 2019.
(g) The dividend rate for Series I preferred stock became floating and payable quarterly starting on
April 30, 2018; prior to which the dividend rate was fixed at 7.90% or $ 395.00per share payable semi
annually.
(h) The dividend rate for Series V preferred stock became floating and payable quarterly starting on
July 1, 2019; prior to which the dividend rate was fixed at 5% or $ 250.00per share payable semi
annually. The Firm declared a dividend of $ 144.11and $ 139.98per share on outstanding Series V
preferred stock on August 15, 2019 and November 15, 2019, respectively.
(i) Prior to May 1, 2020, the dividend rate was fixed at 5.3%.
(j) Dividends in the amount of $ 126.39per share were declared on September 9, 2019 and include
dividends from the original issue date of July 31, 2019 through October 31, 2019. Dividends in the
amount of $ 125.00per share were declared thereafter on December 10, 2019.
(k) Dividends in the amount of $ 125.22per share were declared on March 13, 2020 and include
dividends from the original issue date of January 23, 2020 through April 30, 2020. Dividends in the
amount of $ 115.00per share were declared quarterly thereafter.
(l) Dividends in the amount of $ 141.11per share were declared on May 15, 2020 and include dividends
from the original issue date of February 24, 2020 through June 30, 2020. Dividends in the amount of $
100.00per share were declared quarterly thereafter.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 271 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Each series of preferred stock has a liquidation value and redemption price per share of $ 10,000,
plus accrued but unpaid dividends. The aggregate liquidation value was $ 30.5billion at December 31,
2020.
On March 1, 2020, the Firm redeemed all $ 1.43billion of its 6.125% non-cumulative preferred stock,
Series Y.
On December 1, 2019, the Firm redeemed all $ 900million of its 5.45% non-cumulative preferred stock,
Series P.
On October 30, 2019, the Firm redeemed $ 1.37billion of its fixed-to-floating rate non-cumulative
perpetual preferred stock, Series I.
On September 1, 2019, the Firm redeemed all $ 880million of its 6.30% non-cumulative preferred stock,
Series W.
On March 1, 2019, the Firm redeemed all $ 925million of its 6.70% non-cumulative preferred stock,
Series T.
Redemption rights
Each series of the Firm’s preferred stock may be redeemed on any dividend payment date on or after
the earliest redemption date for that series. All outstanding preferred stock series except Series I
may also be redeemed following a “capital treatment event,” as described in the terms of each series.
Any redemption of the Firm’s preferred stock is subject to non-objection from the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System (the “Federal Reserve”).
 272 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 22 – Common stock 
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, JPMorgan Chase was authorized to issue 9.0billion shares of common
stock with a par value of $ 1per share.
Common shares issued (reissuances from treasury) by JPMorgan Chase during the years ended December
31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total issued – balance at January 1 4,104.9 4,104.9 4,104.9 
 Treasury – balance at January 1 -1,020.9 -829.1 -679.6 
 Repurchase -50.0 -213.0 -181.5 
 Reissuance: 
 Employee benefits and compensation plans 14.2 20.4 21.7 
 Warrant exercise — — 9.4 
 Employee stock purchase plans 1.2 0.8 0.9 
 Total reissuance 15.4 21.2 32.0 
 Total treasury – balance at December 31 -1,055.5 -1,020.9 -829.1 
 Outstanding at December 31 3,049.4 3,084.0 3,275.8 
There were nowarrants to purchase shares of
common stock (“Warrants”) outstanding at
December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 as any
Warrants that were not exercised on or before
October 29, 2018 have expired. On March 15,
2020, in response to the economic disruptions
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Firm
temporarily suspended repurchases of its common
stock. Subsequently, the Federal Reserve
directed all large banks, including the Firm, to
discontinue net share repurchases through the
end of 2020. On December 18, 2020, the Federal
Reserve announced that all large banks,
including the Firm, could resume share
repurchases commencing in the first quarter of
2021, subject to certain restrictions. The
Firm's Board of Directors has authorized a new
common share repurchase program for up to $
30billion.
The following table sets forth the Firm’s repurchases of common stock for the years ended December
31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. There were noWarrants repurchased during 2018.
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total number of shares of common stock 50.0 213.0 181.5 
 repurchased 
 Aggregate purchase price of common stock $ 6,397 $ 24,121 $ 19,983 
 repurchases 
The authorization to repurchase common shares is
utilized at management’s discretion, and the
timing of purchases and the exact amount of
common shares that may be repurchased is subject
to various factors, including market conditions;
legal and regulatory considerations affecting
the amount and timing of repurchase activity;
the Firm’s capital position (taking into account
goodwill and intangibles); internal capital
generation; and alternative investment
opportunities. The repurchase program does not
include specific price targets or timetables;
may be suspended by management at any time; and
may be executed through open market purchases or
privately negotiated transactions, or utilizing
Rule 10b5-1 plans, which are written trading
plans that the Firm may enter into from time to
time under Rule 10b5-1 of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 and which allow the Firm to
repurchase its common shares during periods when
it may otherwise not be repurchasing common
shares —for example, during internal trading
blackout periods. As of December 31, 2020,
approximately 62.1million shares of common stock
were reserved for issuance under various
employee incentive, compensation, option and
stock purchase plans, and directors’
compensation plans.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 273 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Note 23 – Earnings per share
Basic earnings per share (“EPS”) is calculated
using the two-class method. Under the two-class
method, all earnings (distributed and
undistributed) are allocated to common stock and
participating securities. JPMorgan Chase grants
RSUs under its share-based compensation
programs, predominantly all of which entitle
recipients to receive nonforfeitable dividends
during the vesting period on a basis equivalent
to dividends paid to holders of the Firm’s
common stock. These unvested RSUs meet the
definition of participating securities based on
their respective rights to receive
nonforfeitable dividends, and they are treated
as a separate class of securities in computing
basic EPS. Participating securities are not
included as incremental shares in computing
diluted EPS; refer to Note 9 for additional
information.
Diluted EPS incorporates the potential impact of
contingently issuable shares, including awards
which require future service as a condition of
delivery of the underlying common stock. Diluted
EPS is calculated under both the two-class and
treasury stock methods, and the more dilutive
amount is reported. For each of the periods
presented in the table below, diluted EPS
calculated under the two-class method was more
dilutive.
The following table presents the calculation of
net income applicable to common stockholders and
basic and diluted EPS for the years ended
December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions, 
 except per share amounts) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Basic earnings per share 
 Net income $ 29,131 $ 36,431 $ 32,474 
 Less: Preferred stock dividends 1,583 1,587 1,551 
 Net income applicable to common equity 27,548 34,844 30,923 
 Less: Dividends and undistributed 
 earnings allocated to participating 138 202 214 
 securities 
 Net income applicable to common $ 27,410 $ 34,642 $ 30,709 
 stockholders 
 Total weighted-average basic shares 3,082.4 3,221.5 3,396.4 
 outstanding 
 Net income per share $ 8.89 $ 10.75 $ 9.04 
 Diluted earnings per share 
 Net income applicable to common $ 27,410 $ 34,642 $ 30,709 
 stockholders 
 Total weighted-average basic shares 3,082.4 3,221.5 3,396.4 
 outstanding 
 Add: 
 Dilutive impact of SARs and employee 5.0 8.9 17.6 
 stock options, unvested PSUs and 
 nondividend-earning RSUs, and warrants 
 Total weighted-average diluted shares 3,087.4 3,230.4 3,414.0 
 outstanding 
 Net income per share $ 8.88 $ 10.72 $ 9.00 
 274 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Note 24 – Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
AOCI includes the after-tax change in unrealized gains and losses on investment securities, foreign
currency translation adjustments (including the impact of related derivatives), fair value changes of
excluded components on fair value hedges, cash flow hedging activities, net loss and prior service
costs/(credit) related to the Firm’s defined benefit pension and OPEB plans, and fair value option-
elected liabilities arising from changes in the Firm’s own credit risk (DVA).
 … 
 … … 
 … … … … 
 … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … 
 … … … … — … … … … … … … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … 
 $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ 
 … … … … … … 
 $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ 
 … … … … … … 
 $ … … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ … $ 
(a) Represents the adjustment to AOCI as a result of the accounting standards adopted in the first
quarter of 2018. Refer to Note 1 for additional information.
(b) Includes after-tax net unamortized unrealized gains of $ 3.3billion related to AFS securities
that have been transferred to HTM. Refer to Note 10 for further information.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 275 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
The following table presents the pre-tax and after-tax changes in the components of OCI.
 Y… 
 e… 
 D… 
 3… 
 (… 2020 Tax 20… Tax 2018 Tax 
 m… Pre… ef… Aft… Pr… eff… Af… Pre… ef… Aft… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U… 
 g… 
 on 
 i… 
 s… 
 N… 
 u… 
 g… 
 a… $ 6,2… $ -1… $ 4,7… $ 4,… $ -974 $ 3,… $ -2,… $ 665 $ -2,… 
 d… 
 t… 
 p… 
 R… 
 a… 
 f… 
 r… 
 (… -802 192 -610 -2… 62 -1… 395 -93 302 
 i… 
 in 
 n… 
 i… 
 N… 5,4… -1… 4,1… 3,… -912 2,… -2,… 572 -1,… 
 c… 
 T… 
 a… 
 T… 1,4… -1… 1,3… -49 33 -16 -1,… 156 -922 
 H… -1,… 341 -1,… 46 -10 36 1,2… -2… 942 
 N… -4 238 234 -3 23 20 158 -1… 20 
 c… 
 F… 
 v… 
 h… 25 -6 19 39 -9 30 -140 33 -107 
 n… 
 c… 
 C… 
 f… 
 h… 
 N… 
 u… 
 g… 
 a… 3,6… -8… 2,7… 122 -28 94 -245 58 -187 
 d… 
 t… 
 p… 
 R… 
 a… 
 f… 
 r… 
 (… -570 137 -433 103 -25 78 -18 4 -14 
 i… 
 in 
 n… 
 i… 
 N… 3,0… -7… 2,3… 225 -53 172 -263 62 -201 
 c… 
 D… 
 b… 
 p… 
 a… 
 O… 214 -2 212 1,… -193 964 -450 77 -373 
 p… 
 n… 
 c… 
 D… 
 on 
 f… 
 v… 
 o… $ -648 $ 157 $ -491 $ -1… $ 299 $ -9… $ 1,3… $ -3… $ 1,0… 
 e… 
 l… 
 n… 
 c… 
 T… 
 o… $ 8,0… $ -1… $ 6,4… $ 3,… $ -845 $ 3,… $ -1,… $ 285 $ -1,… 
 c… 
 i… 
(a) The pre-tax amount is reported in Investment securities gains/(losses) in the Consolidated
statements of income.
(b) Reclassifications of pre-tax realized gains/(losses) on translation adjustments and related
hedges are reported in other income/expense in the Consolidated statements of income. During the year
ended December 31, 2020, the Firm reclassified a net pre-tax gain of $ 6million to other income
related to the liquidation of legal entities, $ 3million related to net investment hedge gains and $
3million related to cumulative translation adjustments. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the
Firm reclassified net pre-tax gains of $ 7million to other income and $ 1million to other expense,
respectively. These amounts, which related to the liquidation of certain legal entities, are
comprised of $ 18million related to net investment hedge gains and $ 10million related to cumulative
translation adjustments. During the year ended December 31, 2018, the Firm reclassified a net pre-tax
loss of $ 168million to other expense related to the liquidation of certain legal entities, $
17million related to net investment hedge losses and $ 151million related to cumulative translation
adjustments.
(c) Represents changes in fair value of cross-currency swaps attributable to changes in cross-
currency basis spreads, which are excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness and recorded in
other comprehensive income. The initial cost of cross-currency basis spreads is recognized in
earnings as part of the accrual of interest on the cross-currency swap.
(d) The pre-tax amounts are primarily recorded in noninterest revenue, net interest income and
compensation expense in the Consolidated statements of income.
 276 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 25 – Income taxes 
JPMorgan Chase and its eligible subsidiaries
file a consolidated U.S. federal income tax
return. JPMorgan Chase uses the asset and
liability method to provide income taxes on all
transactions recorded in the Consolidated
Financial Statements. This method requires that
income taxes reflect the expected future tax
consequences of temporary differences between
the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities
for book and tax purposes. Accordingly, a
deferred tax asset or liability for each
temporary difference is determined based on the
tax rates that the Firm expects to be in effect
when the underlying items of income and expense
are realized. JPMorgan Chase’s expense for
income taxes includes the current and deferred
portions of that expense. A valuation allowance
is established to reduce deferred tax assets to
the amount the Firm expects to realize. Due to
the inherent complexities arising from the
nature of the Firm’s businesses, and from
conducting business and being taxed in a
substantial number of jurisdictions, significant
judgments and estimates are required to be made.
Agreement of tax liabilities between JPMorgan
Chase and the many tax jurisdictions in which
the Firm files tax returns may not be finalized
for several years. Thus, the Firm’s final tax-
related assets and liabilities may ultimately be
different from those currently reported.
Effective tax rate and expense
The following table presents a reconciliation of
the applicable statutory U.S. federal income tax
rate to the effective tax rate.
 Effective tax rate 
 Year ended December 31, 2020 2019 2018 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Statutory U.S. federal tax rate 21.0 % 21.0 % 21.0 % 
 Increase/(decrease) in tax rate 
 resulting from: 
 U.S. state and local income taxes, net 2.5 3.5 4.0 
 of U.S. federal income tax benefit 
 Tax-exempt income -1.6 -1.4 -1.5 
 Non-U.S. earnings 1.4 1.8 0.6 
 Business tax credits -6.3 -4.4 -3.5 
 Tax audit resolutions — -2.3 -0.1 
 Impact of the TCJA(a) — — -0.7 
 Other, net 0.7 — 0.5 
 Effective tax rate 17.7 % 18.2 % 20.3 % 
(a) Represents changes in the estimates related
to the remeasurement of certain deferred taxes
and the deemed repatriation tax on non-U.S.
earnings under SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No.
118 which was completed in 2018.
The following table reflects the components of
income tax expense/(benefit) included in the
Consolidated statements of income.
 Income tax expense/(benefit) 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Current income tax expense/(benefit) 
 U.S. federal $ 5,759 $ 3,284 $ 2,854 
 Non-U.S. 2,705 2,103 2,077 
 U.S. state and local 1,793 1,778 1,638 
 Total current income tax 10,257 7,165 6,569 
 expense/(benefit) 
 Deferred income tax expense/(benefit) 
 U.S. federal -3,184 709 1,359 
 Non-U.S. -126 20 -93 
 U.S. state and local -671 220 455 
 Total deferred income -3,981 949 1,721 
 taxexpense/(benefit) 
 Total income tax expense $ 6,276 $ 8,114 $ 8,290 
Total income tax expense includes $ 72million, $
1.1billion and $ 54million of tax benefits
recorded in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively,
resulting from the resolution of tax audits.
Tax effect of items recorded in stockholders’
equity
The preceding table does not reflect the tax
effect of certain items that are recorded each
period directly in stockholders’ equity. The tax
effect of all items recorded directly to
stockholders’ equity resulted in a decrease of $
827million and $ 862million in 2020 and 2019,
respectively, and an increase of $ 172million in
2018.
Results from Non-U.S. earnings
The following table presents the U.S. and
non-U.S. components of income before income tax
expense.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. $ 26,904 $ 36,670 $ 33,052 
 Non-U.S.(a) 8,503 7,875 7,712 
 Income before income tax expense $ 35,407 $ 44,545 $ 40,764 
(a) For purposes of this table, non-U.S. income
is defined as income generated from operations
located outside the U.S.
The Firm will recognize any U.S. income tax
expense it may incur on global intangible low
tax income as income tax expense in the period
in which the tax is incurred.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 277 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Affordable housing tax credits The Firm
recognized $ 1.5billion of tax credits and other
tax benefits associated with investments in
affordable housing projects within income tax
expense for each of the three years ended 2020,
2019 and 2018. The amount of amortization of
such investments reported in income tax expense
was $ 1.2billion, $ 1.1billion and $ 1.2billion,
respectively. The carrying value of these
investments, which are reported in other assets
on the Firm’s Consolidated balance sheets, was $
9.7billion and $ 8.6billion at December 31, 2020
and 2019, respectively. The amount of
commitments related to these investments, which
are reported in accounts payable and other
liabilities on the Firm’s Consolidated balance
sheets, was $ 3.8billion and $ 2.8billion at
December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Deferred taxes
Deferred income tax expense/(benefit) results
from differences between assets and liabilities
measured for financial reporting purposes versus
income tax return purposes. Deferred tax assets
are recognized if, in management’s judgment,
their realizability is determined to be more
likely than not. If a deferred tax asset is
determined to be unrealizable, a valuation
allowance is established. The significant
components of deferred tax assets and
liabilities are reflected in the following
table.
 December 31, (in millions) 
 Deferred tax assets 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Allowance for loan losses $ 7,270 $ 3,400 
 Employee benefits 1,104 1,039 
 Accrued expenses and other 3,332 2,767 
 Non-U.S. operations 849 949 
 Tax attribute carryforwards 757 605 
 Gross deferred tax assets 13,312 8,760 
 Valuation allowance -560 -557 
 Deferred tax assets, net of valuation $ 12,752 $ 8,203 
 allowance 
 Deferred tax liabilities 
 Depreciation and amortization $ 3,329 $ 2,852 
 Mortgage servicing rights, net of hedges 2,184 2,354 
 Leasing transactions 5,124 5,598 
 Other, net 6,025 4,683 
 Gross deferred tax liabilities 16,662 15,487 
 Net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets $ -3,910 $ -7,284 
JPMorgan Chase has recorded deferred tax assets
of $ 757million at December 31, 2020, in
connection with U.S. federal and non-U.S. NOL
carryforwards, FTC carryforwards, and state and
local capital loss carryforwards. At December
31, 2020, total U.S. federal NOL carryforwards
were $ 799million, non-U.S. NOL carryforwards
were $ 139million, FTC carryforwards were $
444million, state and local capital loss
carryforwards were $ 1.1billion, and other
federal tax attributes were $ 393million. If not
utilized, a portion of the U.S. federal NOL
carryforwards and other U.S. federal tax
attributes will expire between 2022 and 2037
whereas others have an unlimited carryforward
period.
Similarly, certain non-U.S. NOL carryforwards
will expire between 2026 and 2036 whereas others
have an unlimited carryforward period. The FTC
carryforwards will expire between 2029 and 2030,
and the state and local capital loss
carryforwards will expire between 2021 and 2022.
The valuation allowance at December 31, 2020,
was due to the state and local capital loss
carryforwards, FTC carryforwards, and certain
non-U.S. deferred tax assets, including NOL
carryforwards.
Unrecognized tax benefits
At December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, JPMorgan
Chase’s unrecognized tax benefits, excluding
related interest expense and penalties, were $
4.3billion, $ 4.0billion and $ 4.9billion,
respectively, of which $ 3.1billion, $
2.8billion and $ 3.8billion, respectively, if
recognized, would reduce the annual effective
tax rate. Included in the amount of unrecognized
tax benefits are certain items that would not
affect the effective tax rate if they were
recognized in the Consolidated statements of
income. These unrecognized items include the tax
effect of certain temporary differences, the
portion of gross state and local unrecognized
tax benefits that would be offset by the benefit
from associated U.S. federal income tax
deductions, and the portion of gross non-U.S.
unrecognized tax benefits that would have
offsets in other jurisdictions. JPMorgan Chase
is presently under audit by a number of taxing
authorities, most notably by the Internal
Revenue Service as summarized in the Tax
examination status table below. As JPMorgan
Chase is presently under audit by a number of
taxing authorities, it is reasonably possible
that over the next 12 months the resolution of
these examinations may increase or decrease the
gross balance of unrecognized tax benefits by as
much as approximately $ 300million. Upon
settlement of an audit, the change in the
unrecognized tax benefit would result from
payment or income statement recognition.
The following table presents a reconciliation of
the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized
tax benefits.
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1, $ 4,024 $ 4,861 $ 4,747 
 Increases based on tax positions related 685 871 980 
 to the current period 
 Increases based on tax positions related 362 10 649 
 to prior periods 
 Decreases based on tax positions related -705 -706 -1,249 
 to prior periods 
 Decreases related to cash settlements -116 -1,012 -266 
 with taxing authorities 
 Balance at December 31, $ 4,250 $ 4,024 $ 4,861 
After-tax interest expense/(benefit) and
penalties related to income tax liabilities
recognized in income tax expense were $
147million, $( 52) million and $ 192million in
2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, in addition to
the liability for unrecognized tax benefits, the
Firm had accrued $ 966million and $ 817million,
respectively, for income tax-related interest
and penalties.
 278 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Tax examination status
JPMorgan Chase is continually under examination
by the Internal Revenue Service, by taxing
authorities throughout the world, and by many
state and local jurisdictions throughout the
U.S. The following table summarizes the status
of significant income tax examinations of
JPMorgan Chase and its consolidated subsidiaries
as of December 31, 2020.
 Periods under examination Status 
 JPMorgan Chase – U.S. 2009 – 2013 Field examination of amended 
 returns 
 JPMorgan Chase – U.S. 2014 - 2016 Field Examination 
 JPMorgan Chase – New York State 2012 - 2014 Field Examination 
 JPMorgan Chase – New York City 2012 - 2014 Field Examination 
 JPMorgan Chase – California 2011 – 2012 Field Examination 
 JPMorgan Chase – U.K. 2006 – 2018 Field examination of certain 
 select entities 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 279 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Note 26 – Restricted cash, other restricted
assets and intercompany funds transfers
Restricted cash and other restricted assets
Certain of the Firm’s cash and other assets are
restricted as to withdrawal or usage. These
restrictions are imposed by various regulatory
authorities based on the particular activities
of the Firm’s subsidiaries.
The business of JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. is
subject to examination and regulation by the
OCC. The Bank is a member of the U.S. Federal
Reserve System, and its deposits in the U.S. are
insured by the FDIC, subject to applicable
limits.
The Firm is required to maintain cash reserves
at certain non-US central banks.
The Firm is also subject to rules and
regulations established by other U.S. and non
U.S. regulators. As part of its compliance with
the respective regulatory requirements, the
Firm’s broker-dealers (principally J.P. Morgan
Securities LLC in the U.S and J.P. Morgan
Securities plc in the U.K.) are subject to
certain restrictions on cash and other assets.
The following table presents the components of
the Firm’s restricted cash:
 December 31, (in billions) 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash reserves – Federal Reserve Banks(a) $ — $ 26.6 
 Segregated for the benefit of securities 19.3 16.0 
 and cleared derivative customers 
 Cash reserves at non-U.S. central banks 5.1 3.9 
 and held for other general purposes 
 Total restricted cash(b) $ 24.4 $ 46.5 
(a) Effective March 26, 2020, the Federal
Reserve eliminated reserve requirements for
depository institutions
(b) Comprises $ 22.7billion and $ 45.3billion in
deposits with banks, and $ 1.7billion and $
1.2billion in cash and due from banks on the
Consolidated balance sheets as of December 31,
2020 and 2019, respectively.
Also, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Firm had the following other restricted assets:
• Cash and securities pledged with clearing organizations for the benefit of customers of $
37.2billion and $ 24.7billion, respectively.
• Securities with a fair value of $ 1.3billion and $ 8.8billion, respectively, were also restricted
in relation to customer activity.
Intercompany funds transfers Restrictions imposed by U.S. federal law prohibit JPMorgan Chase & Co.
(“Parent Company”) and certain of its affiliates from borrowing from banking subsidiaries unless the
loans are secured in specified amounts. Such secured loans provided by any banking subsidiary to the
Parent Company or to any particular affiliate, together with certain other transactions with such
affiliate (collectively referred to as “covered transactions”), are generally limited to 10% of the
banking subsidiary’s total capital, as determined by the risk-based capital guidelines; the aggregate
amount of covered transactions between any banking subsidiary and all of its affiliates is limited to
20% of the banking subsidiary’s total capital. The Parent Company’s two principal subsidiaries are
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and JPMorgan Chase Holdings LLC, an intermediate holding company (the
“IHC”). The IHC holds the stock of substantially all of JPMorgan Chase’s subsidiaries other than
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and its subsidiaries. The IHC also owns other assets and owes intercompany
indebtedness to the holding company. The Parent Company is obligated to contribute to the IHC
substantially all the net proceeds received from securities issuances (including issuances of senior
and subordinated debt securities and of preferred and common stock). The principal sources of income
and funding for the Parent Company are dividends from JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and dividends and
extensions of credit from the IHC. In addition to dividend restrictions set forth in statutes and
regulations, the Federal Reserve, the OCC and the FDIC have authority under the Financial
Institutions Supervisory Act to prohibit or to limit the payment of dividends by the banking
organizations they supervise, including the Parent Company and its subsidiaries that are banks or
bank holding companies, if, in the banking regulator’s opinion, payment of a dividend would
constitute an unsafe or unsound practice in light of the financial condition of the banking
organization. The IHC is prohibited from paying dividends or extending credit to the Parent Company
if certain capital or liquidity “thresholds” are breached or if limits are otherwise imposed by the
Parent Company’s management or Board of Directors. At January 1, 2021, the Parent Company’s banking
subsidiaries could pay, in the aggregate, approximately $ 13billion in dividends to their respective
bank holding companies without the prior approval of their relevant banking regulators. The capacity
to pay dividends in 2021 will be supplemented by the banking subsidiaries’ earnings during the year.
 280 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 27 – Regulatory capital 
The Federal Reserve establishes capital
requirements, including well-capitalized
standards, for the consolidated financial
holding company. The OCC establishes similar
minimum capital requirements and standards for
the Firm’s principal IDI subsidiary, JPMorgan
Chase Bank, N.A. The capital rules under Basel
III establish minimum capital ratios and overall
capital adequacy standards for large and
internationally active U.S. bank holding
companies and banks, including the Firm and its
IDI subsidiaries, including JPMorgan Chase Bank,
N.A. Two comprehensive approaches are prescribed
for calculating RWA: a standardized approach
(“Basel III Standardized”), and an advanced
approach (“Basel III Advanced”). For each of the
risk-based capital ratios, the capital adequacy
of the Firm and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. is
evaluated against the lower of the Standardized
or Advanced approaches compared to their
respective minimum capital ratios. The three
components of regulatory capital under the Basel
III rules are as illustrated below: Under the
risk-based capital and leverage-based guidelines
of the Federal Reserve, JPMorgan Chase is
required to maintain minimum ratios for CET1
capital, Tier 1 capital, Total capital, Tier 1
leverage and the SLR. Failure to meet these
minimum requirements could cause the Federal
Reserve to take action. IDI subsidiaries are
also subject to these capital requirements
established by their respective primary
regulators .
The following table presents the minimum and well-capitalized ratios to which the Firm and its IDI
subsidiaries were subject as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 Standar… Advanced 
 capital Minimum Well-ca… 
 ratios capital ratios 
 ratios 
 BHC(a)(… IDI(c)(… BHC(a)(… IDI(c)… BHC(e) IDI(f) 
 Capital 
 ratios 
 CET1 11.3 % 7.0 % 10.5 % 7.0 % NA 6.5 % 
 capital 
 Tier 1 12.8 8.5 12.0 8.5 6.0 8.0 
 capital 
 Total 14.8 10.5 14.0 10.5 10.0 10.0 
 capital 
 Tier 1 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 NA 5.0 
 levera… 
 SLR NA NA 5.0 6.0 NA 6.0 
Note: The table above is as defined by the regulations issued by the Federal Reserve, OCC and FDIC
and to which the Firm and its IDI subsidiaries are subject.
(a) Represents the minimum capital ratios applicable to the Firm. The CET1, Tier 1 and Total capital
minimum capital ratios each include a respective minimum requirement plus a GSIB surcharge of 3.5% as
calculated under Method 2; plus a 3.3% SCB for Basel III Standardized ratios and a fixed 2.5% capital
conservation buffer for Basel III Advanced ratios. The countercyclical buffer is currently set to 0%
by the federal banking agencies.
(b) For the period ended December 31, 2019, the CET1, Tier 1, Total, Tier 1 leverage and SLR minimum
capital ratios under Basel III Standardized applicable to the Firm were 10.5%, 12.0%, 14.0%, 4.0%,
and 5.0%, respectively.
(c) Represents minimum SLR requirement of 3.0%, as well as supplementary leverage buffer requirements
of 2.0% and 3.0% for BHC and IDI, respectively.
(d) Represents requirements for JPMorgan Chase’s IDI subsidiaries. The CET1, Tier 1 and Total capital
minimum capital ratios include a fixed capital conservation buffer requirement of 2.5% that is
applicable to the IDI subsidiaries. The IDI subsidiaries are not subject to the GSIB surcharge.
(e) Represents requirements for bank holding companies pursuant to regulations issued by the Federal
Reserve.
(f) Represents requirements for IDI subsidiaries pursuant to regulations issued under the FDIC
Improvement Act.
Current Expected Credit Losses Effective January
1, 2020, the Firm adopted the Financial
Instruments – Credit Losses guidance under U.S.
GAAP. As permitted under the U.S. capital rules
issued by the federal banking agencies in 2019,
the Firm initially elected to phase-in the
January 1, 2020 (“day 1”) CECL adoption impact
to retained earnings of $2.7 billion to CET1
capital, at 25% per year in each of 2020 to
2023. As part of their response to the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic, on March 31, 2020, the
federal banking agencies issued an interim final
rule (issued as final on August 26, 2020) that
provided the option to delay the effects of CECL
on regulatory capital for two years, followed by
a three-year transition period . The final rule
provides a uniform approach for estimating the
effects of CECL compared to the legacy incurred
loss model during the first two years of the
transition period (the “day 2” transition
amount), whereby the Firm may exclude from CET1
capital 25% of the change in the
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 281 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
allowance for credit losses (excluding allowances on PCD loans). The cumulative day 2 transition
amount as at December 31, 2021 that is not recognized in CET1 capital, as well as the $ 2.7billion
day 1 impact, will be phased into CET1 capital at 25% per year beginning January 1, 2022. The Firm
has elected to apply the CECL capital transition provisions, and accordingly, for the year ended
December 31, 2020, the capital metrics of the Firm exclude $ 5.7billion , which is the $ 2.7billion
day 1 impact to retained earnings and 25% of the $ 12.2billion increase in the allowance for credit
losses (excluding allowances on PCD loans). The impacts of the CECL capital transition provisions
have also been incorporated into Tier 2 capital, adjusted average assets, and total leverage
exposure. Refer to Note 1 for further information on the CECL accounting guidance.
The following tables present the risk-based and leverage-based capital metrics for JPMorgan Chase and
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. under both the Basel III Standardized and Basel III Advanced Approaches. As
of December 31, 2020, the capital metrics are presented applying the CECL capital transition
provisions. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, JPMorgan Chase and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. were well-
capitalized and met all capital requirements to which each was subject.
 December 
 31, 2020 
 (in 
 millions, 
 except Basel III Basel III 
 ratios) Standard… Advanced 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 JPMorgan JPMorgan JPMorgan JPMorgan 
 Chase & Chase Chase & Chase 
 Co.(c) Bank, Co.(c) Bank, 
 N.A.(c) N.A.(c) 
 Risk-bas… 
 capital 
 metrics: 
 CET1 $ 205,078 $ 234,235 $ 205,078 $ 234,235 
 capital 
 Tier 1 234,844 234,237 234,844 234,237 
 capital 
 Total 269,923 252,045 257,228 239,673 
 capital 
 Risk-wei… 1,560,609 1,492,138 1,484,431 1,343,185 
 assets 
 CET1 
 capital 13.1 % 15.7 % 13.8 % 17.4 % 
 ratio 
 Tier 1 
 capital 15.0 15.7 15.8 17.4 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capital 17.3 16.9 17.3 17.8 
 ratio 
 Leverage… 
 capital 
 metrics: 
 Adjusted 
 average $ 3,353,319 $ 2,970,285 $ 3,353,319 $ 2,970,285 
 assets(a) 
 Tier 1 
 leverage 7.0 % 7.9 % 7.0 % 7.9 % 
 ratio 
 Total 
 leverage NA NA $ 3,401,542 $ 3,688,797 
 exposure… 
 SLR(b) NA NA 6.9 % 6.3 % 
 December 
 31, 2019 
 (in 
 million… 
 except Basel III Basel III 
 ratios) Standardi… Advanced 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 JPMorgan JPMorgan JPMorgan JPMorgan 
 Chase & Chase Chase & Chase 
 Co. Bank, N.A. Co. Bank, N.A. 
 Risk-ba… 
 capital 
 metrics: 
 CET1 $ 187,753 $ 206,848 $ 187,753 $ 206,848 
 capital 
 Tier 1 214,432 206,851 214,432 206,851 
 capital 
 Total 242,589 224,390 232,112 214,091 
 capital 
 Risk-we… 1,515,869 1,457,689 1,397,878 1,269,991 
 assets 
 CET1 
 capital 12.4 % 14.2 % 13.4 % 16.3 % 
 ratio 
 Tier 1 
 capital 14.1 14.2 15.3 16.3 
 ratio 
 Total 
 capital 16.0 15.4 16.6 16.9 
 ratio 
 Leverag… 
 capital 
 metrics: 
 Adjusted 
 average $ 2,730,239 $ 2,353,432 $ 2,730,239 $ 2,353,432 
 assets(… 
 Tier 1 
 leverage 7.9 % 8.8 % 7.9 % 8.8 % 
 ratio 
 Total 
 leverage NA NA $ 3,423,431 $ 3,044,509 
 exposure 
 SLR NA NA 6.3 % 6.8 % 
(a) Adjusted average assets, for purposes of calculating the leverage ratio, includes total quarterly
average assets adjusted for on-balance sheet assets that are subject to deduction from Tier 1
capital, predominantly goodwill and other intangible assets.
(b) As of December 31, 2020, JPMorgan Chase’s total leverage exposure for purposes of calculating the
SLR, excludes on-balance sheet amounts of U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at Federal Reserve
Banks, as provided by the interim final rule issued by the Federal Reserve on April 1, 2020. On June
1, 2020, the Federal Reserve, OCC and FDIC issued an interim final rule that provides IDI
subsidiaries with an option to apply this temporary exclusion subject to certain restrictions. As of
December 31, 2020, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. has not elected to apply this exclusion .
(c) As of December 31, 2020, the capital metrics for the Firm reflect the exclusion of assets
purchased from money market mutual fund clients pursuant to nonrecourse advances provided under the
MMLF. Additionally, loans originated under the PPP for the Firm and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. receive
a zero percent risk weight.
 282 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 28 – Off–balance sheet lending-related 
financial instruments, guarantees, and
other commitments
JPMorgan Chase provides lending-related financial instruments (e.g., commitments and guarantees) to
address the financing needs of its customers and clients. The contractual amount of these financial
instruments represents the maximum possible credit risk to the Firm should the customer or client
draw upon the commitment or the Firm be required to fulfill its obligation under the guarantee, and
should the customer or client subsequently fail to perform according to the terms of the contract.
Most of these commitments and guarantees have historically been refinanced, extended, cancelled, or
expired without being drawn or a default occurring. As a result, the total contractual amount of
these instruments is not, in the Firm’s view, representative of its expected future credit exposure
or funding requirements. To provide for expected credit losses in wholesale and certain consumer
lending-related commitments, an allowance for credit losses on lending-related commitments is
maintained.Refer to Note 13 for further information regarding the allowance for credit losses on
lending-related commitments, including the impact of the Firm’s adoption of CECL accounting guidance
on January 1, 2020. The following table summarizes the contractual amounts and carrying values of
off-balance sheet lending-related financial instruments, guarantees and other commitments at December
31, 2020 and 2019. The amounts in the table below for credit card and home equity lending-related
commitments represent the total available credit for these products. The Firm has not experienced,
and does not anticipate, that all available lines of credit for these products will be utilized at
the same time. The Firm can reduce or cancel credit card lines of credit by providing the borrower
notice or, in some cases as permitted by law, without notice. In addition, the Firm typically closes
credit card lines when the borrower is 60days or more past due. The Firm may reduce or close HELOCs
when there are significant decreases in the value of the underlying property, or when there has been
a demonstrable decline in the creditworthiness of the borrower.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 283 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
In conjunction with the adoption of CECL, the Firm reclassified risk-rated loans and lending-related
commitments from the consumer, excluding credit card portfolio segment to the wholesale portfolio
segment, to align with the methodology applied in determining the allowance. Prior-period amounts
have been revised to conform with the current presentation. Refer to Note 1 for further information.
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … C… 
 … a… 
 … 2… E… E… 
 … E… a… a… 
 … in 1 3 
 … 1 y… y… E… 
 … y… t… t… a… Ca… 
 … or 3 5 5 2… va… 
 … l… y… y… y… To… T… 20… 2… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … $ 2… $ 1… $ 3… $ 1… $ 46… $ 3… 148 12 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… 1 8 7… 11… 9… — — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 3… 1… 3… 1… 57… 4… 148 12 
 … 
 … 
 … 6… — — — 65… 6… — — 
 … 
 … 6… 1… 3… 1… 71… 6… 148 12 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 9… 1… 1… 1… 41… 3… 2,… 9… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… 7… 4… 1… 30… 3… 443 6… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… 45 26 — 3,… 2… 14 4 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… 1… 1… 1… 44… 4… 2,… 1… 
 … 
 … $ 8… $ 1… $ 1… $ 3… $ 1,… $ 1… $ 2,… $ 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 2… $ — $ — $ — $ 25… $ 2… $ — $ — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… 5… 1… 3… 54… 5… 322 1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 9… 1… — — 96… 1… 2 — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 1… 6… — — 10… 7… -1 — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … NA NA NA NA NA NA 84 59 
 … 
 … 
 … NA NA NA NA 889 9… 23 27 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 & 
 … 
 … 1… — — — 14… 2… — — 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 2… 5… 7… 2… 6,… 6… -i 52 -… 
 … 
 … 
(a) Includes certain commitments to purchase loans from correspondents.
(b) Also includes commercial card lending-related commitments primarily in CB and CIB.
(c) Predominantly all consumer and wholesale lending-related commitments are in the U.S.
(d) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, reflected the contractual amount net of risk participations
totaling $ 72million and $ 76million, respectively, for other unfunded commitments to extend credit;
$ 8.5billion and $ 9.8billion, respectively, for standby letters of credit and other financial
guarantees; and $ 357million and $ 546million, respectively, for other letters of credit. In
regulatory filings with the Federal Reserve these commitments are shown gross of risk participations.
(e) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans, which resulted in a corresponding reclassification of
commitments from Other guarantees and commitments to Wholesale other unfunded commitments to extend
credit. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
(f) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, collateral held by the Firm in support of securities lending
indemnification agreements was $ 264.3billion and $ 216.2billion, respectively. Securities lending
collateral primarily consists of cash, G7 government securities, and securities issued by U.S. GSEs
and government agencies.
(g) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, includes guarantees to the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation under
the sponsored member repo program and commitments and guarantees associated with the Firm’s
membership in certain clearing houses.
(h) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, primarily includes letters of credit hedged by derivative
transactions and managed on a market risk basis, and unfunded commitments related to certain tax-
oriented equity investments.
(i) Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation .
(j) For lending-related products, the carrying value represents the allowance for lending-related
commitments and the guarantee liability; for derivative-related products, and lending-related
commitments for which the fair value option was elected, the carrying value represents the fair
value.
 284 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Other unfunded commitments to extend credit Other unfunded commitments to extend credit generally
consist of commitments for working capital and general corporate purposes, extensions of credit to
support commercial paper facilities and bond financings in the event that those obligations cannot be
remarketed to new investors, as well as committed liquidity facilities to clearing organizations. The
Firm also issues commitments under multipurpose facilities which could be drawn upon in several
forms, including the issuance of a standby letter of credit. Guarantees U.S. GAAP requires that a
guarantor recognize, at the inception of a guarantee, a liability in an amount equal to the fair
value of the obligation undertaken in issuing the guarantee. U.S. GAAP defines a guarantee as a
contract that contingently requires the guarantor to pay a guaranteed party based upon: (a) changes
in an underlying asset, liability or equity security of the guaranteed party; or (b) a third party’s
failure to perform under a specified agreement. The Firm considers the following off–balance sheet
arrangements to be guarantees under U.S. GAAP: standby letters of credit and other financial
guarantees, securities lending indemnifications, certain indemnification agreements included within
third-party contractual arrangements, certain derivative contracts and the guarantees under the
sponsored member repo program. As required by U.S. GAAP, the Firm initially records guarantees at the
inception date fair value of the non-contingent obligation assumed (e.g., the amount of consideration
received or the net present value of the premium receivable). For these obligations, the Firm records
this fair value amount in other liabilities with an offsetting entry recorded in cash (for premiums
received), or other assets (for premiums receivable). Any premium receivable recorded in other assets
is reduced as cash is received under the contract, and the fair value of the liability recorded at
inception is amortized into income as lending and deposit-related fees over the life of the guarantee
contract. The lending-related contingent obligation is recognized based on expected credit losses in
addition to, and separate from, any non-contingent obligation. Non-lending-related contingent
obligations are recognized when the liability becomes probable and reasonably estimable. These
obligations are not recognized if the estimated amount is less than the carrying amount of any non-
contingent liability recognized at inception (adjusted for any amortization). Examples of non-
lending-related contingent obligations include indemnifications provided in sales agreements, where a
portion of the sale proceeds is allocated to the guarantee, which adjusts the gain or loss that would
otherwise result from the transaction. For these indemnifications, the initial liability is amortized
to income as the Firm’s risk is reduced (i.e., over time or when the indemnification expires). The
contractual amount and carrying value of guarantees and indemnifications are included in the table on
page 284. For additional information on the guarantees, see below. Standby letters of credit and
other financial guarantees Standby letters of credit and other financial guarantees are conditional
lending commitments issued by the Firm to guarantee the performance of a client or customer to a
third party under certain arrangements, such as commercial paper facilities, bond financings,
acquisition financings, trade and similar transactions.
The following table summarizes the contractual amount and carrying value of standby letters of credit
and other financial guarantees and other letters of credit arrangements as of December 31, 2020 and
2019.
Standby letters of credit, other financial guarantees and other letters of credit
 2020 2019 
 Standby Standby 
 letters of letters of 
 December credit and credit and 
 31, other Other other Other 
 (in financial letters financial letters 
 millions) guarantees of credit guarantees of credit 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investme… $ 22,850 $ 2,263 $ 26,880 $ 2,137 
 Noninves… 8,132 790 7,362 824 
 Total 
 contract… $ 30,982 $ 3,053 $ 34,242 $ 2,961 
 amount 
 Allowance 
 for $ 80 $ 14 $ 216 $ 4 
 lending-… 
 commitme… 
 Guarantee 363 — 402 — 
 liability 
 Total 
 carrying $ 443 $ 14 $ 618 $ 4 
 value 
 Commitme… 
 with $ 17,238 $ 498 $ 17,853 $ 728 
 collater… 
(a) The ratings scale is based on the Firm’s internal risk ratings. Refer to Note 12 for further
information on internal risk ratings.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 285 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Securities lending indemnifications Through the
Firm’s securities lending program,
counterparties’ securities, via custodial and
non-custodial arrangements, may be lent to third
parties. As part of this program, the Firm
provides an indemnification in the lending
agreements which protects the lender against the
failure of the borrower to return the lent
securities. To minimize its liability under
these indemnification agreements, the Firm
obtains cash or other highly liquid collateral
with a market value exceeding 100% of the value
of the securities on loan from the borrower.
Collateral is marked to market daily to help
assure that collateralization is adequate.
Additional collateral is called from the
borrower if a shortfall exists, or collateral
may be released to the borrower in the event of
overcollateralization. If a borrower defaults,
the Firm would use the collateral held to
purchase replacement securities in the market or
to credit the lending client or counterparty
with the cash equivalent thereof. The cash
collateral held by the Firm may be invested on
behalf of the client in indemnified resale
agreements, whereby the Firm indemnifies the
client against the loss of principal invested.
To minimize its liability under these
agreements, the Firm obtains collateral with a
market value exceeding 100% of the principal
invested. Derivatives qualifying as guarantees
The Firm transacts in certain derivative
contracts that have the characteristics of a
guarantee under U.S. GAAP. These contracts
include written put options that require the
Firm to purchase assets upon exercise by the
option holder at a specified price by a
specified date in the future. The Firm may enter
into written put option contracts in order to
meet client needs, or for other trading
purposes. The terms of written put options are
typically five yearsor less. Derivatives deemed
to be guarantees also includes stable value
contracts, commonly referred to as “stable value
products”, that require the Firm to make a
payment of the difference between the market
value and the book value of a counterparty’s
reference portfolio of assets in the event that
market value is less than book value and certain
other conditions have been met. Stable value
products are transacted in order to allow
investors to realize investment returns with
less volatility than an unprotected portfolio.
These contracts are typically longer-term or may
have no stated maturity, but allow the Firm to
elect to terminate the contract under certain
conditions. The notional value of derivatives
guarantees generally represents the Firm’s
maximum exposure. However, exposure to certain
stable value products is contractually limited
to a substantially lower percentage of the
notional amount. The fair value of derivative
guarantees reflects the probability, in the
Firm’s view, of whether the Firm will be
required to perform under the contract. The Firm
reduces exposures to these contracts by entering
into offsetting transactions, or by entering
into contracts that hedge the market risk
related to the derivative guarantees.
The following table summarizes the derivatives qualifying as guarantees as of December 31, 2020 and
2019.
 (in millions) December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Notional amounts 
 Derivative guarantees $ 54,415 $ 53,089 
 Stable value contracts with 27,752 28,877 
 contractually limited exposure 
 Maximum exposure of stable value 
 contracts with contractually 2,803 2,967 
 limited 
 exposure 
 Fair value 
 Derivative payables 322 159 
In addition to derivative contracts that meet
the characteristics of a guarantee, the Firm is
both a purchaser and seller of credit protection
in the credit derivatives market. Refer to Note
5 for a further discussion of credit
derivatives. Unsettled securities financing
agreements In the normal course of business, the
Firm enters into resale and securities borrowed
agreements. At settlement, these commitments
result in the Firm advancing cash to and
receiving securities collateral from the
counterparty. The Firm also enters into
repurchase and securities loaned agreements. At
settlement, these commitments result in the Firm
receiving cash from and providing securities
collateral to the counterparty. Such agreements
settle at a future date. These agreements
generally do not meet the definition of a
derivative, and therefore, are not recorded on
the Consolidated balance sheets until settlement
date. These agreements predominantly have
regular-way settlement terms. Refer to Note 11
for a further discussion of securities financing
agreements. Loan sales- and securitization-
related indemnifications Mortgage repurchase
liability In connection with the Firm’s mortgage
loan sale and securitization activities with
U.S. GSEs the Firm has made representations and
warranties that the loans sold meet certain
requirements, and that may require the Firm to
repurchase mortgage loans and/or indemnify the
loan purchaser if such representations and
warranties are breached by the Firm. Private
label securitizations The liability related to
repurchase demands associated with private label
securitizations is separately evaluated by the
Firm in establishing its litigation reserves.
Refer to Note 30 for additional information
regarding litigation. Loans sold with recourse
The Firm provides servicing for mortgages and
certain commercial lending products on both a
recourse and nonrecourse basis. In nonrecourse
servicing, the principal credit risk to the Firm
is the cost of temporary servicing advances of
funds (i.e., normal servicing advances). In
recourse servicing, the servicer agrees to share
credit risk
 286 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
with the owner of the mortgage loans, such as Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac or a private investor,
insurer or guarantor. Losses on recourse servicing predominantly occur when foreclosure sales
proceeds of the property underlying a defaulted loan are less than the sum of the outstanding
principal balance, plus accrued interest on the loan and the cost of holding and disposing of the
underlying property. The Firm’s securitizations are predominantly nonrecourse, thereby effectively
transferring the risk of future credit losses to the purchaser of the mortgage-backed securities
issued by the trust. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the unpaid principal balance of loans sold with
recourse totaled $ 889million and $ 944million, respectively. The carrying value of the related
liability that the Firm has recorded in accounts payable and other liabilities on the Consolidated
balance sheets, which is representative of the Firm’s view of the likelihood it will have to perform
under its recourse obligations, was $ 23million and $ 27million at December 31, 2020 and 2019,
respectively. Other off-balance sheet arrangements Indemnification agreements – general In connection
with issuing securities to investors outside the U.S., the Firm may agree to pay additional amounts
to the holders of the securities in the event that, due to a change in tax law, certain types of
withholding taxes are imposed on payments on the securities. The terms of the securities may also
give the Firm the right to redeem the securities if such additional amounts are payable. The Firm may
also enter into indemnification clauses in connection with the licensing of software to clients
(“software licensees”) or when it sells a business or assets to a third party (“third-party
purchasers”), pursuant to which it indemnifies software licensees for claims of liability or damages
that may occur subsequent to the licensing of the software, or third-party purchasers for losses they
may incur due to actions taken by the Firm prior to the sale of the business or assets. It is
difficult to estimate the Firm’s maximum exposure under these indemnification arrangements, since
this would require an assessment of future changes in tax law and future claims that may be made
against the Firm that have not yet occurred. However, based on historical experience, management
expects the risk of loss to be remote. Merchant charge-backs Under the rules of payment networks, the
Firm, in its role as a merchant acquirer, retains a contingent liability for disputed processed
credit and debit card transactions that result in a charge-back to the merchant. If a dispute is
resolved in the cardholder’s favor, Merchant Services will (through the cardholder’s issuing bank)
credit or refund the amount to the cardholder and will charge back the transaction to the merchant.
If Merchant Services is unable to collect the amount from the merchant, Merchant Services will bear
the loss for the amount credited or refunded to the cardholder. Merchant Services mitigates this risk
by withholding future settlements, retaining cash reserve accounts or obtaining other collateral. In
addition, Merchant Services recognizes a valuation allowance that covers the payment or performance
risk to the Firm related to charge-backs. The carrying value of the valuation allowance was $
12million and $ 11million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the years ended December
31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, Merchant Services processed an aggregate volume of $ 1,597.3billion, $
1,511.5billion, and $ 1,366.1billion, respectively. Clearing Services – Client Credit Risk The Firm
provides clearing services for clients by entering into securities purchases and sales and derivative
contracts with CCPs, including ETDs such as futures and options, as well as OTC-cleared derivative
contracts. As a clearing member, the Firm stands behind the performance of its clients, collects cash
and securities collateral (margin) as well as any settlement amounts due from or to clients, and
remits them to the relevant CCP or client in whole or part. There are two types of margin: variation
margin is posted on a daily basis based on the value of clients’ derivative contracts and initial
margin is posted at inception of a derivative contract, generally on the basis of the potential
changes in the variation margin requirement for the contract. As a clearing member, the Firm is
exposed to the risk of nonperformance by its clients, but is not liable to clients for the
performance of the CCPs. Where possible, the Firm seeks to mitigate its risk to the client through
the collection of appropriate amounts of margin at inception and throughout the life of the
transactions. The Firm can also cease providing clearing services if clients do not adhere to their
obligations under the clearing agreement. In the event of nonperformance by a client, the Firm would
close out the client’s positions and access available margin. The CCP would utilize any margin it
holds to make itself whole, with any remaining shortfalls required to be paid by the Firm as a
clearing member. The Firm reflects its exposure to nonperformance risk of the client through the
recognition of margin receivables from clients and margin payables to CCPs; the clients’ underlying
securities or derivative contracts are not reflected in the Firm’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
It is difficult to estimate the Firm’s maximum possible exposure through its role as a clearing
member, as this would require an assessment of transactions that clients may execute in the future.
However, based upon historical experience, and the credit risk mitigants available to the Firm,
management believes it is unlikely that the Firm will have to make any material payments under these
arrangements and the risk of loss is expected to be remote. Refer to Note 5 for information on the
derivatives that the Firm executes for its own account and records in its Consolidated Financial
Statements.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 287 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Exchange & Clearing House Memberships The Firm is a member of several securities and derivative
exchanges and clearing houses, both in the U.S. and other countries, and it provides clearing
services to its clients. Membership in some of these organizations requires the Firm to pay a pro
rata share of the losses incurred by the organization as a result of the default of another member.
Such obligations vary with different organizations. These obligations may be limited to the amount
(or a multiple of the amount) of the Firm’s contribution to the guarantee fund maintained by a
clearing house or exchange as part of the resources available to cover any losses in the event of a
member default. Alternatively, these obligations may also include a pro rata share of the residual
losses after applying the guarantee fund. Additionally, certain clearing houses require the Firm as a
member to pay a pro rata share of losses that may result from the clearing house’s investment of
guarantee fund contributions and initial margin, unrelated to and independent of the default of
another member. Generally a payment would only be required should such losses exceed the resources of
the clearing house or exchange that are contractually required to absorb the losses in the first
instance. In certain cases, it is difficult to estimate the Firm’s maximum possible exposure under
these membership agreements, since this would require an assessment of future claims that may be made
against the Firm that have not yet occurred. However, based on historical experience, management
expects the risk of loss to the Firm to be remote. Where the Firm’s maximum possible exposure can be
estimated, the amount is disclosed in the table on page 284, in the Exchange & clearing house
guarantees and commitments line. Sponsored member repo program The Firm acts as a sponsoring member
to clear eligible overnight resale and repurchase agreements through the Government Securities
Division of the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation (“FICC”) on behalf of clients that become sponsored
members under the FICC’s rules. The Firm also guarantees to the FICC the prompt and full payment and
performance of its sponsored member clients’ respective obligations under the FICC’s rules. The Firm
minimizes its liability under these overnight guarantees by obtaining a security interest in the cash
or high-quality securities collateral that the clients place with the clearing house; therefore, the
Firm expects the risk of loss to be remote. The Firm’s maximum possible exposure, without taking into
consideration the associated collateral, is included in the Exchange & clearing house guarantees and
commitments line on page 284. Refer to Note 11 for additional information on credit risk mitigation
practices on resale agreements and the types of collateral pledged under repurchase agreements.
Guarantees of subsidiaries In the normal course of business, the Parent Company may provide
counterparties with guarantees of certain of the trading and other obligations of its subsidiaries on
a contract-by-contract basis, as negotiated with the Firm’s counterparties. The obligations of the
subsidiaries are included on the Firm’s Consolidated balance sheets or are reflected as off-balance
sheet commitments; therefore, the Parent Company has not recognized a separate liability for these
guarantees. The Firm believes that the occurrence of any event that would trigger payments by the
Parent Company under these guarantees is remote. The Parent Company has guaranteed certain long-term
debt and structured notes of its subsidiaries, including JPMorgan Chase Financial Company LLC
(“JPMFC”), a 100%-owned and consolidated finance subsidiary. All securities issued by JPMFC are fully
and unconditionally guaranteed by the Parent Company and no other subsidiary of the parent company
guarantees these securities. These guarantees, which rank on a parity with the Firm’s unsecured and
unsubordinated indebtedness, are not included in the table on page 284 of this Note. Refer to Note 20
for additional information.
 288 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 29 – Pledged assets and collateral 
Pledged assets The Firm pledges financial assets
that it owns to maintain potential borrowing
capacity at discount windows with Federal
Reserve banks, various other central banks and
FHLBs. Additionally, the Firm pledges assets for
other purposes, including to collateralize
repurchase and other securities financing
agreements, to cover short sales and to
collateralize derivative contracts and deposits.
Certain of these pledged assets may be sold or
repledged or otherwise used by the secured
parties and are parenthetically identified on
the Consolidated balance sheets as assets
pledged.
The following table presents the Firm’s pledged assets.
 December 31, (in billions) 2020 2019 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Assets that may be sold or repledged or $ 166.6 $ 125.2 
 otherwise used by secured parties 
 Assets that may not be sold or repledged 113.9 80.2 
 or otherwise used by secured parties 
 Assets pledged at Federal Reserve banks 455.3 478.9 
 and FHLBs 
 Total pledged assets $ 735.8 $ 684.3 
Total pledged assets do not include assets of
consolidated VIEs; these assets are used to
settle the liabilities of those entities. Refer
to Note 14 for additional information on assets
and liabilities of consolidated VIEs. Refer to
Note 11 for additional information on the Firm’s
securities financing activities. Refer to Note
20 for additional information on the Firm’s
long-term debt. The significant components of
the Firm’s pledged assets were as follows.
 December 31, (in billions) 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Investment securities $ 80.2 $ 35.9 
 Loans 420.5 460.4 
 Trading assets and other 235.1 188.0 
 Total pledged assets $ 735.8 $ 684.3 
Collateral The Firm accepts financial assets as
collateral that it is permitted to sell or
repledge, deliver or otherwise use. This
collateral is generally obtained under resale
and other securities financing agreements, prime
brokerage-related held-for-investment customer
receivables and derivative contracts. Collateral
is generally used under repurchase and other
securities financing agreements, to cover short
sales, and to collateralize derivative contracts
and deposits.
The following table presents the fair value of collateral accepted.
 December 31, (in billions) 2020 2019 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Collateral permitted to be sold or $ 1,451.7 $ 1,282.5 
 repledged, delivered, or otherwise used 
 Collateral sold, repledged, delivered or 1,038.9 1,000.5 -a 
 otherwise used 
(a) Includes collateral repledged to the Federal Reserve under the Federal Reserve’s open market
operations.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 289 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
 Note 30 – Litigation 
Contingencies
As of December 31, 2020, the Firm and its subsidiaries and affiliates are defendants, putative
defendants or respondents in numerous legal proceedings, including private, civil litigations and
regulatory/government investigations. The litigations range from individual actions involving a
single plaintiff to class action lawsuits with potentially millions of class members. Investigations
involve both formal and informal proceedings, by both governmental agencies and self-regulatory
organizations. These legal proceedings are at varying stages of adjudication, arbitration or
investigation, and involve each of the Firm’s lines of business and several geographies and a wide
variety of claims (including common law tort and contract claims and statutory antitrust, securities
and consumer protection claims), some of which present novel legal theories. The Firm believes the
estimate of the aggregate range of reasonably possible losses, in excess of reserves established, for
its legal proceedings is from $ 0to approximately $ 1.5billion at December 31, 2020. This estimated
aggregate range of reasonably possible losses was based upon information available as of that date
for those proceedings in which the Firm believes that an estimate of reasonably possible loss can be
made. For certain matters, the Firm does not believe that such an estimate can be made, as of that
date. The Firm’s estimate of the aggregate range of reasonably possible losses involves significant
judgment, given: • the number, variety and varying stages of the proceedings, including the fact that
many are in preliminary stages, • the existence in many such proceedings of multiple defendants,
including the Firm, whose share of liability (if any) has yet to be determined, • the numerous yet-
unresolved issues in many of the proceedings, including issues regarding class certification and the
scope of many of the claims, and • the attendant uncertainty of the various potential outcomes of
such proceedings, including where the Firm has made assumptions concerning future rulings by the
court or other adjudicator, or about the behavior or incentives of adverse parties or regulatory
authorities, and those assumptions prove to be incorrect. In addition, the outcome of a particular
proceeding may be a result which the Firm did not take into account in its estimate because the Firm
had deemed the likelihood of that outcome to be remote. Accordingly, the Firm’s estimate of the
aggregate range of reasonably possible losses will change from time to time, and actual losses may
vary significantly. Set forth below are descriptions of the Firm’s material legal proceedings.
Advisory and Other Activities . In November 2020, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. entered into a resolution
with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (“OCC”) regarding historical deficiencies in
internal controls and internal audit for certain fiduciary activities. In connection with the
resolution, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. paid a $ 250million Civil Money Penalty. The OCC found that
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. has remediated the deficiencies that led to the penalty. Amrapali . India’s
Enforcement Directorate (“ED”) is investigating JPMorgan India Private Limited in connection with
investments made in 2010 and 2012 by twooffshore funds formerly managed by JPMorgan Chase entities
into residential housing projects developed by the Amrapali Group (“Amrapali”). In 2017, numerous
creditors filed civil claims against Amrapali including petitions brought by home buyers relating to
delays in delivering or failure to deliver residential units. The home buyers’ petitions have been
overseen by the Supreme Court of India since 2017 pursuant to its jurisdiction over public interest
litigation. In July 2019, the Supreme Court of India issued an order making preliminary findings that
Amrapali and other parties, including unspecified JPMorgan Chase entities and the offshore funds that
had invested in the projects, violated certain currency control and money laundering provisions, and
ordering the ED to conduct a further inquiry under India’s Prevention of Money Laundering Act
(“PMLA”) and Foreign Exchange Management Act (“FEMA”). In May 2020, the Enforcement Directorate
issued a provisional attachment order as part of the criminal PMLA proceedings freezing approximately
$ 25million held by JPMorgan India Private Limited. In June 2020, the funds were transferred to an
account held by the Supreme Court of India. A separate civil proceeding relating to alleged FEMA
violations is ongoing. The Firm is responding to and cooperating with the investigation. Federal
Republic of Nigeria Litigation. JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. operated an escrow and depository account
for the Federal Government of Nigeria (“FGN”) and two major international oil companies. The account
held approximately $ 1.1billion in connection with a dispute among the clients over rights to an oil
field. Following the settlement of the dispute, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. paid out the monies in the
account in 2011 and 2013 in accordance with directions received from its clients. In November 2017,
the Federal Republic of Nigeria (“FRN”) commenced a claim in the English High Court for approximately
$ 875million in payments made out of the accounts. The FRN, claiming to be the same entity as the
FGN, alleges that the payments were instructed as part of a complex fraud not involving JPMorgan
Chase Bank, N.A., but that JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. was or should have been on
 290 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
notice that the payments may be fraudulent. JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. applied for summary judgment
and was unsuccessful. The claim is ongoing and a trial has been scheduled to commence in February
2022. Foreign Exchange Investigations and Litigation. The Firm previously reported settlements with
certain government authorities relating to its foreign exchange (“FX”) sales and trading activities
and controls related to those activities. Among those resolutions, in May 2015, the Firm pleaded
guilty to a single violation of federal antitrust law. In January 2017, the Firm was sentenced, with
judgment entered thereafter and a term of probation ending in January 2020. The term of probation has
concluded, with the Firm remaining in good standing throughout the probation period. The Department
of Labor granted the Firm a five-yearexemption of disqualification that allows the Firm and its
affiliates to continue to rely on the Qualified Professional Asset Manager exemption under the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act (“ERISA”) until January 2023. The Firm will need to reapply
in due course for a further exemption to cover the remainder of the ten-yeardisqualification period.
A South Africa Competition Commission matter is the remaining FX-related governmental inquiry, and is
currently pending before the South Africa Competition Tribunal. In August 2018, the United States
District Court for the Southern District of New York granted final approval to the Firm’s settlement
of a consolidated class action brought by U.S.-based plaintiffs, which principally alleged violations
of federal antitrust laws based on an alleged conspiracy to manipulate foreign exchange rates and
also sought damages on behalf of persons who transacted in FX futures and options on futures. Certain
members of the settlement class filed requests to the Court to be excluded from the class, and
certain of them filed a complaint against the Firm and a number of other foreign exchange dealers in
November 2018. A number of these actions remain pending. Further, putative class actions have been
filed against the Firm and a number of other foreign exchange dealers on behalf of certain consumers
who purchased foreign currencies at allegedly inflated rates and purported indirect purchasers of FX
instruments; these actions also remain pending in the District Court. In 2020, the Court approved a
settlement by the Firm and 11other defendants of a class action filed by purported indirect
purchasers for a total of $ 10million. In addition, some FX-related individual and putative class
actions based on similar alleged underlying conduct have been filed outside the U.S., including in
the U.K., Israel and Australia. Interchange Litigation. G roups of merchants and retail associations
filed a series of class action complaints alleging that Visa and Mastercard, as well as certain
banks, conspired to set the price of credit and debit card interchange fees and enacted related rules
in violation of antitrust laws. In 2012, the parties initially settled the cases for a cash payment,
a temporary reduction of credit card interchange, and modifications to certain credit card network
rules. In 2017, after the approval of that settlement was reversed on appeal, the case was remanded
to the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York for further proceedings
consistent with the appellate decision. The original class action was divided into twoseparate
actions, one seeking primarily monetary relief and the other seeking primarily injunctive relief. In
September 2018, the parties to the class action seeking monetary relief finalized an agreement which
amends and supersedes the prior settlement agreement. Pursuant to this settlement, the defendants
collectively contributed an additional $ 900million to the approximately $ 5.3billion previously held
in escrow from the original settlement. In December 2019, the amended agreement was approved by the
District Court. Certain merchants appealed the District Court’s approval order, and those appeals are
pending. Based on the percentage of merchants that opted out of the amended class settlement, $
700million has been returned to the defendants from the settlement escrow in accordance with the
settlement agreement. The class action seeking primarily injunctive relief continues separately. In
addition, certain merchants have filed individual actions raising similar allegations against Visa
and Mastercard, as well as against the Firm and other banks, and some of those actions remain
pending. LIBOR and Other Benchmark Rate Investigations and Litigation. JPMorgan Chase has responded
to inquiries from various governmental agencies and entities around the world relating primarily to
the British Bankers Association’s London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) for various currencies and
the European Banking Federation’s Euro Interbank Offered Rate (“EURIBOR”). The Swiss Competition
Commission’s investigation relating to EURIBOR, to which the Firm and other banks are subject,
continues. In December 2016, the European Commission issued a decision against the Firm and other
banks finding an infringement of European antitrust rules relating to EURIBOR. The Firm has filed an
appeal of that decision with the European General Court, and that appeal is pending. In addition, the
Firm has been named as a defendant along with other banks in a series of individual and putative
class actions related to benchmarks, including U.S. dollar LIBOR during the period that it was
administered by the BBA and, in a separate consolidated putative class action, during the period that
it was administered by ICE Benchmark Administration. These actions have been filed, or consolidated
for pre-trial purposes, in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York. In
these actions, plaintiffs make varying allegations that in various periods, starting in 2000 or
later, defendants either individually or collectively manipulated various benchmark rates by
submitting rates that were artificially low or high. Plaintiffs allege that they transacted in loans,
derivatives or other financial instruments whose values are affected by
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 291 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
changes in these rates and assert a variety of claims including antitrust claims seeking treble
damages. In actions related to U.S. dollar LIBOR during the period that it was administered by the
BBA, the Firm has resolved certain of these actions, and others are in various stages of litigation.
The District Court dismissed certain claims, including antitrust claims brought by some plaintiffs
whom the District Court found did not have standing to assert such claims, and permitted certain
claims to proceed, including antitrust, Commodity Exchange Act, Section 10(b) of the Securities
Exchange Act and common law claims. The plaintiffs whose antitrust claims were dismissed for lack of
standing have filed an appeal. The District Court granted class certification of antitrust claims
related to bonds and interest rate swaps sold directly by the defendants and denied class
certification motions filed by other plaintiffs. In the consolidated putative class action related to
the time period that U.S. dollar LIBOR was administered by ICE Benchmark Administration, the District
Court granted defendants’ motion to dismiss plaintiffs’ complaint, and the plaintiffs have appealed.
The Firm’s settlements of putative class actions related to Swiss franc LIBOR, the Singapore
Interbank Offered Rate and the Singapore Swap Offer Rate (“SIBOR”), and the Australian Bank Bill Swap
Reference Rate, and one of the putative class actions related to U.S. dollar LIBOR remain subject to
court approval. In the class actions related to SIBOR and Swiss franc LIBOR, the District Court
concluded that the Court lacked subject matter jurisdiction, and plaintiffs’ appeals of those
decisions are pending. In addition to the actions pending or consolidated in the Southern District of
New York, in August 2020, a group of individual plaintiffs filed a lawsuit asserting antitrust claims
in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, alleging that the Firm
and other defendants were engaged in an unlawful agreement to set LIBOR and conspired to monopolize
the market for LIBOR-based consumer loans and credit cards. The complaint seeks injunctive relief and
monetary damages. Metals and U.S. Treasuries Investigations and Litigation and Related Inquiries. The
Firm previously reported that it and/or certain of its subsidiaries had entered into resolutions with
the U.S. Department of Justice (“DOJ”), the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (“CFTC”) and
the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), which, collectively, resolved those agencies’
respective investigations relating to historical trading practices by former employees in the
precious metals and U.S. treasuries markets and related conduct from 2008 to 2016. The Firm entered
into a Deferred Prosecution Agreement (“DPA”) with the DOJ in which it agreed to the filing of a
criminal information charging JPMorgan Chase & Co. with twocounts of wire fraud and agreed, along
with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, to certain terms and obligations as
set forth therein. Under the terms of the DPA, the criminal information will be dismissed after three
years, provided that JPMorgan Chase & Co., JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC
fully comply with all of their obligations. Across the threeresolutions with the DOJ, CFTC and SEC,
JPMorgan Chase & Co., JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC agreed to pay a total
monetary amount of approximately $ 920million. A portion of the total monetary amount includes victim
compensation payments. Several putative class action complaints have been filed in the United States
District Court for the Southern District of New York against the Firm and certain former employees,
alleging a precious metals futures and options price manipulation scheme in violation of the
Commodity Exchange Act. Some of the complaints also allege unjust enrichment and deceptive acts or
practices under the General Business Law of the State of New York. The Court consolidated these
putative class actions in February 2019, and the consolidated action is stayed through May 2021. In
addition, several putative class actions have been filed in the United States District Courts for the
Northern District of Illinois and Southern District of New York against the Firm, alleging
manipulation of U.S. Treasury futures and options, and bringing claims under the Commodity Exchange
Act. Some of the complaints also allege unjust enrichment. The actions in the Northern District of
Illinois have been transferred to the Southern District of New York. The Court consolidated these
putative class actions in October 2020 and set a deadline of February 2021 for the filing of a
consolidated complaint. Twoputative class action complaints have also been filed under the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York against
the Firm and certain individual defendants on behalf of shareholders who acquired shares during the
putative class period alleging that certain SEC filings of the Firm were materially false or
misleading in that they did not disclose certain information relating to the above-referenced
investigations. Plaintiffs have filed a stipulation seeking consolidation of the actions and the
appointment of co-lead plaintiffs and counsel, which is pending Court approval. Wendel. Since 2012,
the French criminal authorities have been investigating a series of transactions entered into by
senior managers of Wendel Investissement (“Wendel”) during the period from 2004 through 2007 to
restructure their shareholdings in Wendel. JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., Paris branch provided financing
for the transactions to a number of managers of Wendel in 2007. JPMorgan Chase has cooperated with
the investigation. The investigating judges issued an ordonnance de renvoi in November 2016,
referring JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. to the French tribunal correctionnel for alleged complicity in
tax fraud. In January 2018, the Paris Court of Appeal issued a decision cancelling the mise en examen
of JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. The Court of Cassation, France’s highest court, ruled in September 2018
that a mise en examen is a prerequisite for an
 292 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
ordonnance de renvoi and in January 2020 ordered the annulment of the ordonnance de renvoi referring
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. to the French tribunal correctionnel . The Court of Appeal found in January
2021 that it had no power to take further action against JPMorgan Chase following the Court of
Cassation’s ruling. At the opening of a trial of the managers of Wendel in January 2021, the tribunal
correctionnel directed the criminal authorities to clarify whether a further investigation should be
opened against JPMorgan Chase, pending which the trial was postponed. In addition, a number of the
managers have commenced civil proceedings against JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. The claims are separate,
involve different allegations and are at various stages of proceedings. * * * In addition to the
various legal proceedings discussed above, JPMorgan Chase and its subsidiaries are named as
defendants or are otherwise involved in a substantial number of other legal proceedings. The Firm
believes it has meritorious defenses to the claims asserted against it in its currently outstanding
legal proceedings and it intends to defend itself vigorously. Additional legal proceedings may be
initiated from time to time in the future. The Firm has established reserves for several hundred of
its currently outstanding legal proceedings. In accordance with the provisions of U.S. GAAP for
contingencies, the Firm accrues for a litigation-related liability when it is probable that such a
liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. The Firm
evaluates its outstanding legal proceedings each quarter to assess its litigation reserves, and makes
adjustments in such reserves, upward or downward, as appropriate, based on management’s best judgment
after consultation with counsel. The Firm’s legal expense was $ 1.1billion, $ 239million and $
72million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. There is no assurance
that the Firm’s litigation reserves will not need to be adjusted in the future. In view of the
inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome of legal proceedings, particularly where the claimants
seek very large or indeterminate damages, or where the matters present novel legal theories, involve
a large number of parties or are in early stages of discovery, the Firm cannot state with confidence
what will be the eventual outcomes of the currently pending matters, the timing of their ultimate
resolution or the eventual losses, fines, penalties or consequences related to those matters.
JPMorgan Chase believes, based upon its current knowledge and after consultation with counsel,
consideration of the material legal proceedings described above and after taking into account its
current litigation reserves and its estimated aggregate range of possible losses, that the other
legal proceedings currently pending against it should not have a material adverse effect on the
Firm’s consolidated financial condition. The Firm notes, however, that in light of the uncertainties
involved in such proceedings, there is no assurance that the ultimate resolution of these matters
will not significantly exceed the reserves it has currently accrued or that a matter will not have
material reputational consequences. As a result, the outcome of a particular matter may be material
to JPMorgan Chase’s operating results for a particular period, depending on, among other factors, the
size of the loss or liability imposed and the level of JPMorgan Chase’s income for that period.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 293 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
 Note 31 – International operations 
The following table presents income statement and balance sheet-related information for JPMorgan
Chase by major international geographic area. The Firm defines international activities for purposes
of this footnote presentation as business transactions that involve clients residing outside of the
U.S., and the information presented below is based predominantly on the domicile of the client, the
location from which the client relationship is managed, booking location or the location of the
trading desk. However, many of the Firm’s U.S. operations serve international businesses. As the
Firm’s operations are highly integrated, estimates and subjective assumptions have been made to
apportion revenue and expense between U.S. and international operations. These estimates and
assumptions are consistent with the allocations used for the Firm’s segment reporting as set forth in
Note 32. The Firm’s long-lived assets for the periods presented are not considered by management to
be significant in relation to total assets. The majority of the Firm’s long-lived assets are located
in the U.S.
 As of 
 or for 
 the 
 year 
 ended 
 Decemb… Income 
 31, before 
 (in income 
 millio… tax Net Total 
 2020 Revenue… Expense… expense income assets 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Europe… $ 16,566 $ 10,987 $ 5,579 $ 3,868 $ 530,687 -e 
 East/A… 
 Asia-P… 9,289 5,558 3,731 2,630 252,553 
 Latin 2,740 1,590 1,150 837 61,980 
 Americ… 
 Total 28,595 18,135 10,460 7,335 845,220 
 intern… 
 North 90,948 66,001 24,947 21,796 2,540,… 
 Americ… 
 Total $ 119,543 $ 84,136 $ 35,407 $ 29,131 $ 3,386,… 
 2019(b) 
 Europe… $ 15,887 $ 9,860 $ 6,027 $ 4,158 $ 391,369 -e 
 East/A… 
 Asia-P… 7,254 5,060 2,194 1,467 183,023 
 Latin 2,405 1,561 844 609 47,820 
 Americ… 
 Total 25,546 16,481 9,065 6,234 622,212 
 intern… 
 North 89,853 54,373 35,480 30,197 2,065,… 
 Americ… 
 Total $ 115,399 $ 70,854 $ 44,545 $ 36,431 $ 2,687,… 
 2018(b) 
 Europe… $ 16,459 $ 10,032 $ 6,427 $ 4,569 $ 424,935 -e 
 East/A… 
 Asia-P… 6,991 4,884 2,107 1,481 171,547 
 Latin 2,365 1,301 1,064 744 43,871 
 Americ… 
 Total 25,815 16,217 9,598 6,794 640,353 
 intern… 
 North 82,968 51,802 31,166 25,680 1,982,… 
 Americ… 
 Total $ 108,783 $ 68,019 $ 40,764 $ 32,474 $ 2,622,… 
(a) Substantially reflects the U.S.
(b) Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
(c) Revenue is composed of net interest income and noninterest revenue.
(d) Expense is composed of noninterest expense and the provision for credit losses.
(e) Total assets for the U.K. were approximately $ 353billion, $ 309billion and $ 299billion at
December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
 294 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Note 32 – Business segments 
The Firm is managed on an LOB basis. There are fourmajor reportable business segments – Consumer &
Community Banking, Corporate & Investment Bank, Commercial Banking and Asset & Wealth Management. In
addition, there is a Corporate segment.The business segments are determined based on the products and
services provided, or the type of customer served, and they reflect the manner in which financial
information is currently evaluated by the Firm’s Operating Committee. Segment results are presented
on a managed basis. Refer to Segment results of this footnote for a further discussion of JPMorgan
Chase’s business segments. The following is a description of each of the Firm’s business segments,
and the products and services they provide to their respective client bases. Consumer & Community
Banking Consumer & Community Banking offers services to consumers and businesses through bank
branches, ATMs, digital (including mobile and online) and telephone banking. CCB is organized into
Consumer & Business Banking (including Consumer Banking, J.P. Morgan Wealth Management and Business
Banking), Home Lending (including Home Lending Production, Home Lending Servicing and Real Estate
Portfolios) and Card & Auto. Consumer & Business Banking offers deposit and investment products,
payments and services to consumers, and lending, deposit, and cash management and payment solutions
to small businesses. Home Lending includes mortgage origination and servicing activities, as well as
portfolios consisting of residential mortgages and home equity loans. Card & Auto issues credit cards
to consumers and small businesses and originates and services auto loans and leases. Corporate &
Investment Bank The Corporate & Investment Bank, which consists of Banking and Markets & Securities
Services, offers a broad suite of investment banking, market-making, prime brokerage, and treasury
and securities products and services to a global client base of corporations, investors, financial
institutions, merchants, government and municipal entities. Banking offers a full range of investment
banking products and services in all major capital markets, including advising on corporate strategy
and structure, capital-raising in equity and debt markets, as well as loan origination and
syndication. Banking also includes Wholesale Payments, which provides payments services enabling
clients to manage payments and receipts globally, and cross-border financing. Markets & Securities
Services includes Markets, a global market-maker across products, including cash and derivative
instruments, which also offers sophisticated risk management solutions, prime brokerage, and
research. Markets & Securities Services also includes Securities Services, a leading global custodian
which provides custody, fund accounting and administration, and securities lending products
principally for asset managers, insurance companies and public and private investment funds.
Commercial Banking Commercial Banking provides comprehensive financial solutions, including lending,
wholesale payments, investment banking and asset management products across threeprimary client
segments: Middle Market Banking, Corporate Client Banking and Commercial Real Estate Banking. Other
includes amounts not aligned with a primary client segment. Middle Market Banking covers small and
midsized companies, local governments and nonprofit clients. Corporate Client Banking covers large
corporations. Commercial Real Estate Banking covers investors, developers, and owners of multifamily,
office, retail, industrial and affordable housing properties. Asset & Wealth Management Asset &
Wealth Management, with client assets of $ 3.7trillion, is a global leader in investment and wealth
management. Asset Management Offers multi-asset investment management solutions across equities,
fixed income, alternatives and money market funds to institutional and retail investors providing for
a broad range of clients’ investment needs. Wealth Management Provides retirement products and
services, brokerage, custody, trusts and estates, loans, mortgages, deposits and investment
management to high net worth clients. The majority of AWM’s client assets are in actively managed
portfolios. Corporate The Corporate segment consists of Treasury and Chief Investment Office and
Other Corporate, which includes corporate staff functions and expense that is centrally managed.
Treasury and CIO is predominantly responsible for measuring, monitoring, reporting and managing the
Firm’s liquidity, funding, capital, structural interest rate and foreign exchange risks. The major
Other Corporate functions include Real Estate, Technology, Legal, Corporate Finance, Human Resources,
Internal Audit, Risk Management, Compliance, Control Management, Corporate Responsibility and various
Other Corporate groups.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 295 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Segment results
The following table provides a summary of the Firm’s segment results as of or for the years ended
December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, on a managed basis. The Firm’s definition of managed basis starts
with the reported U.S. GAAP results and includes certain reclassifications to present total net
revenue for the Firm (and each of the reportable business segments) on an FTE basis. Accordingly,
revenue from investments that receive tax credits and tax-exempt securities is presented in the
managed results on a basis comparable to taxable investments and securities. This allows management
to assess the comparability of revenue from year-to-year arising from both taxable and tax-exempt
sources. The corresponding income tax impact related to tax-exempt items is recorded within income
tax expense/(benefit). These adjustments have no impact on net income as reported by the Firm as a
whole or by the LOBs. Business segment capital allocation Each business segment is allocated capital
by taking into consideration a variety of factors including capital levels of similarly rated peers
and applicable regulatory capital requirements. ROE is measured and internal targets for expected
returns are established as key measures of a business segment’s performance. The Firm’s allocation
methodology incorporates Basel III Standardized RWA, Basel III Advanced RWA, the GSIB surcharge, and
a simulation of capital in a severe stress environment. The assumptions and methodologies used to
allocate capital are periodically assessed and as a result, the capital allocated to the LOBs may
change from time to time. Business segment changes In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Firm
transferred certain assets, liabilities, revenue, expense and headcount associated with certain
wealth management clients from AWM to the J.P. Morgan Wealth Management business unit within CCB.
Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation, including the
transfer of approximately 1,650technology and support staff during the second and third quarters of
2020. Ultra-high-net-worth and certain high-net-worth client relationships remained in AWM. In the
first quarter of 2020, the Firm began reporting a Wholesale Payments business unit within CIB
following a realignment of the Firm’s wholesale payments businesses. The Wholesale Payments business
comprises: • Merchant Services, which was realigned from CCB to CIB • Treasury Services and Trade
Finance in CIB. Trade Finance was previously reported in Lending in CIB. In connection with the
alignment of Wholesale Payments, the assets, liabilities and headcount associated with the Merchant
Services business were realigned to CIB from CCB, and the revenue and expenses of the Merchant
Services business are reported across CCB, CIB and CB based primarily on client relationships. In the
fourth quarter of 2020, payment processing-only clients along with the associated revenue and
expenses were realigned to CIB’s Wholesale Payments business from CCB and CB. Payment processing-only
clients are those that only use payment services offered by Merchant Services, and in general do not
currently utilize other services offered by the Firm. Prior-period amounts have been revised to
reflect this realignment and revised allocation methodology.
Segment results and reconciliation (a)
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 % … 
 … 
 296 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 … … 
 … … … … … … 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 $ … $ … $ $ … … … $ … 
 … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … 
 … … — — … … 
 … … — — … … 
 … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … 
 $ … $ … $ $ — — … $ … 
 $ … $ … $ $ — — … $ … 
 … … … … … 
 … … … … … % … 
 … … … … … … 
(a) Segment results on a managed basis reflect revenue on a FTE basis with the corresponding income
tax impact recorded within income tax expense/(benefit). These adjustments are eliminated in
reconciling items to arrive at the Firm’s reported U.S. GAAP results.
(b) In the second quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain spend-based credit card reward costs
from marketing expense to be a reduction of card income, with no effect on net income. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 297 
 Notes to consolidated financial statements 
Note 33 – Parent Company
The following tables present Parent Company-only
financial statements.
 Statements of income and comprehensive 
 income 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Income 
 Dividends from subsidiaries and 
 affiliates: 
 Bank and bank holding company $ 6,000 $ 26,000 $ 32,501 
 Non-bank(a) — — 2 
 Interest income from subsidiaries 63 223 216 
 Other income from subsidiaries: 
 Bank and bank holding company 2,019 2,738 515 
 Non-bank -569 197 -444 
 Other income 205 -1,731 888 
 Total income 7,718 27,427 33,678 
 Expense 
 Interest expense/(income) to -8,830 -5,303 2,291 
 subsidiaries and affiliates(a) 
 Other interest expense 14,150 13,246 4,581 
 Noninterest expense 2,222 1,992 1,793 
 Total expense 7,542 9,935 8,665 
 Income before income tax benefit and 176 17,492 25,013 
 undistributed net income of subsidiaries 
 Income tax benefit 1,324 2,033 1,838 
 Equity in undistributed net income of 27,631 16,906 5,623 
 subsidiaries 
 Net income $ 29,131 $ 36,431 $ 32,474 
 Other comprehensive income, net 6,417 3,076 -1,476 
 Comprehensive income $ 35,548 $ 39,507 $ 30,998 
 Balance sheets 
 December 31, (in millions) 
 Assets 2020 2019 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and due from banks $ 54 $ 32 
 Deposits with banking subsidiaries 6,811 5,309 
 Trading assets 1,775 3,011 
 Advances to, and receivables from, 
 subsidiaries: 
 Bank and bank holding company 27 2,358 
 Non-bank 86 84 
 Investments (at equity) in subsidiaries 
 and affiliates: 
 Bank and bank holding company 508,602 471,207 
 Non-bank 1,011 1,044 
 Other assets 10,058 10,699 
 Total assets $ 528,424 $ 493,744 
 Liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
 Borrowings from, and payables to, $ 25,150 $ 23,410 
 subsidiaries and affiliates(a) 
 Short-term borrowings 924 2,616 
 Other liabilities 9,612 9,288 
 Long-term debt(b)(c) 213,384 197,100 
 Total liabilities(c) 249,070 232,414 
 Total stockholders’ equity 279,354 261,330 
 Total liabilities and stockholders’ $ 528,424 $ 493,744 
 equity 
 Statements of cash flows 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating activities 
 Net income $ 29,131 $ 36,431 $ 32,474 
 Less: Net income of 
 subsidiaries and 33,631 42,906 38,125 
 affiliates(a) 
 Parent company net loss -4,500 -6,475 -5,651 
 Cash dividends from 
 subsidiaries and 6,000 26,000 32,501 
 affiliates(a) 
 Other operating adjustments 15,357 9,862 -4,400 
 Net cash provided by/(used in) 
 operating 16,857 29,387 22,450 
 activities 
 Investing activities 
 Net change in: 
 Advances to and investments in 
 subsidiaries and affiliates, -2,663 -6 -e 8,036 
 net 
 All other investing activities, 24 71 63 
 net 
 Net cash provided by/(used in) 
 investing -2,639 65 8,099 
 activities 
 Financing activities 
 Net change in: 
 Borrowings from subsidiaries 
 and 1,425 2,941 -2,273 
 affiliates(a) 
 Short-term borrowings -20 -56 -678 
 Proceeds from long-term 37,312 25,569 25,845 
 borrowings 
 Payments of long-term -34,194 -21,226 -21,956 
 borrowings 
 Proceeds from issuance of 
 preferred 4,500 5,000 1,696 
 stock 
 Redemption of preferred stock -1,430 -4,075 -1,696 
 Treasury stock repurchased -6,517 -24,001 -19,983 
 Dividends paid -12,690 -12,343 -10,109 
 All other financing activities, -1,080 -1,290 -1,526 
 net 
 Net cash used in financing -12,694 -29,481 -30,680 
 activities 
 Net decrease in cash and due 
 from banks 1,524 -29 -131 
 and deposits with banking 
 subsidiaries 
 Cash and due from banks and 
 deposits 
 with banking subsidiaries at 5,341 5,370 5,501 
 the 
 beginning of the year 
 Cash and due from banks and 
 deposits 
 with banking subsidiaries at $ 6,865 $ 5,341 $ 5,370 
 the end of 
 the year 
 Cash interest paid $ 5,445 $ 7,957 $ 6,911 
 Cash income taxes paid, net(d) 5,366 3,910 1,782 
(a) Affiliates include trusts that issued
guaranteed capital debt securities (“issuer
trusts”).
(b) At December 31, 2020, long-term debt that
contractually matures in 2021 through 2025
totaled $ 10.8billion, $ 10.0billion, $
19.1billion, $ 21.8billion, and $ 13.5billion,
respectively.
(c) Refer to Notes 20 and 28 for information
regarding the Parent Company’s guarantees of its
subsidiaries’ obligations.
(d) Represents payments, net of refunds, made by
the Parent Company to various taxing authorities
and includes taxes paid on behalf of certain of
its subsidiaries that are subsequently
reimbursed. The reimbursements were $
8.3billion, $ 6.4billion, and $ 1.2billion for
the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and
2018, respectively.
(e) As a result of the merger of Chase Bank USA,
N.A. with and into JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.,
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. distributed $
13.5billion to the Parent company as a return of
capital, which the Parent company contributed to
the IHC.
 298 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Supplementary information 
 Selected quarterly financial data (unaudited) 
 As 
 of 
 or 
 f… 
 t… 
 p… 
 e… 
 (… 
 m… 
 e… 
 p… 
 s… 
 r… 
 h… 
 d… 
 a… 
 w… 
 o… 
 n… 
 S… 
 i… 20… 20… 
 s… 4th 3rd 2nd 1st 4th 3rd 2nd 1st 
 d… qu… qu… qu… qu… qu… qu… qu… qua… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 T… 
 n… $ 29… $ 29… $ 32… $ 28… $ 28… $ 29… $ 28… $ 29,… 
 r… 
 T… 
 n… 16… 16… 16… 16… 16… 16… 16… 16,… 
 e… 
 P… 13… 12… 16… 11… 11… 12… 12… 12,… 
 p… 
 P… 
 f… -1… 611 10… 8,… 1,… 1,… 1,… 1,4… 
 c… 
 l… 
 I… 
 b… 
 i… 15… 11… 5,… 3,… 10… 11… 11… 11,… 
 t… 
 e… 
 I… 
 t… 2,… 2,… 878 251 2,… 2,… 1,… 2,0… 
 e… 
 N… $ 12… $ 9,… $ 4,… $ 2,… $ 8,… $ 9,… $ 9,… $ 9,1… 
 i… 
 E… 
 p… 
 s… 
 d… 
 N… 
 i… $ 3.… $ 2.… $ 1.… $ 0.… $ 2.… $ 2.… $ 2.… $ 2.65 
 B… 
 D… 3.… 2.… 1.… 0.… 2.… 2.… 2.… 2.65 
 A… 
 s… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,2… 
 B… 
 D… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,3… 
 M… 
 a… 
 p… 
 c… 
 s… 
 d… 
 M… $ 38… $ 29… $ 28… $ 27… $ 42… $ 36… $ 35… $ 328… 
 c… 
 C… 
 s… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,2… 
 at 
 p… 
 B… 
 v… 81… 79… 76… 75… 75… 75… 73… 71.… 
 p… 
 s… 
 T… 66… 63… 61… 60… 60… 60… 59… 57.… 
 C… 
 d… 
 d… 0.… 0.… 0.… 0.… 0.… 0.… 0.… 0.80 
 p… 
 s… 
 S… 
 r… 
 a… 
 m… 
 R… 19 % 15 % 7 % 4 % 14 % 15 % 16 % 16 % 
 R… 24 19 9 5 17 18 20 19 
 R… 1.… 1.… 0.… 0.… 1.… 1.… 1.… 1.39 
 O… 55 58 51 60 58 56 57 56 
 r… 
 L… 47 49 52 57 64 64 65 66 
 r… 
 F… 
 L… 110 114 117 114 116 115 113 111 
 (… 
 J… 
 C… 
 B… 160 157 140 117 116 112 112 109 
 N… 
 L… 
 (… 
 C… 
 c… 13… 13… 12… 11… 12… 12… 12… 12.1 
 r… 
 T… 
 1 15… 15… 14… 13… 14… 14… 14… 13.8 
 c… 
 r… 
 T… 
 c… 17… 17… 16… 15… 16… 15… 15… 15.7 
 r… 
 T… 
 1 7.0 7.0 6.9 7.5 7.9 7.9 8.0 8.1 
 l… 
 r… 
 S… 6.9 7.0 6.8 6.0 6.3 6.3 6.4 6.4 
 S… 
 b… 
 s… 
 d… 
 (… 
 T… $ 50… $ 50… $ 49… $ 51… $ 36… $ 45… $ 48… $ 495… 
 a… 
 I… 58… 53… 55… 47… 39… 39… 30… 267… 
 S… 
 L… 1,… 98… 1,… 1,… 99… 98… 99… 990… 
 T… 3,… 3,… 3,… 3,… 2,… 2,… 2,… 2,7… 
 a… 
 D… 2,… 2,… 1,… 1,… 1,… 1,… 1,… 1,4… 
 L… 28… 27… 31… 29… 29… 29… 28… 290… 
 d… 
 C… 
 s… 24… 24… 23… 23… 23… 23… 23… 232… 
 e… 
 T… 
 s… 27… 27… 26… 26… 26… 26… 26… 259… 
 e… 
 H… 25… 25… 25… 25… 25… 25… 25… 255… 
 C… 
 q… 
 m… 
 A… 
 f… 
 l… 
 l… $ 30… $ 33… $ 34… $ 25… $ 14… $ 14… $ 14… $ 14,… 
 a… 
 l… 
 r… 
 c… 
 A… 
 f… 
 l… 
 l… 2.… % 3.… % 3.… % 2.… % 1.… % 1.… % 1.… % 1.43 % 
 to 
 t… 
 r… 
 l… 
 N… $ 10… $ 11… $ 9,… $ 7,… $ 5,… $ 5,… $ 5,… $ 5,6… 
 a… 
 N… 1,… 1,… 1,… 1,… 1,… 1,… 1,… 1,3… 
 c… 
 N… 
 c… 0.… % 0.… % 0.… % 0.… % 0.… % 0.… % 0.… % 0.58 % 
 r… 
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the Financial Instruments – Credit Losses (“CECL”)
accounting guidance. Refer to Note 1 for further information.
(a) In the second quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain spend-based credit card reward costs
from marketing expense to be a reduction of card income, with no effect on net income. Prior-period
amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation.
(b) Pre-provision profit, TBVPS and ROTCE are each non-GAAP financial measures. Tangible common
equity (“TCE”) is also a non-GAAP financial measure. Refer to Explanation and Reconciliation of the
Firm’s Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures on pages 62–64 for a further discussion of these measures.
(c) Quarterly ratios are based on annualized amounts.
(d) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
(e) The capital metrics reflect the relief provided by the Federal Reserve Board in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, including the CECL capital transition provisions that became effective in the
first quarter of 2020. The SLR reflects the temporary exclusions of U.S. Treasury securities and
deposits at Federal Reserve Banks that became effective in the second quarter of 2020. Refer to
Regulatory Developments Relating to the COVID-19 Pandemic on pages 52-53 and Capital Risk Management
on pages 91-101 for additional information.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 299 
Distribution of assets, liabilities and
stockholders’ equity; interest rates and
interest differentials
Consolidated average balance sheets, interest
and rates
Provided below is a summary of JPMorgan Chase’s
consolidated average balances, interest and
rates on a taxable-equivalent basis for the
years 2018 through 2020. Income computed on a
taxable-equivalent basis is the income reported
in the Consolidated statements of income,
adjusted to present interest income and rates
earned on
assets exempt from income taxes (i.e., federal
taxes) on a basis comparable with other taxable
investments. The incremental tax rate used for
calculating the taxable-equivalent adjustment
was approximately 24% in 2020, 2019 and 2018 .
 (Table continued on next page) 
 (Unaudited) 
 Year ended December 31, 2020 
 (Taxable-equivalent interest and Average 
 rates; in millions, except rates) balance Interest(h) Rate 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Assets 
 Deposits with banks $ 444,058 $ 749 0.17 % 
 Federal funds sold and securities 275,926 2,436 0.88 
 purchased under resale agreements 
 Securities borrowed 143,472 -302 -0.21 -j 
 Trading assets – debt 322,936 7,869 2.44 
 instruments(a) 
 Taxable securities 476,650 7,843 1.65 
 Non-taxable securities(b) 33,287 1,437 4.32 
 Total investment securities 509,937 9,280 1.82 -k 
 Loans(a) 1,004,597 43,886 -i 4.37 
 All other interest-earning 78,784 1,023 1.30 
 assets(a)(c) 
 Total interest-earning assets 2,779,710 64,941 2.34 
 Allowance for loan losses -25,775 
 Cash and due from banks 22,241 
 Trading assets – equity and other 118,055 
 instruments(a) 
 Trading assets – derivative 76,572 
 receivables 
 Goodwill, MSRs and other 
 intangible 51,934 
 assets 
 All other noninterest-earning 180,411 
 assets(a) 
 Total assets $ 3,203,148 
 Liabilities 
 Interest-bearing deposits $ 1,389,224 $ 2,357 0.17 % 
 Federal funds purchased and 
 securities 255,421 1,058 0.41 
 loaned or sold under repurchase 
 agreements 
 Short-term borrowings(d) 38,853 372 0.96 
 Trading liabilities – debt and 
 all other 205,255 195 0.10 -j 
 interest-bearing 
 liabilities(e)(f) 
 Beneficial interests issued by 19,216 214 1.12 
 consolidated VIEs 
 Long-term debt 254,400 5,764 2.27 
 Total interest-bearing 2,162,369 9,960 0.46 
 liabilities 
 Noninterest-bearing deposits 517,527 
 Trading liabilities – equity and 
 other 32,628 
 instruments(f) 
 Trading liabilities – derivative 61,593 
 payables 
 All other liabilities, including 
 the 162,267 
 allowance for lending-related 
 commitments 
 Total liabilities 2,936,384 
 Stockholders’ equity 
 Preferred stock 29,899 
 Common stockholders’ equity 236,865 
 Total stockholders’ equity 266,764 -g 
 Total liabilities and 
 stockholders’ $ 3,203,148 
 equity 
 Interest rate spread 1.88 % 
 Net interest income and net yield 
 on $ 54,981 1.98 
 interest-earning assets 
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
(b) Represents securities that are tax-exempt for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
(c) Includes brokerage-related held-for-investment customer receivables, which are classified in
accrued interest and accounts receivable, and all other interest-earning assets, which are classified
in other assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(d) Includes commercial paper.
(e) All other interest-bearing liabilities include brokerage-related customer payables.
Within the Consolidated average balance sheets, interest and rates summary, the principal amounts of
nonaccrual loans have been included in the average loan balances used to determine the average
interest rate earned on loans. Refer to Note 12 for additional information on nonaccrual loans,
including interest accrued.
 300 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 (Ta… 
 con… 
 from 
 pre… 
 pag… 
 2019 2018 
 Ave… Ave… 
 bal… Int… Rate bal… Int… Ra… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 $ 280… $ 3,8… 1.39 % $ 405… $ 5,9… 1.… % 
 275… 6,1… 2.23 217… 3,8… 1.… 
 131… 1,5… 1.20 115… 913 0.… 
 294… 9,1… 3.12 208… 7,2… 3.… 
 284… 7,9… 2.80 194… 5,6… 2.… 
 35,… 1,6… 4.63 42,… 1,9… 4.… 
 319… 9,6… 3.01 -k 236… 7,6… 3.… -k 
 989… 52,… -i 5.25 977… 49,… -i 5.… 
 53,… 2,1… 3.99 52,… 2,0… 3.… 
 2,3… 84,… 3.61 2,2… 76,… 3.… 
 -13… -13… 
 20,… 21,… 
 114… 118… 
 53,… 60,… 
 53,… 54,… 
 167… 154… 
 $ 2,7… $ 2,6… 
 $ 1,1… $ 8,9… 0.80 % $ 1,0… $ 5,9… 0.… % 
 227… 4,6… 2.03 189… 3,0… 1.… 
 52,… 1,2… 2.38 54,… 1,1… 2.… 
 182… 2,5… 1.42 177… 2,3… 1.… 
 22,… 568 2.52 21,… 493 2.… 
 247… 8,8… 3.55 243… 7,9… 3.… 
 1,8… 26,… 1.45 1,7… 21,… 1.… 
 407… 411… 
 31,… 34,… 
 42,… 43,… 
 151… 132… 
 2,4… 2,3… 
 27,… 26,… 
 232… 229… 
 260… -g 255… -g 
 $ 2,7… $ 2,6… 
 2.16 % 2.… % 
 $ 57,… 2.46 $ 55,… 2.… 
(f) The combined balance of trading liabilities – debt and equity instruments was $106.5 billion,
$101.0 billion and $107.0 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(g) The ratio of average stockholders’ equity to average assets was 8.3%, 9.5% and 9.8% for the years
ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The return on average stockholders’ equity,
based on net income, was 10.9%, 14.0% and 12.7% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018,
respectively.
(h) Interest includes the effect of related hedging derivatives. Taxable-equivalent amounts are used
where applicable.
(i) Fees and commissions on loans included in loan interest amounted to $1.0 billion for the year
ended December 31, 2020, and $1.2 billion each for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
(j) Negative interest income and yield are related to the impact of current interest rates combined
with the fees paid on client-driven securities borrowed balances. The negative interest expense
related to prime brokerage customer payables is recognized in interest expense and reported within
trading liabilities - debt and all other interest-bearing liabilities.
(k) The annualized rate for securities based on amortized cost was 1.85%, 3.05% and 3.25% for the
years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, and does not give effect to changes in
fair value that are reflected in AOCI.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 301 
Interest rates and interest differential analysis of net interest income – U.S. and non-U.S.
Presented below is a summary of interest and rates segregated between U.S. and non-U.S. operations
for the years 2018 through 2020. The segregation of U.S. and non-U.S. components is based on the
location of the office recording the transaction. Intercompany funding generally consists of dollar-
denominated deposits originated in various locations that are centrally managed by Treasury and CIO.
 (Table continued on next page) 
 (Unaudited) 
 Year ended December 31, 
 (Taxable-equivalent interest and rates; in 2020 
 millions, except rates) Average balance Interest Rate 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest-earning assets 
 Deposits with banks: 
 U.S. $ 294,669 $ 768 0.26 % 
 Non-U.S. 149,389 -19 -0.01 
 Federal funds sold and securities 
 purchased under resale agreements: 
 U.S. 141,409 1,341 0.95 
 Non-U.S. 134,517 1,095 0.81 
 Securities borrowed:(a) 
 U.S. 100,026 -305 -0.30 
 Non-U.S. 43,446 3 0.01 
 Trading assets – debt instruments:(b) 
 U.S. 216,025 5,056 2.34 
 Non-U.S. 106,911 2,813 2.63 
 Investment securities: 
 U.S. 475,832 8,703 1.83 
 Non-U.S. 34,105 577 1.69 
 Loans:(b) 
 U.S. 909,850 41,708 4.58 
 Non-U.S. 94,747 2,178 2.30 
 All other interest-earning assets, 78,784 1,023 1.30 
 predominantly U.S.(b) 
 Total interest-earning assets 2,779,710 64,941 2.34 
 Interest-bearing liabilities 
 Interest-bearing deposits: 
 U.S. 1,068,857 2,288 0.21 
 Non-U.S. 320,367 69 0.02 
 Federal funds purchased and securities 
 loaned or sold under repurchase 
 agreements: 
 U.S. 204,958 863 0.42 
 Non-U.S. 50,463 195 0.39 
 Trading liabilities – debt, short-term 
 and all other interest-bearing 
 liabilities: 
 (a)(c) 
 U.S. 151,120 -30 -0.02 
 Non-U.S. 92,988 597 0.64 
 Beneficial interests issued by 19,216 214 1.12 
 consolidated VIEs, predominantly U.S. 
 Long-term debt: 
 U.S. 247,623 5,704 2.30 
 Non-U.S. 6,777 60 0.89 
 Intercompany funding: 
 U.S. -46,327 -1,254 — 
 Non-U.S. 46,327 1,254 — 
 Total interest-bearing liabilities 2,162,369 9,960 0.46 
 Noninterest-bearing liabilities(d) 617,341 
 Total investable funds $ 2,779,710 $ 9,960 0.36 % 
 Net interest income and net yield: $ 54,981 1.98 % 
 U.S. 49,242 2.25 
 Non-U.S. 5,739 0.97 
 Percentage of total assets and 
 liabilities attributable to non-U.S. 
 operations: 
 Assets 23.5 
 Liabilities 20.9 
(a) Negative interest income and yield are related to the impact of current interest rates combined
with the fees paid on client-driven securities borrowed balances. The negative interest expense
related to prime brokerage customer payables is recognized in interest expense and reported within
trading liabilities - debt and all other interest-bearing liabilities.
(b) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
(c) Includes commercial paper.
(d) Represents the amount of noninterest-bearing liabilities funding interest-earning assets.
 302 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
Refer to the “Net interest income” discussion in Consolidated Results of Operations on pages 54-56
for further information.
 (Table continued 
 from previous page) 
 2019 2018 
 Average balance Interest Rate Average balance Interest Rate 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 $ 165,066 $ 3,588 2.17 % $ 305,117 $ 5,703 1.87 % 
 114,938 299 0.26 100,397 204 0.20 
 150,205 4,068 2.71 102,144 2,427 2.38 
 125,224 2,078 1.66 115,006 1,392 1.21 
 92,625 1,423 1.54 77,027 825 1.07 
 38,666 151 0.39 38,055 88 0.23 
 200,811 6,157 3.07 121,967 4,229 3.47 
 94,147 3,032 3.22 86,299 2,977 3.45 
 287,961 8,963 3.11 200,883 6,943 3.46 
 31,914 654 2.05 35,805 697 1.95 
 898,570 49,058 5.46 882,314 46,227 5.24 
 91,373 2,954 3.23 95,092 2,981 3.13 
 53,779 2,146 3.99 52,551 2,035 3.87 
 2,345,279 84,571 3.61 2,212,657 76,728 3.47 
 850,493 6,896 0.81 802,786 4,562 0.57 
 265,355 2,061 0.78 242,251 1,411 0.58 
 164,284 3,989 2.43 117,754 2,562 2.18 
 63,710 641 1.01 71,528 504 0.70 
 147,247 2,574 1.75 147,512 2,225 1.51 
 87,284 1,259 1.44 85,269 1,306 1.53 
 22,501 568 2.52 21,079 493 2.34 
 241,914 8,766 3.62 239,718 7,954 3.32 
 6,054 41 0.68 3,528 24 0.68 
 -42,947 -1,414 — -51,933 -746 — 
 42,947 1,414 — 51,933 746 — 
 1,848,842 26,795 1.45 1,731,425 21,041 1.22 
 496,437 481,232 
 $ 2,345,279 $ 26,795 1.14 % $ 2,212,657 $ 21,041 0.95 % 
 $ 57,776 2.46 % $ 55,687 2.52 % 
 52,217 2.86 50,236 2.95 
 5,559 1.07 5,451 1.05 
 24.5 24.7 
 22.1 22.3 
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 303 
 Changes in net interest income, volume and rate analysis 
The table below presents an attribution of net interest income between volume and rate. The
attribution between volume and rate is calculated using annual average balances for each category of
assets and liabilities shown in the table and the corresponding annual rates (refer to pages 300–304
for more information on average balances and rates). In this analysis, when the change cannot be
isolated to either volume or rate, it has been allocated to volume. The annual rates include the
impact of changes in market rates, as well as the impact of any change in composition of the various
products within each category of asset or liability. This analysis is calculated separately for each
category without consideration of the relationship between categories (for example, the net spread
between the rates earned on assets and the rates paid on liabilities that fund those assets). As a
result, changes in the granularity or groupings considered in this analysis would produce a different
attribution result, and due to the complexities involved, precise allocation of changes in interest
rates between volume and rates is inherently complex and judgmental.
 (Unaudit… 
 Year 
 ended 2019 
 December 2020 versus versus 
 31, 2019 2018 
 (On a Increase/(… Increase/… 
 taxable-… due to due to 
 basis; in change in: Net change in: Net 
 millions) Volume Rate change Volume Rate change 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest… 
 assets 
 Deposits 
 with 
 banks: 
 U.S. $ 333 $ -3,153 $ -2,820 $ -3,030 $ 915 $ -2,115 
 Non-U.S. -8 -310 -318 35 60 95 
 Federal 
 funds 
 sold and 
 securiti… 
 purchased 
 under 
 resale 
 agreemen… 
 U.S. -83 -2,644 -2,727 1,304 337 1,641 
 Non-U.S. 81 -1,064 -983 168 518 686 
 Securiti… 
 borrowed… 
 U.S. -24 -1,704 -1,728 236 362 598 
 Non-U.S. -1 -147 -148 2 61 63 
 Trading 
 assets – 
 debt 
 instrume… 
 U.S. 365 -1,466 -1,101 2,416 -488 1,928 
 Non-U.S. 336 -555 -219 253 -198 55 
 Investme… 
 securiti… 
 U.S. 3,426 -3,686 -260 2,723 -703 2,020 
 Non-U.S. 38 -115 -77 -79 36 -43 
 Loans:(b) 
 U.S. 557 -7,907 -7,350 890 1,941 2,831 
 Non-U.S. 74 -850 -776 -122 95 -27 
 All other 
 interest… 
 assets, 324 -1,447 -1,123 48 63 111 
 predomin… 
 U.S.(b) 
 Change in 
 interest 5,418 -25,048 -19,630 4,844 2,999 7,843 
 income 
 Interest… 
 liabilit… 
 Interest… 
 deposits: 
 U.S. 495 -5,103 -4,608 407 1,927 2,334 
 Non-U.S. 25 -2,017 -1,992 165 485 650 
 Federal 
 funds 
 purchased 
 and 
 securiti… 
 loaned or 
 sold 
 under 
 repurcha… 
 agreemen… 
 U.S. 176 -3,302 -3,126 1,133 294 1,427 
 Non-U.S. -51 -395 -446 -85 222 137 
 Trading 
 liabilit… 
 – debt, 
 short-te… 
 and all 
 other 
 interest… 
 liabilit… 
 (a)(c) 
 U.S. 2 -2,606 -2,604 -5 354 349 
 Non-U.S. 36 -698 -662 30 -77 -47 
 Benefici… 
 interests 
 issued by 
 consolid… -37 -317 -354 37 38 75 
 VIEs, 
 predomin… 
 U.S. 
 Long-term 
 debt: 
 U.S. 131 -3,193 -3,062 93 719 812 
 Non-U.S. 6 13 19 17 — 17 
 Intercom… 
 funding: 
 U.S. -89 249 160 293 -961 -668 
 Non-U.S. 89 -249 -160 -293 961 668 
 Change in 
 interest 783 -17,618 -16,835 1,792 3,962 5,754 
 expense 
 Change in 
 net $ 4,635 $ -7,430 $ -2,795 $ 3,052 $ -963 $ 2,089 
 interest 
 income 
(a) Negative interest income and yield are related to the impact of current interest rates combined
with the fees paid on client-driven securities borrowed balances. The negative interest expense
related to prime brokerage customer payables is recognized in interest expense and reported within
trading liabilities - debt and all other interest-bearing liabilities.
(b) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans and other assets. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation.
(c) Includes commercial paper.
 304 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Glossary of Terms and Acronyms 
2020 Form 10-K: Annual report on Form 10-K for
year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
ABS: Asset-backed securities
AFS: Available-for-sale
ALCO: Asset Liability Committee
Amortized cost: Amount at which a financing
receivable or investment is originated or
acquired, adjusted for accretion or amortization
of premium, discount, and net deferred fees or
costs, collection of cash, charge-offs, foreign
exchange, and fair value hedge accounting
adjustments. For AFS securities, amortized cost
is also reduced by any impairment losses
recognized in earnings. Amortized cost is not
reduced by the allowance for credit losses,
except where explicitly presented net.
AOCI: Accumulated other comprehensive
income/(loss)
ARM: Adjustable rate mortgage(s)
AUC: Assets under custody
AUM: “Assets under management”: Represent assets
managed by AWM on behalf of its Private Banking,
Institutional and Retail clients. Includes
“Committed capital not Called.”
Auto loan and lease origination volume: Dollar
amount of auto loans and leases originated.
AWM: Asset & Wealth Management
Beneficial interests issued by consolidated
VIEs: Represents the interest of third-party
holders of debt, equity securities, or other
obligations, issued by VIEs that JPMorgan Chase
consolidates.
Benefit obligation: Refers to the projected
benefit obligation for pension plans and the
accumulated postretirement benefit obligation
for OPEB plans.
BHC: Bank holding company
CB: Commercial Banking
CBB: Consumer & Business Banking
CCAR: Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review
CCB: Consumer & Community Banking
CCO: Chief Compliance Officer
CCP: “Central counterparty” is a clearing house
that interposes itself between counterparties to
contracts traded in one or more financial
markets, becoming the buyer to every seller and
the seller to every buyer and thereby ensuring
the future performance of open contracts. A CCP
becomes a counterparty to trades with market
participants through novation, an open offer
system, or another legally binding arrangement.
CDS: Credit default swaps
CECL: Current Expected Credit Losses
CEO: Chief Executive Officer
CET1 Capital: Common equity Tier 1 capital
CFTC: Commodity Futures Trading Commission
CFO: Chief Financial Officer
CFP: Contingency funding plan
Chase Bank USA, N.A.: Chase Bank USA, National
Association
CIB: Corporate & Investment Bank
CIO: Chief Investment Office
Client assets: Represent assets under management
as well as custody, brokerage, administration
and deposit accounts.
Client deposits and other third-party
liabilities: Deposits, as well as deposits that
are swept to on-balance sheet liabilities (e.g.,
commercial paper, federal funds purchased and
securities loaned or sold under repurchase
agreements) as part of client cash management
programs.
CLO: Collateralized loan obligations
CLTV: Combined loan-to-value
Collateral-dependent: A loan is considered to be
collateral-dependent when repayment of the loan
is expected to be provided substantially through
the operation or sale of the collateral when the
borrower is experiencing financial difficulty,
including when foreclosure is deemed probable
based on borrower delinquency.
Commercial Card: provides a wide range of
payment services to corporate and public sector
clients worldwide through the commercial card
products. Services include procurement,
corporate travel and entertainment, expense
management services, and business-to-business
payment solutions.
Credit cycle: A period of time over which credit
quality improves, deteriorates and then improves
again (or vice versa). The duration of a credit
cycle can vary from a couple of years to several
years.
Credit derivatives: Financial instruments whose
value is derived from the credit risk associated
with the debt of a third-party issuer (the
reference entity) which allow one party (the
protection purchaser) to transfer that risk to
another party (the protection seller). Upon the
occurrence of a credit event by the reference
entity, which may include, among other events,
the bankruptcy or failure to pay its
obligations, or certain restructurings of the
debt of the reference entity, neither party has
recourse to the reference entity. The protection
purchaser has recourse to the protection seller
for the difference between the face value of the
CDS contract and the fair value at the time of
settling the credit derivative contract. The
determination as to whether a credit event has
occurred is generally made by the relevant
International Swaps and Derivatives Association
(“ISDA”) Determinations Committee.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 305 
 Glossary of Terms and Acronyms 
Criticized: Criticized loans, lending-related
commitments and derivative receivables that are
classified as special mention, substandard and
doubtful categories for regulatory purposes.
CRO: Chief Risk Officer
CTC: CIO, Treasury and Corporate
CVA: Credit valuation adjustment
Debit and credit card sales volume : Dollar
amount of card member purchases, net of returns.
Deposit margin/deposit spread: Represents net
interest income expressed as a percentage of
average deposits.
Distributed denial-of-service attack: The use of
a large number of remote computer systems to
electronically send a high volume of traffic to
a target website to create a service outage at
the target. This is a form of cyberattack.
Dodd-Frank Act: Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act
DVA: Debit valuation adjustment
EC: European Commission
Eligible HQLA: Eligible high-quality liquid
assets, for purposes of calculating the LCR, is
the amount of unencumbered HQLA that satisfy
certain operational considerations as defined in
the LCR rule.
Eligible LTD: Long-term debt satisfying certain
eligibility criteria
Embedded derivatives: are implicit or explicit
terms or features of a financial instrument that
affect some or all of the cash flows or the
value of the instrument in a manner similar to a
derivative. An instrument containing such terms
or features is referred to as a “hybrid.” The
component of the hybrid that is the non-
derivative instrument is referred to as the
“host.” For example, callable debt is a hybrid
instrument that contains a plain vanilla debt
instrument (i.e., the host) and an embedded
option that allows the issuer to redeem the debt
issue at a specified date for a specified amount
(i.e., the embedded derivative). However, a
floating rate instrument is not a hybrid
composed of a fixed-rate instrument and an
interest rate swap.
ERISA: Employee Retirement Income Security Act
of 1974
EPS: Earnings per share
ETD: “Exchange-traded derivatives”: Derivative
contracts that are executed on an exchange and
settled via a central clearing house.
Expense categories:
• Volume- and revenue-related expenses generally
correlate with changes in the related
business/transaction volume or revenue. Examples
of volume- and revenue-related expenses include
commissions and incentive compensation,
depreciation expense related to
operating lease assets, and brokerage expense
related to equities trading transaction volume.
• Investments include expenses associated with
supporting medium- to longer-term strategic
plans of the Firm. Examples of investments
include initiatives in technology (including
related compensation), marketing, and
compensation for new bankers and client
advisors.
• Structural expenses are those associated with
the day-today cost of running the bank and are
expenses not covered by the above two
categories. Examples of structural expenses
include employee salaries and benefits, as well
as noncompensation costs such as real estate and
all other expenses.
EU: European Union
Fannie Mae: Federal National Mortgage
Association
FASB: Financial Accounting Standards Board
FCA: Financial Conduct Authority
FCC: Firmwide Control Committee
FDIA: Federal Depository Insurance Act
FDIC: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
Federal Reserve: The Board of the Governors of
the Federal Reserve System
FFIEC: Federal Financial Institutions
Examination Council
FHA: Federal Housing Administration
FHLB: Federal Home Loan Bank
FICC: The Fixed Income Clearing Corporation
FICO score: A measure of consumer credit risk
provided by credit bureaus, typically produced
from statistical models by Fair Isaac
Corporation utilizing data collected by the
credit bureaus.
FINRA: Financial Industry Regulatory Authority
Firm: JPMorgan Chase & Co.
Forward points: Represents the interest rate
differential between two currencies, which is
either added to or subtracted from the current
exchange rate (i.e., “spot rate”) to determine
the forward exchange rate.
FRBB: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
FRBNY: Federal Reserve Bank of New York
FRC: Firmwide Risk Committee
Freddie Mac: Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation
Free standing derivatives: a derivative contract
entered into either separate and apart from any
of the Firm’s other financial instruments or
equity transactions. Or, in conjunction with
some other transaction and is legally detachable
and separately exercisable.
FSB: Financial Stability Board
 306 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Glossary of Terms and Acronyms 
FTE: Fully taxable equivalent
FVA: Funding valuation adjustment
FX: Foreign exchange
G7: Group of Seven nations: Countries in the G7
are Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the
U.K. and the U.S.
G7 government bonds: Bonds issued by the
government of one of the G7 nations.
Ginnie Mae: Government National Mortgage
Association
GSIB: Global systemically important banks
Headcount-related expense: Includes salary and
benefits (excluding performance-based
incentives), and other noncompensation costs
related to employees.
HELOC: Home equity line of credit
Home equity – senior lien: Represents loans and
commitments where JPMorgan Chase holds the first
security interest on the property.
Home equity – junior lien: Represents loans and
commitments where JPMorgan Chase holds a
security interest that is subordinate in rank to
other liens.
Households: A household is a collection of
individuals or entities aggregated together by
name, address, tax identifier and phone number.
HQLA: “High-quality liquid assets” consist of
cash and certain high-quality liquid securities
as defined in the LCR rule.
HTM: Held-to-maturity
IBOR: Interbank Offered Rate
ICAAP: Internal capital adequacy assessment
process
IDI: Insured depository institutions
IHC : JPMorgan Chase Holdings LLC, an
intermediate holding company
Investment-grade: An indication of credit
quality based on JPMorgan Chase’s internal risk
assessment. The Firm considers ratings of
BBB-/Baa3 or higher as investment-grade.
IPO: Initial public offering
ISDA: International Swaps and Derivatives
Association
JPMorgan Chase: JPMorgan Chase & Co.
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.: JPMorgan Chase Bank,
National Association
JPMorgan Securities: J.P. Morgan Securities LLC
Loan-equivalent: Represents the portion of the
unused commitment or other contingent exposure
that is expected, based on historical portfolio
experience, to become drawn prior to an event of
a default by an obligor.
LCR: Liquidity coverage ratio
LDA: Loss Distribution Approach
LGD: Loss given default
LIBOR: London Interbank Offered Rate
LLC: Limited Liability Company
LOB: Line of business
LOB CROs : Line of Business and CTC Chief Risk
Officers
Loss emergence period: Represents the time
period between the date at which the loss is
estimated to have been incurred and the ultimate
realization of that loss.
LTIP: Long-term incentive plan
LTV: “Loan-to-value”: For residential real
estate loans, the relationship, expressed as a
percentage, between the principal amount of a
loan and the appraised value of the collateral
(i.e., residential real estate) securing the
loan.
Origination date LTV ratio
The LTV ratio at the origination date of the
loan. Origination date LTV ratios are calculated
based on the actual appraised values of
collateral (i.e., loan-level data) at the
origination date.
Current estimated LTV ratio
An estimate of the LTV as of a certain date. The
current estimated LTV ratios are calculated
using estimated collateral values derived from a
nationally recognized home price index measured
at the metropolitan statistical area (“MSA”)
level. These MSA-level home price indices
consist of actual data to the extent available
and forecasted data where actual data is not
available. As a result, the estimated collateral
values used to calculate these ratios do not
represent actual appraised loan-level collateral
values; as such, the resulting LTV ratios are
necessarily imprecise and should therefore be
viewed as estimates.
Combined LTV ratio
The LTV ratio considering all available lien
positions, as well as unused lines, related to
the property. Combined LTV ratios are used for
junior lien home equity products.
Managed basis: A non-GAAP presentation of
Firmwide financial results that includes
reclassifications to present revenue on a fully
taxable-equivalent basis. Management also uses
this financial measure at the segment level,
because it believes this provides information to
enable investors to understand the underlying
operational performance and trends of the
particular business segment and facilitates a
comparison of the business segment with the
performance of competitors.
Master netting agreement: A single agreement
with a counterparty that permits multiple
transactions governed by that agreement to be
terminated or accelerated and settled through a
single payment in a single currency in the event
of a default (e.g., bankruptcy, failure to make
a required payment or securities transfer or
deliver collateral or margin when due).
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 307 
 Glossary of Terms and Acronyms 
MBS: Mortgage-backed securities
MD&A: Management’s discussion and analysis
Measurement alternative: Measures equity
securities without readily determinable fair
values at cost less impairment (if any), plus or
minus observable price changes from an identical
or similar investment of the same issuer.
Merchant Services: offers merchants payment
processing capabilities, fraud and risk
management, data and analytics, and other
payments services. Through Merchant Services,
merchants of all sizes can accept payments via
credit and debit cards and payments in multiple
currencies.
MEV: Macroeconomic variable
MMLF: Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity
Facility
Moody’s: Moody’s Investor Services
Mortgage origination channels:
Retail – Borrowers who buy or refinance a home
through direct contact with a mortgage banker
employed by the Firm using a branch office, the
Internet or by phone. Borrowers are frequently
referred to a mortgage banker by a banker in a
Chase branch, real estate brokers, home builders
or other third parties.
Correspondent – Banks, thrifts, other mortgage
banks and other financial institutions that sell
closed loans to the Firm.
Mortgage product types:
Alt-A
Alt-A loans are generally higher in credit
quality than subprime loans but have
characteristics that would disqualify the
borrower from a traditional prime loan. Alt-A
lending characteristics may include one or more
of the following: (i) limited documentation;
(ii) a high CLTV ratio; (iii) loans secured by
non-owner occupied properties; or (iv) a debt-
to-income ratio above normal limits. A
substantial proportion of the Firm’s Alt-A loans
are those where a borrower does not provide
complete documentation of his or her assets or
the amount or source of his or her income.
Option ARMs
The option ARM real estate loan product is an
adjustable-rate mortgage loan that provides the
borrower with the option each month to make a
fully amortizing, interest-only or minimum
payment. The minimum payment on an option ARM
loan is based on the interest rate charged
during the introductory period. This
introductory rate is usually significantly below
the fully indexed rate. The fully indexed rate
is calculated using an index rate plus a margin.
Once the introductory period ends, the
contractual interest rate charged on the loan
increases to the fully indexed rate and adjusts
monthly to reflect movements in the index. The
minimum payment is typically insufficient to
cover interest accrued in the prior month, and
any unpaid interest is deferred and added to the
principal balance of the loan. Option ARM loans
are subject to payment recast, which converts
the loan to a variable-rate fully amortizing
loan upon meeting specified loan balance and
anniversary date
triggers.
Prime
Prime mortgage loans are made to borrowers with
good credit records who meet specific
underwriting requirements, including
prescriptive requirements related to income and
overall debt levels. New prime mortgage
borrowers provide full documentation and
generally have reliable payment histories.
Subprime
Subprime loans are loans that, prior to
mid-2008, were offered to certain customers with
one or more high risk characteristics, including
but not limited to: (i) unreliable or poor
payment histories; (ii) a high LTV ratio of
greater than 80% (without borrower-paid mortgage
insurance); (iii) a high debt-to-income ratio;
(iv) an occupancy type for the loan is other
than the borrower’s primary residence; or (v) a
history of delinquencies or late payments on the
loan.
MSA: Metropolitan statistical areas
MSR: Mortgage servicing rights
Multi-asset: Any fund or account that allocates
assets under management to more than one asset
class.
NA: Data is not applicable or available for the
period presented.
NAV: Net Asset Value
Net Capital Rule: Rule 15c3-1 under the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Net charge-off/(recovery) rate: Represents net
charge-offs/(recoveries) (annualized) divided by
average retained loans for the reporting period.
Net interchange income includes the following
components:
• Interchange income : Fees earned by credit and
debit card issuers on sales transactions.
• Reward costs : The cost to the Firm for points
earned by cardholders enrolled in credit card
rewards programs generally tied to sales
transactions.
• Partner payments : Payments to co-brand credit
card partners based on the cost of loyalty
program rewards earned by cardholders on credit
card transactions.
Net mortgage servicing revenue: Includes
operating revenue earned from servicing third-
party mortgage loans, which is recognized over
the period in which the service is provided;
changes in the fair value of MSRs; the impact of
risk management activities associated with MSRs;
and gains and losses on securitization of excess
mortgage servicing. Net mortgage servicing
revenue also includes gains and losses on sales
and lower of cost or fair value adjustments of
certain repurchased loans insured by U.S.
government agencies.
Net production revenue: Includes fees and income
recognized as earned on mortgage loans
originated with the
 308 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Glossary of Terms and Acronyms 
intent to sell, and the impact of risk
management activities associated with the
mortgage pipeline and warehouse loans. Net
production revenue also includes gains and
losses on sales and lower of cost or fair value
adjustments on mortgage loans held-for-sale
(excluding certain repurchased loans insured by
U.S. government agencies), and changes in the
fair value of financial instruments measured
under the fair value option.
Net revenue rate: Represents Credit Card net
revenue (annualized) expressed as a percentage
of average loans for the period.
Net yield on interest-earning assets: The
average rate for interest-earning assets less
the average rate paid for all sources of funds.
NFA: National Futures Association
NM: Not meaningful
NOL: Net operating loss
Nonaccrual loans: Loans for which interest
income is not recognized on an accrual basis.
Loans (other than credit card loans and certain
consumer loans insured by U.S. government
agencies) are placed on nonaccrual status when
full payment of principal and interest is not
expected, regardless of delinquency status, or
when principal and interest have been in default
for a period of 90 days or more unless the loan
is both well-secured and in the process of
collection. Collateral-dependent loans are
typically maintained on nonaccrual status.
Nonperforming assets: Nonperforming assets
include nonaccrual loans, nonperforming
derivatives and certain assets acquired in loan
satisfaction, predominantly real estate owned
and other commercial and personal property.
NOW: Negotiable Order of Withdrawal
NSFR: Net Stable Funding Ratio
OAS: Option-adjusted spread
OCC: Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
OCI: Other comprehensive income/(loss)
OPEB: Other postretirement employee benefit
OTTI: Other-than-temporary impairment
Over-the-counter (“OTC”) derivatives: Derivative
contracts that are negotiated, executed and
settled bilaterally between two derivative
counterparties, where one or both counterparties
is a derivatives dealer.
Over-the-counter cleared (“OTC-cleared”)
derivatives: Derivative contracts that are
negotiated and executed bilaterally, but
subsequently settled via a central clearing
house, such that each derivative counterparty is
only exposed to the default of that clearing
house.
Overhead ratio: Noninterest expense as a
percentage of total net revenue.
Parent Company: JPMorgan Chase & Co.
Participating securities: Represents unvested
share-based compensation awards containing
nonforfeitable rights to dividends or dividend
equivalents (collectively, “dividends”), which
are included in the earnings per share
calculation using the two-class method. JPMorgan
Chase grants RSUs to certain employees under its
share-based compensation programs, which entitle
the recipients to receive nonforfeitable
dividends during the vesting period on a basis
equivalent to the dividends paid to holders of
common stock. These unvested awards meet the
definition of participating securities. Under
the two-class method, all earnings (distributed
and undistributed) are allocated to each class
of common stock and participating securities,
based on their respective rights to receive
dividends.
PCA: Prompt corrective action
PCD : “Purchased credit deteriorated” assets
represent acquired financial assets that as of
the date of acquisition have experienced a more-
than-insignificant deterioration in credit
quality since origination, as determined by the
Firm.
PCI: “Purchased credit-impaired” loans
represented certain loans that were acquired and
deemed to be credit-impaired on the acquisition
date. The superseded FASB guidance allowed
purchasers to aggregate credit-impaired loans
acquired in the same fiscal quarter into one or
more pools, provided that the loans had common
risk characteristics (e.g., product type, LTV
ratios, FICO scores, past due status, geographic
location). A pool was then accounted for as a
single asset with a single composite interest
rate and an aggregate expectation of cash flows.
PD: Probability of default
PDCF: Primary Dealer Credit Facility
PPP: Paycheck Protection Program
PPPL Facility: Paycheck Protection Program
Lending Facility
PRA: Prudential Regulation Authority
Pre-provision profit/(loss): Represents total
net revenue less noninterest expense. The Firm
believes that this financial measure is useful
in assessing the ability of a lending
institution to generate income in excess of its
provision for credit losses.
Pretax margin: Represents income before income
tax expense divided by total net revenue, which
is, in management’s view, a comprehensive
measure of pretax performance derived by
measuring earnings after all costs are taken
into consideration. It is one basis upon which
management evaluates the performance of AWM
against the performance of their respective
competitors.
Principal transactions revenue: Principal
transactions revenue is driven by many factors,
including:
• the bid-offer spread, which is the difference
between the price at which a market participant
is willing and able to
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 309 
 Glossary of Terms and Acronyms 
sell an instrument to the Firm and the price at
which another market participant is willing and
able to buy it from the Firm, and vice versa;
and
• realized and unrealized gains and losses on
financial instruments and commodities
transactions, including those accounted for
under the fair value option, primarily used in
client-driven market-making activities, and on
private equity investments.
– Realized gains and losses result from the sale
of instruments, closing out or termination of
transactions, or interim cash payments.
– Unrealized gains and losses result from
changes in valuation.
In connection with its client-driven market-
making activities, the Firm transacts in debt
and equity instruments, derivatives and
commodities, including physical commodities
inventories and financial instruments that
reference commodities.
Principal transactions revenue also includes
realized and unrealized gains and losses related
to:
• derivatives designated in qualifying hedge
accounting relationships, primarily fair value
hedges of commodity and foreign exchange risk;
• derivatives used for specific risk management
purposes, primarily to mitigate credit risk and
foreign exchange risk.
PSUs: Performance share units
REIT: “Real estate investment trust”: A special
purpose investment vehicle that provides
investors with the ability to participate
directly in the ownership or financing of real-
estate related assets by pooling their capital
to purchase and manage income property (i.e.,
equity REIT) and/or mortgage loans (i.e.,
mortgage REIT). REITs can be publicly or
privately held and they also qualify for certain
favorable tax considerations.
Regulatory VaR: Daily aggregated VaR calculated
in accordance with regulatory rules.
REO: Real estate owned
Reported basis: Financial statements prepared
under U.S. GAAP, which excludes the impact of
taxable-equivalent adjustments.
Retained loans: Loans that are held-for-
investment (i.e., excludes loans held-for-sale
and loans at fair value).
Revenue wallet: Proportion of fee revenue based
on estimates of investment banking fees
generated across the industry (i.e., the revenue
wallet) from investment banking transactions in
M&A, equity and debt underwriting, and loan
syndications. Source: Dealogic, a third-party
provider of investment banking competitive
analysis and volume-based league tables for the
above noted industry products.
RHS: Rural Housing Service of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture
Risk-rated portfolio: Credit loss estimates are
based on estimates of the probability of default
(“PD”) and loss severity given a default. The
probability of default is the likelihood that a
borrower will default on its obligation; the
loss given default (“LGD”) is the estimated loss
on the loan that would be realized upon the
default and takes into consideration collateral
and structural support for each credit facility.
ROA: Return on assets
ROE: Return on equity
ROTCE: Return on tangible common equity
ROU assets: Right-of-use assets
RSU(s): Restricted stock units
RWA: “Risk-weighted assets” : Basel III
establishes two comprehensive approaches for
calculating RWA (a Standardized approach and an
Advanced approach) which include capital
requirements for credit risk, market risk, and
in the case of Basel III Advanced, also
operational risk. Key differences in the
calculation of credit risk RWA between the
Standardized and Advanced approaches are that
for Basel III Advanced, credit risk RWA is based
on risk-sensitive approaches which largely rely
on the use of internal credit models and
parameters, whereas for Basel III Standardized,
credit risk RWA is generally based on
supervisory risk-weightings which vary primarily
by counterparty type and asset class. Market
risk RWA is calculated on a generally consistent
basis between Basel III Standardized and Basel
III Advanced.
S&P: Standard and Poor’s 500 Index
SAR(s): Stock appreciation rights
SCB: Stress Capital Buffer
Scored portfolios: Consumer loan portfolios that
predominantly include residential real estate
loans, credit card loans, auto loans to
individuals and certain small business loans.
SEC: Securities and Exchange Commission
Securities financing agreements: Include resale,
repurchase, securities borrowed and securities
loaned agreements
Seed capital: Initial JPMorgan capital invested
in products, such as mutual funds, with the
intention of ensuring the fund is of sufficient
size to represent a viable offering to clients,
enabling pricing of its shares, and allowing the
manager to develop a track record. After these
goals are achieved, the intent is to remove the
Firm’s capital from the investment.
Shelf securities: Securities registered with the
SEC under a shelf registration statement that
have not been issued, offered or sold. These
securities are not included in league tables
until they have actually been issued.
Single-name: Single reference-entities
 310 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 
 Glossary of Terms and Acronyms 
SLR: Supplementary leverage ratio
SMBS: Stripped mortgage-backed securities
SOFR: Secured Overnight Financing Rate
SPEs: Special purpose entities
Structural interest rate risk: Represents
interest rate risk of the non-trading assets and
liabilities of the Firm.
Structured notes: Structured notes are financial
instruments whose cash flows are linked to the
movement in one or more indexes, interest rates,
foreign exchange rates, commodities prices,
prepayment rates, or other market variables. The
notes typically contain embedded (but not
separable or detachable) derivatives.
Contractual cash flows for principal, interest,
or both can vary in amount and timing throughout
the life of the note based on non-traditional
indexes or non-traditional uses of traditional
interest rates or indexes.
Taxable-equivalent basis: In presenting results
on a managed basis, the total net revenue for
each of the business segments and the Firm is
presented on a tax-equivalent basis.
Accordingly, revenue from investments that
receive tax credits and tax-exempt securities is
presented in managed basis results on a level
comparable to taxable investments and
securities; the corresponding income tax impact
related to tax-exempt items is recorded within
income tax expense.
TBVPS: Tangible book value per share
TCE: Tangible common equity
TDR: “Troubled debt restructuring” is deemed to
occur when the Firm modifies the original terms
of a loan agreement by granting a concession to
a borrower that is experiencing financial
difficulty. Loans with short-term and other
insignificant modifications that are not
considered concessions are not TDRs.
TLAC: Total loss-absorbing capacity
U.K. : United Kingdom
Unaudited: Financial statements and information
that have not been subjected to auditing
procedures sufficient to permit an independent
certified public accountant to express an
opinion.
U.S.: United States of America
U.S. government agencies : U.S. government
agencies include, but are not limited to,
agencies such as Ginnie Mae and FHA, and do not
include Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac which are
U.S. government-sponsored enterprises (“U.S.
GSEs”). In general, obligations of U.S.
government agencies are fully and explicitly
guaranteed as to the timely payment of principal
and interest by the full faith and credit of the
U.S. government in the event of a default.
U.S. GAAP: Accounting principles generally
accepted in the U.S.
U.S. GSE(s) : “U.S. government-sponsored
enterprises” are quasi-governmental, privately-
held entities established or chartered by the
U.S. government to serve public purposes as
specified by the U.S. Congress to improve the
flow of credit to specific sectors of the
economy and provide certain essential services
to the public. U.S. GSEs include Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, but do not include Ginnie Mae or
FHA. U.S. GSE obligations are not explicitly
guaranteed as to the timely payment of principal
and interest by the full faith and credit of the
U.S. government.
U.S. LCR: Liquidity coverage ratio under the
final U.S. rule.
U.S. Treasury: U.S. Department of the Treasury
VA: U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
VaR: “Value-at-risk” is a measure of the dollar
amount of potential loss from adverse market
moves in an ordinary market environment.
VCG: Valuation Control Group
VGF: Valuation Governance Forum
VIEs: Variable interest entities
Warehouse loans: Consist of prime mortgages
originated with the intent to sell that are
accounted for at fair value and classified as
loans.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co./2020 Form 10-K 311 
 Investment securities portfolio 
Refer to Note 10 for information regarding the investment securities portfolio as of December 31,
2020 and 2019, and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
 2018 
 (Unaudited)December 31, (in millions) Amortized Fair 
 Available-for-sale securities cost value 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Mortgage-backed securities: U.S. GSEs $ 69,026 $ 68,646 
 and government agencies 
 U.S. Treasury and government agencies 55,771 56,059 
 All other AFS securities 103,972 105,689 
 Total available-for-sale securities $ 228,769 $ 230,394 
 Held-to-maturity securities 
 Mortgage-backed securities: U.S. GSEs 26,610 26,544 
 and government agencies 
 All other HTM securities 4,824 4,914 
 Total held-to-maturity securities $ 31,434 $ 31,458 
 Total investment securities $ 260,203 $ 261,852 
 312 
 Loan portfolio 
Effective January 1, 2020, the Firm adopted the CECL accounting guidance. The adoption resulted in a
change in the accounting for PCI loans, which are considered PCD loans under CECL. In conjunction
with the adoption of CECL, the Firm reclassified risk-rated loans and lending-related commitments
from the consumer, excluding credit card portfolio segment to the wholesale portfolio segment, to
align with the methodology applied when determining the allowance. Prior-period amounts have been
revised to conform with the current presentation. Refer to Note 1 for further information.
Additionally, in the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected
lending-related positions from trading assets to loans. Prior-period amounts have been revised to
conform with the current presentation.
The table below presents loans by portfolio segment and loan class that are presented in Note 12.
 (Unau… 
 Decem… 
 31, 
 (in 
 milli… 
 U.S. 
 consu… 
 exclu… 
 credit 
 card 
 loans 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Resid… 
 real $ 241,578 $ 266,135 $ 296,677 $ 291,054 $ 281,7… 
 estate 
 Auto 
 and 76,825 51,682 52,324 55,296 63,380 
 other 
 Total 
 U.S. 
 consu… 
 exclu… 318,403 317,817 349,001 346,350 345,1… 
 credit 
 card 
 loans 
 Non-U… 
 consu… 
 exclu… 
 credit 
 card 
 loans 
 Resid… 
 real 176 — — 836 1,976 
 estate 
 Auto 
 and — — — — — 
 other 
 Total 
 Non-U… 
 consu… 
 exclu… 176 — — 836 1,976 
 credit 
 card 
 loans 
 Total 
 consu… 
 exclu… 
 credit 
 card 
 loans 
 Resid… 
 real 241,754 266,135 296,677 291,890 283,7… 
 estate 
 Auto 
 and 76,825 51,682 52,324 55,296 63,380 
 other 
 Total 
 consu… 
 exclu… 318,579 317,817 349,001 347,186 347,1… 
 credit 
 card 
 loans 
 Credit 
 card 
 Loans 
 U.S. 
 credit 144,103 168,787 156,312 149,107 141,4… 
 card 
 loans 
 Non-U… 
 credit 113 137 320 404 369 
 card 
 loans 
 Total 
 credit 144,216 168,924 156,632 149,511 141,8… 
 card 
 loans 
 Total 
 consu… 462,795 486,741 505,633 496,697 488,9… 
 loans 
 U.S. 
 whole… 
 loans 
 Secur… 
 by 124,887 126,735 121,169 120,078 112,1… 
 real 
 estate 
 Comme… 
 and 112,911 115,389 138,374 115,537 110,5… 
 indus… 
 Other 185,945 154,633 136,609 120,608 111,5… 
 Total 
 U.S. 423,743 396,757 396,152 356,223 334,1… 
 whole… 
 loans 
 Non-U… 
 whole… 
 loans 
 Secur… 
 by 3,090 2,837 2,709 2,625 2,905 
 real 
 estate 
 Comme… 
 and 44,076 38,214 37,035 36,438 35,673 
 indus… 
 Other 79,149 73,071 74,231 67,446 61,109 
 Total 
 non-U… 126,315 114,122 113,975 106,509 99,687 
 whole… 
 loans 
 Total 
 whole… 
 loans 
 Secur… 
 by 127,977 129,572 123,878 122,703 115,0… 
 real 
 estate 
 Comme… 
 and 156,987 153,603 175,409 151,975 146,2… 
 indus… 
 Other 265,094 227,704 210,840 188,054 172,6… 
 Total 
 whole… 550,058 510,879 510,127 462,732 433,8… 
 loans 
 Total $ 1,012,… $ 997,620 $ 1,015,… $ 959,429 $ 922,8… 
 loans… 
 Memo: 
 Loans $ 7,873 $ 7,064 $ 11,988 $ 3,351 $ 2,628 
 held-… 
 Loans 
 at 44,474 44,955 34,357 31,240 30,296 
 fair 
 value 
 Total 
 loans 
 held-… 
 and $ 52,347 $ 52,019 $ 46,345 $ 34,591 $ 32,924 
 loans 
 at 
 fair 
 value 
(a) Loans (other than those for which the fair value option has been elected) are presented net of
unamortized discounts and premiums and net deferred loan fees or costs. These amounts were not
material as of December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016.
 313 
Maturities and sensitivity to changes in interest rates
The table below sets forth wholesale loan maturities and the distribution between fixed and floating
interest rates based on the stated terms of the loan agreements. The table below also presents loans
by loan class that are presented in Note 12. The table does not include the impact of derivative
instruments.
 (Unaudited) 
 December 31, 
 2020 
 (in millions) Within 1-5 After 5 
 U.S. 1 year(a) years years Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Secured by real $ 4,847 $ 25,575 $ 94,465 $ 124,887 
 estate 
 Commercial and 35,318 72,084 5,509 112,911 
 industrial 
 Other 81,462 73,964 30,519 185,945 
 Total U.S. 121,627 171,623 130,493 423,743 
 Non-U.S. 
 Secured by real 907 1,797 386 3,090 
 estate 
 Commercial and 13,307 26,460 4,309 44,076 
 industrial 
 Other 55,249 20,142 3,758 79,149 
 Total non-U.S. 69,463 48,399 8,453 126,315 
 Total wholesale $ 191,090 $ 220,022 $ 138,946 $ 550,058 
 loans 
 Loans at fixed $ 36,693 $ 31,548 
 interest rates 
 Loans at 
 variable 183,329 107,398 
 interest rates 
 Total wholesale $ 220,022 $ 138,946 
 loans 
(a) Includes demand loans and overdrafts.
 Risk elements 
The following tables set forth nonperforming assets, contractually past-due assets, and accruing
restructured loans by portfolio segment and loan class that are presented in Note 12.
 (Unau… 
 Decem… 
 31, 
 (in 
 milli… 
 Nonpe… 
 assets 
 U.S. 
 nonac… 
 loans: 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consu… 
 exclu… 
 credit $ 6,467 $ 3,366 $ 3,853 $ 4,463 $ 4,662 
 card 
 loans 
 Credit 
 card NA NA NA NA NA 
 loans 
 Total 
 U.S. 
 nonac… 6,467 3,366 3,853 4,463 4,662 
 consu… 
 loans 
 Whole… 
 Secur… 
 by 966 267 483 251 253 
 real 
 estate 
 Comme… 
 and 1,249 759 700 887 1,487 
 indus… 
 Other 897 33 35 126 127 
 Total 
 U.S. 
 whole… 3,112 1,059 1,218 1,264 1,867 
 nonac… 
 loans 
 Total 
 U.S. 9,579 4,425 5,071 5,727 6,529 
 nonac… 
 loans 
 Non-U… 
 nonac… 
 loans: 
 Consu… 
 exclu… 
 credit — — — — — 
 card 
 loans 
 Credit 
 card NA NA NA NA NA 
 loans 
 Total 
 non-U… 
 nonac… — — — — — 
 consu… 
 loans 
 Whole… 
 Secur… 
 by 18 — 67 81 35 
 real 
 estate 
 Comme… 
 and 856 209 395 807 459 
 indus… 
 Other 120 3 9 21 79 
 Total 
 non-U… 
 whole… 994 212 471 909 573 
 nonac… 
 loans 
 Total 
 non-U… 994 212 471 909 573 
 nonac… 
 loans 
 Total 
 nonac… 10,573 4,637 5,542 6,636 7,102 
 loans 
 Deriv… 56 30 60 130 223 
 recei… 
 Assets 
 acqui… 
 in 277 387 299 353 429 
 loan 
 satis… 
 Nonpe… $ 10,906 $ 5,054 $ 5,901 $ 7,119 $ 7,754 
 assets 
 Memo: 
 Loans $ 284 $ 7 $ — $ — $ 162 
 held-… 
 Loans 
 at 1,507 647 931 693 219 
 fair 
 value 
 Total 
 loans 
 held-… 
 and $ 1,791 $ 654 $ 931 $ 693 $ 381 
 loans 
 at 
 fair 
 value 
 314 
 (Unaud… 
 Decemb… 
 31, (in 
 millio… 
 Contra… 
 past-d… 
 loans(… 
 U.S. 
 loans: 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consum… 
 exclud… 
 credit $ — $ — $ — $ — $ — 
 card 
 loans(… 
 Credit 
 card 1,317 1,605 1,442 1,378 1,143 
 loans 
 Total 
 U.S. 1,317 1,605 1,442 1,378 1,143 
 consum… 
 loans 
 Wholes… 
 Secured 
 by real 15 1 11 10 9 
 estate 
 Commer… 
 and 20 36 166 67 90 
 indust… 
 Other 19 5 7 62 24 
 Total 
 U.S. 54 42 184 139 123 
 wholes… 
 loans 
 Total 
 U.S. 1,371 1,647 1,626 1,517 1,266 
 loans 
 Non-U.… 
 loans: 
 Consum… 
 exclud… 
 credit — — — — — 
 card 
 loans 
 Credit 
 card 2 2 3 1 2 
 loans 
 Total 
 non-U.… 2 2 3 1 2 
 consum… 
 loans 
 Wholes… 
 Secured 
 by real — — — — — 
 estate 
 Commer… 
 and — 1 2 1 9 
 indust… 
 Other 3 — 2 1 — 
 Total 
 non-U.… 3 1 4 2 9 
 wholes… 
 loans 
 Total 
 non-U.… 5 3 7 3 11 
 loans 
 Total 
 contra… 
 past $ 1,376 $ 1,650 $ 1,633 $ 1,520 $ 1,277 
 due 
 loans 
(a) Represents accruing loans past-due 90 days or more as to principal and interest, which are not
characterized as nonaccrual loans. Prior to the adoption of CECL, excluded PCI loans which were
accounted for on a pool basis. Since each pool was accounted for as a single asset with a single
composite interest rate and an aggregate expectation of cash flows, the past-due status of the pools,
or that of individual loans within the pools, was not meaningful. The Firm recognized interest income
on each pool of loans as each of the pools was performing.
(b) At December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, excluded mortgage loans 90 or more days past due
and insured by U.S. government agencies of $364 million, $193 million, $1.6 billion, $2.7 billion and
$2.7 billion, respectively. At December 31, 2016, student loans insured by U.S. government agencies
under the Federal Family Education Loan Program of $263 million were also excluded prior to sale of
the student loan portfolio in 2017. These amounts have been excluded from nonaccrual loans based upon
the government guarantee.
 (Unaud… 
 Decemb… 
 31, (in 
 millio… 
 Accrui… 
 restru… 
 loans(… 
 U.S.: 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consum… 
 exclud… 
 credit $ 3,007 $ 3,600 $ 4,171 $ 4,972 $ 5,528 
 card 
 loans 
 Credit 
 card 1,375 1,452 1,319 1,215 1,240 
 loans(… 
 Total 
 U.S. 4,382 5,052 5,490 6,187 6,768 
 consum… 
 loans 
 Wholes… 
 Secured 
 by real 16 14 9 6 18 
 estate 
 Commer… 
 and 202 34 59 129 64 
 indust… 
 Other 61 2 4 2 — 
 Total 
 U.S. 279 50 72 137 82 
 wholes… 
 loans 
 Total 4,661 5,102 5,562 6,324 6,850 
 U.S. 
 Non-U.… 
 Consum… 
 exclud… 
 credit — — — — — 
 card 
 loans 
 Credit 
 card — — — — — 
 loans(… 
 Total 
 non-U.… — — — — — 
 consum… 
 loans 
 Wholes… 
 Secured 
 by real — 30 — — — 
 estate 
 Commer… 
 and 75 2 45 21 17 
 indust… 
 Other 4 3 — — — 
 Total 
 non-U.… 79 35 45 21 17 
 wholes… 
 loans 
 Total 79 35 45 21 17 
 non-U.… 
 Total 
 accrui… $ 4,740 $ 5,137 $ 5,607 $ 6,345 $ 6,867 
 restru… 
 notes 
(a) Represents performing loans modified in TDRs in which an economic concession was granted by the
Firm and the borrower has demonstrated its ability to repay the loans according to the terms of the
restructuring. As defined in U.S. GAAP, concessions include the reduction of interest rates or the
deferral of interest or principal payments, resulting from deterioration in the borrowers’ financial
condition. Excludes nonaccrual assets and contractually past-due assets, which are included in the
sections above.
(b) Includes credit card loans that have been modified in a TDR.
Refer to Credit and Investment Risk Management on pages 110–134, and Note 12 for a discussion of
nonaccrual loans, past-due loan accounting policies, and accruing restructured loans.
 315 
Impact of nonaccrual loans and accruing restructured loans on interest income
The negative impact on interest income from nonaccrual loans represents the difference between the
amount of interest income that would have been recorded on such nonaccrual loans according to their
original contractual terms had they been performing and the amount of interest that actually was
recognized on a cash basis. The negative impact on interest income from accruing restructured loans
represents the difference between the amount of interest income that would have been recorded on such
loans according to their original contractual terms and the amount of interest that actually was
recognized under the modified terms. The following table sets forth this data for the years
specified. The change in forgone interest income from 2018 through 2020 was primarily driven by the
change in the levels of nonaccrual loans.
 (Unaudited) 
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Nonaccrual loans 
 U.S.: 
 Consumer, excluding credit card: 
 Gross amount of interest that would have $ 330 $ 242 $ 296 
 been recorded at the original terms 
 Interest that was recognized in income -174 -160 -171 
 Total U.S. consumer, excluding credit 156 82 125 
 card 
 Credit card: 
 Gross amount of interest that would have NA NA NA 
 been recorded at the original terms 
 Interest that was recognized in income NA NA NA 
 Total U.S. credit card NA NA NA 
 Total U.S. consumer 156 82 125 
 Wholesale: 
 Gross amount of interest that would have 104 77 73 
 been recorded at the original terms 
 Interest that was recognized in income -60 -40 -32 
 Total U.S. wholesale 44 37 41 
 Negative impact—U.S. 200 119 166 
 Non-U.S.: 
 Consumer, excluding credit card: 
 Gross amount of interest that would have — — — 
 been recorded at the original terms 
 Interest that was recognized in income — — — 
 Total non-U.S. consumer, excluding — — — 
 credit card 
 Credit card: 
 Gross amount of interest that would have NA NA NA 
 been recorded at the original terms 
 Interest that was recognized in income NA NA NA 
 Total non-U.S. credit card NA NA NA 
 Total non-U.S. consumer — — — 
 Wholesale: 
 Gross amount of interest that would have 59 12 13 
 been recorded at the original terms 
 Interest that was recognized in income -23 -5 -3 
 Total non-U.S. wholesale 36 7 10 
 Negative impact—non-U.S. 36 7 10 
 Total negative impact on interest income $ 236 $ 126 $ 176 
 316 
 (Unaudited) 
 Year ended December 31, (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Accruing restructured loans 
 U.S.: 
 Consumer, excluding credit card: 
 Gross amount of interest that would have $ 241 $ 279 $ 326 
 been recorded at the original terms 
 Interest that was recognized in income -151 -192 -215 
 Total U.S. consumer, excluding credit 90 87 111 
 card 
 Credit card: 
 Gross amount of interest that would have 255 265 227 
 been recorded at the original terms 
 Interest that was recognized in income -69 -72 -65 
 Total U.S. credit card 186 193 162 
 Total U.S. consumer 276 280 273 
 Wholesale: 
 Gross amount of interest that would have 3 5 7 
 been recorded at the original terms 
 Interest that was recognized in income -2 -3 -6 
 Total U.S. wholesale 1 2 1 
 Negative impact — U.S. 277 282 274 
 Non-U.S.: 
 Consumer, excluding credit card: 
 Gross amount of interest that would have — — — 
 been recorded at the original terms 
 Interest that was recognized in income — — — 
 Total non-U.S. consumer, excluding — — — 
 credit card 
 Credit card: 
 Gross amount of interest that would have — — — 
 been recorded at the original terms 
 Interest that was recognized in income — — — 
 Total non-U.S. credit card — — — 
 Total non-U.S. consumer — — — 
 Wholesale: 
 Gross amount of interest that would have — — — 
 been recorded at the original terms 
 Interest that was recognized in income — — — 
 Total non-U.S. wholesale — — — 
 Negative impact — non-U.S. — — — 
 Total negative impact on interest income $ 277 $ 282 $ 274 
 317 
 Cross-border outstandings 
Cross-border disclosure is based on the FFIEC
guidelines governing the determination of cross-
border risk.
The reporting of country exposure under the
FFIEC bank regulatory requirements provides
information on the distribution, by country and
sector, of claims on, and liabilities to, U.S.
and foreign residents held by U.S. banks and
bank holding companies and is used by the
regulatory agencies to determine the presence of
credit and related
risks, including transfer and country risk.
Country location under the FFIEC bank regulatory
reporting is based on where the entity or
counterparty is legally established.
JPMorgan Chase’s total cross-border exposures
may fluct uate from period to period due to
client activity and market flows. Refer to
Country Risk Management on pages 143-144 for a
further discussion of JPMorgan Chase’s country
risk exposure.
The following table lists all countries in which
JPMorgan Chase’s cross-border outstandings
exceed 0.75% of consolidated assets as of the
dates specified.
 Cro… 
 out… 
 exc… 
 0.7… 
 of 
 tot… 
 ass… Net 
 (Un… local Total 
 (in Dece… coun… cros… Total 
 mil… 31, Gove… Banks Othe… asse… outs… Comm… expo… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Ger… 2020 $ 6,165 $ 842 $ 23,6… $ 55,8… $ 86,5… $ 73,7… $ 160,… 
 2019 9,757 4,175 8,709 12,1… 34,7… 54,8… 89,6… 
 2018 12,7… 7,769 15,3… 30,0… 66,0… 67,9… 133,… 
 Cay… 2020 $ 22 $ 329 $ 123,… $ 32 $ 124,… $ 85,8… $ 209,… 
 Isl… 
 2019 15 367 89,1… — 89,5… 114,… 203,… 
 2018 1 308 105,… 20 106,… 45,0… 151,… 
 Jap… 2020 $ 61 $ 11,2… $ 3,739 $ 55,2… $ 70,2… $ 31,3… $ 101,… 
 2019 191 4,863 3,495 45,6… 54,2… 42,0… 96,2… 
 2018 282 9,803 4,167 41,9… 56,2… 51,9… 108,… 
 Fra… 2020 $ 10,5… $ 7,019 $ 19,6… $ 2,476 $ 39,7… $ 114,… $ 154,… 
 2019 9,445 5,294 12,7… 2,697 30,1… 107,… 137,… 
 2018 12,5… 3,499 21,5… 2,771 40,3… 105,… 146,… 
 Ita… 2020 $ 10,6… $ 4,169 $ 5,174 $ 1,052 $ 21,0… $ 49,8… $ 70,8… 
 2019 10,5… 2,192 6,095 881 19,7… 49,4… 69,1… 
 2018 9,401 4,098 5,145 1,375 20,0… 61,3… 81,3… 
 Ire… 2020 $ 125 $ 301 $ 15,6… $ — $ 16,1… $ 6,460 $ 22,5… 
 2019 381 319 18,0… — 18,7… 9,520 28,2… 
 2018 185 45 19,4… — 19,6… 5,585 25,2… 
 Chi… 2020 $ 2,295 $ 8,439 $ 14,9… $ 2,633 $ 28,2… $ 8,827 $ 37,1… 
 Mai… 
 2019 179 5,168 7,207 1,382 13,9… 11,1… 25,0… 
 2018 980 6,728 5,318 1,617 14,6… 14,4… 29,0… 
(a) Consists primarily of non-banking financial institutions.
(b) Outstandings include loans and accrued interest receivable, interest-bearing deposits with banks,
acceptances, resale agreements, other monetary assets, cross-border trading debt and equity
instruments, fair value of foreign exchange and derivative contracts, and local country assets, net
of local country liabilities. The amounts associated with foreign exchange and derivative contracts
are presented after taking into account the impact of legally enforceable master netting agreements.
(c) Commitments include outstanding letters of credit, undrawn commitments to extend credit, and the
gross notional value of credit derivatives where JPMorgan Chase is a protection seller.
 318 
The adoption of the CECL accounting guidance resulted in a change in the accounting for PCI loans,
which are considered PCD loans. In conjunction with the adoption of CECL, the Firm reclassified risk-
rated loans and lending-related commitments from the consumer, excluding credit card portfolio
segment to the wholesale portfolio segment, to align with the methodology applied when determining
the allowance. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform with the current presentation. Refer
to Note 1 for further information.
The following tables summarize the changes in the allowance for loan losses and the allowance for
lending-related commitments, as well as loan loss analysis during the periods indicated. Refer to
Allowance for credit losses on pages 132-133, and Note 13 for a further discussion.
 Allowance 
 for loan 
 losses 
 (Unaudite… 
 Year ended 
 December 
 31, (in 
 millions) 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at 
 beginning $ 13,123 $ 13,445 $ 13,604 $ 13,776 $ 13,555 
 of year 
 Cumulative 
 effect of 
 a change 4,172 NA NA NA NA 
 in 
 accounting 
 principle 
 U.S. 
 charge-of… 
 U.S. 
 consumer, 
 excluding 805 902 977 1,727 1,434 
 credit 
 card 
 U.S. 
 credit 5,077 5,436 5,011 4,521 3,799 
 card 
 Total U.S. 
 consumer 5,882 6,338 5,988 6,248 5,233 
 charge-of… 
 U.S. 
 wholesale: 
 Secured by 
 real 16 53 28 36 43 
 estate 
 Commercial 
 and 530 282 160 102 267 
 Industrial 
 Other 72 27 121 28 16 
 Total U.S. 
 wholesale 618 362 309 166 326 
 charge-of… 
 Total U.S. 6,500 6,700 6,297 6,414 5,559 
 charge-of… 
 Non-U.S. 
 charge-of… 
 Non-U.S. 
 consumer, 
 excluding — — — — — 
 credit 
 card 
 Non-U.S. 
 credit — — — — — 
 card 
 Total 
 non-U.S. — — — — — 
 consumer 
 charge-of… 
 Non-U.S. 
 wholesale: 
 Secured by 
 real — 1 1 2 — 
 estate 
 Commercial 
 and 315 78 51 90 135 
 Industrial 
 Other 21 31 — 6 3 
 Total 
 non-U.S. 336 110 52 98 138 
 wholesale 
 charge-of… 
 Total 
 non-U.S. 336 110 52 98 138 
 charge-of… 
 Total 6,836 6,810 6,349 6,512 5,697 
 charge-of… 
 U.S. 
 recoveries 
 U.S. 
 consumer, 
 excluding -631 -536 -827 -612 -570 
 credit 
 card 
 U.S. 
 credit -791 -588 -493 -398 -357 
 card 
 Total U.S. 
 consumer -1,422 -1,124 -1,320 -1,010 -927 
 recoveries 
 U.S. 
 wholesale: 
 Secured by 
 real -5 -10 -11 -16 -29 
 estate 
 Commercial 
 and -97 -21 -78 -65 -15 
 Industrial 
 Other -22 -18 -38 -17 -9 
 Total U.S. 
 wholesale -124 -49 -127 -98 -53 
 recoveries 
 Total U.S. -1,546 -1,173 -1,447 -1,108 -980 
 recoveries 
 Non-U.S. 
 recoveries 
 Non-U.S. 
 consumer, 
 excluding — — — — — 
 credit 
 card 
 Non-U.S. 
 credit — — — — — 
 card 
 Total 
 non-U.S. — — — — — 
 consumer 
 recoveries 
 Non-U.S. 
 wholesale: 
 Secured by 
 real — — — -1 — 
 estate 
 Commercial 
 and -12 -4 -45 -2 -9 
 Industrial 
 Other -19 -4 -1 -14 -16 
 Total 
 non-U.S. -31 -8 -46 -17 -25 
 wholesale 
 recoveries 
 Total 
 non-U.S. -31 -8 -46 -17 -25 
 recoveries 
 Total -1,577 -1,181 -1,493 -1,125 -1,005 
 recoveries 
 Net 5,259 5,629 4,856 5,387 4,692 
 charge-of… 
 Write-offs 
 of PCI NA 151 187 86 156 
 loans(a) 
 Provision 
 for loan 16,291 5,449 4,885 5,300 5,080 
 losses 
 Other 1 9 -1 1 -11 
 Balance at $ 28,328 $ 13,123 $ 13,445 $ 13,604 $ 13,776 
 year-end 
(a) Prior to the adoption of CECL, write-offs of PCI loans were recorded against the allowance for
loan losses when actual losses for a pool exceeded estimated losses that were recorded as purchase
accounting adjustments at the time of acquisition. A write-off of a PCI loan was recognized when the
underlying loan was removed from a pool.
 319 
Summary of loan and lending-related commitments loss experience
 Allowance for lending-related commitments 
 (Unaudited) 
 Year ended 
 December 31, 
 (in millions) 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at 
 beginning of $ 1,191 $ 1,055 $ 1,068 $ 1,078 $ 786 
 year 
 Cumulative 
 effect of a 
 change in 98 NA NA NA NA 
 accounting 
 principles 
 Provision for 
 lending-related 1,121 136 -14 -10 281 
 commitments 
 Other -1 — 1 — 11 
 Balance at $ 2,409 $ 1,191 $ 1,055 $ 1,068 $ 1,078 
 year-end 
 Loan loss 
 analysis 
 (Unaudited) 
 As of or for the 
 year ended 
 December 31, 
 (in millions, 
 except ratios) 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balances 
 Loans – $ 1,004,597 $ 989,943 $ 977,406 $ 936,618 $ 892,954 
 average(a) 
 Loans – 1,012,853 997,620 1,015,760 959,429 922,831 
 year-end(a) 
 Net charge-offs 5,259 5,629 4,856 5,387 4,692 
 Allowance for 
 loan losses: 
 U.S. $ 27,343 $ 12,303 $ 12,692 $ 12,552 $ 12,738 
 Non-U.S. 985 820 753 1,052 1,038 
 Total allowance $ 28,328 $ 13,123 $ 13,445 $ 13,604 $ 13,776 
 for loan losses 
 Nonaccrual $ 10,573 $ 4,637 $ 5,542 $ 6,636 $ 7,102 
 loans(a) 
 Ratios 
 Net charge-offs 
 to: 
 Loans retained – 0.55 % 0.60 % 0.52 % 0.60 % 0.54 % 
 average 
 Allowance for 18.56 42.89 36.12 39.60 34.06 
 loan losses 
 Allowance for 
 loan losses to: 
 Loans retained – 2.95 1.39 1.39 1.47 1.55 
 year-end(b) 
 Nonaccrual loans 323 329 292 229 205 
 retained 
(a) In the third quarter of 2020, the Firm reclassified certain fair value option elected lending-
related positions from trading assets to loans. Prior-period amounts have been revised to conform
with the current presentation.
(b) For factors which influenced management's judgment in determining the amount of the additions to
the allowance, refer to Critical Accounting Estimates Used by the Firm on pages 152-155 and Note 13.
Refer to Provision for credit losses on page 55 for a more detailed discussion of the 2019 through
2020 provision for credit losses.
 320 
 Deposits 
The following table provides a summary of the average balances and average interest rates of JPMorgan
Chase’s various deposits for the years indicated.
 (Unaudi… 
 Year 
 ended 
 December 
 31, 
 (in 
 million… Average 
 except Average interest 
 interest balances rates 
 rates) 2020 2019 2018 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. 
 offices 
 Noninte… $ 495,722 $ 386,116 $ 391,325 NA NA NA 
 Interes… 
 Demand(… 269,888 195,350 177,403 0.25 % 1.42 % 1.09 % 
 Savings… 739,916 602,728 585,885 0.13 0.46 0.32 
 Time 59,053 52,415 39,498 1.10 2.56 1.94 
 Total 
 interes… 1,068,857 850,493 802,786 0.21 0.81 0.57 
 deposits 
 Total 
 deposits 1,564,579 1,236,609 1,194,111 0.15 0.56 0.38 
 in U.S. 
 offices 
 Non-U.S. 
 offices 
 Noninte… 21,805 21,103 20,099 NA NA NA 
 Interes… 
 Demand 267,545 217,979 210,978 — 0.59 0.45 
 Savings — — — NM NM NM 
 Time 52,822 47,376 31,273 0.13 1.64 1.48 
 Total 
 interes… 320,367 265,355 242,251 0.02 0.78 0.58 
 deposits 
 Total 
 deposits 
 in 342,172 286,458 262,350 0.02 0.72 0.54 
 non-U.S. 
 offices 
 Total $ 1,906,751 $ 1,523,067 $ 1,456,461 0.12 % 0.59 % 0.41 % 
 deposits 
(a) Includes Negotiable Order of Withdrawal (“NOW”) accounts, and certain trust accounts.
(b) Includes Money Market Deposit Accounts (“MMDAs”).
At December 31, 2020, other U.S. time deposits in denominations of $100,000 or more totaled $21.8
billion, substantially all of which mature in three months or less. In addition, the table below
presents the maturities for U.S. time certificates of deposit in denominations of $100,000 or more.
 (Unaudite… 
 By 
 remaining 
 maturity 
 at 
 December Over three Over six 
 31, 2020 months months 
 (in Three months but within but within Over 12 
 millions) or less six months 12 months months Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.S. time 
 certifica… 
 of deposit $ 9,551 $ 5,080 $ 2,108 $ 800 $ 17,539 
 ($100,000 
 or more) 
 321 
 Short-term and other borrowed funds 
The following table provides a summary of JPMorgan Chase’s short-term and other borrowed funds for
the years indicated.
 (Unaudited) 
 As of or for the year ended December 31, (in 
 millions, except rates) 2020 2019 2018 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Federal funds purchased and securities 
 loaned or sold under repurchase 
 agreements: 
 Balance at year-end $ 215,209 $ 183,675 $ 182,320 
 Average daily balance during the year 255,421 227,994 189,282 
 Maximum month-end balance 298,464 251,829 201,340 
 Weighted-average rate at December 31 0.04 % 1.77 % 2.18 % 
 Weighted-average rate during the year 0.41 2.03 1.62 
 Commercial paper: 
 Balance at year-end $ 12,031 $ 14,754 $ 30,059 
 Average daily balance during the year 12,129 22,977 27,834 
 Maximum month-end balance 14,582 30,007 30,470 
 Weighted-average rate at December 31 0.26 % 2.16 % 2.71 % 
 Weighted-average rate during the year 1.12 2.66 2.27 
 Other borrowed funds:(a) 
 Balance at year-end $ 97,393 $ 73,312 $ 101,513 
 Average daily balance during the year 106,887 106,348 108,436 
 Maximum month-end balance 122,860 128,488 125,544 
 Weighted-average rate at December 31 1.00 % 1.85 % 2.23 % 
 Weighted-average rate during the year 1.29 2.05 2.06 
 Short-term beneficial interests:(b) 
 Commercial paper and other borrowed 
 funds: 
 Balance at year-end $ 12,425 $ 11,103 $ 6,527 
 Average daily balance during the year 13,441 12,511 4,756 
 Maximum month-end balance 14,793 16,016 6,527 
 Weighted-average rate at December 31 0.21 % 1.92 % 2.53 % 
 Weighted-average rate during the year 0.71 2.39 2.10 
(a) Includes interest-bearing securities sold but not yet purchased of $64.2 billion, $47.1 billion
and $62.3 billion at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(b) Included on the Consolidated balance sheets in beneficial interests issued by consolidated VIEs.
Federal funds purchased represent overnight funds. Securities loaned or sold under repurchase
agreements generally mature between one and ninety days. Commercial paper generally is issued in
amounts not less than $100,000, and with maturities of 270 days or less. Other borrowed funds consist
of demand notes, term federal funds purchased, and various other borrowings that generally have
maturities of one year or less.
 322 
 Signatures 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the
registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on behalf of the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized.
 JPMorgan Chase & Co. 
 (Registrant) 
 By: /s/ JAMES DIMON 
 (James Dimon 
 Chairman and Chief Executive Officer) 
 February 23, 2021 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacity and on the date
indicated. JPMorgan Chase & Co. does not exercise the power of attorney to sign on behalf of any
Director.
 Capacity Date 
 /s/ JAMES DIMON Director, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
 (Principal Executive Officer) 
 (James Dimon) 
 /s/ LINDA B. BAMMANN Director 
 (Linda B. Bammann) 
 /s/ STEPHEN B. BURKE Director 
 (Stephen B. Burke) 
 /s/ TODD A. COMBS Director 
 (Todd A. Combs) 
 /s/ JAMES S. CROWN Director February 23, 2021 
 (James S. Crown) 
 /s/ TIMOTHY P. FLYNN Director 
 (Timothy P. Flynn) 
 /s/ MELLODY HOBSON Director 
 (Mellody Hobson) 
 /s/ MICHAEL A. NEAL Director 
 (Michael A. Neal) 
 /s/ PHEBE N. NOVAKOVIC Director 
 (Phebe N. Novakovic) 
 /s/ VIRGINIA M. ROMETTY Director 
 (Virginia M. Rometty) 
 /s/ JENNIFER PIEPSZAK Executive Vice President and Chief Financial 
 Officer 
 (Jennifer Piepszak) -Principal Financial Officer 
 /s/ NICOLE GILES Managing Director and Firmwide Controller 
 (Nicole Giles) -Principal Accounting Officer 
 323