╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Item 1.Business.Additional information required by this item is incorporated herein by │
│ reference to Management's Discussion and Analysis (MD&A); and Notes 1 and 2 to our Consolidated │
│ Financial Statements. Unless the context indicates otherwise, the terms the "Company," "P&G," │
│ "we," "our" or "us" as used herein refer to The Procter & Gamble Company (the registrant) and │
│ its subsidiaries.The Procter & Gamble Company is focused on providing branded products of │
│ superior quality and value to improve the lives of the world's consumers, now and for │
│ generations to come. The Company was incorporated in Ohio in 1905, having first been │
│ established as a New Jersey corporation in 1890, and was built from a business founded in │
│ Cincinnati in 1837 by William Procter and James Gamble. Today, our products are sold in more │
│ than 180 countries and territories.Throughout this Form 10-K, we incorporate by reference │
│ information from other documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).The │
│ Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and current reports on │
│ Form 8-K, and amendments thereto, are filed electronically with the SEC. The SEC maintains an │
│ internet site that contains these reports at: www.sec.gov. You can also access these reports │
│ through links from our website at: www.pginvestor.com. P&G includes the website link solely as │
│ a textual reference. The information contained on our website is not incorporated by reference │
│ into this report.Copies of these reports are also available, without charge, by contacting EQ │
│ Shareowner Services, 1100 Centre Pointe Curve, Suite 101, Mendota, MN 55120-4100.Financial │
│ Information about SegmentsInformation about our reportable segments can be found in the MD&A │
│ and Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.Narrative Description of BusinessBusiness │
│ Model. Our business model relies on the continued growth and success of existing brands and │
│ products, as well as the creation of new innovative products and brands. The markets and │
│ industry segments in which we offer our products are highly competitive. Our products are sold │
│ in more than 180 countries and territories through numerous channels as well as │
│ direct-to-consumer. Our growth strategy is to deliver meaningful and noticeable superiority in │
│ all elements of our consumer proposition - product, packaging, brand communication, retail │
│ execution and consumer and customer value equation. We use our research and development and │
│ consumer insights to provide superior products and packaging. We utilize our marketing and │
│ online presence to deliver superior brand messaging to our consumers. We work collaboratively │
│ with our customers to deliver superior retail execution, both in-store and online. In │
│ conjunction with the above elements, we provide superior value to consumers and our retail │
│ customers in each price tier │
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ in which we compete. Productivity improvement is also critical to delivering our objectives of │
│ balanced top and bottom-line growth and value creation.Key Product Categories. Information on │
│ key product categories can be found in the MD&A and Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial │
│ Statements.Key Customers. Our customers include mass merchandisers, e-commerce, grocery stores, │
│ membership club stores, drug stores, department stores, distributors, wholesalers, baby stores, │
│ specialty beauty stores (including airport duty-free stores), high-frequency stores, │
│ pharmacies, electronics stores and professional channels. These customers sell our products to │
│ individual consumers. We also sell direct to consumers. Sales to Walmart Inc. and its │
│ affiliates represent approximately 15% of our total sales in 2020, 2019 and 2018. No other │
│ customer represents more than 10% of our total sales. Our top ten customers accounted for │
│ approximately 38% of our total sales in 2020 and 36% in 2019 and 2018. The nature of our │
│ business does not result in material backlog orders or contracts with the government. We │
│ believe our practices related to working capital items for customers and suppliers are │
│ consistent with the industry segments in which we compete.Sources and Availability of │
│ Materials. Almost all of the raw and packaging materials used by the Company are purchased │
│ from third parties, some of whom are single-source suppliers. We produce certain raw │
│ materials, primarily chemicals, for further use in the manufacturing process. In addition, │
│ fuel, natural gas and derivative products are important commodities consumed in our │
│ manufacturing processes and in the transportation of input materials and finished products to │
│ customers. The prices we pay for materials and other commodities are subject to fluctuation. │
│ When prices for these items change, we may or may not pass the change to our customers. The │
│ Company purchases a substantial variety of other raw and packaging materials, none of which are │
│ material to our business taken as a whole.Trademarks and Patents. We own or have licenses │
│ under patents and registered trademarks, which are used in connection with our activity in all │
│ businesses. Some of these patents or licenses cover significant product formulation and │
│ processes used to manufacture our products. The trademarks are important to the overall │
│ marketing and branding of our products. All major trademarks in each business are registered. │
│ In part, our success can be attributed to the existence and continued protection of these │
│ trademarks, patents and licenses.Competitive Condition. The markets in which our products are │
│ sold are highly competitive. Our products compete against similar products of many large and │
│ small companies, including well-known global competitors. In many of the markets and industry │
│ segments in which we sell our products, we compete against other branded products as well as │
│ retailers' private-label brands. We are well positioned in │
2 The Procter & Gamble Company
the industry segments and markets in which we
operate, often holding a leadership or
significant market share position. We support
our products with advertising, promotions and
other marketing vehicles to build awareness and
trial of our brands and products in conjunction
with our sales force. We believe this
combination provides the most efficient method
of marketing for these types of products.
Product quality, performance, value and
packaging are also important differentiating
factors.
Expenditures for Environmental Compliance .
Expenditures for compliance with federal, state
and local environmental laws and regulations are
fairly consistent from year to year and are not
material to the Company. No material change is
expected in fiscal year 2021.
Employees . As of June 30, 2020, the Company had
approximately 99,000 employees, an increase of
two percent versus the prior year due to
business growth and in-sourcing of certain media
planning and other services. The total number of
employees is an estimate of total Company
employees excluding interns, co-ops, contractors
and employees of joint ventures. The number of
employees includes manufacturing and non-
manufacturing employees.
Item 1A. Risk Factors.
We discuss our expectations regarding future
performance, events and outcomes, such as our
business outlook and objectives in this Form
10-K, as well as in our quarterly and annual
reports, current reports on Form 8-K, press
releases and other written and oral
communications. All statements, except for
historical and present factual information, are
“forward-looking statements” and are based on
financial data and business plans available only
as of the time the statements are made, which
may become outdated or incomplete. We assume no
obligation to update any forward-looking
statements as a result of new information,
future events or other factors, except to the
extent required by law. Forward-looking
statements are inherently uncertain, and
investors must recognize that events could
significantly differ from our expectations.
The following discussion of “risk factors”
identifies significant factors that may
adversely affect our business, operations,
financial position or future financial
performance. This information should be read in
conjunction with Management's Discussion and
Analysis and the Consolidated Financial
Statements and related Notes incorporated in
this report. The following discussion of risks
is not all inclusive, but is designed to
highlight what we believe are important factors
to consider when evaluating our expectations.
These and other factors could cause our future
results to differ from those in the forward-
looking statements and from historical trends,
perhaps materially.
Our business is subject to numerous risks as a
result of our having significant operations and
sales in international markets, including
foreign currency fluctuations, currency exchange
or pricing controls and localized volatility.
We are a global company, with operations in
approximately 70 countries and products sold in
more than 180 countries
and territories around the world. We hold
assets, incur liabilities, generate sales and
pay expenses in a variety of currencies other
than the U.S. dollar, and our operations outside
the U.S. generate more than fifty percent of our
annual net sales. Fluctuations in exchange rates
for foreign currencies have and could continue
to reduce the U.S. dollar value of sales,
earnings and cash flows we receive from non-U.S.
markets, increase our supply costs (as measured
in U.S. dollars) in those markets, negatively
impact our competitiveness in those markets or
otherwise adversely impact our business results
or financial condition. Moreover, discriminatory
or conflicting fiscal or trade policies in
different countries, including changes to
tariffs and existing trade policies and
agreements, could adversely affect our results.
See also the Results of Operations and Cash
Flow, Financial Condition and Liquidity sections
of the MD&A, and the Consolidated Financial
Statements and related Notes.
We also have businesses and maintain local
currency cash balances in a number of countries
with currency exchange, import authorization,
pricing or other controls or restrictions, such
as Nigeria, Algeria, Argentina, Egypt and
Turkey. Our results of operations, financial
condition and cash flows could be adversely
impacted if we are unable to successfully manage
such controls and restrictions, continue
existing business operations and repatriate
earnings from overseas, or if new or increased
tariffs, quotas, exchange or price controls,
trade barriers or similar restrictions are
imposed on our business.
Additionally, our business, operations or
employees have been and could continue to be
adversely affected by political volatility,
labor market disruptions or other crises or
vulnerabilities in individual countries or
regions, including political instability or
upheaval, broad economic instability or
sovereign risk related to a default by or
deterioration in the creditworthiness of local
governments, particularly in emerging markets.
Uncertain economic conditions may adversely
impact demand for our products or cause our
customers and other business partners to suffer
financial hardship, which could adversely impact
our business.
Our business could be negatively impacted by
reduced demand for our products related to one
or more significant local, regional or global
economic disruptions. These disruptions have
included and may in the future include: a slow-
down or recession in the general economy;
reduced market growth rates; tighter credit
markets for our suppliers, vendors or customers;
a significant shift in government policies; the
deterioration of economic relations between
countries or regions, including potential
negative consumer sentiment toward non-local
products or sources; or the inability to conduct
day-to-day transactions through our financial
intermediaries to pay funds to or collect funds
from our customers, vendors and suppliers.
Additionally, these and other economic
conditions may cause our suppliers,
distributors, contractors or other third-party
partners to suffer financial or operational
difficulties that they cannot overcome,
resulting in their inability to provide us with
the
 The Procter & Gamble Company 3
materials and services we need, in which case
our business and results of operations could be
adversely affected. Customers may also suffer
financial hardships due to economic conditions
such that their accounts become uncollectible or
are subject to longer collection cycles. In
addition, if we are unable to generate
sufficient sales, income and cash flow, it could
affect the Company’s ability to achieve expected
share repurchase and dividend payments.
Disruptions in credit markets or changes to our
credit ratings may reduce our access to credit.
A disruption in the credit markets or a
downgrade of our current credit rating could
increase our future borrowing costs and impair
our ability to access capital and credit markets
on terms commercially acceptable to us, which
could adversely affect our liquidity and capital
resources or significantly increase our cost of
capital.
Our business results depend on our ability to
manage disruptions in our global supply chain.
Our ability to meet our customers’ needs and
achieve cost targets depends on our ability to
maintain key manufacturing and supply
arrangements, including execution of supply
chain optimizations and certain sole supplier or
sole manufacturing plant arrangements. The loss
or disruption of such manufacturing and supply
arrangements, including for issues such as labor
disputes, loss or impairment of key
manufacturing sites, discontinuity in our
internal information and data systems, inability
to procure sufficient raw or input materials,
significant changes in trade policy, natural
disasters, increasing severity or frequency of
extreme weather events due to climate change or
otherwise, acts of war or terrorism, disease
outbreaks or other external factors over which
we have no control, have interrupted product
supply and, if not effectively managed and
remedied, could have an adverse impact on our
business, financial condition, results of
operations or cash flows.
Our businesses face cost fluctuations and
pressures that could affect our business
results.
Our costs are subject to fluctuations,
particularly due to changes in the prices of
commodities and raw materials and the costs of
labor, transportation, energy, pension and
healthcare. Therefore, our business results
depend, in part, on our continued ability to
manage these fluctuations through pricing
actions, cost saving projects and sourcing
decisions, while maintaining and improving
margins and market share. Failure to manage
these fluctuations could adversely impact our
results of operations or cash flows.
Our ability to meet our growth targets depends
on successful product, marketing and operations
innovation and successful responses to
competitive innovation and changing consumer
habits .
We are a consumer products company that relies
on continued global demand for our brands and
products. Achieving our business results
depends, in part, on successfully developing,
introducing and marketing new products and on
making significant improvements to our equipment
and manufacturing processes. The success of such
innovation depends on our ability to correctly
anticipate
customer and consumer acceptance and trends, to
obtain, maintain and enforce necessary
intellectual property protections and to avoid
infringing upon the intellectual property rights
of others. We must also successfully respond to
technological advances made by, and intellectual
property rights granted to, competitors. Failure
to continually innovate, improve and respond to
competitive moves and changing consumer habits
could compromise our competitive position and
adversely impact our financial condition,
results of operations or cash flows.
The ability to achieve our business objectives
depends on how well we can compete with our
local and global competitors in new and existing
markets and channels.
The consumer products industry is highly
competitive. Across all of our categories, we
compete against a wide variety of global and
local competitors. As a result, we experience
ongoing competitive pressures in the
environments in which we operate, which may
result in challenges in maintaining profit
margins. To address these challenges, we must be
able to successfully respond to competitive
factors and emerging retail trends, including
pricing, promotional incentives, product
delivery windows and trade terms. In addition,
evolving sales channels and business models may
affect customer and consumer preferences as well
as market dynamics, which, for example, may be
seen in the growing consumer preference for
shopping online, ease of competitive entry into
certain categories, and growth in hard
discounter channels. Failure to successfully
respond to competitive factors and emerging
retail trends, and effectively compete in
growing sales channels and business models,
particularly e-commerce and mobile commerce
applications, could negatively impact our
results of operations or cash flows.
A significant change in customer relationships
or in customer demand for our products could
have a significant impact on our business.
We sell most of our products via retail
customers, which include mass merchandisers,
e-commerce, grocery stores, membership club
stores, drug stores, department stores,
distributors, wholesalers, baby stores,
specialty beauty stores (including airport duty-
free stores), high-frequency stores, pharmacies,
electronics stores and professional channels.
Our success depends on our ability to
successfully manage relationships with our
retail trade customers, which includes our
ability to offer trade terms that are mutually
acceptable and are aligned with our pricing and
profitability targets. Continued concentration
among our retail customers could create
significant cost and margin pressure on our
business, and our business performance could
suffer if we cannot reach agreement with a key
customer on trade terms and principles. Our
business could also be negatively impacted if a
key customer were to significantly reduce the
inventory level of or shelf space allocated to
our products as a result of increased offerings
of other branded manufacturers, private label
brands and generic non-branded products or for
other reasons, significantly tighten product
delivery windows or experience a significant
business disruption.
4 The Procter & Gamble Company
If the reputation of the Company or one or more
of our brands erodes significantly, it could
have a material impact on our financial results.
The Company's reputation, and the reputation of
our brands, form the foundation of our
relationships with key stakeholders and other
constituencies, including consumers, customers
and suppliers. The quality and safety of our
products are critical to our business. Many of
our brands have worldwide recognition and our
financial success directly depends on the
success of our brands. The success of our brands
can suffer if our marketing plans or product
initiatives do not have the desired impact on a
brand's image or its ability to attract
consumers. Our results of operations or cash
flows could also be negatively impacted if one
of our brands suffers substantial harm to its
reputation due to a significant product recall,
product-related litigation, defects or
impurities in our products, product misuse,
changing consumer perceptions of certain
ingredients or environmental impacts,
allegations of product tampering or the
distribution and sale of counterfeit products.
Additionally, negative or inaccurate postings or
comments on social media or networking websites
about the Company or one of its brands could
generate adverse publicity that could damage the
reputation of our brands or the Company. If we
are unable to effectively manage real or
perceived issues, including concerns about
safety, quality, ingredients, efficacy,
environmental impacts or similar matters,
sentiments toward the Company or our products
could be negatively impacted, and our results of
operations or cash flows could suffer. Our
Company also devotes time and resources to
citizenship efforts that are consistent with our
corporate values and are designed to strengthen
our business and protect and preserve our
reputation, including programs driving ethics
and corporate responsibility, strong
communities, diversity and inclusion, gender
equality and environmental sustainability. If
these programs are not executed as planned or
suffer negative publicity, the Company's
reputation and results of operations or cash
flows could be adversely impacted.
We rely on third parties in many aspects of our
business, which creates additional risk.
Due to the scale and scope of our business, we
must rely on relationships with third parties,
including our suppliers, contract manufacturers,
distributors, contractors, commercial banks,
joint venture partners and external business
partners, for certain functions. If we are
unable to effectively manage our third-party
relationships and the agreements under which our
third-party partners operate, our results of
operations and cash flows could be adversely
impacted. Further, failure of these third
parties to meet their obligations to the Company
or substantial disruptions in the relationships
between the Company and these third parties
could adversely impact our operations and
financial results. Additionally, while we have
policies and procedures for managing these
relationships, they inherently involve a lesser
degree of control over business operations,
governance and compliance, thereby potentially
increasing our financial, legal, reputational
and operational risk.
A significant information security or
operational technology incident, including a
cybersecurity breach, or the failure of one or
more key information or operations technology
systems, networks, hardware, processes, and/or
associated sites owned or operated by the
Company or one of its service providers could
have a material adverse impact on our business
or reputation.
We rely extensively on information and
operational technology ("IT/OT") systems,
networks and services, including internet and
intranet sites, data hosting and processing
facilities and technologies, physical security
systems and other hardware, software and
technical applications and platforms, many of
which are managed, hosted, provided and/or used
by third parties or their vendors, to assist in
conducting our business. The various uses of
these IT/OT systems, networks and services
include, but are not limited to:
• ordering and managing materials from
suppliers;
• converting materials to finished products;
• shipping products to customers;
• marketing and selling products to consumers;
• collecting, transferring, storing and/or
processing customer, consumer, employee, vendor,
investor, and other stakeholder information and
personal data, including such data from persons
covered by an expanding landscape of privacy and
data regulations, such as citizens of the
European Union who are covered by the General
Data Protection Regulation (“GDPR”) or residents
of California covered by the California Consumer
Privacy Act ("CCPA");
• summarizing and reporting results of
operations, including financial reporting;
• managing our banking and other cash liquidity
systems and platforms;
• hosting, processing and sharing, as
appropriate, confidential and proprietary
research, business plans and financial
information;
• collaborating via an online and efficient
means of global business communications;
• complying with regulatory, legal and tax
requirements;
• providing data security; and
• handling other processes necessary to manage
our business.
Numerous and evolving information security
threats, including advanced persistent
cybersecurity threats, pose a risk to the
security of our services, systems, networks and
supply chain, as well as to the confidentiality,
availability and integrity of our data and of
our critical business operations. In addition,
because the techniques, tools and tactics used
in cyber-attacks frequently change and may be
difficult to detect for periods of time, we may
face difficulties in anticipating and
implementing adequate preventative measures or
fully mitigating harms after such an attack.
 The Procter & Gamble Company 5
Our IT/OT databases and systems and our third-
party providers’ databases and systems have
been, and will likely continue to be, subject to
advanced computer viruses or other malicious
codes, ransomware, unauthorized access attempts,
denial of service attacks, phishing, social
engineering, hacking and other cyber-attacks.
Such attacks may originate from outside parties,
hackers, criminal organizations or other threat
actors, including nation states. In addition,
insider actors-malicious or otherwise-could
cause technical disruptions and/or confidential
data leakage. We cannot guarantee that our
security efforts or the security efforts of our
third-party providers will prevent material
breaches, operational incidents or other
breakdowns to our or our third-party providers’
IT/OT databases or systems.
If the IT/OT systems, networks or service
providers we rely upon fail to function properly
or cause operational outages or aberrations, or
if we or one of our third-party providers suffer
significant unavailability of key operations, or
inadvertent disclosure of, lack of integrity of,
or loss of our sensitive business or stakeholder
information, due to any number of causes,
ranging from catastrophic events or power
outages to improper data handling, security
incidents or employee error or malfeasance, and
our business continuity plans do not effectively
address these failures on a timely basis, we may
be exposed to reputational, competitive,
operational, financial and business harm as well
as litigation and regulatory action.
Periodically, we also upgrade our IT/OT systems
or adopt new technologies. If such a new system
or technology does not function properly or
otherwise exposes us to increased cybersecurity
breaches and failures, it could affect our
ability to order materials, make and ship
orders, and process payments in addition to
other operational and information integrity and
loss issues. The costs and operational
consequences of responding to the above items
and implementing remediation measures could be
significant and could adversely impact our
results of operations and cash flows.
Changing political conditions could adversely
impact our business and financial results.
Changes in the political conditions in markets
in which we manufacture, sell or distribute our
products may be difficult to predict and may
adversely affect our business and financial
results. For example, the United Kingdom’s
withdrawal from the European Union ("Brexit")
has created uncertainty regarding, among other
things, the U.K.'s future legal and economic
framework and how the U.K. will interact with
other countries, including with respect to the
free movement of goods, services, capital and
people. In addition, results of elections,
referendums or other political processes in
certain markets in which our products are
manufactured, sold or distributed could create
uncertainty regarding how existing governmental
policies, laws and regulations may change,
including with respect to sanctions, taxes,
tariffs, import and export controls and the
general movement of goods, services, capital and
people between countries and other matters. The
potential implications of such uncertainty,
which include, among others, exchange rate
fluctuations, new or increased tariffs, trade
barriers and
market contraction, could adversely affect the
Company’s results of operations and cash flows.
We must successfully manage compliance with laws
and regulations, as well as manage new and
pending legal and regulatory matters in the U.S.
and abroad.
Our business is subject to a wide variety of
laws and regulations across the countries in
which we do business, including those laws and
regulations involving intellectual property,
product liability, product composition or
formulation, packaging content or end-of-life
responsibility, marketing, antitrust, data
protection, environmental (including increasing
focus on the climate, water, and waste impacts
of consumer packaged goods companies' operations
and products), employment, anti-bribery, anti-
corruption, tax, accounting and financial
reporting or other matters. Rapidly changing
laws, regulations, policies and related
interpretations, as well as increased
enforcement actions, create challenges for the
Company, including our compliance and ethics
programs, may alter the environment in which we
do business and may increase the ongoing costs
of compliance, which could adversely impact our
results of operations and cash flows. If we are
unable to continue to meet these challenges and
comply with all laws, regulations, policies and
related interpretations, it could negatively
impact our reputation and our business results.
Failure to successfully manage regulatory and
legal matters and resolve such matters without
significant liability or damage to our
reputation may materially adversely impact our
financial condition, results of operations and
cash flows. Furthermore, if pending legal or
regulatory matters result in fines or costs in
excess of the amounts accrued to date, that may
also materially impact our results of operations
and financial position.
Changes in applicable tax regulations and
resolutions of tax disputes could negatively
affect our financial results.
The Company is subject to taxation in the U.S.
and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Changes in
the various tax laws can and do occur. For
example, the U.S. government enacted
comprehensive tax legislation commonly referred
to as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “U.S. Tax
Act”). The changes included in the U.S. Tax Act
are broad and complex. The ongoing impacts of
the U.S. Tax Act may differ from the estimates
provided elsewhere in the reports we file with
the Securities and Exchange Commission, possibly
materially, due to, among other things, changes
in interpretations, any regulatory guidance or
legislative action to address questions that
arise or any updates or changes to estimates the
Company has used to calculate the impacts.
Additionally, longstanding international tax
norms that determine each country’s jurisdiction
to tax cross-border international trade are
subject to potential evolution. An outgrowth of
the original Base Erosion and Profit Shifting
(“BEPS") project is a project undertaken by the
more than 130 member countries of the expanded
OECD Inclusive Framework focused on "Addressing
the Challenges of the Digitalization of the
Economy." The breadth of this project extends
beyond pure digital businesses and is likely to
6 The Procter & Gamble Company
impact all multinational businesses by
potentially redefining jurisdictional taxation
rights. As this and other tax laws and related
regulations change or evolve, our financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows
could be materially impacted. Given the
unpredictability of these possible changes, it
is very difficult to assess whether the overall
effect of such potential tax changes would be
cumulatively positive or negative, but such
changes could adversely impact our results of
operations and cash flows.
Furthermore, we are subject to regular review
and audit by both foreign and domestic tax
authorities. While we believe our tax positions
will be sustained, the final outcome of tax
audits and related litigation, including
maintaining our intended tax treatment of
divestiture transactions such as the fiscal 2017
Beauty Brands transaction with Coty, may differ
materially from the tax amounts recorded in our
Consolidated Financial Statements, which could
adversely impact our results of operations and
cash flows.
We must successfully manage ongoing acquisition,
joint venture and divestiture activities.
As a company that manages a portfolio of
consumer brands, our ongoing business model
includes a certain level of acquisition, joint
venture and divestiture activities. We must be
able to successfully manage the impacts of these
activities, while at the same time delivering
against our business objectives. Specifically,
our financial results have been, and in the
future could be, adversely impacted by the
dilutive impacts from the loss of earnings
associated with divested brands or dissolution
of joint ventures. Our results of operations and
cash flows have been and, in the future could
also be, impacted by acquisitions or joint
venture activities, if: 1) changes in the cash
flows or other market-based assumptions cause
the value of acquired assets to fall below book
value, or 2) we are not able to deliver the
expected cost and growth synergies associated
with such acquisitions and joint ventures,
including as a result of integration and
collaboration challenges, which could also
result in an impairment of goodwill and
intangible assets.
Our business results depend on our ability to
successfully manage productivity improvements
and ongoing organizational change, including
attracting and retaining key talent as part of
our overall succession planning.
Our financial projections assume certain ongoing
productivity improvements and cost savings,
including staffing adjustments as well as
employee departures. Failure to deliver these
planned productivity improvements and cost
savings, while continuing to invest in business
growth, could adversely impact our results of
operations and cash flows. Additionally,
successfully executing organizational change,
management transitions at leadership levels of
the Company and motivation and retention of key
employees, is critical to our business success.
Factors that may affect our ability to attract
and retain sufficient numbers of qualified
employees include employee morale, our
reputation, competition from other employers and
availability of qualified individuals. Our
success depends on identifying, developing and
retaining key employees to provide uninterrupted
leadership
and direction for our business. This includes
developing and retaining organizational
capabilities in key growth markets where the
depth of skilled or experienced employees may be
limited and competition for these resources is
intense, as well as continuing the development
and execution of robust leadership succession
plans.
We must successfully manage the demand, supply,
and operational challenges associated with the
actual or perceived effects of a disease
outbreak, including epidemics, pandemics, or
similar widespread public health concerns.
Our business may be negatively impacted by the
fear of exposure to or actual effects of a
disease outbreak, epidemic, pandemic, or similar
widespread public health concern, such as travel
restrictions or recommendations or mandates from
governmental authorities to avoid large
gatherings or to self-quarantine as a result of
the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. These
impacts include, but are not limited to:
• Significant reductions in demand or
significant volatility in demand for one or more
of our products, which may be caused by, among
other things: the temporary inability of
consumers to purchase our products due to
illness, quarantine or other travel
restrictions, or financial hardship, shifts in
demand away from one or more of our more
discretionary or higher priced products to lower
priced products, or stockpiling or similar
pantry-loading activity. If prolonged, such
impacts can further increase the difficulty of
business or operations planning and may
adversely impact our results of operations and
cash flows;
• Inability to meet our customers’ needs and
achieve cost targets due to disruptions in our
manufacturing and supply arrangements caused by
constrained workforce capacity or the loss or
disruption of other essential manufacturing and
supply elements such as raw materials or other
finished product components, transportation, or
other manufacturing and distribution capability;
• Failure of third parties on which we rely,
including our suppliers, contract manufacturers,
distributors, contractors, commercial banks,
joint venture partners and external business
partners, to meet their obligations to the
Company, or significant disruptions in their
ability to do so, which may be caused by their
own financial or operational difficulties and
may adversely impact our operations; or
• Significant changes in the political
conditions in markets in which we manufacture,
sell or distribute our products, including
quarantines, import/export restrictions, price
controls, or governmental or regulatory actions,
closures or other restrictions that limit or
close our operating and manufacturing
facilities, restrict our employees’ ability to
travel or perform necessary business functions,
or otherwise prevent our third-party partners,
suppliers, or customers from sufficiently
staffing operations, including operations
necessary for the production, distribution,
sale, and support of our products, which
 The Procter & Gamble Company 7
could adversely impact our results of operations
and cash flows.
Despite our efforts to manage and remedy these
impacts to the Company, their ultimate impact
also depends on factors beyond our knowledge or
control, including the duration and severity of
any such outbreak as well as third-party actions
taken to contain its spread and mitigate its
public health effects.
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments.
None.
Item 2. Properties.
In the U.S., we own and operate 23 manufacturing
sites located in 17 different states. In
addition, we own and operate 84 manufacturing
sites in 37 other countries. Many of the
domestic and international sites manufacture
products for multiple businesses. Beauty
products are manufactured at 24 of these
locations; Grooming products at 19; Health Care
products at 21; Fabric & Home Care products at
38; and Baby, Feminine & Family Care at 36. We
own our Corporate headquarters in Cincinnati,
Ohio. We own or lease our principal regional
general offices in Switzerland, Panama,
Singapore, China and Dubai. We own or lease our
principal regional shared service centers in
Costa Rica, the United Kingdom and the
Philippines. Management believes that the
Company's sites are adequate to support the
business and that the properties and equipment
have been well maintained.
Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
The Company is subject, from time to time, to
certain legal proceedings and claims arising out
of our business, which cover a wide range of
matters, including antitrust and trade
regulation, product liability, advertising,
contracts, environmental issues, patent and
trademark matters, labor and employment matters
and tax. See Note 13 to our Consolidated
Financial Statements for information on certain
legal proceedings for which there are
contingencies.
This item should be read in conjunction with the
Company's Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A for
additional information.
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosure.
Not applicable.
8 The Procter & Gamble Company
 INFORMATION ABOUT OUR EXECUTIVE OFFICERS 
The names, ages and positions held by the Executive Officers of the Company on August 6, 2020, are:
 Name Position Age First Elected to 
 Officer Position 
 David S. Taylor Chairman of the Board, President and 62 2013a 
 Chief Executive Officer 
 Jon R. Moeller Vice Chairman, Chief Operating Officer 56 2009b 
 and Chief Financial Officer 
 Steven D. Bishop Chief Executive Officer - Health Care 56 2016c 
 Gary A. Coombe Chief Executive Officer - Grooming 56 2014d 
 Mary Lynn Ferguson-McHugh Chief Executive Officer - Family Care and 60 2016e 
 P&G Ventures 
 Ma. Fatima D. Francisco Chief Executive Officer - Baby and 52 2018f 
 Feminine Care 
 Shailesh Jejurikar Chief Executive Officer - Fabric and Home 53 2018g 
 Care 
 R. Alexandra Keith Chief Executive Officer - Beauty 52 2017h 
 Carolyn M. Tastad Group President - North America and Chief 59 2014i 
 Sales Officer 
 M. Tracey Grabowski Chief Human Resources Officer 52 2018j 
 Kathleen B. Fish Chief Research, Development and 63 2014 
 Innovation Officer 
 Deborah P. Majoras Chief Legal Officer and Secretary 56 2010 
 Marc S. Pritchard Chief Brand Officer 60 2008 
 Valarie L. Sheppard Controller and Treasurer and Group Vice 56 2005 
 President - Company Transition Leader 
All the Executive Officers named above have been employed by the Company for more than the past five
years.
a Mr. Taylor previously served as Group President - Global Beauty, Grooming & Health Care (February -
October 2015).
b Mr. Moeller previously served as Vice Chairman and Chief Financial Officer (2017 - 2019) and as
Chief Financial Officer (2009 - 2017).
c Mr. Bishop previously served as Group President - Global Oral Care (January - October 2015).
d Mr. Coombe previously served as President - Europe Selling & Market Operations (November 2014 -
February 2018).
e Ms. Ferguson-McHugh previously served as Group President - Global Family Care (2014-2015).
f Ms. Francisco previously served as President - Global Feminine Care (November 2015 - August 2018)
and as Vice President - Brand Franchise Leader, Feminine Care (January - October 2015).
g Mr. Jejurikar previously served as President - Global Fabric Care and Brand-Building Officer Global
Fabric & Home Care (November 2015 - July 2018) and as President - Fabric Care, North America; Brand-
Building Officer Fabric & Home Care New Business Creation (November 2014 - October 2015).
h Ms. Keith previously served as President - Global Skin & Personal Care (November 2014 - June 2017).
i Ms. Tastad previously served as Group President - North America Selling & Market Operations
(January 2015 - May 2019).
j Ms. Grabowski previously served as Vice President - Human Resources, North America Selling and
Market Operations (April 2015 - July 2018).
 The Procter & Gamble Company 9