UNITED STATES 
 SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
 Washington, D.C. 20549 
 FORM 10-K/A 
 (Amendment No. 1) 
(Mark One)
 x ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2024 
 OR 
 ¨ TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 For the transition period fromto 
 Commission File Number: 001-34756 
 Tesla, Inc. 
 (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) 
 Texas 91-2197729 
 (State or other jurisdiction of -I.R.S. Employer 
 incorporation or organization) Identification No. 
 1 Tesla Road 78725 
 Austin, Texas 
 (Address of principal executive offices) -Zip Code 
 ( 512) 516-8177 
 (Registrant’s telephone number, including area code) 
 Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act: 
 Title of each class Trading Symbol(s) Name of each exchange on which registered 
 Common stock TSLA The Nasdaq Global Select Market 
 Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: 
 None 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405
of the Securities Act. Yes x No ¨
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or
15(d) of the Act. Yes ¨ No x
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (“Exchange Act”) during the preceding 12
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)
has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes x No ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data
File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter)
during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit
such files). Yesx No ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant
is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting
company or an emerging growth company.
See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company”
and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act:
 Large accelerated filer x Accelerated filer ¨ 
 Non-accelerated filer ¨ Smaller reporting company ¨ 
 Emerging growth company ¨ 
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check
mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any
new or revised financial accounting
standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant
has filed a report on and attestation to its management’s assessment of the effectiveness of its
internal control over financial
reporting under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public
accounting firm that
prepared or issued its audit report. x
If securities are registered pursuant to Section
12(b) of the Act, indicate by check mark whether the financial statements of the registrant included
in the filing reflect the correction
of an error to previously issued financial statements. ¨
Indicate by check mark whether any of those error
corrections are restatements that required a recovery analysis of incentive-based compensation
received by any of the registrant’s
executive officers during the relevant recovery period pursuant to §240.10D-1(b). ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Exchange Act). Yes ¨ No x
The aggregate market value of voting stock
held by non-affiliates of the registrant, as of June 28, 2024, the last business day of the
registrant’s most recently
completed second fiscal quarter, was $550.17 billion
(based on the closing price for shares of the registrant’s Common Stock as reported by the Nasdaq
Global Select Market on
June 28, 2024). Shares of Common Stock held by each executive officer and director have been excluded
in that such persons may
be deemed to be affiliates. This determination of affiliate status is not necessarily a conclusive
determination for other
purposes.
As of January 22, 2025, there were 3,216,517,037
shares of the registrant’s Common Stock outstanding.
 Auditor Name: PricewaterhouseCoopers Auditor Location: San Jose, Auditor Firm ID: 238 
 LLP California 
 EXPLANATORY NOTE 
On January 30, 2025, Tesla, Inc. (“Tesla,”
the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our”) filed our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
fiscal year ended December 31, 2024 (the “Original Form 10-K”). The Original Form 10-K omitted Part
III, Items
10 (Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance), 11 (Executive Compensation), 12
(Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters), 13
(Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence) and 14 (Principal
Accountant Fees and Services) in reliance on General Instruction G(3) to Form 10-K,
which provides that such information may be either incorporated by reference from the registrant’s
definitive proxy statement or
included in an amendment to Form 10-K, in either case filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (the “SEC”) not
later than 120 days after the end of the fiscal year.
The Board of Directors has not yet established the date of the 2025 annual meeting of shareholders.
When the date is established, the Company will announce it in its filings made with the SEC.
Consequently, we currently expect that our definitive proxy statement for the 2025 annual meeting of
shareholders will be filed later than the 120 thday after the end of the last fiscal year.
Accordingly, this Amendment No. 1 to Form 10-K (this “Amendment”) is being filed solely to:
 · amend Part III, Items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 of the Original Form 10-K to include the 
 information required by such Items; 
 delete the reference on the cover of the Original Form 10-K to the incorporation by reference 
 · of portions of our proxy statement 
 into Part III of the Original Form 10-K; and 
 file new certifications of our principal executive officer and principal financial officer as 
 · exhibits to this Amendment under Item 15 
 of Part IV hereof, pursuant to Rule 12b-15 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as 
 amended (the “Exchange Act”). 
This Amendment does not otherwise change or update
any of the disclosures set forth in the Original Form 10-K and does not otherwise reflect any events
occurring after the filing of
the Original Form 10-K.
 TESLA, INC. 
 AMENDMENT NO. 1 TO ANNUAL REPORT ON FORM 10-K/A 
 FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2024 
 INDEX 
 Page 
 EXPLANATORY NOTE. 
 PART III. 1 
 Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance 1 
 Item 11. Executive Compensation 5 
 Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and 22 
 Management and Related Stockholder Matters 
 Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions and 24 
 Director Independence 
 Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services 25 
 PART IV. 27 
 Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules 27 
 Signatures 42 
 i 
 PART III 
ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Background and Qualifications
The names of the members of Tesla’s Board
of Directors (the “Board”), their respective ages, their positions with Tesla and other biographical
information as of April 30,
2025 are set forth below. Except for Messrs. Elon Musk and Kimbal Musk, who are brothers, there are
no other family relationships
among any of our directors or executive officers.
 Nominati… 
 and 
 Corporate Disclosure Term 
 Chair of Audit Compensat… Governan… Controls of 
 the 
 Name Age Board Committee Committee Committee Committee Office 
 Elon Musk 53 Expires 
 in 2026 
 Robyn 61 X X X X X Expires 
 Denholm in 2026 
 Ira 56 X X Expires 
 Ehrenpre… in 2025 
 Joe 43 X Expires 
 Gebbia in 2025 
 James 52 X X X Expires 
 Murdoch in 2027 
 Kimbal 52 Expires 
 Musk in 2027 
 JB 49 Expires 
 Straubel in 2026 
 Kathleen 67 X X X Expires 
 Wilson-T… in 2025 
Elon Muskis the Technoking of Tesla and has served as our Chief Executive Officer since October 2008
and as a member
of the Board since April 2004. Mr. Musk has also served as Chief Executive Officer, Chief Technology
Officer and Chairman
of Space Exploration Technologies Corporation, a company which develops and launches advanced rockets
and spacecraft
(“SpaceX”), since May 2002, served as Chairman of the Board of SolarCity Corporation, a solar
installation company
(“SolarCity”), from July 2006 until its acquisition by us in November 2016, served as Chief
Technology Officer
of X Corp., a social media company (“X”), since October 2022 and served as the Chief Executive
Officer and Treasurer
of X.AI Corp., an artificial intelligence company (“xAI”), since March 2023. Following the March 2025
merger of
X and xAI, he now serves as the Chief Executive Officer of X.AI Holdings Corp. Mr. Musk is also a
founder of The Boring Company
(“TBC”), an infrastructure company, and Neuralink Corporation, a company focused on developing brain-
machine interfaces.
Mr. Musk is also involved with the Department of Government Efficiency. Prior to SpaceX, Mr. Musk co-
founded PayPal, an
electronic payment system, which was acquired by eBay in October 2002, and Zip2 Corporation, a
provider of Internet enterprise
software and services, which was acquired by Compaq in March 1999. Mr. Musk also served on the board
of directors of
Endeavor Group Holdings, Inc. from April 2021 to June 2022. Mr. Musk holds a B.A. in Physics from the
University
of Pennsylvania and a B.S. in Business from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.
As our Chief Executive Officer, one of our founders
and our largest shareholder, Mr. Musk brings historical knowledge, operational and technical
expertise and continuity to the Board.
Mr. Musk guided Tesla from an early-stage startup, through its IPO in 2010, to transformative growth
into one of the most valuable
companies in the world. Mr. Musk’s leadership and unique vision has played a key role in our mission
to accelerate the world’s
transition to sustainable energy.
Robyn Denholm has been a member of the Board since August 2014 and its Chair since November 2018. In
January 2021, Ms. Denholm joined Blackbird Ventures, a venture capital firm, as an Operating Partner,
where she works with
the founders of later-stage technology companies. In 2024, she transitioned to a role on the Board of
Directors. Ms. Denholm
actively champions the Australian technology sector and was the Inaugural Chair of the Technology
Council of Australia, and
currently serves as a Board Director. She also founded Wollemi Capital Group in 2021, with a mission
to invest in ventures that
deliver a positive impact. The firm’s investment portfolio spans environmental, venture capital and
community focused
investments, and includes majority ownership in two professional basketball teams, the Sydney Kings
and Sydney Flames, and most
recently, the majority ownership of the Women’s National Basketball league in Australia. From January
2017 through
June 2019, Ms. Denholm was with Telstra Corporation Limited, a telecommunications company
(“Telstra”), where
she served as Chief Financial Officer and Head of Strategy from October 2018 through June 2019, and
Chief Operations
Officer from January 2017 to October 2018. Prior to Telstra, from August 2007 to July 2016, Ms.
Denholm was
with Juniper Networks, Inc., a manufacturer of networking equipment, serving in executive roles
including Executive Vice
President, Chief Financial Officer and Chief Operations Officer. Prior to joining Juniper Networks,
Ms. Denholm served in
various executive roles at Sun Microsystems, Inc. from January 1996 to August 2007. Ms. Denholm also
served at
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia for seven years and at Arthur Andersen & Company for five years in
various
finance assignments. Ms. Denholm previously served as a director of ABB Ltd. Ms. Denholm is a Fellow
of the Institute
of Chartered Accountants of Australia/New Zealand, a member of the Australian Institute of Company
Directors, and holds a
Bachelor’s degree in Economics from the University of Sydney, and a Master’s degree in Commerce and a
Doctor of Business
Administration (honoris causa) from the University of New South Wales.
 1 
Ms. Denholm brings nearly 30 years of
executive leadership experience at both NYSE and Nasdaq listed companies, including significant risk
management, financial and accounting
expertise, as well as technology leadership experience. Ms. Denholm has extensive knowledge of both
the automotive and technology
industries, including serving as the Chief Financial Officer and Chief Operations Officer of two
technology companies.
Ira Ehrenpreis has been a member of the Board since May 2007. Mr. Ehrenpreis has been a venture
capitalist since
1996. He is a founder and managing member of DBL Partners, a leading impact investing venture capital
firm formed in 2015. Previously,
he led the Energy Innovation practice at Technology Partners. Mr. Ehrenpreis has served on the board
and Executive Committee, including
as Annual Meeting Chairman, of the National Venture Capital Association (NVCA). Mr. Ehrenpreis
currently serves as the Chairman of
the VCNetwork, the largest and most active California venture capital organization, and as the
President of the Western Association of
Venture Capitalists (WAVC), the oldest venture capital organization in California. Mr. Ehrenpreis is
also deeply involved in the
energy technology sector. He currently serves on the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)
Advisory Council, the University of Texas
at Austin Energy Institute Advisory Board, and the Stanford Precourt Institute for Energy Advisory
Council, and has served on the advisory
boards of many industry groups, including the American Council on Renewable Energy, the Cleantech
Venture Network (Past Chairman of Advisory
Board) and the Stanford Global Climate and Energy Project (GCEP). He was also Chairman of the Clean-
Tech Investor Summit for nine years.
Mr. Ehrenpreis served for years as the Chairman of the Silicon Valley Innovation & Entrepreneurship
Forum (SVIEF) and
on the Advisory Board of the Forum for Women Entrepreneurs (FWE). Mr. Ehrenpreis is an inductee of
the International Green Industry
Hall of Fame. In 2018, the National Venture Capital Association awarded Mr. Ehrenpreis with the
industry’s “Outstanding
Service Award” for career contributions to the venture capital industry. In 2023, the Japan Society
of Northern California honored
Mr. Ehrenpreis with its 2023 Visionary Award for his “Pioneering Leadership in Impact Investing and
the Global Sustainability
Community.” Mr. Ehrenpreis was awarded the 2018 NACD Directorship 100 for his influential leadership
in the boardroom and corporate
governance community. Mr. Ehrenpreis holds a B.A. from the University of California, Los Angeles and
a J.D. and M.B.A. from Stanford
University.
Mr. Ehrenpreis is an acknowledged leader in
the energy, technology, impact and venture capital industries, where he serves on several industry
boards, and brings valuable insights
in corporate governance, strategic growth and shareholder values. Mr. Ehrenpreis’ long tenure on
Tesla’s Board also provides
the Company with stability and experience as it navigates through different challenges.
Joe Gebbiahas been a member of the Board since September 2022. Mr. Gebbia co-founded Airbnb, Inc. in
2008 and
has served on Airbnb’s board of directors since 2009. In 2022, Mr. Gebbia launched Samara, which
produces fully customized,
factory-made homes designed to create rental income, house family, support work from home, or bundled
together, to form new types of housing
communities. Mr. Gebbia received dual degrees in Graphic Design and Industrial Design from the Rhode
Island School of Design, where
he currently serves on the institution’s Board of Trustees. Mr. Gebbia is the Chairman of Airbnb.org,
and also serves on the
Olympic Refuge Foundation and leadership councils for UNHCR, Tent.org and Malala Fund. Mr. Gebbia is
a sought-after speaker on design
and entrepreneurship, and has been named in BusinessWeek’s Top 20 Best Young Tech Entrepreneurs, Inc.
Magazine’s Thirty-under-Thirty,
Fortune’s Forty-under-Forty, and one of Fast Company’s Most Creative People.
Mr. Gebbia has valuable experience derived
from founding and leading a global public company. The Board benefits from his entrepreneurial
background, as well as his experience in
design, innovation, brand development and management of complex regulatory environments.
James Murdoch has been a member of the Board since July 2017. Mr. Murdoch has been the Chief
Executive Officer of Lupa
Systems, a private holding company that he founded, since March 2019. Previously, Mr. Murdoch held a
number of leadership roles
at Twenty-First Century Fox, Inc., a media company (“21CF”), over two decades, including its Chief
Executive Officer
from 2015 to March 2019, its Co-Chief Operating Officer from 2014 to 2015, its Deputy Chief Operating
Officer and Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer, International from 2011 to 2014 and its Chairman and Chief Executive, Europe and
Asia from 2007 to 2011. Previously,
he served as the Chief Executive Officer of Sky plc from 2003 to 2007, and as the Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer of STAR Group Limited,
a subsidiary of 21CF, from 2000 to 2003. Mr. Murdoch formerly served on the board of News Corporation
from 2013 to 2020. In addition,
he has served on the boards of 21CF, Sky plc, GlaxoSmithKline plc and Sotheby’s.
 2 
Mr. Murdoch brings to the Board his decades
of executive and board experience across numerous companies. Tesla’s Board benefits from his
extensive knowledge of international
markets and strategies and experience with the adoption of new technologies.
Kimbal Musk has been a member of the Board since April 2004. Mr. Musk is co-founder and Executive
Chairman of The Kitchen
Restaurant Group, a growing family of businesses with the goal of providing all Americans with access
to real food that was founded in
2004. In 2010, Mr. Musk became the Executive Director of Big Green (formerly The Kitchen Community),
a non-profit organization that
creates learning gardens in schools across the United States. Mr. Musk also co-founded Square Roots,
an urban farming company growing
fresh, local greens in climate-controlled, AI equipped shipping containers, in 2016, and serves as
its Chairman. In 2022, Mr. Musk
founded Nova Sky Stories, with a mission to empower producers and artists to bring art to the skies
with drone light shows, and serves
as its Chief Executive Officer. Previously, Mr. Musk was a co-founder of Zip2 Corporation, a provider
of Internet enterprise software
and services, which was acquired by Compaq in March 1999. In 2006, Mr. Musk became CEO of OneRiot, a
realtime search engine
that was acquired by Walmart in 2011. In addition, Mr. Musk has served on the boards of SpaceX and
Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc.
Mr. Musk holds a B. Comm. in business from Queen’s University and is a graduate of The French
Culinary Institute in New York
City.
Mr. Musk has extensive senior leadership business
experience in the technology, retail and consumer markets, and a robust understanding of mission-
driven ventures. Mr. Musk also provides
valuable expertise based on his experience on the Tesla Board and is able to apply his unique
understanding of the business to the strategy
and execution of the Company.
JB Straubelhas been a member of the Board since May 2023. Mr. Straubel is the Founder and Chief
Executive Officer
of Redwood Materials Inc., a Nevada-based company (“Redwood”) working to drive down the costs and
environmental footprint
of lithium-ion batteries by offering large-scale sources of domestic anode and cathode materials
produced from recycled batteries. Mr. Straubel
also co-founded and served as the Chief Technology Officer of Tesla from May 2005 to July 2019. Mr.
Straubel previously
served on the board of SolarCity and as a member of its Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee
from August 2006 until its
acquisition by Tesla in November 2016. Mr. Straubel has served on the board of directors of
QuantumScape since November 2020.
Mr. Straubel holds a B.S. in Energy Systems Engineering and a M.S. in Engineering, with an emphasis
on energy conversion, from Stanford
University.
As a co-founder and one of the key members of Tesla’s
leadership team for over a decade, Mr. Straubel brings extensive operational experience and in-house
knowledge of Tesla’s technology,
research and development and business management. Mr. Straubel also provides valuable expertise in
the areas of cleantech and batteries.
Kathleen Wilson-Thompson has been a member of the Board since December 2018. Ms. Wilson-Thompson
served as Executive
Vice President and Global Chief Human Resources Officer of Walgreens Boots Alliance, Inc., a global
pharmacy and wellbeing
company, from December 2014 until her retirement in January 2021, and previously served as Senior
Vice President and Chief
Human Resources Officer from January 2010 to December 2014. Prior to Walgreens, Ms. Wilson-Thompson
held various
legal and operational roles at The Kellogg Company, a food manufacturing company, from January 1991
to December 2009,
including most recently as its Senior Vice President, Global Human Resources. Ms. Wilson-Thompson has
served on the board of
directors of Wolverine World Wide, Inc. since May 2021 and McKesson Corporation since January 2022.
She has also
served on the board of directors of Health Care Service Corporation since October 2024. Ms. Wilson-
Thompson previously served on the board of
directors of Ashland Global Holdings Inc. from 2017-2020. Ms. Wilson-Thompson holds an A.B. in
English Literature from the
University of Michigan and a J.D. and L.L.M. (Corporate and Finance Law) from Wayne State University.
Ms. Wilson-Thompson brings extensive executive
and board experience at both consumer-focused and industrial companies. In addition, her expertise in
managing human resources, employment
law and other operations at mature companies with large workforces provides the Board with valuable
insight and advice for workforce management
and relations as Tesla continues to expand.
Additional Information
On October 16, 2018, the U.S. District Court
for the Southern District of New York entered a final judgment approving the terms of a settlement
filed with the court on September 29,
2018, in connection with the actions taken by the SEC relating to Elon Musk’s August 7, 2018 Twitter
post that he was considering
taking Tesla private. On April 26, 2019, this settlement was amended to clarify certain of its terms,
which was subsequently approved
by the Court. Mr. Musk did not admit or deny any of the SEC’s allegations, and there is no
restriction on Mr. Musk’s
ability to serve as an officer or director on the Board.
 3 
Audit Committee 
The Board has four standing committees comprised
solely of independent directors—the Audit Committee, the Compensation Committee, the Nominating and
Corporate Governance Committee
and the Disclosure Controls Committee. The Audit Committee, which has been established in accordance
with Section 3(a)(58) of the
Exchange Act, currently consists of Robyn Denholm, Joe Gebbia and James Murdoch, each of whom is
“independent” as such
term is defined for audit committee members by the listing standards of The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC
(“Nasdaq”). Ms. Denholm
is the chair of the Audit Committee. The Board has determined that Ms. Denholm is an “audit committee
financial expert”
as defined in the rules of the SEC.
Executive Officers
The names of Tesla’s executive officers,
their ages, their positions with Tesla and other biographical information as of April 30, 2025, are
set forth below. Except for
Messrs. Elon Musk and Kimbal Musk, who are brothers, there are no other family relationships among
any of our directors or executive
officers.
 Name Age Position 
 Elon Musk 53 Technoking of Tesla and Chief Executive Officer 
 Vaibhav Taneja 47 Chief Financial Officer 
 Xiaotong (Tom) Zhu 45 Senior Vice President, APAC 
Elon Musk.For a brief biography of Mr. Musk, see “Board of Directors—Background and Qualifications”
under this Item 10 above.
Vaibhav Taneja has served as our Chief Financial Officer since August 2023. Prior to his appointment
as CFO, Mr. Taneja
served as Tesla’s Chief Accounting Officer since March 2019, as Corporate Controller from May 2018,
and as Assistant Corporate
Controller between February 2017 and May 2018. Mr. Taneja served in various finance and accounting
roles at SolarCity from
March 2016. Mr. Taneja holds a Bachelors of Commerce degree from Delhi University and is a Certified
Public Accountant (inactive).
Tom Zhu has served as our Senior Vice President since April 2023, and Senior Vice President, APAC,
since January 2025. Mr. Zhu joined Tesla in April 2014,
and served in various operational roles before being appointed as Vice President, Greater China,
where he led the construction and
operations of Gigafactory Shanghai. Mr. Zhu holds a bachelor’s degree of commerce in information
technology from the
Auckland University of Technology and an M.B.A. from Duke University.
Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports
Under Section 16 of the Exchange Act, Tesla’s
directors, executive officers and any persons holding more than 10% of the Tesla’s common stock are
required to report initial ownership
of the Tesla common stock and any subsequent changes in ownership to the SEC. Specific due dates have
been established by the SEC, and
Tesla is required to disclose in this Amendment any failure to file required ownership reports by
these dates. Based solely upon a review
of forms filed with the SEC and the written representations of such persons for their 2024 fiscal
year transactions, Tesla is aware
of no late Section 16(a) filings.
Code of Business Ethics and Corporate Governance Guidelines
The Board sets high standards for Tesla’s workforce, officers and directors. Tesla is committed to
establishing an operating framework that exercises appropriate oversight of responsibilities at all
levels throughout the Company and managing its affairs in a manner consistent with rigorous
principles of business ethics. Accordingly, Tesla has adopted a Code of Business Ethics, which was
amended in April 2024, and which is applicable to Tesla and its subsidiaries’ directors, officers and
personnel. The Code of Business Ethics sets forth Tesla’s guiding principles, which include thinking
before acting, treating everyone with respect, protecting our information and assets and doing
business with integrity. Tesla has also adopted Corporate Governance Guidelines, which, in
conjunction with our certificate of incorporation, bylaws and charters of the standing committees of
the Board, form the framework for Tesla’s corporate governance. The Code of Business Ethics and the
Corporate Governance Guidelines are each available on Tesla’s website at:
http://ir.tesla.com/corporate. Tesla will disclose on its website any amendment to the Code of
Business Ethics, as well as any waivers of the Code of Business Ethics, that are required to be
disclosed by the rules ofthe SEC or Nasdaq.
 4 
Hedging, Short Sales and Rule 10b5-1 Trading Plans
Tesla has an insider trading policy that is
reasonably designed to promote compliance with insider trading laws, rules and regulations and Nasdaq
listing standards. The
insider trading policy prohibits all of our directors, officers and employees from, among other
things, engaging in short sales,
hedging or similar transactions designed to decrease the risks associated with holding Tesla
securities. This prohibition
encompasses transactions in publicly-traded options, such as puts and calls, and other derivative
securities with respect to Tesla
securities, but not transactions designed to facilitate portfolio diversification, such as broad-
based index options, futures or
baskets. It is also the policy of Tesla to comply with all applicable securities laws when
transacting in its own securities. A copy
of the insider trading policy is filed as Exhibit 19 to the Original Form 10-K.
ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Compensation Discussion and Analysis
The following discussion and analysis of compensation arrangements of our named executive officers
for 2024 should be read together with the compensation tables and related disclosures set forth
below. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on our current
considerations, expectations and determinations regarding future compensation programs. The actual
amount and form of compensation and the compensation programs that we adopt may differ materially
from current or planned programs as summarized in this discussion.
The following discussion and analysis relates to
the compensation arrangements for 2024 of (i) our principal executive officer, (ii) our principal
financial officer, (iii) the
most highly compensated person, other than our principal executive officer and principal financial
officer, who was serving as executive
officer at the end of our fiscal year ended December 31, 2024 and (iv) our former Senior Vice
President, Powertrain and
Energy Engineering, who served in such capacity during part of 2024 (our “named executive officers”).
We had no other executive
officers serving at the end of our fiscal year ended December 31, 2024. Our named executive officers
for fiscal year 2024
were:
 Name Position 
 Elon Musk Technoking of Tesla and Chief Executive Officer 
 Vaibhav Taneja Chief Financial Officer 
 Tom Zhu Senior Vice President, APAC 
 Andrew Baglino Former Senior Vice President, Powertrain and Energy Engineering 
Mr. Baglino departed Tesla in April 2024.
Overview and Fiscal Year 2024 Company Highlights
Our current executive compensation program, which
was developed and approved by the Compensation Committee, generally consists of base salary and
equity-based incentives, as well as other
benefits generally available to employees. We combine these elements in order to formulate
compensation packages with the goal of providing,
on a total basis, competitive pay and aligning the interests of our named executive officers with
long-term shareholder interests by tying
the value of their compensation to our long-term stock price and/or the achievement of financial,
operational and strategic objectives.
In 2024, Tesla’s full-year accomplishments under our executive leadership included the following:
 · Model Y was the best-selling vehicle, of any kind, globally for the full year 2024; 
 · Reached lowest average cost of goods per vehicle ever at less than $35,000; 
 31.4 gigawatt hours of energy storage, representing an increase of 113.3%, compared to the 
 · prior year, and the completion of 
 construction of Megafactory Shanghai; and 
 5 
 Further improvements and deployment of our FSD (Supervised) capabilities, including through 
 · increased AI training compute by over 
 400% in 2024 and the introduction of our purpose-built Robotaxi product, Cybercab. 
Compensation Philosophy
Our mission is to accelerate the world’s transition to sustainable energy. This is a long-term
mission, and our compensation programs reflect this — and our startup origins — in that they consist
primarily of salary or wages and equity awards. Whereas salary or wages are intended to meet our
employees’ near-term liquidity needs, we believe that equity awards are an effective tool for
retaining employees long-term, as they vest incrementally over a period of time or upon the
achievement of specified performance milestones intended to be achieved over the medium- and long-
term. During periods in which our stock price and the underlying value of equity awards increase,
their retention impact is even greater. We believe that the potential for such increases also creates
an ownership culture that promotes holding equity, which in turn aligns the interests of our
employees with the long-term interests of our shareholders. Additionally, this compensation
philosophy further allows our employees to grow their skill sets and contributions consistent with
our long-term mission. For these reasons, our goal is to provide each employee with the opportunity
to participate in our equity programs, with certain cash-based bonus programs serving generally to
accommodate specific incentive structures or liquidity needs. In light of these considerations, we
generally do not make annual grants of equity awards to our senior executives, including our named
executive officers, and instead grant equity
awards from time to time based upon individual roles and contributions and the retentive impact of
currently outstanding equity awards.
By combining salary or wages and our equity award program, we strive to offer a total level of
compensation that is competitive within
specific roles and geographical markets.
In particular, we believe that compensation for
the individuals who are responsible for Tesla’s strategic direction and operations should motivate
them to achieve sustainable shareholder
value and/or tangible milestones rather than to simply remain at Tesla or maintain the status quo.
Therefore, while we offer to our general
employee population restricted stock units that will retain some value even if the market value of
our stock decreases, when grants are
made to executive officers those grants generally comprise stock option awards, which have zero
initial value and accumulate value,
if at all, only to the extent that our stock price increases following their grant, through the
applicable vesting dates and until such
stock options are ultimately exercised and the underlying shares are sold. In addition, because
equity awards comprise a greater proportion
of our executive officers’ total level of compensation compared to comparable roles at peer
companies, a sustained decrease in our
stock price or failure to achieve the applicable operational milestones may result in a level of
total compensation that is significantly
less than that of such peer roles. Likewise, our outside director compensation program has been
comprised primarily of equity awards that
are entirely in the form of stock option awards, as well as relatively modest cash retainer payments
that may be waived at the election
of each director. Each director determined to forego all cash retainer payments in 2024.
We evaluate our compensation philosophy and programs
regularly and evolve them as circumstances merit with oversight by the Compensation Committee,
particularly with respect to executive
and director compensation. For example, if our stock price experiences significant movement over a
short period of time that results in
a persistent change to equity compensation, certain adjustments may be considered to align our
compensation programs to their intended
purposes.
In 2024, we reviewed our compensation programs with respect to our senior executives to align our
compensation programs to their intended purposes, including striving to offer a total level of
compensation that reflects individual performance to be competitive within specific roles and
geographical markets and to provide appropriate retentive impact in light of currently outstanding
equity awards. Following this review, in October 2024, the Compensation Committee, in consultation
with its compensation consultant and our Chief Executive Officer, adjusted base salaries and/or
granted equity awards to certain senior executives, which included Mr. Taneja, one of our named
executive officers, whose compensation had not been adjusted since he was promoted to the role of
Chief Financial Officer in August 2023, as described below.
Additionally, the Company’s Board of Directors has established a Special Committee to consider
certain compensation matters involving
Mr. Musk.
Key Factors in Determining Executive Compensation
Role of Compensation Committee in Executive Compensation
The Compensation Committee has overall responsibility
for recommending to the Board the compensation of our Chief Executive Officer and reviewing and
determining the compensation of our other
executive officers. Members of the Compensation Committee are appointed by the Board. Currently, the
Compensation Committee consists of
three members of the Board: Ira Ehrenpreis (Chair), Robyn Denholm and Kathleen Wilson-Thompson, none
of whom is an executive officer of
Tesla, and each of whom qualifies as an “independent director” under the Nasdaq Stock Market Rules
and is deemed
independent under all applicable requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission and Tesla’s
Corporate Governance Guidelines,
which follow the Nasdaq framework for the determination of independence.
 6 
Role of Compensation Consultants
The Compensation Committee has the authority to
engage, and has from time to time engaged, the services of outside consultants to assist in making
decisions regarding the establishment
of Tesla’s compensation philosophy and programs, including for executives and directors. In 2024,
Compensia, Inc., a national
consulting firm (“Compensia”) was retained as a compensation consultant to advise the Compensation
Committee with respect
to Tesla’s executive compensation program.
Role of Executive Officers in Compensation Decisions
Historically, for executive officers other than
our Chief Executive Officer, the Compensation Committee has sought and considered input from our
Chief Executive Officer regarding such
executive officers’ responsibilities, performance and compensation. Specifically, our Chief Executive
Officer recommends base salary
increases and equity award levels for our senior personnel, and advises the Compensation Committee
regarding the compensation program’s
ability to attract, retain and motivate executive talent. These recommendations reflect compensation
levels that our Chief Executive Officer
believes are qualitatively commensurate with an executive officer’s individual qualifications,
experience, responsibility level,
functional role, knowledge, skills and individual performance, as well as Tesla’s performance. The
Compensation Committee considers
our Chief Executive Officer’s recommendations, but ultimately determines compensation in its judgment
and approves the compensation
for all of our executive officers (other than for our Chief Executive Officer, the compensation for
whom is recommended by the Compensation
Committee to, and ultimately approved by, the Board).
The Compensation Committee meets regularly in executive
session. Our Chief Executive Officer is not present during Compensation Committee deliberations or
votes on his compensation and also
recuses himself from sessions of the Board where the Board acts on the Compensation Committee’s
recommendations regarding his compensation.
In addition, the Board has established a management committee under the Tesla, Inc. 2019 Equity
Incentive Plan (the “Equity
Award Committee”) to grant and administer equity awards, subject to certain
limitations, such as, among other things, maximum limits on the seniority of personnel to whom the
Equity Award Committee may grant awards
and the value of any individual award. For example, the Equity Award Committee is not authorized to
grant awards to employees at or above
the level of vice president. Moreover, pursuant to applicable law, the Equity Award Committee may not
grant awards to its members, and
the number of shares of our common stock underlying awards granted by it may not exceed amounts
determined by the Board from time to time.
The Board has delegated to the Compensation Committee oversight authority over the Equity Award
Committee.
Role of Shareholder Say-on-Pay Votes
At our 2024 annual meeting, our shareholders overwhelmingly
approved the compensation of our named executive officers, with approximately 79% of our shareholders
present and entitled to vote at
the meeting voting in favor of our compensation policies for our named executive officers. Given
these results, the Compensation Committee
has decided to retain our overall approach to executive compensation while continuing to evaluate our
practices.
At the 2023 annual meeting of shareholders, our
shareholders indicated a preference for an annual shareholder advisory vote on the compensation of
our named executive officers. Consistent
with the results of the shareholder vote, we intend to hold a shareholder advisory vote on executive
compensation every year until the
next vote on the frequency of shareholder advisory votes on executive compensation. We are required
to hold a “say on frequency”
vote at least every six years regarding how often to hold a shareholder advisory vote on the
compensation of our named executive officers.
Clawback Policy
We maintain a clawback policy for compliance with
the Nasdaq listing standards and Section 10D of the Exchange Act. This clawback policy applies to
current and former executive officers
in the event that the Company is required to prepare an accounting restatement due to the material
noncompliance of the Company with any
financial reporting requirement under securities laws; misconduct on the part of the executive is not
required. Under this clawback policy,
we are required to recoup incentive-based compensation (as that term is defined in Section 10D of the
Exchange Act) erroneously received
within the three completed fiscal years immediately preceding the date on which we are required to
prepare an accounting restatement.
 7 
Our Corporate Governance Guidelines also sets forth
a compensation recovery (“clawback”) policy with respect to our executive officers. Moreover, the
terms of the performance-based
stock option award granted to Elon Musk in January 2018 (the “2018 CEO Performance Award”) include a
clawback provision
in the event of a restatement of our financial statements previously filed with the SEC. See
“Compensation Discussion and Analysis—Chief Executive Officer Compensation—2018 CEO Performance
Award” under this Item 11 below.
Current Elements of Named Executive Officer Compensation
Base Salary
The Compensation Committee is responsible for reviewing
our Chief Executive Officer’s and other executive officers’ base salaries. The base salaries of all
executive officers are
reviewed and adjusted when necessary to reflect individual roles, performance and the competitive
market. Because we currently do not
provide cash bonuses to our executive officers, salary is the primary cash-based element of our
executive officers’ compensation
structure.
In connection with the 2024 review of our compensation programs discussed
in “Compensation Philosophy” above, the Compensation Committee increased Mr. Taneja’s base salary to
reflect
his promotion in August 2023 to the role of Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Zhu’s base salary decreased
in 2024 as compared to
2023 due to certain geographic considerations that arose in 2023 when he was on assignment from
Gigafactory Shanghai. The following table
sets forth information regarding the annualized base salary rates at the end of 2024 for our named
executive officers:
 Ending Fiscal 2024 
 Name Base Salary($)(1) 
 Elon Musk — -2 
 Vaibhav Taneja 400,000 
 Tom Zhu 350,000 
 Andrew Baglino — -3 
 Reflects an annualized rate assuming 52 weeks each comprised of five work days. Mr. Taneja’s 
 (1) base salary was 
 adjusted in October 2024. 
 Mr. Musk historically earned a base salary that reflected the applicable minimum wage 
 requirements under California law, 
 (2) and he was subject to income taxes based on such base salary. However, he has never accepted 
 his salary. Commencing in May 2019 
 at Mr. Musk’s request, we eliminated altogether the earning and accrual of this base salary. 
 (3) Mr. Baglino departed Tesla in April 2024. His annualized base salary rate at his time of 
 departure was $300,000. 
Equity-Based Incentives
Our equity award program is the primary vehicle for offering long-term
incentives to our named executive officers. The equity awards we have historically granted and
currently grant are options to purchase
shares of our common stock and restricted stock unit awards that are settled in shares of our common
stock upon vesting. We have granted
to our named executive officers both awards that vest over a long-term period and awards that vest
only upon the achievement of specified
Tesla performance milestones, in each case subject to continued service. We emphasize the grant of
stock option awards for our named executive
officers, which have value only to the extent, if any, that our stock price increases following their
grant. Accordingly, since 2020,
equity awards granted to our named executive officers have primarily been in the form of stock
options: Mr. Zhu, our Senior Vice
President, APAC, received 100% of his equity award as stock options upon his promotion to such role
in 2023, and Mr. Taneja,
our Chief Financial Officer, received approximately 80% of his equity award as stock options in 2024,
following the 2024 review of our
compensation programs discussed in “Compensation Philosophy” above and in consideration of his
promotion in August
2023 to the role of Chief Financial Officer. As a result, a significant portion of our named
executive officers’ total compensation
is entirely at risk, depending on long-term stock price performance.
 8 
While we strive to offer a total level of compensation
that is competitive within specific roles and geographical markets, we do not have a rigid set of
criteria for granting equity awards;
instead, the Compensation Committee exercises its judgment and discretion, in consultation with our
Chief Executive Officer and from time
to time, a compensation consultant (other than with respect to decisions pertaining to the Chief
Executive Officer’s compensation).
To determine the form and amount of equity awards previously granted to named executive officers, the
Compensation Committee considers,
among other things, the role and responsibility of the named executive officer, competitive market
factors, equity awards previously granted
to the named executive officer, the impact of any dramatic changes in our stock price over a short
period of time and the cash-based compensation
received by the named executive officer. We generally grant one-time new hire equity awards to our
employees, including executives, upon
their commencement of employment with us, or upon their promotion to a new position. Additionally, as
part of our ongoing executive compensation
review and alignment process, we have periodically granted additional equity awards to our
executives.
The Compensation Committee granted an equity award to Mr. Taneja in October 2024, following the 2024
review of our compensation programs discussed in “ Compensation Philosophy” above and considering his
promotion in August 2023 to the role of Chief Financial Officer. Approximately 80% of Mr. Taneja’s
equity award was granted as stock options and 20% of the award was granted as restricted stock units.
See “ Grants of Plan-Based Awards in 2024” and “ Executive Compensation— Outstanding Equity Awards at
2024 Fiscal Year-End” under this Item 11 below for a description of the equity awards granted to Mr.
Taneja. The Compensation Committee did not grant any equity awards in 2024 to our other named
executive officers, including our Chief Executive Officer.
The Compensation Committee meets
periodically, including to approve equity award grants to our executives from time to time. We do not
have, nor do we plan to
establish, any program, plan or practice to time equity award grants in coordination with releasing
material non-public information,
and the Compensation Committee does not take material non-public information into account when
determining the timing and terms of
equity awards. Tesla has not timed the disclosure of material non-public information to affect the
value of executive compensation.
During 2024, there were no stock options granted to any named executive officer within four business
days preceding, or within one
business day after, the filing of any report on Forms 10-K, 10-Q or 8-K that discloses material non-
public information.
Severance and Change in Control Benefits
No named executive officer has a severance or change
in control arrangement with Tesla.
Bonus
We do not currently have or have planned, and historically
we have rarely entered into, any specific arrangements with our named executive officers providing
for cash-based bonus awards.
Non-Equity Incentive Plan Compensation
We did not provide any non-equity incentive plan
compensation to any of our named executive officers in 2024, and we do not currently have or have
planned any specific arrangements
with our named executive officers providing for non-equity incentive plan compensation.
Perquisites
Generally, we do not provide any perquisites or
other personal benefits to our named executive officers which are not offered on a non-discriminatory
basis to all employees as well.
Health and Welfare Benefits
We provide the following benefits to our named
executive officers on the same basis provided to all of our employees:
 · medical insurance including comprehensive transgender and fertility coverage, mental health, 
 dental and vision; 
 · adoption and surrogacy benefits; 
 9 
 · confidential Employee Assistance Program counseling; 
 · life insurance and accidental death and dismemberment insurance; 
 a Section 401(k) plan where Tesla will provide a company match equal to 50% of the employee’s 
 · contribution, up to 
 a maximum of 3% of the employee’s eligible compensation with a $3,000 annual cap; 
 · an employee stock purchase plan; 
 · short-and long-term disability insurance; 
 · medical and dependent care flexible spending account; and 
 · a health savings account. 
Chief Executive Officer Compensation
Overview
Historically, in developing compensation recommendations
for our Chief Executive Officer, the Compensation Committee has sought both to appropriately reward
our Chief Executive Officer’s
previous and current contributions and to create incentives for our Chief Executive Officer to
continue to contribute significantly to
successful results in the future. Each of the 2018 CEO Performance Award and the performance-based
stock option award granted to our Chief
Executive Officer in August 2012 (the “2012 CEO Performance Award”) was focused on this latter
objective, as it solely
rewards future performance.
In addition to serving as our Chief Executive Officer
since October 2008, Elon Musk has contributed significantly and actively to us since our earliest
days in April 2004 by
recruiting executives and engineers, contributing to vehicle engineering and design, raising capital
for us, bringing investors to us
and raising our public awareness.
Cash Compensation
Mr. Musk historically earned a base salary
that reflected the applicable minimum wage requirements under California law, and he was subject to
income taxes based on such base salary.
However, he has never accepted his salary. Commencing in May 2019 at Mr. Musk’s request, we
eliminated altogether
the earning and accrual of this base salary.
Historical Equity Compensation
Prior to the stock option awards granted in December 2009,
Mr. Musk did not receive any equity compensation for his services for a period of five years.
In 2010 and 2011, Mr. Musk did not receive
any equity grants, because the Compensation Committee believed his grants made in December 2009
already provided sufficient motivation
for Mr. Musk to perform his duties as Chief Executive Officer.
In August 2012, to create incentives for continued
long-term success from the then-recently launched Model S program as well as from Tesla’s then-
planned Model X and Model 3 programs,
and to further align executive compensation with increases in shareholder value, the Board granted to
Mr. Musk the 2012 CEO Performance
Award, comprised of a stock option award to purchase 79,123,515 shares (as adjusted for the 2020
Stock Split and 2022 Stock Split) of
Tesla’s common stock, representing 5% of Tesla’s total issued and outstanding shares at the time of
grant. The 2012 CEO Performance
Award consisted of 10 equal vesting tranches, each requiring that Tesla meet a combination of (i) the
achievement of a specified
operational milestone relating to development of Model X or Model 3, aggregate vehicle production or
a gross margin target, and (ii) a
sustained incremental $4 billion increase in Tesla’s market capitalization from $3.2 billion, Tesla’s
market capitalization
at the time of grant. Prior to its expiration in 2022, the market capitalization conditions for all
of the 10 vesting tranches and nine
of the 10 operational milestones had been achieved, and nine of 10 tranches under the 2012 CEO
Performance Award vested.
 10 
Prior to 2018, the only additional equity awards
received by Mr. Musk related to certain immaterial awards granted during 2013 pursuant to a patent
incentive program that was available
to our employees generally.
2018 CEO Performance Award
Early in 2017, with the 2012 CEO Performance Award
heading to substantial completion after having helped Tesla grow its market capitalization to over
$55 billion in just over five years,
the independent members of the Board began preliminary discussions regarding how to continue to
incentivize Mr. Musk to lead Tesla
through the next phase of its development. In January 2018, following more than six months of careful
analysis and development
led by the Compensation Committee, with participation by every independent Board member, the help of
Compensia and engagement with and
feedback from our largest institutional shareholders, the Board granted the 2018 CEO Performance
Award to Mr. Musk. Such grant was
subject to approval by a majority of the total votes of Tesla common stock not owned by Mr. Musk or
Kimbal Musk cast at a meeting
of the shareholders to approve the 2018 CEO Performance Award. On March 21, 2018, such approval was
obtained, with approximately
73% of the votes cast by such disinterested shares voting in favor of the 2018 CEO Performance Award.
The 2018 CEO Performance Award was comprised of
a 10-year maximum term stock option to purchase 303,960,630 shares (as adjusted for the 2020 Stock
Split and 2022 Stock Split) of Tesla’s
common stock, divided equally among 12 separate tranches that were each equivalent to 1% of the
issued and outstanding shares of Tesla’s
common stock at the time of grant, at an exercise price of $23.34 per share (as adjusted for the 2020
Stock Split and 2022 Stock Split).
Each of the 12 tranches of the 2018 CEO Performance Award vested upon certification by the Board that
both (i) the market capitalization
milestone for such tranche, which began at $100 billion for the first tranche and increased by
increments of $50 billion thereafter and
(ii) any one of the following eight operational milestones focused on revenue or eight operational
milestones focused on profitability,
was met:
 Total Revenue* Adjusted EBITDA** 
 (in billions) -in billions 
 $20.0 $1.5 
 $35.0 $3.0 
 $55.0 $4.5 
 $75.0 $6.0 
 $100.0 $8.0 
 $125.0 $10.0 
 $150.0 $12.0 
 $175.0 $14.0 
* “Revenue”
means total revenues as reported in Tesla’s financial statements on Forms 10-Q or 10-K filed with the
SEC for the previous four
consecutive fiscal quarters.
** “Adjusted
EBITDA” means (i) net income (loss) attributable to common shareholders before (ii) interest expense,
(iii) (benefit)
provision for income taxes, (iv) depreciation and amortization, and (v) stock-based compensation, as
each such item is reported
in Tesla’s financial statements on Forms 10-Q or 10-K filed with the SEC for the previous four
consecutive fiscal quarters.
Any single operational milestone could only satisfy
the vesting requirement of one tranche, together with the corresponding market capitalization
milestone. Subject to any applicable clawback
provisions, policies or other forfeiture terms, once a milestone was achieved, it was forever deemed
achieved for purposes of determining
the vesting of a tranche. Meeting more than 12 of the 16 operational milestones does not result in
any additional vesting or other compensation
to Mr. Musk under the 2018 CEO Performance Award. Except in a change in control situation,
measurement of the market capitalization
milestones was based on both (i) a six calendar month trailing average of Tesla’s stock price as well
as (ii) a 30
calendar day trailing average of Tesla’s stock price, in each case based on trading days only. Upon
the consummation of certain
acquisitions or split-up, spin-off or divestiture transactions, each then-unachieved market
capitalization milestone and/or operational
milestone would have been adjusted to offset the impact of such transactions to the extent they had
been considered material to the achievement
of those milestones.
In establishing the Revenue and Adjusted EBITDA
milestones, the Board carefully considered a variety of factors, including Tesla’s growth trajectory
and internal growth plans and
the historical performance of other high-growth and high-multiples companies in the technology space
that have invested in new businesses
and tangible assets. These benchmarks provided revenue/EBITDA to market capitalization multiples,
which were then used to inform the specific
operational targets that aligned with Tesla’s plans for future growth. Nevertheless, the Board
considered each of the market capitalization
and operational milestones to be challenging hurdles. For example, in order to meet all 12 market
capitalization milestones, Tesla was
required to add approximately $600 billion to its market capitalization at the time of the grant of
the 2018 CEO Performance Award on
a sustained basis, and in order to satisfy all eight revenue-based operational milestones, Tesla
would have to increase revenue by more
than $163 billion from its annual revenue of approximately $11.8 billion in 2017, the last fiscal
year completed prior to the grant
of the 2018 CEO Performance Award.
 11 
In addition, Mr. Musk was required to continue
leading Tesla as our Chief Executive Officer or, alternatively, as our Chief Product Officer and
Executive Chairman (with any other Chief
Executive Officer reporting directly to him), at the time each milestone is met in order for the
corresponding tranche to vest. With limited
exceptions, Mr. Musk must hold any shares that he acquires upon exercise of the 2018 CEO Performance
Award for at least five years
post-exercise. There would have been no acceleration of vesting of the 2018 CEO Performance award
upon Mr. Musk’s termination,
death or disability or a change in control of Tesla. However, in a change in control situation, the
achievement of the milestones would
have been based solely on the market capitalization milestones, with the measurement of Tesla’s
market capitalization determined
by the product of the total number of outstanding shares of Tesla common stock immediately before the
change in control multiplied by
the greater of the last closing price of a share of Tesla common stock before the effective time of
the change in control or the per share
price (plus the per share value of any other consideration) received by Tesla’s shareholders in the
change in control.
In the event of a restatement of Tesla’s
financial statements previously filed with the SEC, if a lesser portion of the 2018 CEO Performance
Award would have vested based on the
restated financial results, then Tesla will require forfeiture (or repayment, as applicable) of the
portion of the 2018 CEO Performance
Award that would not have vested based on the restated financial results (less any amounts Mr. Musk
may have paid to Tesla in exercising
any forfeited awards). The 2018 CEO Performance Award is subject, if more stringent than the
foregoing, to any current or future Tesla
clawback policy applicable to equity awards, provided that the policy does not discriminate solely
against Mr. Musk except as required
by applicable law.
As of the date of this filing, all of the milestones
have been achieved and certified by our Board. Consequently, all 12 of the 12 tranches under the 2018
CEO Performance Award, corresponding
to options to purchase an aggregate 303,960,630 shares of Tesla’s common stock, have vested and
become exercisable, subject to Mr. Musk’s
payment of the exercise price of $23.34 per share and the minimum five-year holding period generally
applicable to any shares he acquires
upon exercise.
Realized Compensation
For purposes of the table in “Summary Compensation Table” under this Item 11 below, we are required
to report pursuant to applicable SEC rules any stock
option grants to Mr. Musk at values determined as of their respective grant dates and which are
driven by certain assumptions prescribed
by Financial Accounting Board Accounting Standards Codification Topic 718, “Compensation–Stock
Compensation”
(“ASC Topic 718”). Moreover, we are required to report in “Pay Ratio Disclosure” under this Item 11
below (i) Mr. Musk’s annual total compensation, (ii) the median of the annual total compensation of
all Tesla employees
qualifying for this analysis, other than Mr. Musk, in each case calculated pursuant to the
methodology used for the table under “Summary Compensation Table,” and (iii) the ratio of the former
to the latter.
In addition, we are required to report in “2024 Option Exercises and Stock Vested” under this Item 11
below an amount for the “value realized” upon: (i) any
exercise by Mr. Musk of a stock option, which is based on the difference between the market price of
the underlying shares at the
time of exercise and the exercise price of the stock option, and (ii) any vesting of a restricted
stock unit award, based on the
market price of the award at the time of vesting. Such amount is required to be reported even if Mr.
Musk does not actually receive
any cash from such exercise or vesting, either because he does not also sell any shares or because he
sells only a number of shares sufficient
to cover the related tax liabilities resulting from the exercise or vesting.
As a result, there may be a significant disconnect
between what is reported as compensation for Mr. Musk in a given year in such sections and the value
actually realized as compensation
in that year or over a period of time. Moreover, the vast majority of compensation in respect of past
stock option grants to Mr. Musk,
including the 2012 CEO Performance Award and the 2018 CEO Performance Award, were structured to be
incentives for future performance
with their value realizable only if Tesla’s stock price appreciated compared to the dates of the
grants, and if the Company achieved
applicable vesting requirements.
 12 
To supplement the disclosures in “Summary Compensation Table,” “Pay Ratio Disclosure” and “2024
Option Exercises and Stock Vested”
under this Item 11 below, we have included the following table, which shows the total realized
compensation of Mr. Musk for
the last three fiscal years, as well as the ratio of Mr. Musk’s realized compensation to the median
of the annual total
compensation of all other Tesla employees qualifying for this analysis as reported under “Pay Ratio
Disclosure.” Realized
compensation is not a substitute for reported compensation in evaluating our compensation structure,
but we believe that realized compensation
is an important factor in understanding that the value of compensation that Mr. Musk ultimately
realizes is dependent on a number
of additional factors, including: (i) the vesting of certain of his option awards only upon the
successful achievement of a number
of market capitalization increase and operational milestone targets; (ii) the fact that Mr. Musk does
not receive any cash if
he does not actually sell shares and thereby reduce his investment in us, and he does not receive any
cash to the extent that he sells
only shares sufficient to cover income taxes with respect to his awards (including stock options
exercised solely to avoid their expiration
in accordance with their terms); and (iii) the then-current market value of our common stock at the
times at which Mr. Musk
may elect to actually sell his shares.
 Median Annual Ratio of Total 
 Total CEO 
 “Value Compensation of 
 Realized on all Realized 
 Exercise 
 “Total or Vesting of Qualifying Compensation 
 Compensation” Awards” of Non-CEO to 
 of 
 CEO, CEO, as Employees, Median Annual 
 as Reported in Reported in as reported in 
 Summary Option Pay Total CEO Total 
 Exercises 
 Compensation and Stock Ratio Realized Compensation 
 Table Vested Table Disclosure of 
 Below Below Section Below Compensation all Qualifying 
 Non-CEO 
 Year -$ -$ -$ -$)(1 Employees 
 2024 — — 57,243 — 0.00:1 
 2023 — 1,861,335 -2 45,811 — 0.00:1 
 2022 — — 34,084 — 0.00:1 
 “Total CEO realized compensation” for a given year is defined as (i) the amounts reported 
 for Mr. Musk 
 in “Summary Compensation Table” under this Item 11 below under the columns “Salary,” 
 “Bonus,” 
 “Non-Equity Incentive Plan Compensation” and “All Other Compensation,” plus (ii) with 
 respect to any 
 stock option exercised by Mr. Musk in such year in connection with which shares of stock 
 were also sold other than to satisfy 
 (1) any resulting tax liability, the difference between the market price of such shares at the 
 time of exercise and the applicable exercise 
 price of the option, plus (iii) with respect to any restricted stock unit vested by Mr. Musk 
 in such year in connection 
 with which shares of stock were also sold other than automatic sales to satisfy any 
 withholding obligations related to such vesting, the 
 market price of such shares at the time of vesting, plus (iv) any cash actually received by 
 Mr. Musk in respect of any 
 shares sold to cover tax liabilities as described in (ii) and (iii) above, following the 
 payment of such tax liabilities. 
 Reflects the exercise of vested stock options granted as part of a company-wide patent 
 (2) incentive program, and which were scheduled 
 to expire in 2023. Mr. Musk paid the exercise price and applicable taxes in cash, and did 
 not sell any of the resulting shares. 
Tax and Accounting Considerations
Sections 280G and 409A. We have not provided or committed to provide any executive officer or
director with a gross-up or other reimbursement
for tax amounts the executive might pay pursuant to Section 280G or Section 409A of the Internal
Revenue Code (the “Tax
Code”). Section 280G and related Tax Code sections provide that executive officers, directors who
hold significant shareholder
interests and certain other service providers could be subject to significant additional excise taxes
if they receive payments or benefits
in connection with a change in control of Tesla that exceeds certain limits, and that we or our
successor could lose a deduction on the
amounts subject to the additional tax. Section 409A also imposes additional significant taxes on the
individual in the event that
an executive officer, director or service provider of certain types receives “deferred compensation”
that does not meet the
requirements of Section 409A.
Tax Deduction Limit. Section 162(m) of the Tax Code generally disallows a tax deduction to public
corporations for compensation
greater than $1,000,000 paid in any fiscal year to certain executive officers. The Compensation
Committee has not adopted a formal
policy regarding tax deductibility of compensation paid to our executive officers and reserves the
right to pay compensation that may
not be deductible to Tesla if it determines that doing so would be in the best interests of Tesla.
 13 
Accounting Implications. We follow ASC Topic 718 for our stock-based compensation awards. ASC Topic
718 requires companies to measure
the compensation expense for all stock-based compensation awards made to employees and directors
based on the grant date “fair value”
of these awards. This calculation is performed for accounting purposes and reported in the
compensation tables below, even though our
named executive officers may never realize any value from their awards. ASC Topic 718 also requires
companies to recognize the compensation
cost of their stock-based compensation awards in their income statements over the period that an
executive officer is required to render
service in exchange for the option or other award.
Other Information
On June 4, 2018, a Tesla shareholder
filed a shareholder derivative complaint in the Delaware Court of Chancery against Mr. Musk and
certain current and former
Tesla directors in connection with the Tesla Board’s approval of the 2018 CEO Performance Award. On
January 30, 2024, the
Court issued a post-trial opinion that granted the plaintiff’s request that the 2018 CEO Performance
Award be fully rescinded.
In addition, following the recommendation of a special committee of the Board, the Board (with Mr.
Musk and Kimbal Musk
recusing themselves) determined that the ratification of the 2018 CEO Performance Award was in the
best interests of the Company and
its shareholders, approved the ratification (the “Ratification”) of the 2018 Performance Award,
directed that the
Ratification be submitted to the shareholders at the 2024 annual meeting, and recommended that
shareholders approve the
Ratification. The Ratification was approved by the shareholders at the 2024 annual meeting. Following
the Ratification, Tesla
requested that the Delaware Court revise its decision to rescind the 2018 CEO Performance Award. On
December 2, 2024, the
Delaware Court rejected the request to revise its decision. On December 13, 2024, the Delaware Court
entered a final judgment
rescinding the 2018 CEO Performance Award. Tesla is appealing the Delaware Court’s decision to not
recognize the Ratification,
its decision to reject the request to revise its decision, and its judgment rescinding the 2018 CEO
Performance Award. The
current and former Tesla directors are also appealing the Delaware Court’s post-trial decision.
Compensation Committee Report
The Compensation Committee oversees Tesla’s
compensation programs, policies and practices. The Compensation Committee has reviewed and discussed
the Compensation Discussion and Analysis
required by Item 402(b) of Regulation S-K with management. Based on such review and discussions, the
Compensation Committee
has recommended to the Board that the Compensation Discussion and Analysis be included in this
Amendment.
Respectfully submitted by the members of the Compensation Committee of the Board
 Ira Ehrenpreis (Chair) 
 Robyn Denholm 
 Kathleen Wilson-Thompson 
This report of the Compensation Committee is required
by the SEC and, in accordance with the SEC’s rules, will not be deemed to be part of or incorporated
by reference by any general
statement incorporating by reference the Original Form 10-K or this Amendment into any filing under
the Securities Act or the Exchange
Act, except to the extent that we specifically incorporate this information by reference, and will
not otherwise be deemed “soliciting
material” or “filed” under either the Securities Act or the Exchange Act.
 14 
Summary Compensation Table
The following table presents information concerning
the total compensation of our named executive officers for each of the last three fiscal years. No
disclosure is provided for fiscal years
for which those persons were not named executive officers.
 Non-E… 
 Stock Option Incen… All 
 Plan Other 
 Salary Bonus Awards Awards Compe… Comp… Total 
 Name 
 and Year -$ -$ -$)(1 -$)(2 -$ -$ -$ 
 Prin… 
 Posi… 
 Elon 2024 — — — — — — — 
 Musk 
 Tech… 
 of 2023 — — — — — — — 
 Tesla 
 and 
 Chief 
 Exec… 2022 — — — — — — — 
 Offi… 
 Vaib… 2024 303,8… — 26,13… -3 113,0… -3 — 3,000 -4 139,4… 
 Tane… 
 Chief 
 Fina… 2023 275,0… — — — — 3,000 278,0… 
 Offi… 
 Tom 2024 350,0… — — — — 168,… -5 518,2… 
 Zhu 
 SVP, 2023 381,0… — — 31,64… — 545,… 32,56… 
 APAC 
 Andr… 2024 121,6… -6 — — — — 3,000 -4 124,6… 
 Bagl… 
 Form… 
 SVP, 2023 300,0… — — — — 3,000 303,0… 
 Powe… 
 and 
 Ener… 2022 300,0… — — — — 3,000 303,0… 
 Engi… 
 This column reflects the aggregate grant date fair value computed in accordance with ASC 
 Topic 718 of the restricted stock units granted 
 to the named executive officers. The assumptions used in the valuation of these awards are 
 set forth in Note 12, Equity Incentive 
 (1) Plans, to the consolidated financial statements included in the Original Form 10-K. These 
 amounts do not necessarily correspond to the actual value that may be recognized by the 
 named executive officers, which depends, among 
 other things, on the market value of our common stock appreciating from that on the grant 
 date(s) of the restricted stock units. 
 This column reflects the aggregate grant date fair value computed in accordance with ASC 
 Topic 718 of the options to purchase shares 
 of our common stock granted to the named executive officers. The assumptions used in the 
 valuation of these awards are set forth in Note 12, 
 (2) Equity Incentive Plans, to the consolidated financial statements included in the Original 
 Form 10-K. 
 These amounts do not necessarily correspond to the actual value that may be recognized by 
 the named executive officers, which depends, 
 among other things, on the market value of our common stock appreciating from that on the 
 grant date(s) of the option(s). 
 (3) Award granted following the 2024 review of our compensation programs 
 discussed in “Compensation Philosophy” and “Equity-Based Incentives” above. 
 Reflects matching contributions made under the Tesla 401(k) Plan based on each of the named 
 (4) executive officer’s fiscal 
 2024 contributions. 
 All Other Compensation consists of $165,250 for tax assistance reimbursement payments for 
 2024 taxes (such payments were made in Chinese 
 yuan and converted to U.S. dollars based on the then prevailing Chinese yuan/U.S. dollar 
 (5) exchange rate on each applicable payment date, which 
 was approximately 0.14) and $3,000 to reflect matching contributions made under the Tesla 
 401(k) Plan based on Mr. Zhu’s 
 fiscal 2024 contributions. 
 (6) Reflects base salary received by Mr. Baglino prior to his departure from Tesla in April 
 2024. 
Grants of Plan-Based Awards in2024
The following table presents information concerning
each grant of an award made to a named executive officer in fiscal 2024 under any plan.
 Estim… Estim… All 
 Future Future Other 
 Payou… Payou… Stock All 
 Under Under Award… Other Exerc… 
 Non-E… Equity Number Option or Grant 
 Incen… Incen… of Awards: Base Date 
 Plan  Plan  Shares Number Price Closing Fair 
 Awards Awards of of of Market Value/ 
 Thres… Thres… Stock Securi… Option Price Incre… 
 Grant Target Target or Underl… Awards (if Fair 
 Name Date(… Maxim… Maxim… Units Options ($/sh) differ… value 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Vaib… 10/31… -2 1,600 $ 249.85 $ 192,0… 
 Tane… 
 10/31… -2 939,887 $ 249.85 $ 112,8… 
 10/31… -2 104,6… $ 26,13… 
 The vesting schedule applicable to each outstanding award is set forth in “Executive 
 (1) Compensation— Outstanding Equity 
 Awards at 2024 Fiscal Year-End” below. 
 Mr. Taneja received approximately 80% of his equity award in the form 
 of stock options and 20% of his equity award in the form of restricted stock units in 2024. 
 (2) The award was granted following the 2024 review 
 of our compensation programs discussed in “Compensation Philosophy” and “Equity-Based 
 Incentives” 
 above. 
 15 
Outstanding Equity Awards at2024 Fiscal Year-End
The following table presents information concerning
unexercised options and unvested restricted stock unit awards for each named executive officer
outstanding as of the end of fiscal 2024.
 Option Stock 
 Awards Awards 
 Equity 
 Incent… 
 Plan 
 Awards: Number Market 
 of 
 Number Number Number Shares Value 
 of of of or of 
 Securi… Securi… Securi… Units Shares 
 of or 
 Stock Units 
 Underl… Underl… Underl… That of 
 Stock 
 Unexer… Unexer… Unexer… Option Option Have That 
 Not Have 
 Options Options Unearn… Exerc… Expira… Vested Not 
 (#) (#) Vested 
 Name Grant Exerci… Unexer… Options Price Date -# -$)(1 
 Date (#) ($) 
 Elon 3/21/2… -2 303,96… — — 23.34 1/19/2… — — 
 Musk 
 Vaibh… 10/31/… -3 19,614 921,873 — 249.85 10/31/… — — 
 Taneja 
 10/31/… -4 — — — — — 98,072 39,605… 
 10/19/… -5 154,095 — — 143.61 10/19/… — — 
 4/19/2… -6 764,245 — — 18.22 4/19/2… — — 
 10/16/… -7 10,575 — — 18.44 10/16/… — — 
 11/13/… -8 13,860 — — 21.03 11/13/… — — 
 Tom 5/19/2… -9 141,275 197,785 — 180.14 05/19/… — — 
 Zhu 
 10/19/… -5 616,377 — — 143.61 10/19/… — — 
 7/19/2… -10 373,760 — — 17.22 7/19/2… — — 
 4/19/2… -11 486,045 — — 18.22 4/19/2… — — 
 10/16/… -7 155,100 — — 18.44 10/16/… — — 
 8/20/2… -12 295,650 — — 20.57 8/20/2… — — 
 Andrew 
 Bagli… — — — — — — — — 
 (13) 
 The market value of unvested restricted stock units is calculated by multiplying the number 
 (1) of unvested restricted stock units held 
 by the applicable named executive officer by the closing price of our common stock on 
 December 31, 2024, which was $403.84. 
 1/12th of the total number of shares subject to the option becomes vested and exercisable 
 each time: (i) our market capitalization 
 increases initially to $100.0 billion for the first tranche, and by an additional $50.0 
 billion for each tranche thereafter; and (ii) one 
 of 16 specified operational milestones relating to total revenue or adjusted EBITDA (other 
 than any operating milestone that previously 
 (2) counted towards the vesting of another tranche) is attained, subject to Mr. Musk’s continued 
 service to us as either CEO or 
 as both Executive Chairman and Chief Product Officer, with the CEO reporting to him, at each 
 such vesting event. See “Compensation 
 Discussion and Analysis—Chief Executive Officer Compensation—2018 CEO Performance Award” 
 under this Item 11 
 above. 
 1/48th of the aggregate shares subject to the option became vested and exercisable on 
 December 5, 2024, and 1/48th of the shares 
 (3) subject to the option became vested and exercisable each month thereafter, subject to the 
 grantee’s continued service to us on each 
 such vesting date. 
 1/16th of this award vested on December 5, 2024, and 1/16th this award vests every three 
 (4) months thereafter, subject to the grantee’s 
 continued service to us on each such vesting date. 
 1/48th of the shares subject to the option became vested and exercisable on December 5, 
 (5) 2020, and 1/48th of the shares subject 
 to the option became vested and exercisable every month thereafter. 
 16 
 1/8th of the shares subject to the option became vested and exercisable on September 13, 
 (6) 2019, and 1/48th of the shares subject 
 to the option became vested and exercisable each month thereafter. 
 1/60th of the shares subject to the option became vested and exercisable on November 1, 
 (7) 2018, and 1/60th of the shares subject 
 to the option became vested and exercisable each month thereafter. 
 1/24th of the shares subject to the option vested on November 13, 2017 and 1/48th of the 
 (8) shares subject to the option became 
 vested and exercisable each month thereafter. 
 1/48th of the shares subject to the option became vested and exercisable on May 19, 2023, 
 and 1/48th of the shares subject to 
 (9) the option became vested and exercisable each month thereafter, subject to the grantee’s 
 continued service to us on each such vesting 
 date. 
 1/60th of the shares subject to the option became vested and exercisable on July 24, 2019, 
 (10) and 1/60th of the shares subject to 
 the option became vested and exercisable each month thereafter. 
 1/4th of the shares subject to the option each became vested and exercisable upon the 
 (11) Company’s achievement of certain performance 
 objectives set forth in the option agreements. 
 With respect to 150,000 shares subject to the option, 1/48th of such shares became vested 
 and exercisable upon the Company’s 
 achievement of certain performance objectives set forth in the option agreements, and 
 (12) 1/48th of the shares became vested and exercisable 
 on each monthly anniversary thereafter, and with respect to 225,000 shares subject to the 
 option, 1/60th of such shares became vested 
 and exercisable on August 20, 2018, and 1/60th of the shares became vested and exercisable 
 each month thereafter. 
 (13) Mr. Baglino departed Tesla in April 2024, which led to forfeitures of unvested awards. 
2024Option Exercises and Stock Vested
The following table presents information concerning
each exercise of stock options and vesting of stock awards during fiscal 2024 for each of the named
executive officers.
 Option Awards Stock Awards 
 Number of Shares Value Realized Number of Shares Value Realized 
 on on 
 Acquired on Exercise Acquired on Vesting 
 Exercise Vesting 
 Name -# -$)(1 -# -$)(2 
 Vaibhav Taneja 35,000 9,653,338 6,538 2,415,726 
 Tom Zhu — — 7,899 1,542,701 
 Andrew 1,162,362 98,688,029 — — 
 Baglino(3) 
 Reflects the product of the number of shares of stock subject to the exercised option 
 (1) multiplied by the difference between the market 
 price of our common stock at the time of exercise on the exercise date and the exercise 
 price of the option. 
 (2) Reflects the product of the number of shares of stock vested multiplied by the market price 
 of our common stock on the vesting date. 
 Includes Mr. Baglino’s exercise, in connection with his departure from Tesla in April 2024, 
 of 
 (3) all of his remaining vested options within the period required by the terms and conditions 
 of the applicable award for 
 post-termination exercise. 
Potential Payments Upon Termination or Change in Control
We do not have an employment agreement for
any specific term with any of our named executive officers. Moreover, we do not have any contract,
agreement, plan or arrangement
that would result in payments to a named executive officer at, following, or in connection with any
termination of employment,
including resignation, severance, retirement or a constructive termination of employment of a named
executive officer, or a change
in control of Tesla or a change in the named executive officer’s responsibilities.
Pay Ratio Disclosure
Tesla is committed to fair and competitive compensation
for our employees. Moreover, Elon Musk, the Technoking of Tesla and our Chief Executive Officer, has
agreed to a compensation arrangement
in the 2018 CEO Performance Award that is substantially tied to the appreciation of our market
capitalization. Because equity awards are
generally made available to Tesla employees, this also means that Mr. Musk’s compensation is tied to
the success of Tesla employees.
We are providing a ratio of (i) Mr. Musk’s 2024 annual total compensation to (ii) the median of the
2024 annual total
compensation of all applicable qualifying Tesla employees other than Mr. Musk, in each case
calculated pursuant to the disclosure
requirements of “Summary Compensation Table” above. As we continue our expansion, the median annual
total compensation
of our employees reflects differences in local compensation scales and practices.
 17 
Mr. Musk’s 2024 annual total compensation,
as reported under “Summary Compensation Table,” was $0, and the median 2024 annual total compensation
of all other
qualifying employees, as determined pursuant to the methodology set forth below, was $57,243.
Consequently, the applicable ratio of such
amounts for 2024 was 0.00:1.
Our methodology for identifying the median of the
2024 annual total compensation for each individual other than Mr. Musk was as follows:
 We selected December 31, 2024, which is within the last three months of 2024, as the date upon 
 which we would identify the 
 “median employee” because it enabled us to make such identification in a reasonably efficient 
 · and economical manner. 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 We determined that as of December 31, 2024, Tesla and all our subsidiaries had 126,507 
 individuals qualifying for this analysis 
 · (full-time, part-time and temporary employees other than Mr. Musk, subject to the following 
 bullet), of which approximately 43% were 
 based outside of the U.S. and approximately 37% were production line employees. 
 We did not include in the population of qualifying individuals any employees of staffing 
 · agencies whose compensation is determined 
 by such agencies. 
 We applied the requirements and assumptions required for the table under “Summary Compensation 
 Table” above for 
 · each of such individuals to calculate the total annual compensation, including base salary or 
 wages, performance-based commission payments, 
 and equity awards based on their grant date fair values. 
 We converted any payment earned or paid in a foreign currency to U.S. dollars using the 
 · average of the prevailing conversion rates 
 for the month of December 2024. 
 · We selected the median of all total annual compensation amounts calculated in accordance with 
 the foregoing. 
Employee Risks
The Compensation Committee oversees management
of risks relating to Tesla’s compensation plans and programs. Tesla’s management and the Compensation
Committee have assessed
the risks associated with Tesla’s compensation policies and practices for all employees, including
non-executive officers. These
include risks relating to setting ambitious targets for our employees’ compensation or the vesting of
their equity awards and our
emphasis on at-risk equity-based compensation, and the potential impact of such practices on the
retention or decision-making of our employees,
particularly our senior management. Based on the results of this assessment, Tesla does not believe
that its compensation policies and
practices for all employees, including non-executive officers, create risks that are reasonably
likely to have a material adverse effect
on Tesla.
Compensation of Directors
2024 Director Compensation Table
The following table provides information concerning
the compensation paid by us to each of our non-employee directors who served during any part of
fiscal year 2024. Elon Musk, who
is a named executive officer, does not receive additional compensation for his services as a
director.
 18 
The awards with respect to which values are provided
under the column “Option Awards” below are exclusively stock options, which have realizable value
only if they vest over time
and to the extent, if any, that our stock price exceeds the applicable exercise prices. The values
provided below for these awards are
based on applicable accounting standards, and do not necessarily reflect the actual amounts realized
or realizable pursuant to the underlying
stock options.
 Fees Earned or 
 Paid in Cash Option Awards All Other Total 
 Name -$)(1 -$)(2)(3 Compensation -$ 
 Robyn Denholm — — — — 
 Ira Ehrenpreis — — — — 
 Joe Gebbia — — — — 
 James Murdoch — — — — 
 Kimbal Musk — — — — 
 JB Straubel — — — — 
 Kathleen Wilson-Thompson — — — — 
 Reflects cash compensation for service on the Board and/or its applicable committees 
 pursuant to Tesla’s outside director compensation 
 policy (the “Director Compensation Policy”) and/or for service as Chair of the Board as 
 previously approved by the Board, 
 (1) as applicable. The earning and payment of cash retainer payments payable to outside 
 directors may be waived in whole or part at the election 
 of the director. All seven of the outside directors have requested that the Company 
 eliminate the future payment of all of their cash 
 retainer amounts for service on the Board unless the director notified otherwise. 
 As of December 31, 2024, the aggregate number of shares underlying option awards outstanding 
 (2) for each of our non-employee directors 
 with such awards was: 
 Aggregate 
 Number of 
 Shares 
 Underlying 
 Name Options 
 Outstanding 
 Robyn 1,020,220 
 Denholm(4) 
 Ira 1,110,000 
 Ehrenpreis(4) 
 Joe — 
 Gebbia 
 James 1,020,000 
 Murdoch(4) 
 Kimbal 326,750 
 Musk(4) 
 JB — 
 Straubel 
 Kathleen 565,855 
 Wilson-Thompson(4) 
 Reflects 
 stock option grants for service on the Board or as members or chairs of Board committees 
 that were automatically granted pursuant to the Director Compensation Policy. In June 2021, 
 the Board unanimously adopted a resolution to forego any automatic grants of annual stock 
 option awards under the Director Compensation Policy or otherwise previously approved by 
 the Board (the “Board Stock Option Grants”) until July 2022 unless the Board 
 earlier acts to amend the Director Compensation Policy or otherwise amends such resolution. 
 In May 2022, the Board agreed to further forego the Board Stock Options Grants until 
 (3) the Board earlier acts to amend the Director Compensation Policy or otherwise amends such 
 resolution. Under the Stipulation and Agreement of Compromise and Settlement (the “Detroit 
 Settlement Agreement”) in connection with a derivative action brought by a purported 
 Tesla stockholder regarding compensation awards granted to Tesla’s directors, other 
 than Elon Musk, between 2017 and 2020, the Board will permanently forego the Board Stock 
 Option Grants for 2021 and 2022, and the Board will not receive any compensation for Board 
 service for 2021 and 2022. Ms. Denholm, Mr. Ehrenpreis, Kimbal Musk, Mr. Murdoch and Ms. 
 Wilson-Thompson will also permanently forego any compensation for Board service for 2023. 
 See “Other Information” below for additional information regarding 
 the Detroit Settlement Agreement. 
 In connection with the Detroit Settlement Agreement, certain current or former directors 
 have agreed to, among other things, return to 
 Tesla certain unexercised options, totaling 1,957,861, that were awarded as compensation 
 from 2017 to 2020 (the “Returned 
 (4) Options”). Tesla expects to implement the provisions of the Detroit Settlement Agreement in 
 May 2025 by cancelling the Returned 
 Options. Once the Returned Options are cancelled, the number of authorized shares under the 
 Tesla, Inc. 2019 Equity Incentive Plan will 
 be increased by the number of Returned Options. The Returned Options are included in this 
 table. 
 19 
Overview and Philosophy
The compensation program for Tesla’s non-employee
directors is designed to be consistent with our compensation philosophy for our employees, with an
emphasis on equity-based compensation
over cash in order to align the value of their compensation with the market value of our stock, and
consequently, with the long-term interests
of our shareholders. Moreover, while we offer to our general employee population restricted stock
units that will retain some value even
if the market value of our stock decreases, the equity-based compensation to our directors has been
exclusively in the form of stock options,
which have zero initial value and accumulate value, if at all, only to the extent that our stock
price increases following their grant,
through the applicable vesting dates and until such stock options are ultimately exercised and the
underlying shares are sold. The remaining
portion of our directors’ compensation has consisted of cash retainer payments that are relatively
modest compared to peer companies
and that may be waived at the election of each director. Consequently, a large portion and in some
cases, the entirety, of each of our
non-employee directors’ compensation is entirely at risk, and fluctuating stock prices have at times
resulted in 100% of the vested
stock options then held by each of our non-employee directors being out-of-the-money.
In 2020 and 2021, the Compensation Committee reviewed
the Director Compensation Policy with the aid of Compensia and in light of Tesla’s exceptional
performance and commitment to at-risk
director compensation in the form of annual stock option awards to ensure continued alignment of the
interests of directors with those
of Tesla’s shareholders. Following such review, the Compensation Committee recommended that the Board
approve a resolution that
all existing directors forego any automatic grants of annual stock option awards under the Director
Compensation Policy or otherwise previously
approved by the Board until July 2022 unless the Board earlier acts to amend the Director
Compensation Policy or otherwise amends
such resolution. In June 2021, the Board unanimously approved and adopted this resolution and in May
2022, the Board agreed
to further forego the Board Stock Option Grants until the Board earlier acts to amend the Director
Compensation Policy or otherwise amends
such resolution. The Compensation Committee intends to make further recommendations with respect to
the Board’s compensation program
for directors, if any, who join the Board after the date of this resolution, as well as for future
periods of service by existing directors,
following further periodic reviews.
Other Information
If, following a change in control of Tesla, the
service of a non-employee director is terminated, all stock options granted to the director shall
fully vest and become immediately exercisable.
Non-employee directors may also have their travel,
lodging and related expenses associated with attending Board or Board committee meetings reimbursed
by Tesla.
On June 17, 2020, a purported Tesla stockholder
filed a derivative action in the Delaware Court of Chancery, purportedly on behalf of Tesla, against
certain of Tesla’s current
and former directors regarding compensation awards granted to Tesla’s directors, other than Elon
Musk, between 2017 and 2020. The
suit asserts claims for breach of fiduciary duty and unjust enrichment and seeks declaratory and
injunctive relief, unspecified damages
and other relief. Defendants filed their answer on September 17, 2020.
On July 14, 2023, the parties filed a Stipulation
and Agreement of Compromise and Settlement, which does not involve an admission of any wrongdoing by
any party. Pursuant to the terms
of the agreement, Tesla provided notice of the proposed settlement to stockholders of record as of
July 14, 2023. The Court held a hearing
regarding the settlement on October 13, 2023, after which it took the settlement and plaintiff
counsels’ fee request under advisement.
On January 8, 2025, the Court approved the settlement and awarded Plaintiff’s counsel fees in the
amount of approximately $176 million.
A final judgment was entered by the Court on January 13, 2025.
The Company disagrees with the amount of
attorneys’ fees awarded by the court. On February 10, 2025, Tesla appealed the attorneys’ fee award
amount to the
Delaware Supreme Court. Tesla did not appeal the Delaware Court of Chancery’s approval of the
underlying settlement. Also on
February 10, 2025, a single shareholder appealed the approval of the settlement. This shareholder’s
appeal does not seek to
alter any material terms (e.g., financial contributions or the defendants’ obligations under the
Detroit Settlement
Agreement). The Delaware Court of Chancery had previously rejected this shareholder’s objections when
approving the Detroit
Settlement Agreement.
Because neither Tesla’s appeal nor the
shareholder’s appeal seeks to vacate the Detroit Settlement Agreement or materially modify its terms,
the Company expects to
implement the provisions of the Detroit Settlement Agreement in May 2025 by cancelling the options
requiring cancellation under its
terms. The settlement is not expected to have an adverse impact on our results of operations, cash
flows or financial position.
Pledging of Shares
The ability of our directors and executive officers
to pledge Tesla stock for personal loans and investments is inherently related to their compensation
due to our use of equity awards and
promotion of long-termism and an ownership culture. Moreover, providing these individuals flexibility
in financial planning without having
to rely on the sale of shares aligns their interests with those of our shareholders.
In order to mitigate the risk of forced sales of
pledged shares, the Board has a policy that limits pledging of Tesla stock by our directors and
executive officers. Pursuant to this policy,
directors and executive officers may pledge their stock (exclusive of options, warrants, restricted
stock units or other rights to purchase
stock) as collateral for loans and investments, provided that the maximum aggregate loan or
investment amount collateralized by such pledged
stock does not exceed, (i) with respect to our CEO, the lesser of $3.5 billion or twenty-five percent
(25%) of the total value
of the pledged stock, or (ii) with respect to our directors and officers other than our CEO, fifteen
percent (15%) of the total
value of the pledged stock.
 20 
Example: A director (other than our CEO) pledges 1,000 shares as collateral for a loan, and the
current stock price is $800 per share. The director may borrow up to 15% of 1,000 x $800, or
$120,000, against such shares. If the stock price later increases to $1,600 per share, the director
may borrow up to an additional $120,000 against the pledged shares. If the director borrows the full
allowable amount of $240,000 and the stock price then decreases to $1,200, the director must repay
$60,000 to maintain compliance with the 15% limit under the pledging policy.
See “Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder
Matters—Ownership of Securities” under Item 12 below for information
regarding any shares pledged by our directors or executive officers as of December 31, 2024; however,
such pledging does
not indicate the extent to which there may be actual borrowings against such shares as of such date,
which may be substantially
less than the value of the shares pledged. As of December 31, 2024, based on written representations
of our directors and executive
officers to the Company, the aggregate loan or investment amount collateralized by our directors and
executive officers’ pledged
shares was less than 1% of the total value of the pledged shares.
We require our directors and executive officers
to make written representations, at least annually, that he or she is in compliance with our pledging
policy. If a director or executive
officer wishes to take a loan collateralized by pledged stock, Tesla management works with the
director or executive officer during the
original loan approval, and subsequently monitors compliance with this policy by regularly reviewing
and requesting updates from the applicable
director or executive officer on his or her pledged stock amount and loan amount. If necessary, Tesla
management will report to the Board
or its committees the extent to which any officer or director has pledged shares of Company stock. We
believe that this monitoring is
effective and includes appropriate controls, and we have confirmed that each of our directors and
executive officers who have pledged
stock are and have been compliant with this policy since our last confirmation.
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation
Robyn Denholm, Ira Ehrenpreis and
Kathleen Wilson-Thompson served as members of the Compensation Committee during 2024. None of such
persons is or was formerly an officer
or an employee of Tesla. See “Certain Relationships and Related Person Transactions and Director
Independence—Related Person Transactions”under Item 13 below for certain transactions involving Tesla
in which members of the Compensation Committee
may potentially be deemed to have an indirect interest.
During 2024, no interlocking relationships existed
between any member of Tesla’s Board or Compensation Committee and any member of the board of
directors or compensation committee
of any other company.
 21 
ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER
MATTERS
Equity Compensation Plan Information
The following table summarizes the number of securities
underlying outstanding options, stock awards, warrants and rights granted to employees and directors,
as well as the number of securities
remaining available for future issuance, under Tesla’s equity compensation awards as of December 31,
2024.
 -c 
 Number of 
 securities 
 -a remaining available 
 for 
 Number of -b future issuance 
 securities under 
 to be issued upon Weighted-average equity compensation 
 exercise of exercise price of plans (excluding 
 outstanding 
 options, warrants outstanding options, securities 
 and reflected in 
 rights warrants and rights column (a)) 
 Plan category -#)(1 -$)(2 -# 
 Equity compensation 
 plans approved by 363,183,229 40.41 208,528,520 -3 
 security holders 
 Equity compensation 
 plans not approved 12,525 -4 33.24 — 
 by security holders 
 Total 363,195,754 40.41 208,528,520 
 Consists of options to purchase shares of our common stock, including the 2018 CEO 
 (1) Performance Award, and restricted stock unit awards 
 representing the right to acquire shares of our common stock. 
 The weighted average exercise price is calculated based solely on the outstanding stock 
 (2) options. It does not take into account the 
 shares issuable upon vesting of outstanding restricted stock unit awards, which have no 
 exercise price. 
 Consists of 112,985,272 shares remaining available for issuance under the Tesla, Inc. 2019 
 (3) Equity Incentive Plan, and 95,543,248 
 shares remaining available for issuance under the Tesla, Inc. 2019 Employee Stock Purchase 
 Plan. 
 Consists of outstanding stock options and restricted stock unit awards that were assumed in 
 (4) connection with acquisitions. No additional 
 awards may be granted under the plans pursuant to which such awards were initially granted. 
Ownership of Securities
The following table sets forth certain information
regarding the beneficial ownership of Tesla’s common stock, as of December 31, 2024, for the
following:
 · each person (or group of affiliated persons) who is known by us to beneficially own 5% of the 
 outstanding shares of our common stock; 
 · each of our non-employee directors; 
 · each of our current executive officers named in the Summary Compensation Table in Item 11 
 above; and 
 · all current directors and executive officers of Tesla as a group. 
In computing the number of shares of common stock
beneficially owned by a person and the percentage ownership of that person, we deemed to be
outstanding all shares of common stock
subject to options or other convertible securities held by that person or entity that are currently
exercisable or exercisable within
60 days of December 31, 2024. We did not deem these shares outstanding, however, for the purpose of
computing the percentage
ownership of any other person. Applicable percentage ownership is based on 3,216,138,890 shares of
Tesla’s common stock outstanding
at December 31, 2024.
 22 
Unless otherwise indicated, all persons named below
can be reached at Tesla, Inc., 1 Tesla Road, Austin, Texas 78725.
 Percentage 
 Shares of Shares 
 Beneficially Beneficially 
 Beneficial Owner Name Owned Owned 
 5% Shareholders 
 Elon Musk(1) 714,754,706 20.3 % 
 The Vanguard Group(2) 229,805,491 7.1 % 
 Blackrock, Inc.(3) 188,797,465 5.9 % 
 Named Executive Officers & Directors 
 Elon Musk(1) 714,754,706 20.3 % 
 Vaibhav Taneja(4) 1,110,701 * 
 Tom Zhu(5) 2,156,889 * 
 Andrew Baglino(6) 31,230 * 
 Robyn Denholm(7) 1,105,220 * 
 Ira Ehrenpreis(8) 1,681,005 * 
 Joe Gebbia 111 * 
 James Murdoch(9) 1,427,295 * 
 Kimbal Musk(10) 1,864,970 * 
 JB Straubel 0 * 
 Kathleen Wilson-Thompson(11) 571,255 * 
 All current executive officers and 724,672,152 20.5 % 
 directors as a group (10 persons)(12) 
* Represents
beneficial ownership of less than 1%.
 Includes (i) 410,794,076 shares held of record by the Elon Musk Revocable Trust dated July  
 22, 2003 and (ii) 303,960,630 
 (1) shares issuable to Mr. Musk upon exercise of options exercisable within 60 days after 
 December 31, 2024. Includes 235,998,721 
 shares pledged as collateral to secure certain personal indebtedness. 
 Includes shares beneficially owned by The Vanguard Group, of which The Vanguard Group has 
 shared voting power over 3,719,744 shares, 
 sole dispositive power over 217,847,966 shares and shared dispositive power over 11,957,525 
 shares. The address for The Vanguard Group 
 (2) is 100 Vanguard Blvd., Malvern, PA 19355. The foregoing information is based solely on 
 Schedule 13G of The Vanguard Group filed on February 13, 
 2024, which we do not know or have reason to believe is not complete or accurate and on 
 which we are relying pursuant to applicable SEC 
 regulations. 
 Includes shares beneficially owned by BlackRock, Inc., of which Blackrock, Inc. has sole 
 voting power over 169,527,462 shares 
 and sole dispositive power over 188,797,465 shares. The address for Blackrock, Inc. is 50 
 (3) Hudson Yards, New York, NY 10001. The foregoing 
 information is based solely on Schedule 13G of Blackrock, Inc. filed on January 29, 2024, 
 which we do not know or have reason 
 to believe is not complete or accurate and on which we are relying pursuant to applicable 
 SEC regulations. 
 Includes (i) 86,000 shares held by a grantor retained annuity trust, (ii) 1,001,617 shares 
 issuable upon exercise of options 
 (4) exercisable within 60 days after December 31, 2024 and (iii) 119 employee stock purchase 
 plan shares acquired within 60 days after December 31, 
 2024. 
 (5) Includes 2,089,398 shares issuable upon exercise of options exercisable within 60 days after 
 December 31, 2024. 
 Mr. Baglino departed Tesla in April 2024. 
 (6) This beneficial ownership information is partially based on his most recent Form 4, which 
 was filed on April 3, 2024. 
 (7) Includes 1,020,220 shares issuable upon exercise of options exercisable within 60 days after 
 December 31, 2024. 
 (8) Includes 1,110,000 shares issuable upon exercise of options exercisable within 60 days after 
 December 31, 2024. 
 Includes (i) 250,020 shares held by JRM Revocable Trust, (ii) 157,275 shares held by the 
 (9) Seven Hills Trust and (ii) 1,020,000 
 shares issuable upon exercise of options exercisable within 60 days after December 31, 2024. 
 Includes 326,750 shares issuable upon exercise of options exercisable within 60 days after 
 (10) December 31, 2024. Includes 1,538,220 
 shares pledged as collateral to secure certain personal indebtedness. 
 (11) Includes 565,855 shares issuable upon exercise of options exercisable within 60 days after 
 December 31, 2024. 
 Includes 311,094,470 shares issuable upon exercise of options held by our current executive 
 (12) officers and directors within 60 days 
 after December 31, 2024 and 119 employee stock purchase plan shares acquired within 60 days 
 after December 31, 2024. 
 23 
ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
Review of Related Person Transactions
In accordance with the charter for the Audit Committee
of the Board and our written Policies and Procedures with Respect to Related Person Transactions
(“RPT Policy”), our Audit
Committee reviews and approves any related person transactions.
For purposes of these procedures, “related
person” and “transaction” have the meanings contained in Item 404 of Regulation S-K.
Under the RPT Policy, the Audit Committee must
review and approve all transactions in which (i) Tesla or one of its subsidiaries is a participant,
(ii) the amount involved
exceeds $120,000 and (iii) a related person has a direct or indirect material interest, other than
transactions available to all
Tesla employees generally.
In assessing a related person transaction brought
before it for approval the Audit Committee considers, among other factors, whether the related person
transaction is on terms no less
favorable than terms generally available to an unaffiliated third-party under the same or similar
circumstances and the extent of the
related person’s interest in the transaction. The Audit Committee may then approve or disapprove the
transaction in its discretion,
or may request additional information.
Related person transactions will be disclosed in
the applicable SEC filing as required by the rules of the SEC.
Related Person Transactions
Elon Musk is an executive officer, director and/or
significant shareholder of SpaceX, X, xAI and TBC. In March 2025, xAI and X effected a transaction
under which xAI and X became wholly-owned
subsidiaries of a new parent company named X.AI Holdings Corp.
SpaceX is party to certain commercial, licensing
and support agreements with Tesla. Under these agreements, SpaceX incurred expenses of approximately
$2.4 million in 2024 and approximately
$0.1 million through February 2025.
Since April 2016, SpaceX has invoiced Tesla
for our use of an aircraft owned and operated by SpaceX at rates determined by Tesla and SpaceX,
subject to rules of the Federal
Aviation Administration governing such arrangements. Tesla incurred expenses of approximately $0.8
million in 2024 and approximately
$0.04 million through February 2025.
X is party to certain commercial, consulting and
support agreements with Tesla. Under these agreements, Tesla incurred expenses of approximately $0.1
million in 2024. As part of a multi-platform
advertising campaign, Tesla also directly or indirectly purchased advertising on X, which totaled
approximately $0.4 million in 2024
and approximately $0.01 million through February 2025.
xAI is party to certain commercial (including those
for the purchase of Megapacks), consulting and support agreements with Tesla. Under these agreements,
xAI incurred expenses of approximately
$198.3 million in 2024 and approximately $36.9 million through February 2025. Approximately $191.0
million during 2024 and $36.8 million through February 2025 was incurred by xAI for its purchase of
our Megapack products.
TBC is party to commercial agreements with Tesla.
Under these agreements, Tesla incurred expenses of approximately $3.6 million in 2024 and
approximately $0.8 million through February
2025.
We are party to a service agreement with a security
company, owned by Elon Musk and organized to provide security services concerning him, including in
connection with his duties to and
work for Tesla. Tesla incurred expenses of approximately $2.8 million for such security services in
2024 and approximately $0.5 million
through February 2025, representing a portion of the total cost of security services concerning Elon
Musk.
JB Straubel is the Chief Executive Officer of Redwood.
Tesla is party to an agreement with Redwood to supply certain scrap materials. Under this agreement,
Redwood incurred expenses of approximately
$30.3 million in 2024 and approximately $0.6 million through February 2025.
Kimbal Musk is the Chief Executive Officer of Nova
Sky Stories. In 2024, we entered into a commercial agreement with Nova Sky Stories in relation to the
production of an aerial show. Under
this agreement, Tesla incurred expenses of approximately $0.3 million in 2024.
Other Transactions
Tesla periodically does business with certain entities
its directors are affiliated with. Such transactions are done on terms no less favorable than terms
generally available to an unaffiliated
third-party under the same or similar circumstances.
 24 
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into
offer letters with our executive officers. We have also entered into indemnification agreements with
each of our directors and officers.
The indemnification agreements and our certificate of formation and bylaws require us to indemnify
our directors and officers to the fullest
extent permitted by applicable law. In relation to our CEO’s exercise of stock options and sale of
common stock from the 2012 CEO
Performance Award, Tesla withheld the appropriate amount of taxes. However, given the significant
amounts involved, our CEO entered into
an indemnification agreement with us in November 2021 to indemnify the Company for additional taxes
owed, if any.
Director Independence
The Board periodically assesses, with the recommendation
of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee, the independence of its members as defined in
the listing standards of Nasdaq and
applicable law. The Board undertook an analysis for each director and director nominee and considered
all relevant facts and circumstances,
including the director’s other commercial, accounting, legal, banking, consulting, charitable and
familial relationships. The Board
determined that with respect to each of its current members and director nominees, other than Elon
Musk, who is our Chief Executive Officer,
and Kimbal Musk, who is Elon Musk’s brother, there are no disqualifying factors with respect to
director independence enumerated
in the listing standards of Nasdaq or any relationships that would interfere with the exercise of
independent judgment in carrying out
the responsibilities of a director, and that each such member is an “independent director” as defined
in the listing standards
of Nasdaq and applicable laws.
In particular, the Board reviewed the following
considerations:
 Ira Ehrenpreis, Joe Gebbia, James Murdoch, Elon Musk, Kimbal Musk and JB Straubel and/or 
 investment funds affiliated with them, have 
 made minority investments in certain companies or investment funds (i) of which other Tesla 
 directors are founders, significant shareholders, 
 · directors, officers, or managers, and/or (ii) with which Tesla has had certain relationships, 
 such as those set forth in “Related 
 Person Transactions” under this Item 13 above. The Board concluded that none of these 
 investments are material so as to 
 impede the exercise of independent judgment by any of Messrs. Ehrenpreis, Gebbia, Murdoch or 
 Straubel. 
ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
The following table presents fees billed for professional
audit services and other services rendered to Tesla by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP for the years ended
December 31, 2023 and
2024. The dollar amounts in the table and accompanying footnotes are in thousands.
 2023 2024 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Audit Fees (1) $ 17,365 $ 15,634 
 Audit-Related Fees(2) 42 54 
 Tax Fees (3) 2,579 2,154 
 All Other Fees (4) 269 81 
 Total $ 20,255 $ 17,923 
 Audit Fees consist of fees for professional services rendered for the audit of Tesla’s 
 consolidated financial statements included 
 in Tesla’s Annual Report on Form 10-K and for the review of the financial statements 
 (1) included in Tesla’s Quarterly Reports 
 on Form 10-Q, as well as services that generally only Tesla’s independent registered public 
 accounting firm can reasonably 
 provide, including statutory audits and services rendered in connection with SEC filings. 
 Audit-Related Fees in 2023 and 2024 consisted of fees for professional services for certain 
 (2) agreed upon procedures in conjunction 
 with certain financing transactions and other attestation services. 
 (3) Tax Fees in 2023 and 2024 consisted of fees related to consultation, tax planning and 
 compliance services. 
 Other Fees in 2023 and 2024 consisted of permitted services other than those that meet the 
 (4) criteria above and include fees for accounting 
 research software, the assessment of non-financial metrics and documentation and 
 pre-implementation review of non-financial systems. 
 25 
Pre-Approval of Audit and Non-Audit Services
Tesla’s Audit Committee has adopted a policy
for pre-approving audit and non-audit services and associated fees of Tesla’s independent registered
public accounting firm. Under
this policy, the Audit Committee must pre- approve all services and associated fees provided to Tesla
by its independent registered public
accounting firm, with certain de minimis exceptions described in the policy.
All PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP services and fees
in fiscal 2023 and 2024 were pre-approved by the Audit Committee.
 26 
 PART IV 
ITEM 15. EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
 1. Financial statements (see Index to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of 
 the Original Form 10-K) 
 All financial statement schedules have been omitted since the required information was not 
 applicable or was not present in amounts 
 2. sufficient to require submission of the schedules, or because the information required is 
 included in the consolidated financial statements 
 or the accompanying notes 
 3. The exhibits listed in the following Index to Exhibits are filed or incorporated by reference 
 as part of this report 
 INDEX TO EXHIBITS 
 Exhib… Incorp… Filed 
 Number by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhibit Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descri… No. Date 
 Certif… 
 of July 
 3.1 Format… 10-Q 001-34… 3.1 24, 
 of the 2024 
 Regist… 
 Bylaws July 
 3.2 of the 10-Q 001-34… 3.2 24, 
 Regist… 2024 
 Specim… 
 common January 
 4.1 stock 10-K 001-34… 4.1 30, 
 certif… 2025 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 Fifth 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Invest… 
 Rights 
 Agreem… 
 dated 
 as of 
 August 
 31, January 
 4.2 2009, S-1 333-16… 4.2 29, 
 between 2010 
 Regist… 
 and 
 certain 
 holders 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 capital 
 stock 
 named 
 therei… 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Fifth 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Invest… 
 Rights 
 Agreem… 
 dated 
 as of 
 4.3 May 20, S-1/A 333-16… 4.2A May 27, 
 2010, 2010 
 between 
 Regist… 
 and 
 certain 
 holders 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 capital 
 stock 
 named 
 therei… 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Fifth 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Invest… 
 Rights 
 Agreem… 
 between 
 Regist… May 27, 
 4.4 Toyota S-1/A 333-16… 4.2B 2010 
 Motor 
 Corpor… 
 and 
 certain 
 holders 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 capital 
 stock 
 named 
 therei… 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Fifth 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Invest… 
 Rights 
 Agreem… 
 dated 
 as of 
 June June 
 4.5 14, S-1/A 333-16… 4.2C 15, 
 2010, 2010 
 between 
 Regist… 
 and 
 certain 
 holders 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 capital 
 stock 
 named 
 therei… 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Fifth 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Invest… 
 Rights 
 Agreem… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Novemb… Novemb… 
 4.6 2, 8-K 001-34… 4.1 4, 2010 
 2010, 
 between 
 Regist… 
 and 
 certain 
 holders 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 capital 
 stock 
 named 
 therei… 
 27 
 Exhib… Incorp… Filed 
 Number by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhibit Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descri… No. Date 
 Waiver 
 to 
 Fifth 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Invest… 
 Rights 
 Agreem… 
 dated 
 as of 
 4.7 May 22, S-1/A 333-17… 4.2E June 2, 
 2011, 2011 
 between 
 Regist… 
 and 
 certain 
 holders 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 capital 
 stock 
 named 
 therei… 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Fifth 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Invest… 
 Rights 
 Agreem… 
 dated 
 as of 
 4.8 May 30, 8-K 001-34… 4.1 June 1, 
 2011, 2011 
 between 
 Regist… 
 and 
 certain 
 holders 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 capital 
 stock 
 named 
 therei… 
 Sixth 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Fifth 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Invest… 
 Rights 
 Agreem… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 15, 
 2013 
 among 
 the 
 Regist… 
 the May 20, 
 4.9 Elon 8-K 001-34… 4.1 2013 
 Musk 
 Revoca… 
 Trust 
 dated 
 July 
 22, 
 2003 
 and 
 certain 
 other 
 holders 
 of the 
 capital 
 stock 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 named 
 therei… 
 Waiver 
 to 
 Fifth 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Invest… 
 Rights 
 Agreem… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 14, 
 4.10 2013, 8-K 001-34… 4.2 May 20, 
 between 2013 
 the 
 Regist… 
 and 
 certain 
 holders 
 of the 
 capital 
 stock 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 named 
 therei… 
 Waiver 
 to 
 Fifth 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Invest… 
 Rights 
 Agreem… 
 dated 
 as of 
 August 
 13, August 
 4.11 2015, 8-K 001-34… 4.1 19, 
 between 2015 
 the 
 Regist… 
 and 
 certain 
 holders 
 of the 
 capital 
 stock 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 named 
 therei… 
 Waiver 
 to 
 Fifth 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Invest… 
 Rights 
 Agreem… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 18, 
 4.12 2016, 8-K 001-34… 4.1 May 24, 
 between 2016 
 the 
 Regist… 
 and 
 certain 
 holders 
 of the 
 capital 
 stock 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 named 
 therei… 
 Waiver 
 to 
 Fifth 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Invest… 
 Rights 
 Agreem… 
 dated 
 as of 
 March 
 15, March 
 4.13 2017, 8-K 001-34… 4.1 17, 
 between 2017 
 the 
 Regist… 
 and 
 certain 
 holders 
 of the 
 capital 
 stock 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 named 
 therei… 
 Waiver 
 to 
 Fifth 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Invest… 
 Rights 
 Agreem… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 1, 
 4.14 2019, 8-K 001-34… 4.1 May 3, 
 between 2019 
 the 
 Regist… 
 and 
 certain 
 holders 
 of the 
 capital 
 stock 
 of the 
 Regist… 
 named 
 therei… 
 28 
 Exhib… Incorp… Filed 
 Number by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhibit Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descri… No. Date 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 22, 
 2013, 
 by and 
 4.15 between 8-K 001-3… 4.1 May 22, 
 the 2013 
 Regist… 
 and 
 U.S. 
 Bank 
 Nation… 
 Associ… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 October 
 15, 
 2014, 
 between October 
 4.16 SolarC… S-3ASR… 333-1… 4.1 15, 
 and 2014 
 U.S. 
 Bank 
 Nation… 
 Associ… 
 as 
 truste… 
 Tenth 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 March 
 9, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between March 
 4.17 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-3… 4.3 9, 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.00% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/6… 
 Eleven… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 March 
 9, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between March 
 4.18 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-3… 4.4 9, 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.75% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/7… 
 Fiftee… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 March 
 19, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between March 
 4.19 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-3… 4.5 19, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Sixtee… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 March 
 19, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between March 
 4.20 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-3… 4.6 19, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Twenti… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 March 
 26, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between March 
 4.21 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-3… 4.5 26, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Twenty… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 March 
 26, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between March 
 4.22 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-3… 4.6 26, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Twenty… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 April 
 2, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between April 
 4.23 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-3… 4.5 2, 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Thirti… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 April 
 9, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between April 
 4.24 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-3… 4.5 9, 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 29 
 Exhib… Incorp… Filed 
 Number by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhibit Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descri… No. Date 
 Thirty… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 April 
 9, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between April 
 4.25 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 9, 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Thirty… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 April 
 14, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between April 
 4.26 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 14, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Thirty… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 April 
 14, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between April 
 4.27 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 14, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Thirty… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 April 
 21, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between April 
 4.28 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.3 21, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Thirty… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 April 
 21, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between April 
 4.29 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.4 21, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Forty-… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 April 
 27, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between April 
 4.30 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 27, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Forty-… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 April 
 27, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between April 
 4.31 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 27, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Forty-… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 1, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between 
 4.32 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 May 1, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.00% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/1… 
 Forty-… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 1, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between 
 4.33 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 May 1, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.75% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/1… 
 30 
 Exhib… Incorp… Filed 
 Number by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhibit Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descri… No. Date 
 Fifty-… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 11, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between 
 4.34 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.4 May 11, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Fifty-… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 11, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between 
 4.35 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 May 11, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Fifty-… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 18, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between 
 4.36 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.4 May 18, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Fifty-… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 18, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between 
 4.37 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 May 18, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Sixty-… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 26, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between 
 4.38 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.4 May 26, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Sixty-… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 26, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between 
 4.39 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 May 26, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Sevent… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 June 
 16, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between June 
 4.40 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.4 16, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Sevent… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 June 
 16, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between June 
 4.41 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 16, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Sevent… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 June 
 22, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between June 
 4.42 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.4 23, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 31 
 Exhib… Incorp… Filed 
 Number by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhibit Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descri… No. Date 
 Sevent… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 June 
 22, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between June 
 4.43 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 23, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Eighti… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 June 
 29, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between June 
 4.44 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 29, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Eighty… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 June 
 29, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between June 
 4.45 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 29, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Nineti… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 July 
 20, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between July 
 4.46 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 21, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Ninety… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 July 
 20, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between July 
 4.47 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 21, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 Ninety… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 July 
 31, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between July 
 4.48 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 31, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.00% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/2… 
 Ninety… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 July 
 31, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between July 
 4.49 SolarC… 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 31, 
 and the 2015 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.75% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/2… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 August 
 10, 
 2015, 
 by and August 
 4.50 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 10, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 August 
 17, 
 2015, 
 by and August 
 4.51 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 17, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 32 
 Exhib… Incorp… Filed 
 Number by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhibit Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descri… No. Date 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 August 
 24, 
 2015, 
 by and August 
 4.52 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 24, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 August 
 31, 
 2015, 
 by and August 
 4.53 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 31, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Septem… 
 14, 
 2015, 
 by and Septem… 
 4.54 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 15, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Septem… 
 14, 
 2015, 
 by and Septem… 
 4.55 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 15, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Septem… 
 28, 
 2015, 
 by and Septem… 
 4.56 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 29, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Septem… 
 28, 
 2015, 
 by and Septem… 
 4.57 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 29, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 October 
 13, 
 2015, 
 by and October 
 4.58 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 13, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 October 
 30, 
 2015, 
 by and October 
 4.59 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 30, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.00% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/2… 
 33 
 Exhib… Incorp… Filed 
 Number by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhibit Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descri… No. Date 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 October 
 30, 
 2015, 
 by and October 
 4.60 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 30, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.75% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/2… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Novemb… 
 4, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 4.61 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 Novemb… 
 SolarC… 4, 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Novemb… 
 16, 
 2015, 
 by and Novemb… 
 4.62 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 17, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Novemb… 
 16, 
 2015, 
 by and Novemb… 
 4.63 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 17, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Novemb… 
 30, 
 2015, 
 by and Novemb… 
 4.64 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 30, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Novemb… 
 30, 
 2015, 
 by and Novemb… 
 4.65 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 30, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Decemb… 
 14, 
 2015, 
 by and Decemb… 
 4.66 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.5 14, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Decemb… 
 14, 
 2015, 
 by and Decemb… 
 4.67 between 8-K(1) 001-35… 4.6 14, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 34 
 Exhib… Incorp… Filed 
 Number by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhibit Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descri… No. Date 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Decemb… 
 28, 
 2015, 
 by and Decemb… 
 4.68 between 8-K(1) 001-3… 4.5 28, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 4.70% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Decemb… 
 28, 
 2015, 
 by and Decemb… 
 4.69 between 8-K(1) 001-3… 4.6 28, 
 SolarC… 2015 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.45% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2015/C… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 January 
 29, 
 2016, 
 by and January 
 4.70 between 8-K(1) 001-3… 4.5 29, 
 SolarC… 2016 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.00% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2016/4… 
 One 
 Hundre… 
 Supple… 
 Indent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 January 
 29, 
 2016, 
 by and January 
 4.71 between 8-K(1) 001-3… 4.6 29, 
 SolarC… 2016 
 and the 
 Truste… 
 related 
 to 
 SolarC… 
 5.75% 
 Solar 
 Bonds, 
 Series 
 2016/5… 
 Descri… January 
 4.72 of 10-K 001-3… 4.72 30, 
 Regist… 2025 
 Securi… 
 Form of 
 Indemn… 
 Agreem… 
 between June 
 10.1** the S-1/A 333-1… 10.1 15, 
 Regist… 2010 
 and its 
 direct… 
 and 
 office… 
 2003 
 10.2** Equity S-1/A 333-1… 10.2 May 27, 
 Incent… 2010 
 Plan. 
 Form of 
 Stock 
 Option 
 Agreem… January 
 10.3** under S-1 333-1… 10.3 29, 
 2003 2010 
 Equity 
 Incent… 
 Plan. 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… Februa… 
 10.4** 2010 10-K 001-3… 10.4 23, 
 Equity 2018 
 Incent… 
 Plan. 
 Form of 
 Stock 
 Option 
 Agreem… March 
 10.5** under 10-K 001-3… 10.6 1, 2017 
 2010 
 Equity 
 Incent… 
 Plan. 
 Form of 
 Restri… 
 Stock 
 Unit 
 Award March 
 10.6** Agreem… 10-K 001-3… 10.7 1, 2017 
 under 
 2010 
 Equity 
 Incent… 
 Plan. 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 2010 
 Employ… 
 Stock March 
 10.7** Purcha… 10-K 001-3… 10.8 1, 2017 
 Plan, 
 effect… 
 as of 
 Februa… 
 1, 
 2017. 
 2019 June 
 10.8** Equity S-8 333-2… 4.2 12, 
 Incent… 2019 
 Plan. 
 35 
 Exhi… Incor… Filed 
 Numb… by Herew… 
 Refer… 
 Exhib… Form File Exhib… Filing 
 Descr… No. Date 
 Form 
 of 
 Stock 
 Option June 
 10.9… Agree… S-8 333-23… 4.3 12, 
 under 2019 
 2019 
 Equity 
 Incen… 
 Plan. 
 Form 
 of 
 Restr… 
 Stock 
 Unit June 
 10.1… Award S-8 333-23… 4.4 12, 
 Agree… 2019 
 under 
 2019 
 Equity 
 Incen… 
 Plan. 
 Emplo… 
 Stock 
 Purch… 
 Plan, June 
 10.1… effec… S-8 333-23… 4.5 12, 
 as of 2019 
 June 
 12, 
 2019. 
 2012 
 Solar… 
 Equity 
 Incen… 
 Plan October 
 10.1… and S-1(1) 333-18… 10.3 5, 2012 
 form 
 of 
 agree… 
 used 
 there… 
 Offer 
 Letter 
 betwe… 
 the 
 Regis… January 
 10.1… and S-1 333-16… 10.9 29, 
 Elon 2010 
 Musk 
 dated 
 Octob… 
 13, 
 2008. 
 Perfo… 
 Stock 
 Option 
 Agree… 
 betwe… 
 the 
 10.1… Regis… DEF 14A 001-34… Append… Februa… 
 and A 8, 2018 
 Elon 
 Musk 
 dated 
 Janua… 
 21, 
 2018. 
 Indem… 
 Agree… 
 effec… 
 as of 
 June 
 23, July 
 10.15 2020, 10-Q 001-34… 10.4 28, 
 betwe… 2020 
 Regis… 
 and 
 Elon 
 R. 
 Musk. 
 Form 
 of 
 Call 
 Option 
 Confi… 
 relat… 
 to March 
 10.16 1.25% 8-K 001-34… 10.3 5, 2014 
 Conve… 
 Senior 
 Notes 
 Due 
 March 
 1, 
 2021. 
 Supply 
 Agree… 
 betwe… 
 Panas… 
 Corpo… Februa… 
 10.1… and 10-K 001-34… 10.50 27, 
 the 2012 
 Regis… 
 dated 
 Octob… 
 5, 
 2011. 
 Amend… 
 No. 1 
 to 
 Supply 
 Agree… 
 betwe… 
 Panas… Februa… 
 10.1… Corpo… 10-K 001-34… 10.35A 26, 
 and 2014 
 the 
 Regis… 
 dated 
 Octob… 
 29, 
 2013. 
 Agree… 
 betwe… 
 Panas… 
 Corpo… 
 and Novemb… 
 10.19 the 10-Q 001-34… 10.1 7, 2014 
 Regis… 
 dated 
 July 
 31, 
 2014. 
 Gener… 
 Terms 
 and 
 Condi… 
 betwe… 
 Panas… October 
 10.2… Corpo… 8-K 001-34… 10.2 11, 
 and 2016 
 the 
 Regis… 
 dated 
 Octob… 
 1, 
 2014. 
 Letter 
 Agree… 
 dated 
 as of 
 Febru… 
 24, 
 2015, 
 regar… 
 addit… 
 of 
 co-pa… 
 to 
 Gener… 
 Terms Februa… 
 10.21 and 10-K 001-34… 10.25A 24, 
 Condi… 2016 
 Produ… 
 Prici… 
 Agree… 
 and 
 Inves… 
 Letter 
 Agree… 
 betwe… 
 Panas… 
 Corpo… 
 and 
 the 
 Regis… 
 36 
 Exhib… Incorp… Filed 
 Number by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhibit Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descri… No. Date 
 Invest… 
 Letter 
 Agreem… 
 between 
 Panaso… 
 10.22† Corpor… 10-Q 001-34… 10.4 Novemb… 
 and the 7, 2014 
 Regist… 
 dated 
 October 
 1, 
 2014. 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Gigafa… 
 Docume… 
 dated 
 April 
 5, 
 2016, 
 by and 
 among 
 the 
 Regist… 
 10.23 Panaso… 10-Q 001-34… 10.2 May 10, 
 Corpor… 2016 
 Panaso… 
 Corpor… 
 of 
 North 
 America 
 and 
 Panaso… 
 Energy 
 Corpor… 
 of 
 North 
 Americ… 
 2019 
 Pricing 
 Agreem… 
 (Japan 
 Cells) 
 with 
 respect 
 to 2011 
 Supply 
 Agreem… 
 execut… 
 Septem… 
 20, 
 2019, October 
 10.24… by and 10-Q 001-34… 10.6 29, 
 among 2019 
 the 
 Regist… 
 Tesla 
 Motors 
 Nether… 
 B.V., 
 Panaso… 
 Corpor… 
 and 
 SANYO 
 Electr… 
 Co., 
 Ltd. 
 2020 
 Pricing 
 Agreem… 
 (Gigaf… 
 2170 
 Cells), 
 entered 
 into on 
 June 9, 
 2020, 
 by and 
 among July 
 10.25… Regist… 10-Q 001-34… 10.3 28, 
 Tesla 2020 
 Motors 
 Nether… 
 B.V., 
 Panaso… 
 Corpor… 
 and 
 Panaso… 
 Corpor… 
 of 
 North 
 Americ… 
 2021 
 Pricing 
 Agreem… 
 (Japan 
 Cells) 
 with 
 respect 
 to 2011 
 Supply 
 Agreem… 
 execut… 
 Decemb… 
 29, 
 2020, 
 by and 
 10.26… among 10-K 001-34… 10.39 Februa… 
 the 8, 2021 
 Regist… 
 Tesla 
 Motors 
 Nether… 
 B.V., 
 Panaso… 
 Corpor… 
 of 
 North 
 America 
 and 
 SANYO 
 Electr… 
 Co., 
 Ltd. 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Factory 
 Lease, 
 execut… 
 as of 
 March 
 26, 
 2019, 
 by and 
 between 
 the 
 Regist… July 
 10.27… and 10-Q 001-34… 10.3 29, 
 Panaso… 2019 
 Energy 
 North 
 Americ… 
 a 
 divisi… 
 of 
 Panaso… 
 Corpor… 
 of 
 North 
 Americ… 
 as 
 tenant. 
 Lease 
 Amendm… 
 execut… 
 Septem… 
 20, 
 2019, 
 by and 
 among 
 the 
 Regist… 
 Panaso… 
 Corpor… 
 of 
 North 
 Americ… 
 on 
 behalf 
 of its October 
 10.28… divisi… 10-Q 001-34… 10.7 29, 
 Panaso… 2019 
 Energy 
 of 
 North 
 Americ… 
 with 
 respect 
 to the 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Factory 
 Lease, 
 execut… 
 as of 
 March 
 26, 
 2019. 
 Second 
 Lease 
 Amendm… 
 entered 
 into on 
 June 9, 
 2020, 
 by and 
 between 
 the 
 Regist… 
 and 
 Panaso… 
 Energy 
 of 
 North 
 Americ… 
 a July 
 10.29… divisi… 10-Q 001-34… 10.1 28, 
 of 2020 
 Panaso… 
 Corpor… 
 of 
 North 
 Americ… 
 with 
 respect 
 to the 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Factory 
 Lease 
 dated 
 January 
 1, 
 2017. 
 37 
 Exhi… Incorp… Filed 
 Numb… by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhib… Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descr… No. Date 
 Agreem… 
 for Tax 
 Abatem… 
 and 
 Incent… 
 dated 
 as of 
 May 7, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between 
 Tesla 
 Motors, 
 10.3… Inc. 10-Q 001-3… 10.1 August 
 and the 7, 2015 
 State 
 of 
 Nevada, 
 acting 
 by and 
 through 
 the 
 Nevada 
 Govern… 
 Office 
 of 
 Econom… 
 Develo… 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Agreem… 
 For 
 Resear… 
 & 
 Develo… 
 Allian… 
 on 
 Triex 
 Module 
 Techno… 
 effect… 
 as of 
 Septem… 
 2, 
 2014, 
 by and 
 between 
 The 
 Resear… Novemb… 
 10.31 Founda… 10-Q(… 001-3… 10.16 6, 2014 
 For The 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 on 
 behalf 
 of the 
 College 
 of 
 Nanosc… 
 Science 
 and 
 Engine… 
 of the 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 and 
 Silevo, 
 Inc. 
 First 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Agreem… 
 For 
 Resear… 
 & 
 Develo… 
 Allian… 
 on 
 Triex 
 Module 
 Techno… 
 effect… 
 as of 
 October 
 31, 
 2014, 
 by and 
 between Februa… 
 10.32 The 10-K(… 001-3… 10.16a 24, 
 Resear… 2015 
 Founda… 
 For The 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 on 
 behalf 
 of the 
 College 
 of 
 Nanosc… 
 Science 
 and 
 Engine… 
 of the 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 and 
 Silevo, 
 Inc. 
 Second 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Agreem… 
 For 
 Resear… 
 & 
 Develo… 
 Allian… 
 on 
 Triex 
 Module 
 Techno… 
 effect… 
 as of 
 Decemb… 
 15, 
 2014, 
 by and 
 between Februa… 
 10.33 The 10-K(… 001-3… 10.16b 24, 
 Resear… 2015 
 Founda… 
 For The 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 on 
 behalf 
 of the 
 College 
 of 
 Nanosc… 
 Science 
 and 
 Engine… 
 of the 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 and 
 Silevo, 
 Inc. 
 Third 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Agreem… 
 For 
 Resear… 
 & 
 Develo… 
 Allian… 
 on 
 Triex 
 Module 
 Techno… 
 effect… 
 as of 
 Februa… 
 12, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between 
 10.34 The 10-Q(… 001-3… 10.16c May 6, 
 Resear… 2015 
 Founda… 
 For The 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 on 
 behalf 
 of the 
 College 
 of 
 Nanosc… 
 Science 
 and 
 Engine… 
 of the 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 and 
 Silevo, 
 Inc. 
 38 
 Exhi… Incorp… Filed 
 Numb… by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhib… Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descr… No. Date 
 Fourth 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Agreem… 
 For 
 Resear… 
 & 
 Develo… 
 Allian… 
 on 
 Triex 
 Module 
 Techno… 
 effect… 
 as of 
 March 
 30, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between 
 10.35 The 10-Q(… 001-3… 10.16d May 6, 
 Resear… 2015 
 Founda… 
 For The 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 on 
 behalf 
 of the 
 College 
 of 
 Nanosc… 
 Science 
 and 
 Engine… 
 of the 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 and 
 Silevo, 
 Inc. 
 Fifth 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Agreem… 
 For 
 Resear… 
 & 
 Develo… 
 Allian… 
 on 
 Triex 
 Module 
 Techno… 
 effect… 
 as of 
 June 
 30, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between July 
 10.36 The 10-Q(… 001-3… 10.16e 30, 
 Resear… 2015 
 Founda… 
 For The 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 on 
 behalf 
 of the 
 College 
 of 
 Nanosc… 
 Science 
 and 
 Engine… 
 of the 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 and 
 Silevo, 
 LLC. 
 Sixth 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Agreem… 
 For 
 Resear… 
 & 
 Develo… 
 Allian… 
 on 
 Triex 
 Module 
 Techno… 
 effect… 
 as of 
 Septem… 
 1, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between October 
 10.37 The 10-Q(… 001-3… 10.16f 30, 
 Resear… 2015 
 Founda… 
 For The 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 on 
 behalf 
 of the 
 College 
 of 
 Nanosc… 
 Science 
 and 
 Engine… 
 of the 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 and 
 Silevo, 
 LLC. 
 Seventh 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Agreem… 
 For 
 Resear… 
 & 
 Develo… 
 Allian… 
 on 
 Triex 
 Module 
 Techno… 
 effect… 
 as of 
 October 
 9, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between October 
 10.38 The 10-Q(… 001-3… 10.16g 30, 
 Resear… 2015 
 Founda… 
 For The 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 on 
 behalf 
 of the 
 College 
 of 
 Nanosc… 
 Science 
 and 
 Engine… 
 of the 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 and 
 Silevo, 
 LLC. 
 Eighth 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Agreem… 
 For 
 Resear… 
 & 
 Develo… 
 Allian… 
 on 
 Triex 
 Module 
 Techno… 
 effect… 
 as of 
 October 
 26, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between October 
 10.39 The 10-Q(… 001-3… 10.16h 30, 
 Resear… 2015 
 Founda… 
 For The 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 on 
 behalf 
 of the 
 College 
 of 
 Nanosc… 
 Science 
 and 
 Engine… 
 of the 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 and 
 Silevo, 
 LLC. 
 39 
 Exhi… Incorp… Filed 
 Numb… by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhib… Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descr… No. Date 
 Ninth 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Agreem… 
 For 
 Resear… 
 & 
 Develo… 
 Allian… 
 on 
 Triex 
 Module 
 Techno… 
 effect… 
 as of 
 Decemb… 
 9, 
 2015, 
 by and 
 between Februa… 
 10.40 The 10-K(… 001-3… 10.16i 10, 
 Resear… 2016 
 Founda… 
 For The 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 on 
 behalf 
 of the 
 College 
 of 
 Nanosc… 
 Science 
 and 
 Engine… 
 of the 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 and 
 Silevo, 
 LLC. 
 Tenth 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Agreem… 
 For 
 Resear… 
 & 
 Develo… 
 Allian… 
 on 
 Triex 
 Module 
 Techno… 
 effect… 
 as of 
 March 
 31, 
 2017, 
 by and 
 between 
 10.41 The 10-Q 001-3… 10.8 May 10, 
 Resear… 2017 
 Founda… 
 For The 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 on 
 behalf 
 of the 
 Colleg… 
 of 
 Nanosc… 
 Science 
 and 
 Engine… 
 of the 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 and 
 Silevo, 
 LLC. 
 Eleven… 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Agreem… 
 for 
 Resear… 
 & 
 Develo… 
 Allian… 
 on 
 Triex 
 Module 
 Techno… 
 effect… July 
 10.42 as of 10-Q 001-3… 10.6 28, 
 July 2020 
 22, 
 2020, 
 among 
 the 
 Resear… 
 Founda… 
 for the 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 Silevo, 
 LLC and 
 Tesla 
 Energy 
 Operat… 
 Inc. 
 Twelfth 
 Amendm… 
 to 
 Amended 
 and 
 Restat… 
 Agreem… 
 for 
 Resear… 
 & 
 Develo… 
 Allian… 
 on 
 Triex 
 Module 
 Techno… 
 effect… October 
 10.43 as of 10-Q 001-3… 10.1 25, 
 May 1, 2021 
 2021, 
 among 
 the 
 Resear… 
 Founda… 
 for the 
 State 
 Univer… 
 of New 
 York, 
 Silevo, 
 LLC and 
 Tesla 
 Energy 
 Operat… 
 Inc. 
 Grant 
 Contra… 
 for 
 State-… 
 Constr… 
 Land 
 Use 
 Right, 
 dated 
 as of 
 October 
 17, 
 2018, 
 by and 
 between 
 Shangh… July 
 10.4… Planni… 10-Q 001-3… 10.2 29, 
 and 2019 
 Land 
 Resour… 
 Admini… 
 Bureau, 
 as 
 granto… 
 and 
 Tesla 
 (Shang… 
 Co., 
 Ltd., 
 as 
 grantee 
 (Engli… 
 transl… 
 Credit 
 Agreem… 
 dated 
 as of 
 January 
 20, 
 2023, 
 among 
 Tesla, 
 Inc., 
 the 
 Lenders 
 and 
 Issuing 
 Banks 
 from January 
 10.45 time to 10-K 001-3… 10.59 31, 
 time 2023 
 party 
 theret… 
 Citiba… 
 N.A., 
 as 
 Admini… 
 Agent 
 and 
 Deutsc… 
 Bank 
 Securi… 
 Inc., 
 as 
 Syndic… 
 Agent 
 Insider January 
 19 Trading 10-K 001-3… 19 30, 
 Policy 2025 
 40 
 Exhib… Incorp… Filed 
 Number by Herew… 
 Refere… 
 Exhibit Form File Exhibit Filing 
 Descri… No. Date 
 List of January 
 21.1 Subsid… 10-K 001-34… 21.1 30, 
 of the 2025 
 Regist… 
 Consent 
 of 
 Pricew… 
 LLP, January 
 23.1 Indepe… 10-K 001-34… 23.1 30, 
 Regist… 2025 
 Public 
 Accoun… 
 Firm 
 Rule 
 13a-14… 
 / 
 15(d)-… January 
 31.1 Certif… 10-K 001-34… 31.1 30, 
 of 2025 
 Princi… 
 Execut… 
 Officer 
 Rule 
 13a-14… 
 / 
 15(d)-… January 
 31.2 Certif… 10-K 001-34… 31.2 30, 
 of 2025 
 Princi… 
 Financ… 
 Officer 
 Rule 
 13a-14… 
 / 
 15(d)-… 
 31.3 Certif… — — — — X 
 of 
 Princi… 
 Execut… 
 Officer 
 Rule 
 13a-14… 
 / 
 15(d)-… 
 31.4 Certif… — — — — X 
 of 
 Princi… 
 Financ… 
 Officer 
 Section January 
 32.1* 1350 10-K 001-34… 32.1 30, 
 Certif… 2025 
 Tesla, January 
 97 Inc. 10-K 001-34… 97 29, 
 Clawba… 2024 
 Policy 
 Inline 
 101.I… XBRL — — — — X 
 Instan… 
 Docume… 
 Inline 
 XBRL 
 101.S… Taxono… — — — — X 
 Extens… 
 Schema 
 Docume… 
 Inline 
 XBRL 
 Taxono… 
 101.C… Extens… — — — — X 
 Calcul… 
 Linkba… 
 Docume… 
 Inline 
 XBRL 
 Taxono… 
 101.D… Extens… — — — — X 
 Defini… 
 Linkba… 
 Docume… 
 Inline 
 XBRL 
 Taxono… 
 101.L… Extens… — — — — X 
 Label 
 Linkba… 
 Docume… 
 Inline 
 XBRL 
 Taxono… 
 101.P… Extens… — — — — X 
 Presen… 
 Linkba… 
 Docume… 
 Cover 
 Page 
 Intera… 
 Data 
 File 
 (forma… 
 as 
 inline 
 104 XBRL 
 with 
 applic… 
 taxono… 
 extens… 
 inform… 
 contai… 
 in 
 Exhibi… 
 101) 
 * Furnished herewith 
 ** Indicates a management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement 
 † Confidential treatment has been requested for portions of this exhibit 
 †† Portions of this exhibit have been redacted in compliance with Regulation S-K Item 
 601(b)(10). 
 (1) Indicates a filing of SolarCity 
 (2) Indicates a filing of Maxwell Technologies, Inc. 
 41 
 SIGNATURES 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13
or 15(d) the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed
on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized.
 Tesla, Inc. 
 Date: April 30, 2025 /s/ Vaibhav Taneja 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Vaibhav Taneja 
 Chief Financial Officer 
 -Principal Financial Officer and 
 Principal Accounting Officer 
 42