╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1. Business │
 OVERVIEW 
Visa is one of the world’s leaders in digital payments. Our purpose is to uplift everyone, everywhere
by being the best way to pay and be paid. We facilitate global commerce and money movement across
more than 200 countries and territories among a global set of consumers, merchants, financial
institutions and government entities through innovative technologies.
Since Visa’s early days in 1958, we have been in the business of facilitating payments between
consumers and businesses. As a trusted engine of commerce and with new ways to pay, we are working to
provide payment solutions for everyone, everywhere. We are focused on extending, enhancing and
investing in our proprietary network, VisaNet, to offer a single connection point for facilitating
payment transactions to multiple endpoints through various form factors. Through our network, we
offer products, solutions and services that facilitate secure, reliable and efficient money movement
for participants in the ecosystem.
• We facilitate secure, reliable and efficient money movement among consumers, issuing and acquiring
financial institutions, and merchants. We have traditionally referred to this as the “four-party”
model. Please see Our Core Business discussion below. As the payments ecosystem continues to evolve,
we have broadened this model to include digital banks, digital wallets and a range of financial
technology companies (fintechs), governments and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). We provide
transaction processing services (primarily authorization, clearing and settlement) to our financial
institution and merchant clients through VisaNet, our advanced transaction processing network. During
fiscal year 2022, we saw 258 billion payments and cash transactions with Visa’s brand, equating to an
average of 707 million transactions per day. Of the 258 billion total transactions, 193 billion were
processed by Visa.
• We offer a wide range of Visa-branded payment products that our clients, including nearly 15,000
financial institutions, use to develop and offer core business solutions, including credit, debit,
prepaid and cash access programs for individual, business and government account holders. During
fiscal year 2022, Visa’s total payments and cash volume was $14 trillion, and 4.1 billion credentials
(1) were available worldwide to be used at more than 80 million merchant locations, plus an estimated
20 million locations through payment facilitators. (1)
• We take an open partnership approach and seek to provide value by enabling access to our global
network, including offering our technology capabilities through application programming interfaces
(APIs). We partner with both traditional and emerging players to innovate and expand the payments
ecosystem, allowing them to leverage the resources of our platform to scale and grow their businesses
more quickly and effectively.
• We are accelerating the migration to digital payments and continue to evolve to be a “network of
networks” to enable the movement of money through all available networks. We aim to provide a single
connection point so that Visa clients can enable money movement for businesses, governments and
consumers, regardless of which network is used to start or complete the transaction. This ultimately
helps to unify a complex payments ecosystem. Visa’s network of networks approach creates
opportunities by facilitating person-to-person (P2P), business-to-consumer (B2C), business-to-
business (B2B), business-to-small business (B2b) and government-to-consumer (G2C) payments, in
addition to consumer to business (C2B) payments.
• We provide value added services to our clients, including issuing solutions, acceptance solutions,
risk and identity solutions, open banking and advisory services.
• We invest in and promote our brand to the benefit of our clients and partners through advertising,
promotional and sponsorship initiatives with FIFA, the International Olympic Committee, the
International Paralympic Committee and the National Football League (NFL), among others. We also use
these sponsorship assets to showcase our payment innovations.
(1) Data provided to Visa by acquiring institutions and other third parties as of June 30, 2022.
 4 
Table of Contents
 FISCAL YEAR 2022 KEY STATISTICS 
(1) Please see Item 7–Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations for a reconciliation of our GAAP to non-GAAP financial results.
 OUR CORE BUSINESS 
In an example of a typical Visa C2B payment transaction, the consumer purchases goods or services
from a merchant using a Visa card or payment product. The merchant presents the transaction data to
an acquirer, usually a bank or third-party processing firm that supports acceptance of Visa cards or
payment products, for verification and processing. Through VisaNet, the acquirer presents the
transaction data to Visa, which in turn contacts the issuer to check the account holder’s account or
credit line for authorization. After the transaction is authorized, the issuer effectively pays the
acquirer an amount equal to the value of the transaction, minus the interchange reimbursement fee,
and then posts the transaction to the consumer’s account. The acquirer pays the amount of the
purchase, minus the merchant discount rate (MDR), to the merchant.
Visa earns revenue by facilitating money movement across more than 200 countries and territories
among a global set of consumers, merchants, financial institutions and government entities through
innovative technologies. Net revenues consist of service revenues, data processing revenues,
international transaction revenues and other revenues, minus client incentive arrangements we have
with our clients. We have one reportable segment, which is Payment Services. We generally do not
experience any pronounced seasonality in our business.
Visa is not a financial institution. We do not issue cards, extend credit or set rates and fees for
account holders of Visa products nor do we earn revenues from, or bear credit risk with respect to,
any of these activities. Interchange reimbursement fees reflect the value merchants receive from
accepting our products and play a key
 5 
Table of Contents
role in balancing the costs and benefits that account holders and merchants derive from participating
in our payments networks. Generally, interchange reimbursement fees are collected from acquirers and
paid to issuers. We establish default interchange reimbursement fees that apply absent other
established settlement terms. In addition, we do not earn revenues from the fees that merchants are
charged by acquirers for acceptance, including the MDR. Our acquiring clients are generally
responsible for soliciting merchants as well as establishing and earning these fees.
Our net revenues in fiscal year 2022 consisted of the following:
 6 
Table of Contents
Visa’s strategy is to accelerate our revenue growth in consumer payments, new flows and value added
services, and fortify the key foundations of our business model.
We seek to accelerate revenue growth in three primary areas — consumer payments, new flows and value
added services.
 Consumer Payments 
We remain focused on moving the trillions of consumer spending in cash and checks to cards and
digital accounts on Visa’s network of networks.
 Core Products 
Visa’s growth has been driven by the strength of our core products — credit, debit and prepaid.
Credit: Credit cards and digital credentials allow consumers and businesses to access credit to pay
for goods and services. Credit cards are affiliated with programs operated by financial institution
clients, co-brand partners, fintechs and affinity partners.
Debit: Debit cards and digital credentials allow consumers and small businesses to purchase goods and
services using funds held in their bank accounts. Debit cards enable account holders to transact in
person, online or via mobile without needing cash or checks and without accessing a line of credit.
The Visa/PLUS Global ATM network also provides debit, credit and prepaid account holders with cash
access, and other banking capabilities, in more than 200 countries and territories worldwide through
issuing and acquiring partnerships with both financial institutions and independent ATM operators.
 7 
Table of Contents
Prepaid: Prepaid cards and digital credentials draw from a designated balance funded by individuals,
businesses or governments. Prepaid cards address many use cases and needs, including general purpose
reloadable, payroll, government and corporate disbursements, healthcare, gift and travel. Visa-
branded prepaid cards also play an important part in financial inclusion, bringing payment solutions
to those with limited or no access to traditional banking products.
 Enablers 
We enable consumer payments and help our clients grow as digital commerce, new technologies and new
participants continue to transform the payments ecosystem. Some examples include:
 Tap to Pay 
As we seek to improve the user experience in the face-to-face environment, contactless payments or
tap to pay, which is the process of tapping a contactless card or mobile device on a terminal to make
a payment, has emerged as a preferred way to pay among consumers in many countries around the world.
Tap to pay adoption is growing and many consumers have come to expect touchless payment experiences.
Globally, we have more than 30 countries and territories with more than 90 percent contactless
penetration and more than 90 countries where tap to pay is more than 50 percent of face-to-face
transactions. Excluding the United States, more than 70 percent of face-to-face transactions globally
were contactless. In the U.S., Visa has 28 percent contactless penetration and 495 million tap-to-
pay-enabled Visa cards. We have activated more than 600 contactless public transport projects
worldwide. In addition, we surpassed one billion contactless transactions on global transit systems
in fiscal year 2022, an increase of 70% year over year.
 Tokenization 
Visa Token Service (VTS) brings trust to digital commerce innovation. As consumers increasingly rely
on digital transactions, VTS is designed to enhance the digital ecosystem through improved
authorization, reduced fraud and improved consumer experience. VTS helps protect digital transactions
by replacing 16-digit Visa account numbers with a token that includes a surrogate account number,
cryptographic information and other data to protect the underlying account information. This security
technology can work for a variety of payment transactions, both in the physical and online space.
The provisioning of network tokens continues to accelerate. As of the end of fiscal year 2022, Visa
provisioned more than 4 billion network tokens, surpassing the number of physical cards in
circulation. The milestone reinforces Visa’s commitment to secure, seamless, digital payments, in-
store and online.
 Click to Pay 
Click to Pay provides a simplified and more consistent cardholder checkout experience online by
removing time-consuming key entry of personal information and enabling consumer and transaction data
to be passed securely between payments network participants. Based on the EMV® Secure Remote Commerce
industry standard, Click to Pay brings a standardized and streamlined approach to online checkout and
meets the needs of consumers shopping across a growing number of connected devices. The goal of Click
to Pay is to make digital payments safe, consistent and interoperable like the checkout experience in
physical stores.
 8 
Table of Contents
 New Flows 
Visa’s network of networks approach creates opportunities to capture new sources of money movement
through card and non-card flows for consumers, businesses and governments around the world by
facilitating P2P, B2C, B2B, B2b and G2C payments.
 Visa Direct 
Visa Direct is Visa’s global, real-time (2) payments network that helps facilitate the fast delivery
of funds directly to eligible cards and bank accounts around the world. Visa Direct leverages Visa’s
infrastructure to enable different transaction types and new money flows between parties for a wide
range of use cases, such as P2P payments and account-to-account transfers, business and government
payouts to individuals and small businesses, merchant settlements and refunds.
In fiscal year 2022, we had 5.9 billion Visa Direct transactions, an increase of 36 percent year over
year, excluding Russia from both periods, and more than 60 use cases and 2,000 programs. Visa Direct
connected 16 card-based networks, 66 automated clearing house (ACH) schemes, 11 real-time payment
(RTP) networks and five gateways. With the addition of push-to-wallet capabilities to Visa Direct
Payouts, which is an existing service that allows Visa financial institutions and its partners to
send push-to-account and push-to-card payouts, Visa Direct will be able to provide access to nearly 7
billion cards, accounts and digital wallets across more than 190 countries and territories.
 Visa Business Solutions 
We are also extending our network with B2B payments. Our three strategic areas of focus include
investing and growing card-based payments, accelerating our efforts in non-card, cross-border
payments and digitizing domestic accounts payable and accounts receivable processes. We offer a
portfolio of business payment solutions, including small business, corporate (travel) cards,
purchasing cards, virtual cards and digital credentials, non-card cross-border B2B payment options
and disbursement accounts, covering most major industry segments around the world. Business solutions
are designed to bring efficiency, controls and automation to small businesses, commercial and
government payment processes, ranging from employee travel to fully integrated, invoice-based
payables.
Visa B2B Connect is a multilateral B2B cross-border payments network designed to facilitate
transactions from the bank of origin directly to the beneficiary bank, helping streamline settlement
and optimize payments for financial institutions’ corporate clients. The network delivers B2B cross-
border payments that are predictable, flexible, data-rich, secure and cost-effective. Visa B2B
Connect continues to scale and is available in more than 100 countries and territories.
 Visa Treasury as a Service 
Aligned with our global network of networks strategy, we are focused on building the infrastructure
that enables our clients to deliver cross-border products and services for their consumers. This
includes a series of new solutions for our established cross-border consumer payments business as
well as introducing new use cases enabled by our digitally native Currencycloud platform, which
includes real-time foreign exchange rates, virtual accounts, and enhanced liquidity and settlement
capabilities.
(2) Actual fund availability varies by receiving financial institution, receiving account type,
region and whether the transaction is domestic or cross-border.
 9 
Table of Contents
 Value Added Services 
Value added services represent an opportunity for us to diversify our revenue with products and
solutions that differentiate our network, deepen our client relationships and deliver innovative
solutions across other networks.
 Issuing Solutions 
Visa DPS is one of the largest issuer processors of Visa debit transactions in the world. In addition
to multi-network transaction processing, Visa DPS also provides a wide range of value added services,
including fraud mitigation, dispute management, data analytics, campaign management, a suite of
digital solutions and contact center services. Our capabilities in API-based issuer processing
solutions, like DPS Forward, allow our clients to create new payments use cases and provide them with
modular capabilities for digital payments.
We also provide a range of other services and digital solutions to issuers, such as account controls,
digital issuance, branded consumer experiences and Buy Now, Pay Later (BNPL) capabilities. BNPL or
installment payments allow shoppers the flexibility to pay for a purchase in equal payments over a
defined period of time. Visa is investing in installments as a payments strategy — by offering a
portfolio of BNPL solutions for traditional clients, as well as installments providers, who use our
cards and services to support a wide variety of installment options before, during or after checkout,
in store and online.
 Acceptance Solutions 
Cybersource is a global payment management platform that provides modular, value added services in
addition to the traditional gateway function of connecting merchants to payment processing. Using
Cybersource, merchants of all sizes can improve the way their consumers engage, transact and mitigate
fraud; help to lower operational costs; and adapt to changing business requirements. Cybersource
white-labeled capabilities provide new and enhanced payment integrations with ecommerce platforms,
enabling sellers and acquirers to provide tailored commerce experiences with payments seamlessly
embedded. Cybersource enables an omnichannel solution with a cloud-based architecture to deliver more
innovation at the point of sale.
In addition, Visa provides secure, reliable services for merchants and acquirers that reduce friction
and drive acceptance. Examples include Global Urban Mobility, which supports transit operators to
accept Visa contactless payments in addition to closed-loop payment solutions; and Visa Account
Updater, which provides updated account information for merchants to help strengthen customer
relationships and retention. Visa also offers dispute management services, including a network-
agnostic solution from Verifi that enables merchants to prevent and resolve disputes with a single
connection.
 Risk and Identity Solutions 
Visa’s risk and identity solutions transform data into insights for near real-time decisions and
facilitate account holder authentication to help clients prevent fraud and protect account holder
data. With the increasing popularity of omnichannel commerce and digital payments among consumers,
fraud prevention helps increase trust in digital payments. Solutions such as Visa Advanced
Authorization, Visa Secure, Visa Advanced Identity Score, Visa Consumer Authentication Service, and
payment-decisioning solutions from CardinalCommerce empower financial institutions and merchants with
tools that help automate and simplify fraud prevention and enhance payment security.
These value-added fraud prevention tools layer on top of a suite of programs that protect the safety
and integrity of the payment ecosystem, and along with our investments in intelligence and
technology, help to prevent, detect and mitigate threats. These programs and Visa’s fraud prevention
expertise are among the core benefits of being part of the Visa network. Through the combined efforts
of security and identity tools and services, payment and cyber intelligence, insights and learnings
from client or partner breach investigations, and law enforcement
 10 
Table of Contents
engagement, Visa helps protect financial institutions and merchants from fraud and solve payment
security challenges.
 Open Banking 
In March 2022, Visa acquired Tink AB (Tink), an open banking platform, to catalyze fintech innovation
and accelerate the development and adoption of open banking securely and at scale. Visa’s open
banking capabilities range from data access use cases, such as account verification, balance check
and personal finance management, to payment initiation capabilities, such as account-to-account
transactions and merchant payments. These capabilities can help our partner businesses deliver
valuable services to their customers.
 Advisory Services 
Visa Consulting and Analytics is the payments consulting advisory arm of Visa. The combination of our
deep payments expertise, proprietary analytical models applied to a breadth of data and our economic
intelligence allows us to identify actionable insights, make recommendations and help implement
solutions that can drive better business decisions and measurable outcomes for clients. Visa
Consulting and Analytics offers consulting services for issuers, acquirers, merchants, fintechs and
other partners, spanning the entire customer journey from acquisition to retention.
We are fortifying the key foundations of our business model, which consist of becoming a network of
networks, our technology platforms, security, brand and talent.
 Network of Networks 
Visa strives to become a network of networks, offering a single connection point for senders and
receivers to enable money movement to all endpoints and to all form factors, using all available
networks.
 Technology Platforms 
Visa’s technology platforms include software, hardware, data centers and a large telecommunications
infrastructure, each with a distinct architecture and operational footprint wrapped with several
layers of security and protection technologies. Visa’s three data centers are a critical part of our
global processing environment and have a high redundancy of network connectivity, power and cooling
designed to provide continuous availability of systems. Together, these systems deliver the secure,
convenient and reliable service that our clients and consumers expect from the Visa brand.
 Security 
Our in-depth, multi-layer security approach includes a formal program to devalue sensitive and/or
personal data through various cryptographic means; embedded security in the software development
lifecycle; identity and access management controls to protect against unauthorized access; and
advanced cyber detection and response capabilities. We deploy security tools that help keep our
clients and consumers safe. We also invest significantly in our comprehensive approach to
cybersecurity. We deploy security technologies to strengthen data confidentiality, the integrity of
our network and service availability to protect our core cybersecurity capabilities to minimize risk.
 Brand 
Visa’s strong brand helps deliver added value to our clients and their customers, financial
institutions, merchants and partners through compelling brand expressions, a wide range of products
and services as well as innovative brand and marketing efforts. In line with our commitment to an
expansive and diverse range of partnerships for the benefit of our stakeholders, Visa is the only
brand in the world that is a top sponsor of FIFA, the
 11 
Table of Contents
Olympic Games, and the NFL and is one of the most active sponsors of women’s football around the
world.
 Talent 
Attracting, developing and advancing the best talent globally is critical to our continued success.
This year we grew our total workforce from approximately 21,500 in fiscal year 2021 to approximately
26,500 employees in fiscal year 2022, an increase of 23 percent year over year. Voluntary workforce
turnover (rolling 12-month attrition) was 12.1 percent as of September 30, 2022. Visa employees are
located in more than 80 countries and territories, with 54 percent located outside the U.S. At the
end of fiscal year 2022, Visa’s global workforce was 58 percent men and 42 percent women, and women
represented 36 percent of Visa’s leadership (defined as vice president level and above). In the U.S.,
ethnicity of our workforce was 41 percent Asian, 8 percent Black, 12 percent Hispanic, 3 percent
Other and 36 percent White. For our U.S. leadership, the breakdown was 18 percent Asian, 7 percent
Black, 13 percent Hispanic, 2 percent Other and 60 percent White.
Given Visa’s ambitious growth agenda, it is important to enable our employees to achieve their
individual performance goals while also supporting personal career interests. This year we introduced
several changes to career growth and planning at Visa, including new growth paths and tools that take
into consideration the unique professional backgrounds, skills, accomplishments, and future
performance goals of our employees. These tools support meaningful dialogue about performance and
help drive development, retention and growth of top talent in a highly competitive talent market.
We have an unwavering commitment to valuing the unique identities of our employees and their
contributions to Visa. In 2020, we established the Stand Together initiative in support of social
justice and racial equality in the U.S. focused on our people, our community and our company. We are
proud of the progress we have made. Our partnership with the Thurgood Marshall College Fund for the
Visa Black Scholars and Jobs Program resulted in Visa’s inaugural class of 51 scholars participating
in year-round programs and training aimed at developing their professional and technical skills this
past year. We also welcomed the second cohort of 75 scholars this fall. Upon graduation, all scholars
who have met their commitments will be offered a full-time job with Visa.
We continue to increase the number of underrepresented employees in the U.S. We are committed to
recruiting and retaining diverse talent through employee development programs aimed at advancing
their careers at Visa. As a company, we continue to partner with historically Black colleges and a
generally more diverse set of universities to further develop our talent pipeline. Visa is committed
to pay equity, regardless of gender or race/ethnicity, and conducts pay equity analyses on an annual
basis. More details regarding our human capital management, as well as enhanced workforce disclosures
that include our 2021 Consolidated EEO-1 Report and our 2021 Environmental, Social and Governance
(ESG) Report, can be found on our website at visa.com/esg . See Available Information below.
For additional information, please see the section titled “Talent and Human Capital Management” in
Visa’s 2022 Proxy Statement.
 FINTECH AND DIGITAL PARTNERSHIPS 
Fintechs are key enablers of new payment experiences and new flows. Our work with fintechs has opened
new points of acceptance, extended credit at the point of sale, made cross-border money flows more
efficient, moved B2B spend onto Visa’s network, expedited payroll and provided digital wallet
customers access to our services.
To better serve fintechs, Visa has a suite of streamlined commercial programs and digital onboarding
tools. Our Fintech Fast Track program enables qualifying fintechs to quickly launch and scale their
programs. The program has welcomed hundreds of fintechs who are actively engaged in the program.
With our startup engagement programs, the Visa Everywhere Initiative and the Inclusive Fintech 50,
early-stage companies can build payment solutions based on our capabilities. With the global Visa
Fintech Partner Connect program, we are helping our clients tap into innovations emerging from the
fintech community. The program is designed to help financial institutions quickly connect with a
curated set of technology providers, helping Visa’s issuing partners create digital-first
experiences.
MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS, JOINT VENTURES AND STRATEGIC INVESTMENTS
Visa continually explores opportunities to augment our capabilities and provide meaningful value to
our clients. Mergers and acquisitions, joint ventures and strategic investments complement our
internal development and
 12 
Table of Contents
enhance our partnerships to align with Visa’s priorities. Visa applies a rigorous business analysis
to our acquisitions, joint ventures and investments to ensure they will differentiate our network,
provide value added services and accelerate growth.
In fiscal year 2022, we acquired The Currency Cloud Group Limited (Currencycloud), a global platform
that enables financial institutions and fintechs to provide innovative, cross-border foreign exchange
solutions. We also acquired Tink, an open banking platform that enables financial institutions,
fintechs and merchants to build financial products and services and move money.
 ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND GOVERNANCE 
As a trusted brand, Visa has an opportunity and responsibility to contribute to a more inclusive,
equitable and sustainable world. We believe that economies that include everyone everywhere, uplift
everyone everywhere. As we build business resilience and long-term value, we are committed to
managing the risks and opportunities that arise from ESG issues. We are focused on empowering people
and economies; securing commerce and protecting customers; investing in our workforce; protecting the
planet; and operating responsibly. Our 2021 ESG report, as well as other ESG-related resources are
available on our website at visa.com/esg . See Available Information below.
 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
We own and manage the Visa brand, which stands for acceptance, security, convenience, speed and
reliability. Our portfolio of Visa-owned trademarks is important to our business. Generally,
trademark registrations are valid indefinitely as long as they are in use and/or maintained. We give
our clients access to these assets through agreements with our issuers and acquirers, which authorize
the use of our trademarks in connection with their participation in our payments network.
Additionally, we own a number of patents and patent applications related to our business and continue
to pursue patents in emerging technologies that may have applications in our business. We rely on a
combination of patent, trademark, copyright and trade secret laws in the U.S. and other
jurisdictions, as well as confidentiality procedures and contractual provisions, to protect our
proprietary technology.
 COMPETITION 
The global payments industry continues to undergo dynamic change. Existing and emerging competitors
compete with Visa’s network and payment solutions for consumers and for participation by financial
institutions and merchants. Technology and innovation are shifting consumer habits and driving growth
opportunities in ecommerce, mobile payments, blockchain technology and digital currencies. These
advances are enabling new entrants, many of which depart from traditional network payment models. In
certain countries, the evolving regulatory landscape is creating local networks or enabling
additional processing competition.
We compete against all forms of payment. This includes paper-based payments, primarily cash and
checks, and all forms of electronic payments. Our electronic payment competitors principally include:
Global or Multi-Regional Networks: These networks typically offer a range of branded, general purpose
card payment products that consumers can use at millions of merchant locations around the world.
Examples include Mastercard, American Express, Discover, JCB and UnionPay. These competitors may be
more concentrated in specific geographic regions, such as JCB in Japan and Discover in the U.S., or
have a leading position in certain countries, such as UnionPay in China. See Item 1A—Risk
Factors—Regulatory Risks—Government-imposed obligations and/or restrictions on international payment
systems may prevent us from competing against providers in certain countries, including significant
markets such as China and India . Based on available data, Visa is one of the largest retail
electronic funds transfer networks used throughout the world.
The following chart compares our network with these network competitors for calendar year 2021 (1) :
 Visa Mastercard American Express JCB Diners Club 
 Payments Volume ($B) 10,894 5,975 1,274 325 207 
 Total Volume ($B) 13,508 7,723 1,284 335 219 
 Total Transactions (B) 244 140 9 5 3 
 Cards (M) 3,936 2,579 122 144 66 
(1) Mastercard, American Express, JCB and Diners Club / Discover data sourced from The Nilson Report
issue 1224 (July 2022). Includes all consumer, small business and commercial credit, debit and
prepaid cards. Mastercard excludes Maestro and Cirrus figures. American Express, Diners Club /
Discover, and JCB include business from third-party issuers. JCB figures include other payment-
related products and some figures are estimates.
 13 
Table of Contents
Local and Regional Networks: Operated in many countries, these networks often have the support of
government influence or mandate. In some cases, they are owned by financial institutions or payment
processors. These networks typically focus on debit payment products, and may have strong local
acceptance, and recognizable brands. Examples include STAR, NYCE, and Pulse in the U.S., Interac in
Canada and eftpos in Australia.
Digital Wallet Providers: They continue to expand payment capabilities in person and online for
consumers and merchants. While digital wallets can help drive Visa volumes, they can also be funded
by non-card payment options.
Alternative Payments Providers: These providers, such as closed commerce ecosystems, BNPL solutions
and cryptocurrency platforms, often have a primary focus of enabling payments through ecommerce and
mobile channels; however, they are expanding or may expand their offerings to the physical point of
sale. These companies may process payments using in-house account transfers between parties,
electronic funds transfer networks like the ACH, global or local networks like Visa, or some
combination of the foregoing. In some cases, these entities can be both a partner and a competitor to
Visa.
Real-time Payment (RTP) Networks: RTP networks have launched in multiple markets, mainly driven by
government sponsorship and regulatory intervention. These networks primarily focus on domestic
transactions, with adoption varying by use cases and geographies. They can compete with Visa on
consumer payments and other payment flows (e.g., B2B and P2P) but can be partners for value added
services, such as risk management.
Payment Processors: We compete with payment processors for the processing of Visa transactions. These
processors may benefit from mandates requiring them to handle processing under local regulation. For
example, as a result of regulation in Europe under the Interchange Fee Regulation (IFR), we may face
competition from other networks, processors and other third parties who could process Visa
transactions directly with issuers and acquirers.
Value Added Service and New Flows Providers: We face competition from companies that provide
alternatives to our value added services as well as new flows (e.g., Visa Direct and Visa B2B
Connect). This includes a wide range of players, such as technology companies, information services
and consulting firms, governments and merchant services companies. Regulatory initiatives could also
lead to increased competition in these areas.
We believe our fundamental value proposition of security, convenience, speed and reliability as well
as the number of credentials and our acceptance footprint help us to succeed. In addition, we
understand the needs of the individual markets in which we operate and partner with local financial
institutions, merchants, fintechs, governments, NGOs and business organizations to provide tailored
and innovative solutions. We will continue to utilize our network of networks strategy to facilitate
the movement of money. We believe Visa is well-positioned competitively due to our global brand, our
broad set of payment products, new flows offerings and value added services, and our proven track
record of processing payment transactions securely and reliably.
 GOVERNMENT REGULATION 
As a global payments technology company, we are subject to complex and evolving global regulations in
the various jurisdictions in which our products and services are used. The most significant
government regulations that impact our business are discussed below. For further discussion of how
global regulations may impact our business, see Item 1A-Risk Factors-Regulatory Risks .
Anti-Corruption, Anti-Money Laundering, Anti-Terrorism and Sanctions: We are subject to anti-
corruption laws and regulations, including the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA), the UK
Bribery Act and other laws that generally prohibit the making or offering of improper payments to
foreign government officials and political figures for the purpose of obtaining or retaining business
or to gain an unfair business advantage. We are also subject to anti-money laundering and anti-
terrorist financing laws and regulations, including the U.S. Bank Secrecy Act. In addition, we are
subject to economic and trade sanctions programs administered by the Office of Foreign Assets Control
(OFAC) in the U.S. Therefore, we do not permit financial institutions or other entities that are
domiciled in countries or territories subject to comprehensive OFAC trade sanctions (currently, Cuba,
Iran, North Korea, Syria and Crimea), or that are included on OFAC’s list of Specially Designated
Nationals and Blocked Persons, to issue or acquire Visa cards or engage in transactions using our
services.
 14 
Table of Contents
Government-Imposed Market Participation Restrictions: Certain governments, including China, India,
Indonesia, Thailand and Vietnam, have taken actions to promote domestic payments systems and/or
certain issuers, payments networks or processors, by imposing regulations that favor domestic
providers, impose local ownership requirements on processors, require data localization or mandate
that domestic processing be done in that country.
Interchange Rates and Fees: An increasing number of jurisdictions around the world regulate or
influence debit and credit interchange reimbursement rates in their regions. For example, the U.S.
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Act (Dodd-Frank Act) limits interchange reimbursement
rates for certain debit card transactions in the U.S., the European Union (EU) IFR limits interchange
rates in the European Economic Area (EEA) (as discussed below), and the Reserve Bank of Australia and
the Central Bank of Brazil regulate average permissible levels of interchange.
Internet Transactions: Many jurisdictions have adopted regulations that require payment system
participants to monitor, identify, filter, restrict or take other actions with regard to certain
types of payment transactions on the Internet, such as gambling, digital currencies, the purchase of
cigarettes or alcohol and other controversial transaction types.
Network Exclusivity and Routing: In the U.S., the Dodd-Frank Act limits network exclusivity and
restrictions on merchant routing choice for the debit and prepaid market segments. Other
jurisdictions impose similar limitations, such as the IFR’s prohibition in Europe on restrictions
that prevent multiple payment brands or functionality on the same card.
No-surcharge Rules: We have historically enforced rules that prohibit merchants from charging higher
prices to consumers who pay using Visa products instead of other means. However, merchants’ ability
to surcharge varies by geographic market as well as Visa product type, and continues to be impacted
by litigation, regulation and legislation.
Privacy and Data Protection: Aspects of our operations or business are subject to privacy, data use
and data security regulations, which impact the way we use and handle data, operate our products and
services and even impact our ability to offer a product or service. In addition, regulators are
proposing new laws or regulations that could require Visa to adopt certain cybersecurity and data-
handling practices, create new individual privacy rights and impose increased obligations on
companies handling personal data.
Supervisory Oversight of the Payments Industry: Visa is subject to financial sector oversight and
regulation in substantially all of the jurisdictions in which we operate. In the U.S., for example,
the Federal Banking Agencies (FBA) (formerly known as the Federal Financial Institutions Examination
Council) has supervisory oversight over Visa under applicable federal banking laws and policies as a
technology service provider to U.S. financial institutions. The federal banking agencies comprising
the FBA are the Federal Reserve Board, the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation and the National Credit Union Administration. Visa also may be separately examined by the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau as a service provider to the banks that issue Visa-branded
consumer credit and debit card products. Central banks in other countries/regions, including Europe,
India, Ukraine and the United Kingdom (as discussed below), have recognized or designated Visa as a
retail payment system under various types of financial stability regulations. Visa is also subject to
oversight by banking and financial sector authorities in other jurisdictions, such as Brazil and Hong
Kong.
European and United Kingdom Regulations and Supervisory Oversight: Visa in Europe continues to be
subject to complex and evolving regulation in the EEA and the UK.
There are a number of EU regulations that impact our business. As discussed above, the IFR regulates
interchange rates within the EEA, requires Visa Europe to separate its payment card scheme activities
from processing activities for accounting, organization and decision-making purposes within the EEA
and imposes limitations on network exclusivity and routing. National competent authorities in the EEA
are responsible for monitoring and enforcing the IFR in their markets. We are also subject to
regulations governing privacy and data protection, anti-bribery, anti-money laundering, anti-
terrorism and sanctions. Other regulations in Europe, such as the second Payment Services Directive
(PSD2), require, among other things, that our financial institution clients provide certain customer
account access rights to emerging non-financial institution players. PSD2 also includes strong
customer authentication requirements for certain transactions that could impose both operational
complexity on Visa and negatively impact consumer payment experiences. Visa Europe is also subject to
supervisory oversight by the European Central Bank and other national competent authorities in
Europe.
 15 
Table of Contents
In the UK, Visa Europe is designated as a Recognized Payment System, bringing it within the scope of
the Bank of England’s supervisory powers and subject to various requirements, including on issues
such as governance and risk management designed to maintain the stability of the UK’s financial
system. Visa Europe is also regulated by the UK’s Payment Systems Regulator (PSR), which has wide-
ranging powers and authority to review our business practices, systems, rules and fees with respect
to promoting competition and innovation in the UK, and ensuring payment systems take care of, and
promote, the interest of service-users. Post-Brexit, the UK has adopted various European regulations,
including regulations that impact the payments ecosystem, such as the IFR and PSD2. The PSR is
responsible for monitoring Visa Europe’s compliance with the IFR as adopted in the UK.
ESG and Sustainability: Certain governments around the world are adopting laws and regulations
pertaining to ESG performance, transparency and reporting. Regulations may include mandated corporate
reporting on ESG overall (e.g., Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive) or in individual areas,
such as mandated reporting on climate-related financial disclosures.
Additional Regulatory Developments: Various regulatory agencies across the world also continue to
examine a wide variety of other issues, including mobile payment transactions, tokenization, access
rights for non-financial institutions, money transfer services, identity theft, account management
guidelines, disclosure rules, security and marketing that could affect our financial institution
clients and our business. Furthermore, following the passage of PSD2 in Europe, several countries,
including Australia, Brazil, Canada, Hong Kong and Mexico, are contemplating granting or have already
granted various types of access rights to third party processors, including access to consumer
account data maintained by our financial institution clients. These changes could have negative
implications for our business depending on how the regulations are framed and implemented.
 AVAILABLE INFORMATION 
Our corporate website is visa.com/ourbusiness . Our annual reports on Form 10-K, our quarterly
reports on Form 10-Q, our current reports on Form 8-K, proxy statements and any amendments to those
reports filed or furnished pursuant to the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, can be
viewed at sec.gov and our investor relations website at investor.visa.com as soon as reasonably
practicable after these materials are electronically filed with or furnished to the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC). In addition, we routinely post financial and other information, which
could be deemed to be material to investors, on our investor relations website. Information regarding
our ESG, corporate responsibility and sustainability initiatives is also available on our website at
visa.com/esg. The content of any of our websites referred to in this report is not incorporated by
reference into this report or any other filings with the SEC.
 16 
Table of Contents
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1A. Risk Factors │
 Regulatory Risks 
We are subject to complex and evolving global regulations that could harm our business and financial
results.
As a global payments technology company, we are subject to complex and evolving regulations that
govern our operations. See Item 1 — Business — Government Regulation for more information on the most
significant areas of regulation that affect our business. The impact of these regulations on us, our
clients, and other third parties could limit our ability to enforce our payments system rules;
require us to adopt new rules or change existing rules; affect our existing contractual arrangements;
increase our compliance costs; and require us to make our technology or intellectual property
available to third parties, including competitors, in an undesirable manner. As discussed in more
detail below, we may face differing rules and regulations in matters like interchange reimbursement
rates, preferred routing, domestic processing requirements, currency conversion, point-of-sale
transaction rules and practices, privacy, data use or protection, licensing requirements, and
associated product technology. As a result, the Visa operating rules and our other contractual
commitments may differ from country to country or by product offering. Complying with these and other
regulations increases our costs and reduces our revenue opportunities.
If widely varying regulations come into existence worldwide, we may have difficulty rapidly adjusting
our product offerings, services, fees and other important aspects of our business to comply with the
regulations. Our compliance programs and policies are designed to support our compliance with a wide
array of regulations and laws, such as anti-money laundering, anti-corruption, competition, money
transfer services, privacy and sanctions, and we continually adjust our compliance programs as
regulations evolve. However, we cannot guarantee that our practices will be deemed compliant by all
applicable regulatory authorities. In the event our controls should fail or we are found to be out of
compliance for other reasons, we could be subject to monetary damages, civil and criminal penalties,
litigation, investigations and proceedings, and damage to our global brands and reputation.
Furthermore, the evolving and increased regulatory focus on the payments industry could negatively
impact or reduce the number of Visa products our clients issue, the volume of payments we process,
our revenues, our brands, our competitive positioning, our ability to use our intellectual property
to differentiate our products and services, the quality and types of products and services we offer,
the countries in which our products are used, and the types of consumers and merchants who can obtain
or accept our products, all of which could harm our business and financial results.
Increased scrutiny and regulation of the global payments industry, including with respect to
interchange reimbursement fees, merchant discount rates, operating rules, risk management protocols
and other related practices, could harm our business.
Regulators around the world have been establishing or increasing their authority to regulate certain
aspects of the payments industry. See Item 1 — Business —Government Regulation for more information .
In the U.S. and many other jurisdictions, we have historically set default interchange reimbursement
fees. Even though we generally do not receive any revenue related to interchange reimbursement fees
in a payment transaction (in the context of credit and debit transactions, those fees are paid by the
acquirers to the issuers; the reverse is true for certain transactions like ATM), interchange
reimbursement fees are a factor on which we compete with other payments providers and are therefore
an important determinant of the volume of transactions we process. Consequently, changes to these
fees, whether voluntarily or by mandate, can substantially affect our overall payments volumes and
revenues.
Interchange reimbursement fees, certain operating rules and related practices continue to be subject
to increased government regulation globally, and regulatory authorities and central banks in a number
of jurisdictions have reviewed or are reviewing these fees, rules and practices. For example:
• Regulations adopted by the U.S. Federal Reserve cap the maximum U.S. debit interchange
reimbursement rate received by large financial institutions at 21 cents plus 5 basis points per
transaction, plus a possible fraud adjustment of 1 cent. The Dodd-Frank Act also limits issuers’ and
our ability to adopt network exclusivity and preferred routing in the debit and prepaid area, which
also impacts our business. In October 2022, the Federal Reserve published a final rule effectively
requiring issuers to ensure that at least two unaffiliated networks are available for routing card
not present debit transactions by July 1, 2023. Various stakeholder groups are also advocating that
the Federal Reserve further lower interchange fees on debit transactions and restrict the ability of
payments networks to enter into certain incentive and growth agreements with issuers. In addition,
there continues to be interest in further regulation of interchange fees
 17 
Table of Contents
and routing practices by members of Congress and state legislators in the U.S. In 2022, legislation
was introduced in the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate, which among other things, would
require large issuing banks to offer a choice of at least two unaffiliated networks over which
electronic credit transactions may be processed. In Europe, the EU’s IFR places an effective cap on
consumer credit and consumer debit interchange fees for both domestic and cross-border transactions
within the EEA (30 basis points and 20 basis points, respectively). EU member states have the ability
to further reduce these interchange levels within their territories. The European Commission recently
announced its intention to conduct another impact assessment of the IFR, which could result in even
lower caps on interchange rates and the expansion of regulation to other types of products, services
and fees. Several countries in Latin America are exploring regulatory measures against payments
networks and have either adopted or are exploring interchange caps, including Argentina, Brazil,
Chile and Costa Rica. In Asia Pacific, the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) completed its review of
the country’s payment system regulations and adopted a series of measures, which include lower
interchange rates for debit transactions. The RBA also continues to assess the potential merits of
mandating co-badging and routing requirements on dual network debit cards. In addition, the New
Zealand Parliament passed legislation capping domestic interchange rates for debit and credit
products.
• While the focus of interchange regulation has primarily been on domestic rates historically, there
is increasing focus on cross-border rates in recent years. For example, in 2019, we settled certain
cross-border interchange rates with the European Commission. T he UK’s PSR recently initiated two
market reviews: one focusing on post-Brexit increases in interchange rates for transactions between
the UK and Europe, and the other focusing on increases in scheme and processing fees in the UK.
Meanwhile, Costa Rica became the first country to formally regulate cross-border interchange rates by
direct regulation. Cross-border MDR is also regulated in Costa Rica and Turkey.
• Many governments including, but not limited to governments in India, Costa Rica and Turkey are
using regulation to further drive down MDR, which could negatively affect the economics of our
transactions. With increased lobbying by merchants and other industry participants, we are also
beginning to see regulatory interest in network fees in the UK, Europe and Chile. Also, some
countries in Latin America, like Peru, Argentina and Chile, are also relying on antitrust-driven
regulatory actions that can have implications for how the payments ecosystem and four party model
operate, including the enforceability of important network rules relating to honor all cards or
products and cross-border acquiring. Other countries, like New Zealand, are adopting regulations that
require us to seek government pre-approval of our network rules, which could also impact the way we
operate in certain markets.
• Government regulations or pressure may also impact our rules and practices and require us to allow
other payments networks to support Visa products or services, to have the other network’s
functionality or brand marks on our products, or to share our intellectual property with other
networks. As innovations in payment technology have enabled us to expand into new products and
services, they have also expanded the potential scope of regulatory influence. For instance, new
products and capabilities, including tokenization, push payments, and new flows (e.g., Visa B2B
Connect) could bring increased licensing or authorization requirements in the countries where the
product or capability is offered. Furthermore, certain of our businesses are regulated as payment
institutions or as money transmitters, subjecting us to various licensing, supervisory, and other
requirements. In addition, the EU’s requirement to separate scheme and processing adds costs and
impacts the execution of our commercial, innovation and product strategies.
Regulators around the world increasingly take note of each other’s approaches to regulating the
payments industry. Consequently, a development in one jurisdiction may influence regulatory
approaches in another. The risks created by a new law, regulation or regulatory outcome in one
jurisdiction have the potential to be replicated and to negatively affect our business in another
jurisdiction or in other product offerings. For example, our settlement with the European Commission
on cross-border interchange rates has drawn preliminary attention from some regulators in other parts
of the world. Similarly, new regulations involving one product offering may prompt regulators to
extend the regulations to other product offerings. For example, credit payments could become subject
to similar regulation as debit payments (or vice versa). The Reserve Bank of Australia initially
capped credit interchange, but subsequently capped debit interchange as well.
When we cannot set default interchange reimbursement rates at optimal levels, issuers and acquirers
may find our payments system less attractive. This may increase the attractiveness of other payments
systems, such as our competitors’ closed-loop payments systems with direct connections to both
merchants and consumers. We believe some issuers may react to such regulations by charging new or
higher fees, or reducing certain benefits to
 18 
Table of Contents
consumers, which make our products less appealing to consumers. Some acquirers may elect to charge
higher MDR regardless of the Visa interchange reimbursement rate, causing merchants not to accept our
products or to steer customers to alternative payments systems or forms of payment. In addition, in
an effort to reduce the expense of their payment programs, some issuers and acquirers have obtained,
and may continue to obtain, incentives from us, including reductions in the fees that we charge,
which directly impacts our revenues.
In addition, we are also subject to central bank oversight in a growing number of countries,
including, Brazil, India, the UK and within the EU. Some countries with existing oversight frameworks
are looking to further enhance their regulatory powers while regulators in other jurisdictions are
considering or adopting approaches based on these regulatory principles. This oversight could result
in new governance, reporting, licensing, cybersecurity, processing infrastructure, capital, or credit
risk management requirements. We could also be required to adopt policies and practices designed to
mitigate settlement and liquidity risks, including increased requirements to maintain sufficient
levels of capital and financial resources locally, as well as localized risk management or
governance. Increased oversight could also include new criteria for member participation and merchant
access to our payments system.
Finally, policymakers and regulatory bodies in the U.S., Europe, and other parts of the world are
exploring ways to reform existing competition laws to meet the needs of the digital economy,
including restricting large technology companies from engaging in mergers and acquisitions, requiring
them to interoperate with potential competitors, and prohibiting certain kinds of self-preferencing
behaviors. While the focus of these efforts remains primarily on increasing regulation of large
technology, e-commerce and social media companies, they could also have implications for other types
of companies including payments networks, which could constrain our ability to effectively manage our
business.
Government-imposed obligations and/or restrictions on international payment systems may prevent us
from competing against providers in certain countries, including significant markets such as China
and India.
Governments in a number of jurisdictions shield domestic payment card networks, brands and processors
from international competition by imposing market access barriers and preferential domestic
regulations. To varying degrees, these policies and regulations affect the terms of competition in
the marketplace and undermine the competitiveness of international payments networks. Public
authorities may impose regulatory requirements that favor domestic providers or mandate that domestic
payments or data processing be performed entirely within that country, which could prevent us from
managing the end-to-end processing of certain transactions.
In China, UnionPay remains the predominant processor of domestic payment card transactions and
operates the predominant domestic acceptance mark. Although we have filed an application with the
People’s Bank of China (PBOC) to operate a Bank Card Clearing Institution (BCCI) in China, the timing
and the procedural steps for approval remain uncertain. The approval process might take several
years, and there is no guarantee that the license to operate a BCCI will be approved or, if we obtain
such license, that we will be able to successfully compete with domestic payments networks. Co-
badging and co-residency regulations also pose additional challenges in markets where Visa competes
with national networks for issuance and routing. Certain banks have issued dual-branded cards for
which domestic transactions in China are processed by UnionPay and transactions outside of China are
processed by us or other international payments networks. The PBOC is contemplating that dual-branded
cards could be phased out over time as new licenses are issued to international companies to
participate in China’s domestic payments market. Accordingly, we have been working with Chinese
issuers to issue Visa-only branded cards for international travel, and later for domestic
transactions after we obtain a BCCI license. However, notwithstanding such efforts, the phase out of
dual-branded cards have decreased our payment volumes and impacted the revenue we generate in China.
UnionPay has grown rapidly in China and is actively pursuing international expansion plans, which
could potentially lead to regulatory pressures on our international routing rule (which requires that
international transactions on Visa cards be routed over VisaNet). Furthermore, although regulatory
barriers shield UnionPay from competition in China, alternative payments providers such as Alipay and
WeChat Pay have rapidly expanded into ecommerce, offline, and cross-border payments, which could make
it difficult for us to compete even if our license is approved in China. NetsUnion Clearing Corp, a
Chinese digital transaction routing system, and other such systems could have a competitive advantage
in comparison with international payments networks .
Regulatory initiatives in India, including a data localization mandate passed by the government that
suggests growing nationalistic priorities, has cost implications for us and could affect our ability
to effectively compete with
 19 
Table of Contents
domestic payment providers. Furthermore, any inability to meet the requirements of the data
localization mandate could impact our ability to do business in India. In Europe, with the support of
the European Central Bank, a group of European banks have announced their intent to launch a pan-
European payment system, the European Payments Initiative or EPI. While EPI subsequently announced a
focus on account-to-account instant payments across a range of use cases, it is noteworthy that the
purported motivation behind EPI is to reduce the risks of disintermediation of European providers by
international technology companies and continued reliance on international payments networks for
intra-Europe card transactions. Furthermore, regional groups of countries, such as the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) and a number of countries in Southeast Asia (e.g., Malaysia), have adopted
or may consider, efforts to restrict our participation in the processing of regional transactions.
The African Development Bank has also indicated an interest in supporting national payment systems in
its efforts to expand financial inclusion and strengthen regional financial stability. Finally, some
countries such as South Africa are mandating on-shore processing of domestic transactions.
Geopolitical events, including sanctions, trade tensions or other types of activities have
intensified any or all of these activities, which could adversely affect our business. For example,
in the aftermath of U.S. and European sanctions against Russia and the decision by U.S. payments
networks, including Visa to suspend operations in the country, Russia called for the BRICS countries
(a five-country bloc made up of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa), to lessen dependence
on Western payment systems by, among other things, integrating payment systems and cards across
member countries.
Finally, central banks in a number of countries, including those in Argentina, Australia, Brazil,
Mexico and Canada, are in the process of developing or expanding national RTP networks with the goal
of driving a greater number of domestic transactions onto these systems. Similarly, an increasing
number of jurisdictions are exploring the concept of building central bank digital currencies for
retail payments. If successfully deployed, these national payment platforms and digital currencies
could have significant implications for Visa’s domestic and cross-border payments, including
potential disintermediation.
Due to our inability to manage the end-to-end processing of transactions for cards in certain
countries (e.g., Thailand), we depend on our close working relationships with our clients or third-
party service providers to ensure transactions involving our products are processed effectively. Our
ability to do so may be adversely affected by regulatory requirements and policies pertaining to
transaction routing or on-shore processing. In general, national laws that protect or otherwise
support domestic providers or processing may increase our costs; decrease our payments volumes and
impact the revenue we generate in those countries; decrease the number of Visa products issued or
processed; impede us from utilizing our global processing capabilities and controlling the quality of
the services supporting our brands; restrict our activities; limit our growth and the ability to
introduce new products, services and innovations; force us to leave countries or prevent us from
entering new markets; and create new competitors, all of which could harm our business.
Laws and regulations regarding the handling of personal data and information may impede our services
or result in increased costs, legal claims, or fines against us .
Our business relies on the processing of data in many jurisdictions and the movement of data across
national borders. Legal requirements relating to the collection, storage, handling, use, disclosure,
transfer and security of personal data continue to evolve, and regulatory scrutiny in this area is
increasing around the world. For example, in Europe, data protection authorities have been
increasingly ruling on cross-border data transfers in the wake of the July 2020 decision from the
Court of Justice of the European Union known as Schrems II. Significant uncertainty exists as privacy
and data protection laws that are interpreted and applied differently from country to country may
have extra-territorial effects, and could create inconsistent or conflicting requirements. Although
we have a global data privacy program that addresses the requirements applicable to our international
business, our ongoing efforts to comply with U.S. state privacy and cybersecurity regulations, as
well as rapidly emerging international privacy and data protection laws may increase the complexity
of our compliance operations, entail substantial expenses, divert resources from other initiatives
and projects, and could limit the services we are able to offer.
Furthermore, inconsistent local and regional regulations restricting location, movement, collection,
use and management of data may limit our ability to innovate or compete in certain jurisdictions. For
example, China adopted its first comprehensive privacy law, the Personal Information Protection Law
(PIPL). Although certain details of PIPL are beginning to be clarified by the issuance of further
regulatory clarification or guidance, Visa could be impacted more significantly if our license is
approved and we begin processing domestic card transactions in China. Lastly, enforcement actions and
investigations by regulatory authorities related to data security incidents and privacy violations
continue to increase. The enactment of more restrictive laws, rules, regulations, or future
 20 
Table of Contents
enforcement actions or investigations could impact us through increased costs or restrictions on our
business, and noncompliance could result in regulatory penalties and significant legal liability.
We may be subject to tax examinations or disputes, or changes in tax laws.
We exercise significant judgment and make estimates in calculating our worldwide provision for income
taxes and other tax liabilities. Although we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, many factors
may limit their accuracy. We are currently under examination by, or in disputes with, the U.S.
Internal Revenue Service, the UK’s HM Revenue and Customs as well as tax authorities in other
jurisdictions, and we may be subject to additional examinations or disputes in the future. Relevant
tax authorities may disagree with our tax treatment of certain material items and thereby increase
our tax liability. Failure to sustain our position in these matters could harm our cash flow and
financial position. In addition, changes in existing laws in the U.S. or foreign jurisdictions,
including unilateral actions of foreign jurisdictions to introduce digital services taxes, or changes
resulting from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development’s Program of Work, related
to the revision of profit allocation and nexus rules and design of a system to ensure multinational
enterprises pay a minimum level of tax to the countries where we earn revenue, may also materially
affect our effective tax rate. A substantial increase in our tax payments could have a material,
adverse effect on our financial results. See also Note 19—Income Taxes to our consolidated financial
statements included in Item 8—Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report.
 Litigation Risks 
We may be adversely affected by the outcome of litigation or investigations.
We are involved in numerous litigation matters, investigations, and proceedings asserted by civil
litigants, governments, and enforcement bodies investigating or alleging, among other things,
violations of competition and antitrust law, consumer protection law, privacy law and intellectual
property law (these are referred to as “actions” in this section). Details of the most significant
actions we face are described more fully in Note 20—Legal Matters to our consolidated financial
statements included in Item 8—Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report. These
actions are inherently uncertain, expensive and disruptive to our operations. In the event we are
found liable or reach a settlement in any action, particularly in a large class action lawsuit, such
as one involving an antitrust claim entitling the plaintiff to treble damages in the U.S., or we
incur liability arising from a government investigation, we may be required to pay significant
awards, settlements or fines. In addition, settlement terms, judgments, orders or pressures resulting
from actions may harm our business by influencing or requiring us to modify, among other things, the
default interchange reimbursement rates we set, the Visa operating rules or the way in which we
enforce those rules, our fees or pricing, or the way we do business. These actions or their outcomes
may also influence regulators, investigators, governments or civil litigants in the same or other
jurisdictions, which may lead to additional actions against Visa. Finally, we are required by some of
our commercial agreements to indemnify other entities for litigation brought against them, even if
Visa is not a defendant.
For certain actions like those that are U.S. covered litigation or VE territory covered litigation,
as described in Note 5—U.S. and Europe Retrospective Responsibility Plans and Note 20—Legal Matters
to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8—Financial Statements and Supplementary
Data of this report, we have certain financial protections pursuant to the respective retrospective
responsibility plans. The two retrospective responsibility plans are different in the protections
they provide and the mechanisms by which we are protected. The failure of one or both of the
retrospective responsibility plans to adequately insulate us from the impact of such settlements,
judgments, losses, or liabilities could materially harm our financial condition or cash flows, or
even cause us to become insolvent.
 Business Risks 
 We face intense competition in our industry. 
The global payments space is intensely competitive. As technology evolves, new competitors or methods
of payment emerge, and existing clients and competitors assume different roles. Our products compete
with cash, checks, electronic funds, virtual currency payments, global or multi-regional networks,
other domestic and closed-loop payments systems, digital wallets and alternative payments providers
primarily focused on enabling payments through ecommerce and mobile channels. As the global payments
space becomes more complex, we face increasing competition from our clients, other emerging payment
providers such as fintechs, other digital payments, technology companies that have developed payments
systems enabled through online activity in ecommerce, social media, and mobile channels, as well as
governments in a number of jurisdictions (e.g., Brazil and India) as
 21 
Table of Contents
discussed above, that are developing, supporting and/or operating national schemes, RTP networks and
other payment platforms.
Our competitors may acquire or develop substantially better technology, have more widely adopted
delivery channels or have greater financial resources. They may offer more effective, innovative or a
wider range of programs, products and services. They may use more effective advertising and marketing
strategies that result in broader brand recognition, and greater use, including with respect to
issuance and merchant acceptance. They may also develop better security solutions or more favorable
pricing arrangements. Moreover, even if we successfully adapt to technological change and the
proliferation of alternative types of payment services by developing and offering our own services in
these areas, such services may provide less favorable financial terms for us than we currently
receive from VisaNet transactions, which could hurt our financial results and prospects.
Certain of our competitors operate with different business models, have different cost structures or
participate in different market segments. Those business models may ultimately prove more successful
or more adaptable to regulatory, technological and other developments. In some cases, these
competitors have the support of government mandates that prohibit, limit or otherwise hinder our
ability to compete for transactions within certain countries and regions. Some of our competitors,
including American Express, Discover, private-label card networks, virtual currency providers,
technology companies that enable the exchange of digital assets, and certain alternative payments
systems like Alipay and WeChat Pay, operate closed-loop payments systems, with direct connections to
both merchants and consumers. Government actions or initiatives such as the Dodd-Frank Act, the IFR
in Europe, or RTP initiatives by governments such as the U.S. Federal Reserve’s FedNow or the Central
Bank of Brazil’s Pix system may provide competitors with increased opportunities to derive
competitive advantages from these business models, and may create new competitors, including in some
cases the government itself. Similarly, regulation in Europe under PSD2 and the IFR may require us to
open up access to, and allow participation in, our network to additional participants, and reduce the
infrastructure investment and regulatory burden on competitors. We also run the risk of
disintermediation due to factors such as emerging technologies and platforms, including mobile
payments, alternative payment credentials, other ledger technologies or payment forms, and by virtue
of increasing bilateral agreements between entities that prefer not to use our payments network for
processing transactions. For example, merchants could process transactions directly with issuers, or
processors could process transactions directly with issuers and acquirers.
We expect the competitive landscape to continue to shift and evolve. For example:
• we, along with our competitors, clients, network participants, and others are developing or
participating in alternative payments systems or products, such as mobile payment services, ecommerce
payment services, P2P payment services, real-time and faster payment initiatives, and payment
services that permit ACH or direct debits from or to consumer checking accounts, that could either
reduce our role or otherwise disintermediate us from the transaction processing or the value added
services we provide to support such processing. Examples include initiatives from The Clearing House,
an association consisting of large financial institutions that has developed its own faster payments
system; Early Warning Services, which operates Zelle, a bank-offered alternative network that
provides another platform for faster funds or real-time payments across a variety of payment types,
including P2P, corporate and government disbursement, bill pay and deposit check transactions; and
cryptocurrency or stablecoin-based payments initiatives.
• many countries or regions are developing or promoting domestic networks, switches and RTP systems
(e.g., U.S., India and Europe). To the extent these governments mandate local banks and merchants to
use and accept these systems for domestic or other transactions, prohibit international payments
networks, like Visa, from participating on those systems, and/or impose restrictions or prohibitions,
on international payments networks from offering payment services on such transactions, we could face
the risk of our business being disintermediated in those countries. For example, in Argentina, the
government has mandated local acquirers to use debit card credentials to initiate payment
transactions on a government-sponsored national RTP system. Furthermore, in some regions (e.g.,
Southeast Asia and the Middle East), through intergovernmental organizations such as the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and the GCC, some countries are looking into cross-border connectivity of
such domestic systems;
• parties that process our transactions may try to minimize or eliminate our position in the payments
value chain;
• parties that access our payment credentials, tokens and technologies, including clients, technology
solution providers or others might be able to migrate or steer account holders and other clients to
alternative
 22 
Table of Contents
payment methods or use our payment credentials, tokens and technologies to establish or help bolster
alternate payment methods and platforms;
• participants in the payments industry may merge, form joint ventures or enable or enter into other
business combinations that strengthen their existing business propositions or create new, competing
payment services; and
• new or revised industry standards related to online checkout and web payments, cloud-based
payments, tokenization or other payments-related technologies set by individual countries, regions or
organizations such as the International Organization for Standardization, American National Standards
Institute, World Wide Web Consortium, European Card Standards Group, PCI Co, Nexo and EMVCo may
result in additional costs and expenses for Visa and its clients, or otherwise negatively impact the
functionality and competitiveness of our products and services.
As the competitive landscape is quickly evolving, we may not be able to foresee or respond
sufficiently to emerging risks associated with new businesses, products, services and practices. We
may be asked to adjust our local rules and practices, develop or customize certain aspects of our
payment services, or agree to business arrangements that may be less protective of Visa’s proprietary
technology and interests in order to compete and we may face increasing operational costs and risk of
litigation concerning intellectual property. Our failure to compete effectively in light of any such
developments could harm our business and prospects for future growth.
Our revenues and profits are dependent on our client and merchant base, which may be costly to win,
retain and develop.
Our financial institution clients and merchants can reassess their commitments to us at any time or
develop their own competitive services. While we have certain contractual protections, our clients,
including some of our largest clients, generally have flexibility to issue non-Visa products.
Further, in certain circumstances, our financial institution clients may decide to terminate our
contractual relationship on relatively short notice without paying significant early termination
fees. Because a significant portion of our net revenues is concentrated among our largest clients,
the loss of business from any one of these larger clients could harm our business, results of
operations and financial condition. For more information, please see Note 14—Enterprise-wide
Disclosures and Concentration of Business to our consolidated financial statements included in Item
8—Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report.
In addition, we face intense competitive pressure on the prices we charge our financial institution
clients. In order to stay competitive, we may need to adjust our pricing or offer incentives to our
clients to increase payments volume, enter new market segments, adapt to regulatory changes, and
expand their use and acceptance of Visa products and services. These include up-front cash payments,
fee discounts, rebates, credits, performance-based incentives, marketing and other support payments
that impact our revenues and profitability. In addition, we offer incentives to certain merchants and
acquirers to win routing preference in relation to other network options or forms of payment. Market
pressures on pricing, incentives, fee discounts and rebates could moderate our growth. If we are not
able to implement cost containment and productivity initiatives in other areas of our business or
increase our volumes in other ways to offset or absorb the financial impact of these incentives, fee
discounts and rebates, it may harm our net revenues and profits.
In addition, it may be difficult or costly for us to acquire or conduct business with financial
institutions or merchants that have longstanding exclusive, or nearly exclusive, relationships with
our competitors. These financial institutions or merchants may be more successful and may grow more
quickly than our existing clients or merchants. In addition, if there is a consolidation or
acquisition of one or more of our largest clients or co-brand partners by a financial institution
client or merchant with a strong relationship with one of our competitors, it could result in our
business shifting to a competitor, which could put us at a competitive disadvantage and harm our
business.
Merchants’ and processors’ continued push to lower acceptance costs and challenge industry practices
could harm our business.
We rely in part on merchants and their relationships with our clients to maintain and expand the use
and acceptance of Visa products. Certain merchants and merchant-affiliated groups have been exerting
their influence in the global payments system in certain jurisdictions, such as the U.S., Canada and
Europe, to attempt to lower their acceptance costs by lobbying for new legislation, seeking
regulatory intervention, filing lawsuits and in some cases, surcharging or refusing to accept Visa
products. If they are successful in their efforts, we may face increased
 23 
Table of Contents
compliance and litigation expenses, issuers may decrease their issuance of our products, and consumer
usage of our products could be adversely impacted. For example, in the U.S., certain stakeholders
have raised concerns regarding how payment security standards and rules may impact debit routing
choice and the cost of payment card acceptance. In addition to ongoing litigation related to the U.S.
migration to EMV-capable cards and point-of-sale terminals, U.S. merchant-affiliated groups and
processors have expressed concerns regarding the EMV certification process and some policymakers have
expressed concerns about the roles of industry bodies such as EMVCo and the Payment Card Industry
Security Standards Council in the development of payment card standards. Additionally, some merchants
and processors have advocated for changes to industry practices and Visa acceptance requirements at
the point of sale, including the ability for merchants to accept only certain types of Visa products,
to mandate only PIN authenticated transactions, to differentiate or steer among Visa product types
issued by different financial institutions, and to impose surcharges on customers presenting Visa
products as their form of payment. If successful, these efforts could adversely impact consumers’
usage of our products, lead to regulatory enforcement and/or litigation, increase our compliance and
litigation expenses, and harm our business.
We depend on relationships with financial institutions, acquirers, processors, merchants, payment
facilitators, ecommerce platforms, fintechs and other third parties.
As noted above, our relationships with industry participants are complex and require us to balance
the interests of multiple third parties. For instance, we depend significantly on relationships with
our financial institution clients and on their relationships with account holders and merchants to
support our programs and services, and thereby compete effectively in the marketplace. We provide
incentives to merchants, acquirers, ecommerce platforms and processors to promote routing preference
and acceptance growth. We also engage in many payment card co-branding efforts with merchants, who
receive incentives from us. As emerging participants such as fintechs enter the payments industry, we
engage in discussions to address the role they may play in the ecosystem, whether as, for example, an
issuer, merchant, ecommerce platform or digital wallet provider. As these and other relationships
become more prevalent and take on a greater importance to our business, our success will increasingly
depend on our ability to sustain and grow these relationships. In addition, we depend on our clients
and third parties, including network partners, vendors and suppliers, to submit, facilitate and
process transactions properly, provide various services associated with our payments network on our
behalf, and otherwise adhere to our operating rules and applicable laws. To the extent that such
parties fail to perform or deliver adequate services, it may result in negative experiences for
account holders or others when using their Visa-branded payment products, which could harm our
business and reputation.
Our business could be harmed if we are not able to maintain and enhance our brand, if events occur
that have the potential to damage our brand or reputation, or if we experience brand
disintermediation.
Our brand is globally recognized and is a key asset of our business. We believe that our clients and
their account holders associate our brand with acceptance, security, convenience, speed, and
reliability. Our success depends in large part on our ability to maintain the value of our brand and
reputation of our products and services in the payments ecosystem, elevate the brand through new and
existing products, services and partnerships, and uphold our corporate reputation. The popularity of
products that we have developed in partnership with technology companies and financial institutions
may have the potential to cause brand disintermediation at the point of sale and decrease the
presence of our brand. Our brand reputation may be negatively impacted by a number of factors,
including authorization, clearing and settlement service disruptions; data security breaches;
compliance failures by Visa, including by our employees, agents, clients, partners or suppliers;
failure to meet our environmental, social and governance goals or our stakeholders’ expectations;
negative perception of our industry, the industries of our clients, Visa-accepting merchants, or our
clients’ customers, including third party payments providers; ill-perceived actions or affiliations
by clients, partners or other third parties, such as sponsorship or co-brand partners; and
fraudulent, or illegal activities using our payment products. Our brand could also be negatively
impacted when our products are used to facilitate payment for legal, but controversial, products and
services, including, but not limited to, adult content, cryptocurrencies, firearms and gambling
activities. Additionally, these risks could be exacerbated if our financial institution partners
and/or merchants fail to maintain necessary controls to ensure the legality of these transactions, if
any legal liability associated with such goods or services is extended to ancillary participants in
the value chain like payments networks, or if our network and industry become entangled in political
or social debates concerning such legal, but controversial, commerce. If we are unable to maintain
our reputation, the value of our
 24 
Table of Contents
brand may be impaired, which could harm our relationships with clients, account holders, employees,
prospective employees, governments and the public, as well as impact our business.
Global economic, political, market, health and social events or conditions, including the war in
Ukraine and the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, may harm our business.
More than half of our net revenues are earned outside the U.S. International cross-border transaction
revenues represent a significant part of our revenue and are an important part of our growth
strategy. Our revenues are dependent on the volume and number of payment transactions made by
consumers, governments, and businesses whose spending patterns may be affected by economic,
political, market, health and social events or conditions. Adverse macroeconomic conditions within
the U.S. or internationally, including but not limited to recessions, inflation, rising interest
rates, high unemployment, currency fluctuations, actual or anticipated large-scale defaults or
failures, rising energy prices, or a slowdown of global trade, and reduced consumer, small business,
government, and corporate spending, have a direct impact on our volumes, transactions and revenues.
Furthermore, in efforts to deal with adverse macroeconomic conditions, governments may introduce new
or additional initiatives or requests to reduce or eliminate payment fees or other costs. In an
overall soft global economy, such pricing measures could result in additional financial pressures on
our business.
In addition, outbreaks of illnesses, pandemics like COVID-19, or other local or global health issues,
political uncertainties, international hostilities, armed conflict, war (such as the ongoing war in
Ukraine), civil unrest, climate-related events, including the increasing frequency of extreme weather
events, impacts to the power grid, and natural disasters have to varying degrees negatively impacted
our operations, clients, third-party suppliers, activities, and cross-border travel and spend. The
ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic remain difficult to predict due to numerous uncertainties,
including the transmissibility and severity of new variants of the virus; the uptake and
effectiveness of actions that are taken by governments, businesses or individuals in response to the
pandemic; the impact of the reopening of borders and resumption of international travel; the indirect
impact of the pandemic on global economic activity; and the impact on our employees and our
operations, the business of our clients, suppliers and business partners. In addition, a number of
countries took steps during the pandemic to temporarily cap interchange or other fees on electronic
payments as part of their COVID-19 economic relief measures. While most have been rescinded or have
expired, it is possible that proponents of interchange and/or MDR regulation may try to position
government intervention as necessary to support potential future economic relief initiatives.
Geopolitical trends towards nationalism, protectionism, and restrictive visa requirements, as well as
continued activity and uncertainty around economic sanctions, tariffs or trade restrictions also
limit the expansion of our business in certain regions and have resulted in us suspending our
operations in other regions. As a result of U.S. and European sanctions against Russia, we suspended
our operations in Russia in March 2022 and are no longer generating revenue from domestic and cross-
border activities related to Russia. For fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, total net revenues from Russia,
including revenues driven by domestic as well as cross-border activities, were approximately 2% and
4% of our consolidated net revenues, respectively. All transactions initiated with Visa cards issued
by financial institutions outside Russia no longer work within Russia, and all transactions on cards
issued by financial institutions in Russia may be processed on a domestic network, unrelated to Visa,
and no longer work outside the country. The war in Ukraine and any further actions by, or in response
to such actions by, Russia or its allies could have lasting impacts on Ukraine as well as other
regional and global economies, any or all of which could adversely affect our business.
A decline in economic, political, market, health and social conditions could impact our clients as
well, and their decisions could reduce the number of cards, accounts, and credit lines of their
account holders, which would ultimately impact our revenues. Our clients may implement cost-reduction
initiatives that reduce or eliminate marketing budgets, and decrease spending on optional or enhanced
value added services from us. Any events or conditions that impair the functioning of the financial
markets, tighten the credit market, or lead to a downgrade of our current credit rating could
increase our future borrowing costs and impair our ability to access the capital and credit markets
on favorable terms, which could affect our liquidity and capital resources, or significantly increase
our cost of capital.
Finally, as governments, investors and other stakeholders face additional pressures to accelerate
actions to address climate change and other environmental, governance and social topics, governments
are implementing regulations and investors and other stakeholders are imposing new expectations or
focusing investments in ways that may cause significant shifts in disclosure, commerce and
consumption behaviors that may have negative impacts on our business. As a result of any of these
factors, any decline in cross-border travel and spend would
 25 
Table of Contents
impact our cross-border volumes, the number of cross-border transactions we process and our currency
exchange activities, which in turn would reduce our international transaction revenues.
Our indemnification obligation to fund settlement losses of our clients exposes us to significant
risk of loss and may reduce our liquidity.
We indemnify issuers and acquirers for settlement losses they may suffer due to the failure of
another issuer or acquirer to honor its settlement obligations in accordance with the Visa operating
rules. In certain instances, we may indemnify issuers or acquirers in situations in which a
transaction is not processed by our system. This indemnification creates settlement risk for us due
to the timing difference between the date of a payment transaction and the date of subsequent
settlement. Our indemnification exposure is generally limited to the amount of unsettled Visa card
payment transactions at any point in time and any subsequent amounts that may fall due relating to
adjustments for previously processed transactions. Changes in the credit standing of our clients or
concurrent settlement failures or insolvencies involving more than one of our largest clients,
several of our smaller clients, or systemic operational failures could expose us to liquidity risk,
and negatively impact our financial position. Even if we have sufficient liquidity to cover a
settlement failure or insolvency, we may be unable to recover the amount of such payment. This could
expose us to significant losses and harm our business. See Note 12—Settlement Guarantee Management to
our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8—Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
of this report.
 Technology and Cybersecurity Risks 
Failure to anticipate, adapt to, or keep pace with, new technologies in the payments industry could
harm our business and impact future growth.
The global payments industry is undergoing significant and rapid technological change, including
increased proliferation of mobile and other proximity and in-app payment technologies, ecommerce,
tokenization, cryptocurrencies, distributed ledger and blockchain technologies, cloud-based
encryption and authorization, and new authentication technologies such as biometrics, FIDO 2.0, 3D
Secure 2.0 and dynamic cardholder verification values or dCVV2. As a result, we expect new services
and technologies to continue to emerge and evolve, including those developed by Visa such as our new
flows offerings. In addition to our own initiatives and innovations, we work closely with third
parties, including potential competitors, for the development of, and access to, new technologies. It
is difficult, however, to predict which technological developments or innovations will become widely
adopted and how those technologies may be regulated. Moreover, some of the new technologies could be
subject to intellectual property-related lawsuits or claims, potentially impacting our development
efforts and/or requiring us to obtain licenses, implement design changes or discontinue our use. If
we or our partners fail to adapt and keep pace with new technologies in the payments space in a
timely manner, it could harm our ability to compete, decrease the value of our products and services
to our clients, impact our intellectual property or licensing rights, harm our business and impact
our future growth.
A disruption, failure or breach of our networks or systems, including as a result of cyber-attacks,
could harm our business.
Our cybersecurity and processing systems, as well as those of financial institutions, merchants and
third-party service providers, have experienced and may continue to experience errors, interruptions,
delays or damage from a number of causes, including power outages, hardware, software and network
failures, computer viruses, ransomware, malware or other destructive software, internal design,
manual or user errors, cyber-attacks, terrorism, workplace violence or wrongdoing, catastrophic
events, natural disasters, severe weather conditions and other effects from climate change. In
addition, there is risk that third party suppliers of hardware and infrastructure required to operate
our data centers and support employee productivity could be impacted by supply chain disruptions,
such as manufacturing, shipping delays, and service disruption due to cyber-attacks. An extended
supply chain or service disruption could also impact processing or delivery of technology services.
Furthermore, our visibility and role in the global payments industry also puts our company at a
greater risk of being targeted by hackers. In the normal course of our business, we have been the
target of malicious cyber-attack attempts. For example, in response to U.S. and European sanctions
against Russia earlier this year, we saw increased cyber-threats from state sponsored or nation-state
actors. We have been, and may continue to be, impacted by attacks and data security breaches of
financial institutions, merchants, and third-party service providers. We are also aware of instances
where nation states have sponsored attacks against some of our financial institution clients, and
other instances where merchants and issuers have encountered substantial data
 26 
Table of Contents
security breaches affecting their customers, some of whom were Visa account holders. Given the
increase in online banking, ecommerce and other online activity, as well as more employees working
remotely as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to see increased cyber and payment fraud
activity, as cybercriminals attempt DDoS related attacks, phishing and social engineering scams and
other disruptive actions. Overall, such attacks and breaches have resulted, and may continue to
result in, fraudulent activity and ultimately, financial losses to Visa’s clients.
Numerous and evolving cybersecurity threats, including advanced and persistent cyber-attacks,
targeted attacks against our employees and trusted partners (i.e., insider threats), phishing and
social engineering schemes, particularly on our internet-facing applications, could compromise the
confidentiality, availability and integrity of data in our systems or the systems of our third-party
service providers. Because the tactics, techniques and procedures used to obtain unauthorized access,
or to disable or degrade systems change frequently, have become increasingly more complex and
sophisticated, and may be difficult to detect for periods of time, we may not anticipate these acts
or respond adequately or timely. The security measures and procedures we, our financial institution
and merchant clients, other merchants and third-party service providers in the payments ecosystem
have in place to protect sensitive consumer data and other information may not be successful or
sufficient to counter all data security breaches, cyber-attacks or system failures. In some cases,
the mitigation efforts may be dependent on third parties who may not deliver to the required
contractual standards, who may not be able to timely patch vulnerabilities or fix security defects,
or whose hardware, software or network services may be subject to error, defect, delay, outage or
lack appropriate malware prevention to prevent breaches or data exfiltration incidents. Despite our
security measures and programs to protect our systems and data, and prevent, detect and respond to
data security incidents, there can be no assurance that our efforts will prevent these threats.
These events could significantly disrupt our operations; impact our clients and consumers; damage our
reputation and brand; result in litigation or claims, violations of applicable privacy and other
laws, and increased regulatory review or scrutiny, investigations, actions, fines or penalties;
result in damages or changes to our business practices; decrease the overall use and acceptance of
our products; decrease our volume, revenues and future growth prospects; and be costly, time
consuming and difficult to remedy. In the event of damage or disruption to our business due to these
occurrences, we may not be able to successfully and quickly recover all of our critical business
functions, assets, and data through our business continuity program. Furthermore, while we maintain
insurance, our coverage may not sufficiently cover all types of losses or claims that may arise.
 Structural and Organizational Risks 
We may not achieve the anticipated benefits of our acquisitions, joint ventures or strategic
investments, and may face risks and uncertainties as a result.
As part of our overall business strategy, we make acquisitions and strategic investments, and enter
into joint ventures. We may not achieve the anticipated benefits of our current and future
acquisitions, joint ventures or strategic investments and they may involve significant risks and
uncertainties, including:
• disruption to our ongoing business, including diversion of resources and management’s attention
from our existing business;
• greater than expected investment of resources or operating expenses;
• failure to adequately develop our acquired entities or joint ventures;
• the data security, cybersecurity and operational resilience posture of our acquired entities, joint
ventures or companies we invest in or partner with, may not be adequate and may be more susceptible
to cyber incidents;
• difficulty, expense or failure of implementing controls, procedures and policies at our acquired
entities or joint ventures;
• challenges of integrating new employees, business cultures, business systems and technologies;
• failure to retain employees, clients or partners of our acquired entities or joint ventures;
• in the case of foreign acquisitions, risks related to the integration of operations across
different cultures and languages;
 27 
Table of Contents
• disruptions, costs, liabilities, judgments, settlements or business pressures resulting from
litigation matters, investigations or legal proceedings involving our acquisitions, joint ventures or
strategic investments;
• the inability to pursue aspects of our acquisitions or joint ventures due to outcomes in litigation
matters, investigations or legal proceedings;
• failure to obtain the necessary government or other approvals at all, on a timely basis or without
the imposition of burdensome conditions or restrictions;
• the economic, political, regulatory and compliance risks associated with our acquisitions, joint
ventures or strategic investments, including when entering into a new business or operating in new
regions or countries. For more information on regulatory risks, please see Item 1—Business—Government
Regulations and Item 1A—Risk Factors—Regulatory Risks above;
• discovery of unidentified issues and related liabilities after our acquisitions, joint ventures or
investments were made;
• failure to mitigate the deficiencies and liabilities of our acquired entities or joint ventures;
• dilutive issuance of equity securities, if new securities are issued;
• the incurrence of debt;
• negative impact on our financial position and/or statement of operations; and
• anticipated benefits, synergies or value of our acquisitions, joint ventures or investments not
materializing or taking longer than expected to materialize.
We may be unable to attract, hire and retain a highly qualified and diverse workforce, including key
management.
The talents and efforts of our employees, particularly our key management, are vital to our success.
The market for highly skilled workers and leaders in our industry, especially in fintech, technology
and other specialized areas, is extremely competitive. Our management team has significant industry
experience and would be difficult to replace. We may be unable to retain them or to attract, hire or
retain other highly qualified employees, particularly if we do not offer employment terms that are
competitive with the rest of the labor market. Ongoing changes in laws and policies regarding
immigration, travel and work authorizations have made it more difficult for employees to work in, or
transfer among, jurisdictions in which we have operations and could continue to impair our ability to
attract, hire and retain qualified employees. Failure to attract, hire, develop, motivate and retain
highly qualified and diverse employee talent, especially in light of evolving health and safety
protocols resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, and changing worker expectations and talent
marketplace variability regarding flexible work models; to meet our goals related to fostering an
inclusive and diverse culture, including increasing the number of underrepresented employees in the
U.S.; to develop and implement an adequate succession plan for the management team; to maintain our
strong corporate culture of fostering innovation, collaboration and inclusion in our current hybrid
model; or to design and successfully implement flexible work models that meet the expectations of
employees and prospective employees could impact our workforce development goals, impact our ability
to achieve our business objectives, and adversely affect our business and our future success.
The conversions of our class B and class C common stock or series A, B and C preferred stock into
shares of class A common stock would result in voting dilution to, and could impact the market price
of, our existing class A common stock.
The market price of our class A common stock could fall as a result of many factors. The value of our
class B and C common stock and series A, B and C preferred stock is tied to the value of the class A
common stock. Under our U.S. retrospective responsibility plan, upon final resolution of our U.S.
covered litigation, all class B common stock will become convertible into class A common stock. Under
our Europe retrospective responsibility plan, Visa will continue to release value from the series B
and series C preferred stock in stages based on developments in current and potential litigation. The
series B and series C preferred stock will become fully convertible to series A preferred stock or
class A common stock no later than 2028 (subject to a holdback to cover any pending claims). Visa may
take action on the class B common stock and series B and C preferred stock at a certain valuation and
due to unforeseen circumstances the overall value of the class B and C common stock and series A, B
and C preferred stock as determined by the class A common stock price, may later decrease. Conversion
of our class B
 28 
Table of Contents
and class C common stock into class A common stock, or our series A, B and C preferred stock into
class A common stock, would increase the amount of class A common stock outstanding, which could
adversely affect the market price of our existing class A common stock and would dilute the voting
power of existing class A common stockholders.
Holders of our class B and C common stock and series A, B and C preferred stock may have different
interests than our class A common stockholders concerning certain significant transactions.
Although their voting rights are limited, holders of our class B and C common stock and, in certain
specified circumstances, holders of our series A, B and C preferred stock, can vote on certain
significant transactions. With respect to our class B and C common stock, these transactions include
a proposed consolidation or merger, a decision to exit our core payments business and any other vote
required under Delaware law. With respect to our series A, B and C preferred stock, voting rights are
limited to proposed consolidations or mergers in which holders of the series A, B and C preferred
stock would receive shares of stock or other equity securities with preferences, rights and
privileges that are not substantially identical to the preferences, rights and privileges of the
applicable series of preferred stock; or, in the case of series B and C preferred stock, holders
would receive securities, cash or other property that is different from what our class A common
stockholders would receive. Because the holders of classes of capital stock other than class A common
stock are our current and former financial institution clients, they may have interests that diverge
from our class A common stockholders. As a result, the holders of these classes of capital stock may
not have the same incentive to approve a corporate action that may be favorable to the holders of
class A common stock, and their interests may otherwise conflict with interests of our class A common
stockholders.
Delaware law, provisions in our certificate of incorporation and bylaws, and our capital structure
could make a merger, takeover attempt or change in control difficult.
Provisions contained in our certificate of incorporation and bylaws and our capital structure could
delay or prevent a merger, takeover attempt or change in control that our stockholders may consider
favorable. For example, except for limited exceptions:
• no person may beneficially own more than 15 percent of our class A common stock (or 15 percent of
our total outstanding common stock on an as-converted basis), unless our board of directors approves
the acquisition of such shares in advance;
• no competitor or an affiliate of a competitor may hold more than 5 percent of our total outstanding
common stock on an as-converted basis;
• the affirmative votes of the class B and C common stock and series A, B and C preferred stock are
required for certain types of consolidations or mergers;
• our stockholders may only take action during a stockholders’ meeting and may not act by written
consent; and
• only the board of directors, Chairman, or CEO or any stockholders who have owned continuously for
at least one year not less than 15 percent of the voting power of all shares of class A common stock
outstanding may call a special meeting of stockholders.
 29 
Table of Contents
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments │
Not applicable.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 2. Properties │
At September 30, 2022, we owned or leased 145 office locations in 79 countries around the world,
including three global processing centers located in the U.S. and the United Kingdom. Our corporate
headquarters are located in owned and leased premises in the San Francisco Bay Area.
We believe that these facilities are suitable and adequate to support our ongoing business needs.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 3. Legal Proceedings │
Refer to Note 20—Legal Matters to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8—Financial
Statements and Supplementary Data of this report.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 4. Mine Safety Disclosures │
Not applicable.
 30 
Table of Contents