╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1. Business │
 OVERVIEW 
Visa is one of the world’s leaders in digital payments. Our purpose is to uplift everyone, everywhere
by being the best way to pay and be paid. We facilitate global commerce and money movement across
more than 200 countries and territories among a global set of consumers, merchants, financial
institutions and government entities through innovative technologies.
Since Visa’s early days in 1958, we have been in the business of facilitating payments between
consumers and businesses. We are focused on extending, enhancing and investing in our proprietary
advanced transaction processing network, VisaNet, to offer a single connection point for facilitating
payment transactions to multiple endpoints through various form factors. As a network of networks
enabling global movement of money through all available networks, we are working to provide payment
solutions and services for everyone, everywhere.
• We facilitate secure, reliable and efficient money movement among consumers, issuing and acquiring
financial institutions and merchants. We have traditionally referred to this structure as the “four-
party” model. Please see Our Core Business discussion below. As the payments ecosystem continues to
evolve, we have broadened this model to include digital banks, digital wallets and a range of
financial technology companies (fintechs), governments and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). We
provide transaction processing services (primarily authorization, clearing and settlement) to our
financial institution and merchant clients through VisaNet. During fiscal 2024, 303 billion payments
and cash transactions with Visa’s brand were processed by Visa or other networks, equating to an
average of 829 million transactions per day. Of the 303 billion total transactions, 234 billion were
processed by Visa.
• We offer a wide range of Visa-branded payment products that our clients, including nearly 14,500
financial institutions, use to develop and offer payment solutions or services, including credit,
debit, prepaid and cash access programs for individual, business and government account holders.
During fiscal 2024, Visa’s total payments and cash volume were $16 trillion, an d we had 4.6 billion
payment credentials, which are issued Visa card accounts, that were available to be used at more than
150 million merchant locations worldwide. (1)
• We take an open partnership approach and seek to provide value by enabling access to our global
network, including offering our technology capabilities through application programming interfaces
(APIs). We partner with both traditional and emerging players to innovate and expand the payments
ecosystem, allowing them to use the resources of our platform to scale and grow their businesses more
quickly and effectively.
• We are accelerating the migration to digital payments through our network of networks strategy. We
aim to provide a single connection point so that Visa clients can enable money movement for
businesses, governments and consumers, regardless of which network is used to start or complete the
transaction. This model ultimately helps to unify a complex payments ecosystem. Visa’s network of
networks approach creates opportunities by facilitating person-to-person (P2P), business-to-consumer
(B2C), business-to-business (B2B) and government-to-consumer (G2C) payments, in addition to consumer
to business (C2B) payments.
• We provide value-added services to our clients, including issuing solutions, acceptance solutions,
risk and identity solutions, open banking solutions and advisory services.
• We invest in and promote our brand to the benefit of our clients and partners through advertising,
promotional and sponsorship initiatives with the International Olympic Committee, the International
Paralympic Committee, the National Football League, and the Red Bull Formula One Teams — the Oracle
Red Bull Racing Team and the Visa Cash App RB Formula One Team, among others. We also use these
sponsorship assets to showcase our payment innovations.
(1) The number includes an estimated 42 million locations through payment facilitators, which are
technology providers that provide payment acceptance services to merchants on behalf of acquirers .
Data provided to Visa by acquiring institutions and other third parties as of June 30, 2024.
 4 
Table of Contents
 FISCAL 2024 KEY STATISTICS 
(1) Please see Item 7 of this report for a reconciliation of our GAAP to non-GAAP financial results.
 OUR CORE BUSINESS 
In a typical Visa C2B payment transaction, the consumer purchases goods or services from a merchant
using a Visa card or payment product. The merchant presents the transaction data to an acquirer,
usually a bank or third-party processing firm that supports acceptance of Visa cards or payment
products, for verification and processing. Through VisaNet, the acquirer presents the transaction
data to Visa, which in turn sends the transaction data to the issuer to check the account holder’s
account balance or credit line for authorization. After the transaction is authorized, the issuer
posts the transaction to the consumer’s account and effectively pays the acquirer an amount equal to
the value of the transaction, minus the interchange reimbursement fee. The acquirer pays the amount
of the purchase, minus the merchant discount rate (MDR), to the merchant.
Visa earns revenue by facilitating money movement across more than 200 countries and territories
among a global set of consumers, merchants, financial institutions and government entities through
innovative technologies.
 5 
Table of Contents
Our net revenue in fiscal 2024 consisted of the following:
 OTHER REVENUE 
 SERVICEREVENUE Consist mainly of value-added services related 
 Earned for services provided in support of to advisory, marketing and certain card 
 client usage of Visa payment services benefits; license fees for use of the Visa 
 brand or technology; and fees for account 
 holder services, certification and licensing 
 DATA PROCESSING REVENUE 
 Earned for authorization, clearing and 
 settlement; value-added services related to 
 issuing, acceptance, and risk and identity 
 solutions; network access; and other 
 maintenance and support services that 
 facilitate transaction and information 
 processing among our clients globally 
 CLIENT INCENTIVES 
 Paid to financial institution clients, 
 merchants and other business partners to grow 
 payments volume; increase Visa product 
 acceptance; encourage merchant acceptance and 
 use of Visa payment services; and drive 
 innovation 
 INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTION REVENUE 
 Earned for cross-border transaction processing 
 and currency conversion activities 
Please see Item 7 and Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial
statements included in Item 8 of this report, which include disclosures on how we earn and recognize
our revenue.
Visa provides payment processing for both non-Visa-branded and Visa-branded card transactions. In the
context of non-Visa-branded card transactions, we facilitate payment processing by providing gateway
routing services to other payment networks. At the client’s request, we may provide authorization,
clearing or settlement services on our network before or after we route the transaction to the other
payments network. In those instances, Visa may earn data processing revenue for the specific services
provided. In the context of Visa-branded card transactions on our network, we provide authorization,
clearing and settlement services and may earn service, data processing, international transaction or
other revenue. Depending on applicable regulations, some payment processors may or may not use our
network to process Visa-branded card transactions. If they use our network, we may earn service
revenue and data processing revenue. If they do not use our network, we earn only service revenue.
Visa is not a financial institution. We do not issue cards, extend credit or set rates and fees for
account holders of Visa products nor do we earn revenue from, or bear credit risk with respect to,
any of these activities. Interchange reimbursement fees reflect the value merchants receive from
accepting our products and play a key role in balancing the costs and benefits that account holders
and merchants derive from participating in our payments network. Generally, interchange reimbursement
fees are paid by acquirers to issuers. We establish default interchange reimbursement fees that apply
absent other established settlement terms. These default interchange reimbursement fees are set
independently from the revenue we receive from issuers and acquirers. Our acquiring clients are
responsible for setting the fees they charge to merchants for the MDR and for soliciting merchants.
Visa sets fees to acquirers independently from any fees that acquirers may charge merchants.
Therefore, the fees we receive from issuers and acquirers are not derived from interchange
reimbursement fees or MDRs.
 6 
Table of Contents
Visa’s strategy is to accelerate our revenue growth in consumer payments, new flows and value-added
services, and fortify the key foundations of our business model.
We seek to accelerate revenue growth in three primary areas — consumer payments, new flows and value-
added services.
 Consumer Payments 
On an annual basis, we see more than $20 trillion (2) of opportunity globally, excluding Russia and
China, to convert cash, check, Automated Clearing House (ACH), domestic schemes, and other forms of
electronic payment into cards and digital accounts on Visa’s network. We aim to grow consumer
payments through expansion of credentials and acceptance points and deepening engagement with
consumers through key enablers. We are focused on developing innovative digital solutions and
products across face-to-face and ecommerce payments, providing consumers and merchants around the
world the best ways to pay and be paid.
 Core Products 
Visa’s growth has been driven by the strength of our core products — credit, debit and prepaid.
Credit: Credit cards and digital credentials allow consumers and businesses to access credit to pay
for goods and services. Credit cards are affiliated with programs operated by financial institution
clients, co-brand partners, fintechs and affinity partners.
Debit: Debit cards and digital credentials allow consumers and small businesses to purchase goods and
services using funds held in their deposit accounts. Debit cards enable account holders to transact
in person, online or via mobile without needing cash or checks and without accessing a line of
credit. The Visa/PLUS Global ATM network also provides debit, credit and prepaid account holders with
cash access, and other
(2) Visa analysis based on third party studies.
 7 
Table of Contents
banking capabilities, in more than 200 countries and territories worldwide through issuing and
acquiring partnerships with both financial institutions and independent automated teller machine
(ATM) operators.
Prepaid: Prepaid cards and digital credentials draw from a designated balance funded by individuals,
businesses or governments. Prepaid cards address many use cases and needs, including general purpose
reloadable, payroll, government and corporate disbursements, healthcare, gift and travel. Visa-
branded prepaid cards also play an important part in financial inclusion, bringing payment solutions
to those with limited or no access to traditional banking products.
 Key Enablers 
We enable consumer payments and help our clients grow as digital commerce, new technologies and new
participants continue to transform the payments ecosystem. Some examples include:
 Tap to Pay 
Since we introduced Tap to Pay technology over ten years ago, it has emerged as a preferred way to
pay in the face-to-face environment among consumers in many countries around the world. Tap to Pay
adoption is growing and many consumers have come to expect this seamless payment experience.
Tap to Pay has become the default way Visa cardholders pay in nearly 60 countries and territories,
with more than 90 percent penetration of Visa face-to-face transactions, and in over 125 countries
and territories, Tap to Pay comprises more than 50 percent of our face-to-face transactions.
Excluding the U.S., over 80 percent of face-to-face Visa transactions globally were contactless in
fiscal 2024. In the U.S., Visa has surpassed 50 percent contactless penetration and more than 535
million Tap to Pay-enabled Visa cards have been issued. In addition, we have activated more than 870
contactless public transport projects worldwide. We processed more than 2.0 billion contactless
transactions on global transit systems in fiscal 2024, surpassing the number of transactions in 2023.
 Tokenization 
Visa Token Service (VTS) brings trust to digital commerce innovation. As consumers increasingly rely
on digital transactions, VTS is designed to enhance the digital ecosystem through improved
authorization, reduced fraud and improved consumer experience. VTS helps protect digital transactions
by replacing 16-digit Visa account numbers with a token that includes a surrogate account number,
cryptographic information and other data to protect the underlying account information. This security
technology can work for a variety of in person or online payment transactions. As of September 30,
2024, Visa has provisioned 11.5 billion network tokens.
 Click to Pay 
Click to Pay provides a simplified and more consistent cardholder checkout experience online by
removing time-consuming key entry of personal information and enabling consumer and transaction data
to be passed securely between payments network participants. Based on the EMV ® Secure Remote
Commerce industry standard, Click to Pay brings a standardized and streamlined approach to online
checkout and meets the needs of consumers shopping across a growing number of connected devices. The
goal of Click to Pay is to make online payments as secure, reliable and interoperable as the in-
person checkout experience.
 New Flows 
Our new flows business is focused on driving digitization and improving the payments and money
movement experience across all payment flows, beyond C2B, through our network of networks. These
include P2P, B2C, B2B and G2C payments, which provide some of the largest payment opportunities in
the world. Representing a total addressable opportunity of approximately $200 trillion (3) of payment
flows annually, excluding Russia and China, this pillar of our business aims to make payments and
money movement easier for businesses, consumers, and governments, using both Visa’s global network
and connectivity to other networks around the world .
We have two key objectives in this business area.
The first objective is to grow B2B payments volume through our Visa Commercial Solutions. This part
of the business focuses on addressing the $145 trillion of opportunity in B2B payment flows around
the world annually, excluding Russia and China. We believe around 15% of the annual opportunity, or
$20 trillion, could be addressed
(3) Visa analysis based on third party studies.
 8 
Table of Contents
by our card and virtual products, which we are continuously evolving for more use cases. Another $105
trillion of the annual opportunity is in the accounts payable and accounts receivable space that
largely relies on check, ACH, and wires. Lastly, cross-border volumes, which are addressable by our
Visa Commercial Solutions and Visa Direct Platform, represent $20 trillion of opportunity on an
annual basis.
The second objective is to put the power of money movement in our clients’ hands, enabling them to
move money around the world. This part of the business focuses on addressing $20 trillion in B2C, $20
trillion in P2P, and $15 trillion in G2C opportunities annually, excluding Russia and China, as well
as the cross-border B2B opportunity. These flows are largely addressed through our Visa Direct
Platform, encompassing a broad network of eligible cards, bank accounts, and digital wallets, as well
as our Visa B2B Connect network.
 Visa Commercial Solutions 
As a long-time participant in the B2B ecosystem, we have been supporting small businesses, large and
middle market companies, and governments with their payments needs. We continue to see opportunity
for growth as businesses seek simple digital experiences, similar to those available to consumers.
Visa offers a holistic suite of tailored solutions for businesses – providing payment,
reconciliation, and data to help manage working capital and drive efficiency, set spend controls,
manage expenses, and automate payment processes.
Our portfolio of commercial payments solutions includes small business cards, corporate (travel)
cards, purchasing cards, virtual cards and digital credentials. Businesses look to optimize processes
and effectively manage working capital by utilizing our commercial payments solutions. To support
small businesses we expanded the small business supplier matching webtool so that it is directly
accessible to small and medium size businesses, enhancing their ability to use their cards for
business payments. For large business spend, we have been expanding our presence in specific
commercial spend verticals, such as fleet and fuel, travel and agriculture. We have also extended our
products and capabilities specifically for accounts receivable and accounts payable spend, through
either embedded finance capabilities, or new solutions like our Accounts Receivable Manager virtual
card automation solution in the U.S.
 Visa Direct Platform 
We facilitate domestic and cross-border money movement, enabling clients to collect, convert, hold
and send funds across our network, which has the potential to reach more than 11 billion cards, bank
accounts and digital wallets. Visa Direct enables P2P payments and account-to-account (A2A)
transfers, business and government payouts to individuals or small businesses, merchant settlements
and refunds, among other use cases, across more than 195 countries and territories.
Visa Direct utilizes more than 75 domestic payment schemes, more than 15 real-time payments schemes,
more than 15 card-based networks and more than five payment gateways, with the potential to reach
more than 11.0 billion endpoints, through 4.0 billion cards, 3.5 billion bank accounts and 3.5
billion digital wallets. In fiscal 2024, Visa Direct processed nearly 10 billion transactions for
more than 550 partners.
Visa B2B Connect is a key part of our value proposition and considered part of the Visa Direct
platform. It is a multilateral B2B cross-border payments network designed to facilitate reliable,
secure and cost-effective transactions from the bank of origin directly to the beneficiary bank,
helping streamline settlement and optimize payments for financial institutions’ corporate clients.
Visa B2B Connect continues to scale and is available in more than 100 countries and territories.
The Visa Direct platform now also includes Visa Cross-Border Solutions and our digitally native
Currencycloud capabilities that service new flows and our established cross-border consumer payments
businesses with capabilities such as providing real-time foreign exchange rates, virtual accounts,
and enhanced liquidity and settlement.
In addition, our Visa+ solution provides interoperability for our clients. In fiscal 2023, we
announced the launch of Visa+, which enables transfers between participating P2P apps. Visa+ is now
fully live for eligible users of PayPal and Venmo in the U.S. In addition to bringing reach,
flexibility and convenience to P2P payment experiences, Visa+
 9 
Table of Contents
can help merchants improve the process of disbursing funds to their users, also known as B2C payouts,
which is live with DailyPay.
 Value-Added Services 
Value-added services represent an opportunity for us to diversify our revenue with products and
solutions that help our clients and partners optimize their performance, differentiate their
offerings and create better experiences for their customers. Our comprehensive suite of value-added
services spans five categories — Issuing Solutions, Acceptance Solutions, Risk and Identity
Solutions, Open Banking Solutions and Advisory Services.
Our value-added services strategy has three areas of focus: (1) provide services for Visa
transactions; (2) deliver network-agnostic services for non-Visa transactions; and (3) provide
services that go beyond payments. We have made significant progress across each of these areas and
offer more than 200 products and services as of September 30, 2024, many of which are designed to
work together to deliver high impact business outcomes.
 Issuing Solutions 
Visa DPS is a large issuer processor of Visa debit transactions. In addition to multi-network
transaction processing, Visa DPS also provides a wide range of value-added services, including fraud
mitigation, dispute management, data analytics, campaign management, a suite of digital solutions and
contact center services. Our capabilities in API-based issuer processing solutions, like DPS Forward,
allow our clients to create new payments use cases and provide them with modular capabilities for
digital payments.
In early 2024, Visa completed its acquisition of Pismo, a global, cloud-native issuer processing and
core banking platform with operations in Latin America, Asia Pacific and Europe. Pismo’s technology
platform expands Visa’s offerings to include core banking and card-issuer processing capabilities
across credit, debit and prepaid cards via cloud native APIs and also helps enable Visa to provide
support and connectivity for emerging payment frameworks and real-time payments (RTP) networks for
financial institution clients.
We provide a range of other services and digital solutions to issuers, such as account controls,
digital issuance and branded consumer experiences. In addition, Visa offers loyalty and benefits
solutions to issuers aimed at creating compelling and differentiated cardholder experiences, as well
as Buy Now, Pay Later (BNPL) capabilities, which allow shoppers the flexibility to pay for a purchase
in equal payments over a defined period of time. Visa is investing in installments as a payments
strategy — by offering Visa credentials and BNPL solutions to issuers and fintechs.
 Acceptance Solutions 
Visa Acceptance Solutions provide modular, value-added services in addition to the traditional
gateway function of connecting merchants to payment processing. Using the Visa Acceptance Platform,
acquirers, payment service providers, independent software vendors and merchants can improve the way
their consumers engage and transact; help to mitigate fraud and lower operational costs; and adapt to
changing business requirements. They can also connect with other fintechs through a global payment
management platform to use their services. Using an omnichannel solution with a cloud-based
architecture, Visa Acceptance Solutions capabilities, which includes Cybersource and Authorize.net,
provide new and enhanced payment integrations with ecommerce platforms, enabling sellers and
acquirers to provide tailored commerce experiences with payments seamlessly embedded.
In addition, Visa Acceptance Solutions provide secure, reliable services for merchants and acquirers
that reduce friction and drive acceptance. Examples include Token Management Service, which helps
simplify network token adoption, access and management for merchant and acquiring clients, provides a
single integration point into major card networks and is used standalone or easily integrated into
other payment solutions (please see the Tokenization discussion above); Global Urban Mobility, which
supports transit operators to accept Visa contactless payments in addition to closed-loop payment
solutions; and Account Updater, which provides updated account information for merchants to help
strengthen customer relationships and retention. Visa also offers Dispute
 10 
Table of Contents
Management Services, including a network-agnostic solution from Verifi that enables merchants to
prevent and resolve disputes with a single connection.
 Risk and Identity Solutions 
Visa’s Risk and Identity Solutions transform data into insights for near real-time decisions and
facilitate account holder authentication to help financial institution and merchant clients prevent
fraud and protect account holder data. With the increasing popularity of omnichannel commerce and
digital payments among consumers, fraud prevention helps increase trust in digital payments. The Visa
Protect suite of solutions include a range of products that empower financial institutions and
merchants with tools that facilitate automation, simplify fraud prevention and enhance payment
security, such as: Visa Consumer Authentication Service, Visa Protect Authentication Intelligence,
and Visa Provisioning Intelligence. These offerings highlight our artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning capabilities, for example, Visa Protect Authentication Intelligence uses machine
learning algorithms to identify fraud for Visa Secure authentication requests and Visa Provisioning
Intelligence is an AI-based product designed to prevent tokens from being fraudulently provisioned.
In March 2024, Visa announced three new products as part of the end-to-end Visa Protect suite that
are designed to reduce fraud across immediate A2A and card not present (CNP) payments, as well as
transactions both on and off Visa’s network. Visa Deep Authorization is an AI-powered transaction
risk scoring solution tailored to better manage CNP payments, which strengthens the protection of
Visa’s transactions through transaction risk scoring. Visa Protect for A2A Payments is our first
fraud prevention solution built specifically for real-time non-card payments. Finally, Visa Risk
Manager with scheme agnostic Visa Advanced Authorization is a comprehensive AI-powered fraud risk
management solution. Visa’s value-added fraud prevention tools layer on top of a suite of our network
programs that protect the safety and integrity of the payment ecosystem, help to prevent, detect and
mitigate threats.
 Open Banking Solutions 
Since our acquisition of Tink AB, an open banking platform, we continue to accelerate the development
and adoption of open banking securely and at scale. Visa’s open banking capabilities range from data
access use cases, such as account verification, balance check and personal finance management, to
payment initiation capabilities, such as A2A transactions and merchant payments. These capabilities
can help our partner businesses deliver valuable services to their customers.
In fiscal 2024, we expanded our presence in Europe and began expanding into the U.S. with a suite of
product offerings that enable users to connect accounts and provide trusted parties with access to
their financial data, including digitizing and streamlining the A2A payments experience. In fiscal
2025, we plan to launch Visa A2A in the UK, an open system bringing standards, rules and a dispute
management service to eligible banks and businesses, enabling them to provide consumers with a more
streamlined bill payment experience. Key features will include increased protection, more optionality
by allowing consumers to pay directly from their bank accounts and enhanced controls over payment
permissions.
 Advisory Services 
Visa Advisory Services offers deep payments expertise through a global consulting practice,
proprietary analytics models, data scientists and economists, marketing services and managed services
to deliver insights for issuers, acquirers, merchants, fintechs and other partners that help them
make better business decisions and scale their operations.
Operating as the payments consulting arm of Visa, Visa Consulting and Analytics (VCA) utilizes our
payments expertise and economic intelligence to identify actionable insights, make recommendations
and help implement solutions. VCA is comprised of specialized advisory practices such as: strategy
and commercial money movement, portfolio optimization, digital, AI, risk and implementation support,
which drive measurable outcomes for our clients. VCA Managed Services embeds teams within client
organizations to help execute key initiatives.
Visa Marketing Services provides clients with unique activation opportunities with Visa’s
sponsorships and utilizes our data analytics and understanding of customers’ transactional behavior
to provide marketing solutions designed to deliver effective results, drive brand preference and
influence consumer behavior.
 11 
Table of Contents
We are fortifying the key foundations of our business model, which consist of becoming a network of
networks, our technology platforms, security, brand and talent.
 Network of Networks 
Our network of networks strategy means moving money to all endpoints and to all form factors, using
all available networks and being a single connection point for our partners and providing our value-
added services on all transactions, no matter the network. The key component of our network of
networks strategy is interoperability. We are opening up our network and increasingly using other
networks to reach accounts we could not otherwise reach and enabling new types of money movement.
Visa B2B Connect, Visa Direct and Visa+ are examples of our strategy. Visa has invested more than $3
billion in AI and data infrastructure over the last 10 years.
 Technology Platforms 
Visa’s leading technology platforms comprise software, hardware, data centers and a large
telecommunications infrastructure. Visa’s four data centers are a critical part of our global
processing environment and have a high redundancy of network connectivity, power and cooling designed
to provide continuous availability of systems. Together, these systems deliver the secure, convenient
and reliable service that our clients and consumers expect from the Visa brand.
 Security 
Our in-depth, multi-layer security approach includes a formal program to devalue sensitive and/or
personal data through various cryptographic means; embedded security in the software development
lifecycle; identity and access management controls to protect against unauthorized access; and
advanced cyber detection and response capabilities. We use information security tools that help keep
our clients and consumers safe and invest significantly in our comprehensive approach to
cybersecurity. We deploy information security technologies to protect data confidentiality, the
integrity of our network and service availability and to strengthen our core cybersecurity
capabilities to minimize risk. Our payments ecosystem risk and control team continually monitors
threats to the payments ecosystem to help ensure attacks are detected and prevented efficiently and
effectively through pairing our AI capabilities with our security experts.
 Brand 
Visa’s strong brand helps deliver added value to our clients and their customers, financial
institutions, merchants and partners through compelling brand expressions, a wide range of products
and services as well as innovative brand and marketing efforts. In line with our commitment to an
expansive and diverse range of partnerships for the benefit of our stakeholders, Visa is a sponsor of
top entertainment and sports properties including the FIFA World Cup 2026 TM , the Olympic and
Paralympic Games, the National Football League, the Red Bull Formula One Teams — the Oracle Red Bull
Racing Team and the Visa Cash App RB Formula One Team.
 Talent 
Attracting, developing and advancing the best talent globally is critical to our continued success.
This year, we grew our total workforce from approximately 28,800 in fiscal 2023 to approximately
31,600 employees in fiscal 2024, an increase of 10 percent year over year. Voluntary workforce
turnover (rolling 12-month attrition) was 5 percent as of September 30, 2024. Visa employees are
located in more than 80 countries and territories, with 57 percent located outside the U.S. At the
end of fiscal 2024, Visa’s global workforce was 58 percent men and 42 percent women, and women
represented 38 percent of Visa’s leadership (defined as vice president level and above). In the U.S.,
ethnicity of our workforce was 42 percent Asian, 8 percent Black, 13 percent Hispanic, 3
 12 
Table of Contents
percent Other and 34 percent White. For our U.S. leadership, the breakdown was 19 percent Asian, 5
percent Black, 13 percent Hispanic, 3 percent Other and 59 percent White.
As Visa strives to achieve our purpose and our growth objectives, we have focused on enhancing our
employees’ expertise across our business. We offer unique career pathways for employees and provide
them with tools and support to build on their leadership impact and develop their careers. Along with
learning support from Visa University and our educational assistance program, employees are
encouraged to broaden their knowledge and develop new skills through alternative career pathways and
talent development programs including our global technology apprenticeship, military talent and
mentorship programs. Visa’s commitment to fostering a culture of innovation and collaboration also is
demonstrated through our employees’ adoption of generative AI tools for content generation,
productivity and business automation, including an internal, secure version of ChatGPT and our Ask
People Team Portal.
We are committed to providing benefits that support our employees. As part of our inclusive “whole
person” approach to benefits, Visa offers a robust package of curated tools, resources, and benefits
for our employees. While some programs may vary by location, some of our financial benefits include
our 401(k) match, employee stock purchase plan and financial wellbeing sessions and resources. In
addition to our enhanced mental well-being benefits, we began offering mental health first aid
training for employees and are piloting a peer-to-peer ambassador network to create an employee
support system.
Based on our latest employee engagement survey, 91% of employees would recommend Visa as a great
place to work. We strive to put our people first, and this is exemplified by prioritizing investments
to create spaces that encourage collaboration, inspire creativity and reflect our brand in our office
locations and data centers worldwide. In 2024, Visa opened the Mission Rock market support center in
San Francisco, forming a unified, complementary campus with our Foster City location.
This year, we also recommitted to ensuring that employees feel closely connected to one another and
to our business at large. To support this effort, Visa activated Viva Engage, our new internal social
network, as a place for all employees to collaborate, share information and connect with company
leadership in real time, every day. Since our launch of Viva Engage, 97% of employees had visited the
platform at least once, with 82% accessing the platform at least twice a week on average.
We also are dedicated to ensuring that employees feel valued in their day-to-day work. In recent
years, Visa has prioritized and invested in employee recognition, which in turn drives engagement and
innovation. Our UPLIFT program is designed to drive engagement and innovation by enabling employees
to recognize, appreciate and celebrate each other, no matter their role or level. The UPLIFT program
also drives Visa’s culture by grounding the recognition categories in Visa’s Leadership Principles –
further reinforcing that at Visa, it is not only about what you achieve, but how you do it. For
fiscal 2024, active UPLIFT platform users as a percentage of all users was 78%, while the number of
recognitions sent nearly doubled, from approximately 130,000 to nearly 248,000 since the prior year.
For additional information regarding our human capital management, please see the section titled
“Talent and Human Capital Management” in Visa’s 2024 Proxy Statement as well as our website at
visa.com/crs , which includes our 2023 Consolidated EEO-1 Report and our 2023 Corporate
Responsibility and Sustainability (CRS) Report. See Available Information below.
 FINTECH AND DIGITAL PARTNERSHIPS 
Fintechs are a vital growth engine for Visa and a key driver in realizing our purpose — to uplift
everyone, everywhere by being the best way to pay and be paid. Fintechs are key enablers of new
payment experiences and new flows. Our work with fintechs is one of our greatest opportunities and
has opened new points of acceptance, extended credit at the point of sale, made cross-border money
flows more efficient, moved B2B payments volume onto Visa’s network, expedited payroll and provided
digital wallet customers access to our services. Our portfolio of fintech partners is diverse and
continues to grow and scale. In fiscal 2024, we signed over 650 commercial partnerships with fintechs
globally, from early-stage companies to growing and mature players, an increase of 30 percent year
over year.
To better serve fintechs, Visa has a suite of streamlined commercial programs and digital onboarding
tools. Fintech Fast Track, our flagship program for fintechs, is designed to help launch new
financial features quickly, such as launching a new card program or enabling the movement of money
with Visa Direct. We provide streamlined
 13 
Table of Contents
onboarding and turnkey access to hundreds of ecosystem partners. The program has welcomed hundreds of
fintechs who are actively engaged in the program.
Visa Ready, our certification program, helps technology companies build and launch payment solutions
that meet Visa’s global standards around security and functionality. With our startup engagement
programs, like the Visa Everywhere Initiative, early-stage companies can build payment solutions
based on our capabilities. Visa also manages programs including She’s Next, Empowered by Visa, a
global women’s entrepreneurship initiative, and the Africa Fintech Accelerator Program to uplift
underrepresented communities.
MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS, JOINT VENTURES AND STRATEGIC INVESTMENTS
Visa continually explores opportunities to augment our capabilities and provide meaningful value to
our clients. Mergers and acquisitions, joint ventures and strategic investments complement our
internal development and enhance our partnerships to align with Visa’s priorities. Visa applies a
rigorous business analysis to our acquisitions, joint ventures and investments to ensure they will
differentiate our network, provide value-added services and accelerate growth.
In fiscal 2024, we completed our acquisition of Pismo, and entered into definitive agreements to
acquire a majority interest in Prosa, a leading payments processor in Mexico, and to acquire
Featurespace, a developer of real-time AI payments protection technology that prevents and mitigates
payments fraud and financial crime risks. After closing, Prosa will continue to operate as an
independent company. The Prosa and Featurespace acquisitions are both subject to customary closing
conditions, including applicable regulatory approvals.
 CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY AND SUSTAINABILITY 
Visa is committed to operating as a responsible, ethical, inclusive and sustainable company. As one
of the global leaders in digital payments, Visa strives to join with clients, partners and other
stakeholders to empower people, businesses and communities to thrive, to be an industry leader in
addressing the CRS topics most significant to our role as a payments technology company, and to meet
and exceed our expectations for performance and transparency. Visa’s purpose is to uplift everyone,
everywhere by being the best way to pay and be paid. We believe deeply in our purpose, and we are
focused on empowering people and economies, securing commerce and protecting customers, investing in
our workforce, protecting the planet and operating responsibly. Our 2023 CRS Report, as well as other
CRS-related resources are available on our website at visa.com/crs . See Available Information below.
 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
We own and manage the Visa brand, which stands for acceptance, security, convenience, speed and
reliability. Our portfolio of Visa-owned trademarks is important to our business. Generally,
trademark registrations are valid indefinitely as long as they are in use and/or maintained. We give
our clients access to these assets through agreements with our issuers and acquirers, which authorize
the use of our trademarks in connection with their participation in our payments network.
Additionally, we own a number of patents and patent applications related to our business and continue
to pursue patents in emerging technologies that may have applications in our business. We rely on a
combination of patent, trademark, copyright and trade secret laws in the U.S. and other
jurisdictions, as well as confidentiality procedures and contractual provisions, to protect our
proprietary technology.
 COMPETITION 
The global payments industry continues to undergo dynamic and rapid change. Existing and emerging
competitors compete with Visa’s network and payment solutions for consumers and for participation by
financial institutions and merchants. Technology and innovation are shifting consumer habits and
driving growth opportunities in ecommerce, mobile payments, blockchain technology and digital
currencies. These advances are enabling new entrants, many of which depart from traditional network
payment models. In certain countries, the evolving regulatory landscape is creating local networks or
enabling additional processing competition.
We compete against all forms of payment. These include paper-based payments, primarily cash and
checks, and all forms of electronic payments. Our electronic payment competitors principally include:
Global or Multi-regional Networks: These networks typically offer a range of branded, general purpose
card payment products that consumers can use at millions of merchant locations around the world.
Examples include American Express, Diners Club/Discover, JCB, Mastercard and UnionPay. These
competitors may be more concentrated in specific geographic regions, such as Discover in the U.S. and
JCB in Japan, or have a leading
 14 
Table of Contents
position in certain countries, such as UnionPay in China. See Item 1A—Regulatory Risks—Government-
imposed obligations and/or restrictions on international payments systems may prevent us from
competing against providers in certain countries, including significant markets such as China and
India . Based on available data, Visa is one of the largest retail electronic funds transfer networks
used throughout the world.
The following chart compares our network with certain network competitors for calendar year 2023 (1)
:
 Visa American Express Diners Club / JCB Mastercard 
 Discover 
 Payments Volume ($B) 12,620 1,665 256 321 7,344 
 Total Volume ($B)(2) 15,114 1,680 272 329 9,029 
 Total Transactions 284 12 4 7 184 
 (B) 
 Cards (M) 4,484 141 72 156 2,948 
(1) American Express, Diners Club / Discover, JCB and Mastercard data sourced from The Nilson Report
issue 1264 (May 2024). Includes all consumer, small business and commercial credit, debit and prepaid
cards. American Express, Diners Club / Discover, and JCB include business from third-party issuers.
JCB figures include other payment-related products and some figures are estimates. Mastercard
excludes Maestro and Cirrus figures.
(2) Total volume is the sum of payments volume and cash volume. Cash volume generally consists of
cash access transactions, balance access transactions, balance transfers and convenience checks.
Local and Regional Networks: Operated in many countries, these networks often have the support of
government influence or mandate. In some cases, they are owned by financial institutions or payment
processors. These networks typically focus on debit payment products, and may have strong local
acceptance, and recognizable brands. Examples include NYCE, Pulse and STAR in the U.S.; Interac in
Canada; and eftpos in Australia.
Alternative Payments Providers: These providers, such as closed commerce ecosystems, BNPL solutions
and cryptocurrency platforms, often have a primary focus of enabling payments through ecommerce and
mobile channels; however, they are expanding or may expand their offerings to the physical point of
sale. These companies may process payments using in-house account transfers between parties,
electronic funds transfer networks like the ACH, global or local networks like Visa, or some
combination of the foregoing. In some cases, these entities can be both a partner and a competitor to
Visa.
RTP Networks: RTP networks have launched in at least 80 countries and continue to be driven by strong
government sponsorship and regulatory initiatives to enable and drive adoption (e.g., FedNow in the
U.S., PIX in Brazil and United Payments Interface (UPI) in India), increasing their position as an
alternative to payment card schemes. These networks primarily focus on domestic transactions, with
adoption varying by use cases and geographies. However, with linkages such as PayNow in Singapore and
UPI in India, cross-border RTP networks are advancing and will compete with our cross-border
business. RTP networks can compete with Visa on consumer payments and other payment flows (e.g., B2B
and P2P) but can also be customers for value-added services, such as risk management.
Digital Wallet Providers: They continue to expand payment capabilities in person and online for
consumers and merchants and provide consumers with additional ways to pay. While digital wallets can
help drive Visa volumes, they can also be funded by non-card payment options. Digital wallet
providers who utilize RTP networks provide additional competition.
Payment Processors: Payment processors may perform processing services on third-party payments
networks on behalf of issuers or acquirers . We compete with payment processors for the processing of
Visa transactions. These processors may benefit from mandates requiring them to handle processing
under local regulation. For example, as a result of regulation in Europe under the Interchange Fee
Regulation (IFR), we may face competition from other networks, processors and other third parties who
could process Visa transactions directly with issuers and acquirers.
New Flows Providers: We compete with alternative solutions to our new flows (e.g., Visa Direct and
Visa B2B Connect) such as ACH, RTP and wires. We compete with other global and local card networks
for commercial card portfolios. Additionally, we may face competition from financial institution
clients who are experimenting with B2B blockchain payments.
 15 
Table of Contents
Value-Added Service Providers: We face competition from companies that provide alternatives to our
value-added services. These include a wide range of players, such as technology companies,
information services and consulting firms, governments and merchant services companies. The
integration of technology like generative AI can create new and better offerings that compete with
our value-added services, such as strengthened risk monitorization and managing digital
identification. Regulatory initiatives could also lead to increased competition in these areas.
We believe our fundamental value proposition of security, convenience, speed and reliability as well
as the number of credentials and our acceptance footprint help us to succeed. In addition, we
understand the needs of the individual markets in which we operate and partner with local financial
institutions, merchants, fintechs, governments, NGOs and business organizations to provide tailored
and innovative solutions. We will continue to utilize our network of networks strategy to facilitate
the movement of money. We believe Visa is well-positioned competitively due to our global brand, our
broad set of payment products, new flows offerings and value-added services and our proven track
record of processing payment transactions securely and reliably.
 GOVERNMENT REGULATION 
As a global payments technology company, we are subject to complex and evolving global regulations in
the various jurisdictions in which our products and services are used. The most significant
government regulations that impact our business are discussed below. For further discussion of how
global regulations may impact our business, see Item 1A — Regulatory Risks .
Anti-Corruption, Anti-Money Laundering, Anti-Terrorism and Sanctions: We are subject to anti-
corruption laws and regulations, including the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA), the UK
Bribery Act and other laws that generally prohibit the making or offering of improper payments to
foreign government officials and political figures for the purpose of obtaining or retaining business
or to gain an unfair business advantage. We are also subject to anti-money laundering and anti-
terrorist financing laws and regulations, including the U.S. Bank Secrecy Act. In addition, we are
subject to economic and trade sanctions programs administered by the Office of Foreign Assets Control
(OFAC) in the U.S. Therefore, we do not permit financial institutions or other entities that are
domiciled in countries or territories subject to comprehensive OFAC trade sanctions (currently, Cuba,
Iran, North Korea, Syria, Crimea and the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic
regions of Ukraine), or that are included on OFAC’s list of Specially Designated Nationals and
Blocked Persons, to issue or acquire Visa cards or engage in transactions using our products and
services.
Government-imposed Market Participation Restrictions: Certain governments, including China, India,
Indonesia, Thailand and Vietnam, have taken actions to promote domestic payments systems and/or
certain issuers, payments networks or processors, by imposing regulations that favor domestic
providers, impose local ownership requirements on processors, require data localization or mandate
that domestic processing be done in that country.
Interchange Rates and Fees: An increasing number of jurisdictions around the world regulate or
influence debit and credit interchange reimbursement rates in their regions. For example, the U.S.
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Act (Dodd-Frank Act) limits interchange reimbursement
rates for certain debit card transactions in the U.S.; the European Union (EU) IFR limits interchange
rates in the European Economic Area (EEA) (as discussed below); and the Reserve Bank of Australia
(RBA) regulates average permissible levels of interchange.
Internet Transactions: Many jurisdictions have adopted regulations that require payments system
participants to monitor, identify, filter, restrict or take other actions with regard to certain
types of payment transactions on the Internet, such as gambling, digital currencies, the purchase of
cigarettes or alcohol and other controversial transaction types.
Network Exclusivity and Routing: In the U.S., the Dodd-Frank Act limits network exclusivity and
restrictions on merchant routing choice for the debit and prepaid market segments. Other
jurisdictions impose similar limitations, such as the IFR’s prohibition in Europe on restrictions
that prevent multiple payment brands or functionality on the same card.
No-surcharge Rules: We have historically enforced rules that prohibit merchants from charging higher
prices to consumers who pay using Visa products instead of other means. However, merchants’ ability
to surcharge varies by geographic market as well as Visa product type, and continues to be impacted
by litigation, regulation and legislation.
 16 
Table of Contents
Privacy, Data Use, AI and Cybersecurity: Aspects of our operations or business are subject to
increasingly complex and fragmented data-related regulations, including with respect to privacy, data
use, AI and cybersecurity, which impact the way we collect, use and handle data, operate our products
and services and even impact our ability to offer a product or service. In addition, legislatures and
regulators globally are proposing new laws or regulations on these topics that could require Visa to
adopt more restrictive data collection and processing practices; expand cybersecurity requirements;
limit cross-border data flows; impact the adoption of advanced AI systems; and impose increased
obligations on companies handling personal data.
Supervisory Oversight of the Payments Industry: Visa is subject to financial sector oversight and
regulation in substantially all of the jurisdictions in which we operate. In the U.S., for example,
the Federal Banking Agencies (FBA) (formerly known as the Federal Financial Institutions Examination
Council) has supervisory oversight over Visa under applicable federal banking laws and policies as a
technology service provider to U.S. financial institutions. The federal banking agencies comprising
the FBA are the Federal Reserve Board, the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation and the National Credit Union Administration. Visa may also be separately examined by the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) as a service provider to the banks that issue Visa-
branded consumer credit and debit card products. Central banks in other countries/regions, including
Canada, Europe, India, Ukraine and the UK (as discussed below), have recognized or designated Visa as
a retail payment system under various types of financial stability regulations. Visa is also subject
to oversight by banking and financial sector authorities in other jurisdictions, such as Brazil and
Hong Kong.
European and United Kingdom Regulations and Supervisory Oversight: Visa in Europe continues to be
subject to complex and evolving regulation in the EEA and the UK.
There are a number of EU regulations that impact our business. As discussed above, the IFR regulates
interchange rates within the EEA, requires Visa Europe to separate its payment card scheme activities
from processing activities for accounting, organization and decision-making purposes within the EEA,
and imposes limitations on network exclusivity and routing. National competent authorities in the EEA
are responsible for monitoring and enforcing the IFR in their markets. We are also subject to
regulations governing areas such as privacy and data protection, anti-bribery, anti-money laundering,
anti-terrorism and sanctions. Other regulations in Europe, such as the second Payment Services
Directive (PSD2), require, among other things, that our financial institution clients provide certain
customer account access rights to emerging non-financial institution players. PSD2 also includes
strong customer authentication requirements for certain transactions that could impose both
operational complexity on Visa and impact consumer payment experiences. Visa Europe is also subject
to supervisory oversight by the European Central Bank and certain competent authorities in Europe.
In the UK, Visa Europe is designated as a Recognized Payment System, bringing it within the scope of
the Bank of England’s supervisory powers and subjecting it to various requirements, including on
issues such as governance and risk management designed to maintain the stability of the UK’s
financial system. Visa Europe is also regulated by the UK’s Payment Systems Regulator (PSR), which
has wide-ranging powers and authority to review our business practices, systems, rules and fees with
respect to promoting competition and innovation in the UK, and ensuring payment systems take care of,
and promote, the interests of service-users. The PSR recently established a supervisory team to
specifically oversee payment system operators like Visa in the aforementioned areas. Post-Brexit, the
UK has adopted various European regulations, including regulations that impact the payments
ecosystem, such as the IFR and PSD2. The PSR is responsible for monitoring Visa Europe’s compliance
with the IFR as adopted in the UK.
Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability: Certain governments around the world are adopting laws
and regulations pertaining to corporate responsibility and sustainability performance, transparency
and reporting. Regulations may include mandated corporate reporting (e.g., Corporate Sustainability
Reporting Directive) or in individual areas, such as mandated reporting on climate-related financial
disclosures.
Additional Regulatory Developments: Various regulatory agencies across the world also continue to
examine a wide variety of other issues, including mobile payment transactions, tokenization, access
rights for non-financial institutions, money transfer services, identity theft, account management
guidelines, disclosure rules, security and marketing that could affect our financial institution
clients and our business. Furthermore, following the passage of PSD2 in Europe, several countries,
including Australia, Brazil, Canada, Hong Kong and Mexico, are contemplating granting or have already
granted various types of access rights to third-party processors, including access to consumer
account data maintained by our financial institution clients. In October 2024, the CFPB in the United
States issued a final rule on personal financial data rights that would provide consumers (and third
parties
 17 
Table of Contents
authorized by consumers) with access to consumers’ financial data. These changes have the potential
to change the competitive landscape, which would present new challenges and opportunities to our
business.
 AVAILABLE INFORMATION 
Our corporate website is visa.com/ourbusiness . Our annual reports on Form 10-K, our quarterly
reports on Form 10-Q, our current reports on Form 8-K, proxy statements and any amendments to those
reports filed or furnished pursuant to the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934 can be viewed at
sec.gov and our investor relations website at investor.visa.com as soon as reasonably practicable
after these materials are electronically filed with or furnished to the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC). In addition, we routinely post financial and other information, which could be
deemed to be material to investors, on our investor relations website. Information regarding our
corporate responsibility and sustainability initiatives is also available on our website at
visa.com/crs. The content of any of our websites referred to in this report is not incorporated by
reference into this report or any other filings with the SEC.
 18 
Table of Contents
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1A. Risk Factors │
 Regulatory Risks 
We are subject to complex and evolving global regulations that could harm our business and financial
results.
As a global payments technology company, we are subject to complex and evolving regulations that
govern our operations. See Item 1 — Government Regulation for more information on the most
significant areas of regulation that affect our business. The impact of these regulations on us, our
clients, and other third parties could limit our ability to enforce our payments system rules;
require us to adopt new rules or change existing rules; affect our existing contractual arrangements;
increase our compliance costs; and require us to make our technology or intellectual property
available to third parties, including competitors, in an undesirable manner. As discussed in more
detail below, we may face differing rules and regulations in matters like interchange reimbursement
rates, preferred routing, domestic processing and localization requirements, currency conversion,
point-of-sale transaction rules and practices, privacy, data use and protection, licensing
requirements, and associated product technology. As a result, the Visa operating rules and our other
contractual commitments may differ from country to country, state to state, or by products. Complying
with these and other regulations increases our costs and operational complexity, and reduces our
revenue opportunities.
If widely varying regulations come into existence worldwide, we may have difficulty rapidly adjusting
our products, services, fees and other important aspects of our business to comply with the
regulations. Our compliance programs and policies are designed to support our compliance with a wide
array of regulations and laws, such as regulations regarding anti-money laundering, anti-corruption,
competition, money transfer services, privacy, and sanctions, and we continually adjust our
compliance programs as regulations evolve. However, we cannot guarantee that our practices will be
deemed compliant by all applicable regulatory authorities. In the event our controls should fail or
we are found to be out of compliance for other reasons, we could be subject to monetary damages,
civil and criminal penalties, litigation, investigations and proceedings, and damage to our global
brands and reputation. Furthermore, the evolving and increased regulatory focus on the payments
industry could negatively impact or reduce the number of Visa products our clients issue, the volume
of payments we process, our net revenue, our brands, our competitive positioning, our ability to use
our intellectual property to differentiate our products and services, the quality and types of
products and services we offer, the countries in which our products are used, and the types of
consumers and merchants who can obtain or accept our products, all of which could harm our business
and financial results.
Increased scrutiny and regulation of the global payments industry, including with respect to
interchange reimbursement fees, merchant discount rates, operating rules, risk management protocols
and other related practices, could harm our business.
Regulators around the world have been establishing or increasing their authority to regulate various
aspects of the payments industry. See Item 1—Government Regulation for more information . In the U.S.
and many other jurisdictions, we have historically set default interchange reimbursement fees. Even
though we generally do not receive any revenue related to interchange reimbursement fees in a payment
transaction (in the context of credit and debit transactions, those fees are paid by the acquirers to
the issuers; the reverse is true for certain transactions like ATM), interchange reimbursement fees
are a factor on which we compete with other payments providers and are therefore an important
determinant of the volume of transactions we process. Consequently, changes to these fees, whether
voluntarily or by mandate, can substantially affect our overall payments volumes and net revenue.
Interchange reimbursement fees, certain operating rules and related practices continue to be subject
to increased government regulation globally, and regulatory authorities and central banks in a number
of jurisdictions have reviewed or are reviewing these fees, rules, and practices. For example:
• Regulations adopted by the U.S. Federal Reserve cap the maximum U.S. debit interchange
reimbursement rate received by large financial institutions at 21 cents plus 5 basis points per
transaction, plus a possible fraud adjustment of 1 cent. Additionally, the Dodd-Frank Act limits
issuers’ and payment networks’ ability to adopt network exclusivity and preferred routing in the
debit and prepaid area, which also impacts our business. In response to merchant requests, the
Federal Reserve has recently taken actions to revisit its regulations that implement these aspects of
the Dodd-Frank Act. For example, in October 2022, the Federal Reserve published a final rule
effectively requiring issuers to ensure that at least two unaffiliated networks
 19 
Table of Contents
are available for routing CNP debit transactions by July 1, 2023. In October 2023, the Federal
Reserve issued a proposal for comment which would further lower debit interchange rates, with a
mechanism for automatic adjustment every two years. Separately, there continues to be interest in
regulation of credit interchange fees and routing practices by members of Congress and state
legislators in the U.S. In June 2023, legislation was reintroduced in the U.S. House of
Representatives and Senate, which among other things, would require large issuing banks to offer a
choice of at least two unaffiliated networks over which electronic credit transactions may be
processed. Similar legislation was introduced in the previous Congress in 2022 but failed to advance.
The current legislation has additional bipartisan support, and while the ultimate outcome of the
legislation remains unclear, its sponsors continue to strongly advocate for its passage. Finally,
some states in the U.S. have passed or are considering passing laws that regulate how interchange can
be assessed. For example, in May 2024, Illinois passed a law that restricts the assessment of
interchange on the state tax and gratuity portions of a transaction, and restricts financial
institutions and payment networks, among others, from using payment transaction data for any purpose
other than facilitating or processing a transaction. Such laws may also impose significant technical
and compliance burdens on our business. In Europe, the EU’s IFR places an effective cap on consumer
credit and consumer debit interchange fees for both domestic and cross-border transactions within the
EEA (30 basis points and 20 basis points, respectively). EU member states have the ability to further
reduce these interchange levels within their territories. The European Commission has announced its
intention to conduct another impact assessment of the IFR, which could result in even lower caps on
interchange rates and the expansion of regulation to other types of products, services and fees.
• Several countries in Latin America continue to explore regulatory measures against payments
networks and have either adopted or are exploring interchange caps, including Argentina, Brazil,
Chile and Costa Rica. In Asia Pacific, the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) which already regulates
interchange, continues to monitor issues related to the cost of acceptance, the potential merits of
mandating merchant choice routing on dual network debit cards and competition in digital wallet
payments. In 2022, the New Zealand Parliament passed legislation capping domestic interchange rates
for debit and credit products, and the government remains focused on lowering costs of digital
payments to businesses and consumers. Interchange is also regulated in certain countries in the
Central and Eastern Europe, Middle East and Africa region, including the United Arab Emirates.
Finally, many governments, including but not limited to governments in India, Costa Rica, and Turkey,
are using regulation to further drive down MDR, which could negatively affect the economics of our
transactions.
• While the focus of interchange and MDR regulation has primarily been on domestic rates
historically, there are several examples of increasing focus on cross-border rates in recent years.
For example, in 2019, we agreed to limit certain cross-border interchange rates in a settlement with
the European Commission. That agreement has been extended through 2029. In 2020, Costa Rica became
the first country to formally regulate cross-border interchange rates by regulation. Cross-border MDR
is also regulated in Costa Rica and Turkey. In June 2022, the UK’s PSR initiated a market review
focusing on post-Brexit increases in interchange rates for transactions between the UK and Europe.
• As referenced above, with increased lobbying by merchants and other industry participants, we are
also beginning to see regulatory interest in network fees. For example, the UK’s PSR is conducting a
market review into scheme and processing fees. In its interim report, the PSR indicated that it is
reviewing possible remedies, any of which, if adopted, could impose additional complexity and burdens
on our business in the UK. Other regulators, for example, in Australia, the EU, and Chile, have
expressed an interest in network fees, including issues related to transparency. Finally, in 2024,
the Greek Parliament limited acquirer fees for certain small ticket transactions in some merchant
categories for a period of three years.
• In addition, industry participants in some countries, including Argentina, Colombia, the Dominican
Republic, Paraguay, Peru and South Africa have sought intervention from competition regulators or
filed claims relating to certain network rules, including Visa’s restrictions on cross-border
acquiring. The Central Bank of Chile recently enacted regulation that will permit cross-border
acquiring for CNP transactions under certain conditions. Other countries, like Brazil, have adopted
regulations that require us to seek government pre-approval for certain of our network rules, which
could also impact the way we operate in certain markets.
• Government regulations or pressure may also impact our rules and practices and require us to allow
other payments networks to support Visa products or services, to have the other networks’
functionality or brand marks on our products, or to share our intellectual property with other
networks. In addition, the EU’s
 20 
Table of Contents
requirement to separate scheme and processing adds costs and impacts the execution of our commercial,
innovation and product strategies.
• We are also subject to central bank oversight in a growing number of countries, including Brazil,
India, the UK and within the EU. In several jurisdictions, we have been designated as a “systemically
important payment system.” Some countries with existing oversight frameworks are looking to further
enhance their regulatory powers, while regulators in other jurisdictions are considering or adopting
approaches based on these regulatory principles. For example, in October 2023, VisaNet was designated
as a prominent payment system in Canada. These types of designations generally result in oversight of
authorization, clearing and settlement activities, including policies, procedures and requirements
related to governance, reporting, cybersecurity, processing infrastructure, capital, and/or credit
risk management. We could also be required to adopt policies and practices designed to mitigate
settlement and liquidity risks, including increased requirements to maintain sufficient levels of
capital and financial resources locally, as well as localized risk management or governance.
Increased oversight could also include new criteria for member participation and merchant access to
our payment systems. Furthermore, as governments increase their focus on cybersecurity, parts of our
business have become considered significant or critical infrastructure by certain central banks.
• As innovations in payment technology have enabled us to expand into new products and services, they
have also expanded the potential scope of regulatory influence. For instance, new products and
capabilities, including tokenization, push payments, and new flows (e.g., Visa B2B Connect) could
bring increased licensing or authorization requirements in the countries where the product or
capability is offered. Furthermore, certain portions of our business are regulated as payment
institutions or as money transmitters, subjecting us to various licensing, supervisory, and other
requirements. As we continue to expand our capabilities and offerings in furtherance of our network
of networks strategy, we will need to obtain new types of licenses. These licenses could result in
increased supervisory and compliance obligations that are distinct from the obligations we are
subject to in our capacity as a payment card network.
Regulators around the world increasingly take note of each other’s approaches to regulating the
payments industry. Consequently, a development in one jurisdiction may influence regulatory
approaches in another. The risks created by a new law, regulation or regulatory outcome in one
jurisdiction have the potential to be replicated and to negatively affect our business in another
jurisdiction or in other product offerings. For example, our settlement with the European Commission
on cross-border interchange rates has drawn preliminary attention from some regulators in other parts
of the world. Similarly, new regulations involving one product offering may prompt regulators to
extend the regulations to other product offerings. For example, credit payments could become subject
to similar regulation as debit payments (or vice versa). The RBA initially capped credit interchange,
but subsequently capped debit interchange as well.
When we cannot set default interchange reimbursement rates at optimal levels, issuers and acquirers
may find our payments system less attractive. This may increase the attractiveness of other payments
systems, such as our competitors’ closed-loop payments systems with direct connections to both
merchants and consumers. We believe some issuers may react to such regulations by charging new or
higher fees, or reducing certain benefits to consumers, which make our products less appealing to
consumers. Some acquirers may elect to charge higher MDR regardless of the Visa interchange
reimbursement rate, causing merchants not to accept our products or to steer customers to alternative
payments systems or forms of payment. In addition, in an effort to reduce the expense of their
payment programs, some issuers and acquirers have obtained, and may continue to obtain, incentives
from us, including reductions in the fees that we charge, which directly impacts our net revenue.
Finally, policymakers and regulatory bodies in the U.S., Europe, and other parts of the world are
exploring ways to reform existing competition laws to meet the needs of the digital economy,
including restricting large technology companies from engaging in mergers and acquisitions, requiring
them to interoperate with potential competitors, and prohibiting certain kinds of self-preferencing
behaviors. While the focus of these efforts remains primarily on increasing regulation of large
technology, ecommerce and social media companies, they could also have implications for other types
of companies including payments networks, which could constrain our ability to effectively manage our
business or potentially limit how we make our products and services available.
 21 
Table of Contents
Government-imposed obligations and/or restrictions on international payments systems may prevent us
from competing against providers in certain countries, including significant markets such as China
and India.
Governments in a number of jurisdictions shield domestic payments providers, including card networks,
brands, and processors, from international competition by imposing market access barriers and
preferential domestic regulations. To varying degrees, these policies and regulations affect the
terms of competition in the marketplace and impair the ability of international payments networks to
compete. Public authorities may also impose regulatory requirements that favor domestic providers or
mandate that domestic payments or data processing be performed entirely within that country, which
could prevent us from managing the end-to-end processing of certain transactions.
In China, UnionPay remains the predominant processor of domestic payment card transactions and
operates the predominant domestic acceptance mark. Although we filed an application with the People’s
Bank of China (PBOC) in May 2020 to operate a Bank Card Clearing Institution (BCCI) in China, the
timing and the procedural steps for approval remain uncertain. There is no guarantee that the license
to operate a BCCI will be approved or, if we obtain such license, that we will be able to
successfully compete with domestic payments networks. Co-badging and co-residency regulations also
pose additional challenges in markets where Visa competes with national networks for issuance and
routing. Certain banks have issued dual-branded cards for which domestic transactions in China are
processed by UnionPay and transactions outside of China are processed by Visa or other international
payments networks. The PBOC is contemplating that dual-branded cards be phased out over time as new
licenses are issued to international companies to participate in China’s domestic payments market.
Accordingly, we have been working with Chinese issuers to issue Visa-only branded cards for
international travel, and later for domestic transactions should we obtain a BCCI license. However,
notwithstanding such efforts, the phase out of dual-branded cards has decreased our payment volumes
and impacted the net revenue we generate in China.
UnionPay has grown rapidly in China and is actively pursuing international expansion plans, which
could potentially lead to regulatory pressures on our international routing rule (which requires that
international transactions on Visa cards be routed over VisaNet). Furthermore, although regulatory
barriers shield UnionPay from competition in China, alternative payments providers such as Alipay and
WeChat Pay have rapidly expanded into ecommerce, offline, and cross-border payments, which could make
it difficult for us to compete even if our license is approved in China. NetsUnion Clearing Corp, a
Chinese digital transaction routing system, and other such systems could have a competitive advantage
in comparison with international payments networks .
Regulatory initiatives in India, including a data localization mandate implemented by the government,
have cost implications for us and could affect our ability to effectively compete with domestic
payments providers. Furthermore, any inability to meet the requirements of the data localization
mandate could impact our ability to do business in India. In Europe, with the support of the European
Central Bank, a group of European banks announced their intent to launch a pan-European payment
system, the European Payments Initiative (EPI). While EPI subsequently announced a focus on account-
to-account instant payments across a range of use cases, the purported motivation behind EPI is to
reduce the risks of disintermediation of European providers by international technology companies and
continued reliance on international payments networks for intra-Europe card transactions.
Furthermore, regional groups of countries, such as the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) and a number of
countries in Southeast Asia (e.g., Malaysia), have adopted or may consider, efforts to restrict our
participation in the processing of regional transactions. The African Development Bank has also
indicated an interest in supporting national payment systems in its efforts to expand financial
inclusion and strengthen regional financial stability. Finally, some countries such as Nigeria and
South Africa are mandating on-shore processing of domestic transactions. Geopolitical events,
including sanctions, trade tensions or other types of activities have intensified these activities,
which could adversely affect our business. For example, in the aftermath of U.S. and European
sanctions against Russia and the decision by U.S. payments networks, including Visa, to suspend
operations in the country, some countries have expressed concerns about their reliance on U.S.
financial services companies, including payments networks, and have taken steps to bolster the
development of domestic solutions. Separately, Russia has called for the BRICS countries (a five-
country bloc made up of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, and which has recently
expanded to include countries such as Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab
Emirates), to lessen dependence on Western payments systems by, among other things, integrating
payments systems and cards across member countries.
Central banks in a number of countries, including those in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada,
Europe, India, and Mexico, are in the process of developing or expanding national RTP networks and
instant payment solutions with the goal of driving a greater number of domestic transactions onto
these systems. In July 2023, the U.S.
 22 
Table of Contents
Federal Reserve launched its FedNow Service with core clearing and settlement functionality, and
expects to add more features and enhancements over time. Some countries are also exploring cross-
border connectivity of their respective RTP systems. Finally, an increasing number of jurisdictions
are exploring the concept of building central bank digital currencies for retail payments, such as
the European Central Bank’s Digital Euro initiative. If successfully deployed, these national payment
platforms and digital currencies could have significant implications for Visa’s domestic and cross-
border payments, including potential disintermediation.
Due to our inability to manage the end-to-end processing of transactions for cards in certain
countries (e.g., Thailand), we depend on our close working relationships with our clients or third-
party service providers to ensure transactions involving our products are processed effectively. Our
ability to do so may be adversely affected by regulatory requirements and policies pertaining to
transaction routing or on-shore processing. In general, national laws that protect or otherwise
support domestic providers or processing may increase our costs; decrease our payments volumes and
impact the net revenue we generate in those countries; decrease the number of Visa products issued or
processed; impede us from utilizing our global processing capabilities and controlling the quality of
the services supporting our brands; restrict our activities; limit our growth and the ability to
introduce new products, services and innovations; force us to leave countries or prevent us from
entering new markets; and create new competitors, all of which could harm our business.
Laws and regulations regarding the handling of personal data, including laws and regulations related
to privacy, cybersecurity and AI, may impede our services or result in increased costs, legal claims,
or fines against us .
Our business relies on the processing of data across national borders. Legal requirements relating to
the collection, storage, handling, use, disclosure, transfer, disposal and security of personal data
continue to evolve, and we are subject to an increasing number of privacy, data protection,
cybersecurity and AI requirements around the world. For example, our ongoing efforts to comply with
complex U.S. state privacy and data protection regulations, and emerging international privacy and
data protection laws, may increase the complexity of our compliance operations, entail substantial
expenses, divert resources from other initiatives and projects, and limit the services we are able to
offer. Additionally, privacy laws in other regions, such as China’s Personal Information Protection
Law and India’s Personal Data Protection Act, may have extraterritorial application and include
restrictions on cross-border data transfers, extensive notification and localization requirements,
and substantial compliance and audit obligations. The global proliferation of new privacy and data
protection laws may lead to inconsistent and conflicting requirements, which create an uncertain
regulatory environment. Noncompliance could also result in regulatory penalties and significant legal
liability. Enforcement actions and investigations by regulatory authorities into companies related to
data security incidents and privacy violations are generally increasing. In Europe, data protection
authorities continue to apply and enforce the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), imposing
record setting fines.
We are also subject to a variety of laws and regulations governing the development, use, and
deployment of AI technologies. These laws and regulations are still evolving, and there is no single
global regulatory framework for AI. The market is still assessing how regulators may apply existing
consumer protection and other laws in the context of AI. There is thus uncertainty on what new laws
will look like and how existing laws will apply to our development, use, and deployment of AI. In the
midst of this uncertainty, we may face challenges due to the complexity and rapidly changing nature
of AI technology and applicable laws. Our use of AI and machine learning is subject to various risks
at each stage of use. In the context of AI development, risks include those related to intellectual
property considerations, the collection and use of personal information, third party risks, technical
limitations of algorithms and the accuracy of training data, and compliance with emerging AI legal
standards. In the context of use and deployment, risks include ethical and compliance considerations,
and our ability to monitor and safely deploy AI systems throughout the organization with appropriate
safeguards. The EU has adopted a comprehensive AI Act that applies harmonized rules across Europe
with the aim of fostering innovation and respecting fundamental rights. The EU AI Act comes into
force in stages with the key provisions related to high risk AI coming into force in August 2026.
There is still limited guidance on the EU AI Act, but it could, depending on how provisions are
interpreted and enforced, limit the ability to create and deploy AI systems for uses deemed high-risk
in the EU or add increased compliance costs associated with these systems. Our development and
implementation of governance frameworks for our AI and machine learning systems may not be successful
in mitigating all of these emerging risks.
Further, as we develop integrated and personalized products and services and acquire new companies to
meet the needs of a changing marketplace, we may expand our data profile through additional data
types and sources, across multiple channels, and involving new partners. This potential expansion
could amplify the impact of these various laws and regulations on our business. As a result, we are
required to constantly monitor our privacy,
 23 
Table of Contents
data and cybersecurity practices and potentially change them when necessary or appropriate. We also
may need to provide increased care in our data management, governance and quality practices,
particularly as it relates to the use of data in products leveraging AI.
We may be subject to tax examinations or disputes, or changes in tax laws.
The application of tax laws requires significant judgment and can be subject to uncertainty and
differing interpretations. We are currently under examination by, or in disputes with, the U.S.
Internal Revenue Service as well as tax authorities in other jurisdictions, and we may be subject to
additional examinations or disputes in the future. We exercise significant judgment and make
estimates that we believe to be reasonable in calculating our worldwide provision for income taxes
and other tax liabilities. However, relevant tax authorities may disagree with our estimates,
interpretations or tax treatment of certain material items. Failure to sustain our position in these
matters could adversely affect our cash flows and financial position.
In addition, changes in existing laws in the U.S. or foreign jurisdictions, including unilateral
actions of foreign jurisdictions to introduce digital services taxes, or changes resulting from the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development’s proposals for modernizing the international
tax system, including the introduction of a global minimum tax with widespread implementation by
member countries expected by 2025, may also materially affect our effective tax rate and could
increase our tax payments. Please see Item 7 and Note 19—Income Taxes to our consolidated financial
statements included in Item 8 of this report.
 Litigation Risks 
We may be adversely affected by the outcome of litigation or investigations.
We are involved in numerous litigation matters, investigations, and proceedings asserted by civil
litigants, governments, and enforcement bodies investigating or alleging, among other things,
violations of competition and antitrust law, consumer protection law, privacy law and intellectual
property law (these are referred to as “actions” in this section). Details of the most significant
actions we face are described more fully in Note 20—Legal Matters to our consolidated financial
statements included in Item 8 of this report. These actions are inherently uncertain, expensive and
disruptive to our operations. In the event we are found liable or reach a settlement in any action,
particularly in a large class action lawsuit, such as one involving an antitrust claim entitling the
plaintiff to treble damages in the U.S., or we incur liability arising from a government
investigation, we may be required to pay significant awards or judgments, settlements, costs or
fines. In addition, settlement terms, judgments, orders, pressures or events in or resulting from
actions have impacted and may continue to impact our business by creating uncertainty for our
business or by influencing or requiring us to modify, among other things, the default interchange
reimbursement rates we set, the Visa operating rules or the way in which we enforce those rules, our
fees or pricing, or the way we do business. These actions or their outcomes may also influence
regulators, investigators, governments or civil litigants in the same or other jurisdictions, which
may lead to additional actions against Visa. Finally, we are required by some of our commercial
agreements to indemnify other entities for litigation brought against them, even if Visa is not a
defendant.
For certain actions like those that are U.S. covered litigation or VE territory covered litigation,
as described in Note 5—U.S. and Europe Retrospective Responsibility Plans and Note 20—Legal Matters
to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report, we have certain financial
protections pursuant to the respective retrospective responsibility plans. The two retrospective
responsibility plans are different in the protections they provide and the mechanisms by which we are
protected. The failure of one or both of the retrospective responsibility plans to adequately
insulate us from the impact of such settlements, judgments, losses, or liabilities could materially
harm our financial condition or cash flows, or even cause us to become insolvent.
 Business Risks 
 We face intense competition in our industry. 
The global payments space is intensely competitive. As technology evolves and consumer expectations
change, new competitors or methods of payment emerge, and existing clients and competitors assume
different roles. Our products compete with cash, checks, electronic payments, virtual currency
payments, global or multi-regional networks, other domestic and closed-loop payments systems, digital
wallets and alternative payments providers primarily focused on enabling payments through ecommerce
and mobile channels. As the global payments space becomes more complex, we face increasing
competition from our clients, other emerging payment providers such as fintechs, other digital
payments, technology companies that have developed payments systems
 24 
Table of Contents
enabled through online activity in ecommerce, social media, and mobile channels, other providers of
new flows and value-added service offerings, as well as governments in a number of jurisdictions
(e.g., Brazil and India) as discussed above, that are developing, supporting and/or operating
national schemes, RTP networks and other payment platforms. For more information, please see Item
1—Competition above.
Our competitors may acquire, develop, or make better use of substantially better technology, have
more widely adopted delivery channels, or have greater financial resources. They may offer more
effective, innovative or a wider range of programs, products and services. They may use more
effective advertising and marketing strategies that result in broader brand recognition and greater
use, including with respect to issuance and merchant acceptance. They may also develop better
security solutions or more favorable pricing arrangements. Moreover, even if we successfully adapt to
technological change and the proliferation of alternative types of payment services by developing and
offering our own services in these areas, such services may provide less favorable financial terms
for us than we currently receive from VisaNet transactions, which could hurt our financial results
and prospects.
Certain of our competitors operate with different business models, have different cost structures or
participate in different market segments. Many of these competitors are also able to use existing
payment networks without being subject to many of the associated costs. Moreover, these competitors
also occupy various roles in the payments ecosystem that enable them to influence payment choice of
other participants. Those business models may ultimately prove more successful or more adaptable to
regulatory, technological and other developments. In some cases, these competitors have the support
of government mandates that prohibit, limit or otherwise hinder our ability to compete for
transactions within certain countries and regions. Some of our competitors, including American
Express, Discover, private-label card networks, virtual currency providers, technology companies that
enable the exchange of digital assets, and certain alternative payments systems like Alipay and
WeChat Pay, operate closed-loop payments systems, with direct connections to both merchants and
consumers. Government actions or initiatives such as the Dodd-Frank Act, the IFR in Europe, or RTP
initiatives by governments such as the U.S. Federal Reserve’s FedNow or the Central Bank of Brazil’s
Pix system may provide competitors with increased opportunities to derive competitive advantages from
these business models, and may create new competitors, including in some cases the government itself.
Similarly, regulation in Europe under PSD2 and the IFR may require us to open up access to, and allow
participation in, our network to additional participants, and reduce the infrastructure investment
and regulatory burden on competitors. In addition to the open banking provisions under PSD2, efforts
to implement or facilitate open banking and open finance requirements are underway across a number of
countries, including Australia, Brazil, Canada and the U.S., which could impose additional
requirements on financial institutions or others regarding access to and use of financial data. We
also run the risk of disintermediation due to factors such as emerging technologies and platforms,
including mobile payments, alternative payment credentials, other ledger technologies or payment
forms, and by virtue of increasing bilateral agreements between entities that prefer not to use our
payments network for processing transactions. For example, merchants could process transactions
directly with issuers, or processors could process transactions directly with issuers and acquirers.
We expect the competitive landscape to continue to shift and evolve. For example:
• We, along with our competitors, clients, network participants, and others are developing or
participating in alternative payments systems or products, such as mobile payment services, ecommerce
payment services, P2P payment services, real-time and faster payment initiatives, and payment
services that permit ACH or direct debits from or to consumer checking accounts, that could either
reduce our role or otherwise disintermediate us from the transaction processing or the value-added
services we provide to support such processing. Examples include initiatives from The Clearing House,
an association consisting of large financial institutions that has developed its own faster payments
system; Early Warning Services, which operates Zelle, a bank-offered alternative network that
provides another platform for faster funds or real-time payments across a variety of payment types,
including P2P, corporate and government disbursement, bill pay and deposit check transactions; and
cryptocurrency or stablecoin-based payments initiatives.
• Many countries or regions are developing or promoting domestic networks, switches and RTP systems
(e.g., U.S., Brazil, India and Europe) and in some countries the government itself owns and operates
these RTP systems (e.g., Brazil). To the extent these governments mandate local banks and merchants
to use and accept these systems for domestic or other transactions, prohibit international payments
networks, like Visa, from participating on those systems, and/or impose restrictions or prohibitions
on international payments networks from offering payment services on such transactions, we could face
the risk of our business being disintermediated in those countries. For example, in some regions
(Latin America, Southeast Asia and the Middle East), including through intergovernmental
organizations such as the
 25 
Table of Contents
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the GCC, some countries are at varying stages of exploring
or operationalizing the cross-border connectivity of such domestic systems. Similarly, India has
expressed interest in expanding its digital public infrastructure, which includes its RTP system,
Unified Payments Interface (UPI), outside the country and for cross-border payments. Currently,
international payment networks like Visa are unable to participate in UPI.
• Parties that process our transactions may try to minimize or eliminate our position in the payments
value chain.
• Parties that access our payment credentials, tokens and technologies, including clients, technology
solution providers or others might be able to migrate or steer account holders and other clients to
alternative payment methods or use our payment credentials, tokens and technologies to establish or
help bolster alternate payment methods and platforms.
• Participants in the payments industry may merge, form joint ventures or enable or enter into other
business combinations that strengthen their existing business propositions or create new, competing
payment services.
• New or revised industry standards related to online checkout and web payments, cloud-based
payments, tokenization or other payments-related technologies set by individual countries, regions or
organizations such as the International Organization for Standardization, American National Standards
Institute, World Wide Web Consortium, European Card Standards Group, PCI Co, Nexo and EMVCo may
result in additional costs and expenses for Visa and its clients, or otherwise negatively impact the
functionality and competitiveness of our products and services.
As the competitive landscape is quickly evolving, we may not be able to foresee or respond
sufficiently to emerging risks associated with new businesses, products, services and practices. We
may be asked to adjust our local rules and practices, develop or customize certain aspects of our
payment services, or agree to business arrangements that may be less protective of Visa’s proprietary
technology and interests in order to compete and we may face increasing operational costs and risk of
litigation concerning intellectual property. Our failure to compete effectively in light of any such
developments could harm our business and prospects for future growth.
Our net revenue and profits are dependent on our client and merchant base, which may be costly to
win, retain and develop.
Our financial institution clients and merchants can reassess their commitments to us at any time or
develop their own competitive services. While we have certain contractual protections, our clients,
including some of our largest clients, generally have flexibility to issue non-Visa products.
Further, in certain circumstances, our financial institution clients may decide to terminate our
contractual relationship on relatively short notice without paying significant early termination
fees. Because a significant portion of our net revenue is concentrated among our largest clients, the
loss of business from any one of these larger clients could harm our business, results of operations
and financial condition. For more information, please see Note 14—Enterprise-wide Disclosures and
Concentration of Business to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report.
In addition, we face intense competitive pressure on the prices we charge our financial institution
clients. In certain regions, we are increasingly facing competition from RTP networks, other payment
facilitators offering lower pricing, and government involvement in domestic and cross-border
payments. In order to stay competitive, we may need to adjust our pricing or offer incentives to our
clients to grow payments volume, enter new market segments, adapt to regulatory changes, and expand
their use and acceptance of Visa products and services. These include up-front cash payments, fee
discounts, rebates, credits, performance-based incentives, marketing and other support payments that
impact our net revenue and profitability. In addition, we offer incentives to certain merchants and
acquirers to encourage them to route transactions to Visa. Pressures on pricing, incentives, fee
discounts and rebates could moderate our growth. If we are not able to implement cost containment and
productivity initiatives in other areas of our business or grow our volumes in other ways to offset
or absorb the financial impact of these incentives, fee discounts and rebates, it may harm our net
revenue and profits.
In addition, it may be difficult or costly for us to acquire or conduct business with financial
institutions or merchants that have longstanding exclusive, or nearly exclusive, relationships with
our competitors. These financial institutions or merchants may be more successful and may grow more
quickly than our existing clients or merchants. In addition, if there is a consolidation or
acquisition of one or more of our largest clients or co-brand partners by a financial institution
client or merchant with a strong relationship with one of our competitors, it could
 26 
Table of Contents
result in our business shifting to a competitor, which could put us at a competitive disadvantage and
harm our business.
Merchants’ and processors’ continued push to lower acceptance costs and challenge industry practices
could harm our business.
We rely in part on merchants and their relationships with our clients or their agents to maintain and
expand the use and acceptance of Visa products. Certain merchants and merchant-affiliated groups have
been exerting their influence in the global payments system in certain jurisdictions, such as the
U.S., Australia, Canada and Europe, to attempt to lower acceptance costs paid by merchants to
acquirers or their agents to accept payment products or services, by lobbying for new legislation,
seeking regulatory intervention, filing lawsuits and in some cases, surcharging or refusing to accept
Visa products. If they are successful in their efforts, we may face increased compliance and
litigation expenses, issuers may decrease their issuance of our products, and consumer usage of our
products could be adversely impacted. For example, in the U.S., certain stakeholders have raised
concerns regarding how payment security standards and rules may impact debit routing choice and the
cost of payment card acceptance. In addition to ongoing litigation related to the U.S. migration to
EMV-capable cards and point-of-sale terminals, U.S. merchant-affiliated groups and processors have
expressed concerns regarding the EMV certification process and some policymakers have expressed
concerns about the roles of industry bodies such as EMVCo and the Payment Card Industry Security
Standards Council in the development of payment card standards. Additionally, many merchants have
advocated for lower acceptance costs in the form of reduced interchange rates, which could result in
some issuers eliminating or reducing their promotion or use of Visa’s products and services,
eliminating or reducing cardholder benefits such as rewards programs, or charging account holders
increased or new fees for using Visa-branded products, all of which could negatively impact Visa’s
transaction volumes and related revenue. Finally, some merchants and processors have advocated for
changes to industry practices and Visa acceptance requirements at the point of sale, including the
ability for merchants to accept only certain types of Visa products, to mandate only PIN
authenticated transactions, to differentiate or steer among Visa product types issued by different
financial institutions, and to impose surcharges on customers presenting Visa products as their form
of payment. If successful, these efforts could adversely impact consumers’ usage of our products and
decrease our overall transaction volumes and net revenue, lead to regulatory enforcement and/or
litigation that increases our compliance and litigation expenses, and ultimately harm our business.
We depend on relationships with financial institutions, acquirers, processors, merchants, payment
facilitators, ecommerce platforms, fintechs and other third parties.
As noted above, our relationships with industry participants are complex and require us to balance
the interests of multiple third parties. For instance, we depend significantly on relationships with
our financial institution clients and on their relationships with account holders and merchants to
provide our products and services, and thereby compete effectively in the marketplace. We offer
incentives to merchants, acquirers, ecommerce platforms and processors to encourage routing
preference and acceptance growth. We also engage in many payment card co-branding efforts with
merchants, who receive incentives from us. As emerging participants such as fintechs enter the
payments industry, we engage in discussions to address the role they may play in the ecosystem,
whether as, for example, an issuer, merchant, ecommerce platform or digital wallet provider. As these
and other relationships become more prevalent and take on a greater importance to our business, our
success will increasingly depend on our ability to sustain and grow these relationships. In addition,
we depend on our clients and third parties, including network partners, vendors and suppliers, to
submit, facilitate and process transactions properly, provide various services associated with our
payments network on our behalf, and otherwise adhere to our operating rules and applicable laws. As
our clients expand their global footprint, their legal and regulatory obligations can become even
more complex. From time to time, our relationships may be affected by actions of our clients and
industry participants that may materially and adversely impact our business, products or services,
and to the extent we or such parties fail to perform or deliver adequate services or comply with
regulatory obligations, it may result in negative experiences for account holders or others when
using their Visa-branded payment products, which could harm our business and reputation.
Our business could be harmed if we are not able to maintain and enhance our brand, if events occur
that have the potential to damage our brand or reputation, or if we experience brand
disintermediation.
Our brand is globally recognized and is a key asset of our business. We believe that our clients and
their account holders associate our brand with acceptance, security, convenience, speed, and
reliability. Our success depends in large part on our ability to maintain the value of our brand and
reputation of our products and services in the payments ecosystem, elevate the brand through new and
existing products, services and partnerships, and
 27 
Table of Contents
uphold our corporate reputation. The popularity of products that we have developed in partnership
with technology companies and financial institutions as well as government actions that mandate other
networks to process Visa-branded card transactions may have the potential to cause brand
disintermediation at the point of sale, in ecommerce and mobile channels, and decrease the presence
of our brand. Our brand reputation may also be negatively impacted by a number of factors, including
authorization, clearing and settlement service disruptions; data security breaches; compliance
failures by Visa, including by our employees, agents, clients, partners or suppliers; failure to meet
expectations of our clients, consumers, or other stakeholders; negative perception of our industry,
the industries of our clients, Visa-accepting merchants, or our clients’ customers and agents,
including third-party payments providers; ill-perceived actions or affiliations by clients, partners
or other third parties, such as sponsorship or co-brand partners; and fraudulent, or illegal
activities using our payment products or services, and which we may not always be in a position to
detect and/or prevent from occurring over our network. Our brand could also be negatively impacted
when our products are used to facilitate payment for legal, but controversial, products and services,
including, adult content, cryptocurrencies, firearms, and gambling activities. Additionally, these
risks could be exacerbated if our financial institution partners and/or merchants fail to maintain
necessary controls to ensure the legality of these transactions, if any legal liability associated
with such goods or services is extended to ancillary participants in the value chain like payments
networks, or if our network and industry become entangled in political or social debates concerning
such legal, but controversial, commerce. If we are unable to maintain our reputation, the value of
our brand may be impaired, which could harm our relationships with clients, account holders,
employees, prospective employees, governments and the public, as well as impact our business.
Global economic, political, market, health and social events or conditions may harm our business.
More than half of our net revenue is earned outside the U.S. In addition, international cross-border
transaction revenue represents a significant part of our net revenue and is an important part of our
growth strategy. Our net revenue is dependent on the volume and number of payment transactions made
by consumers, governments, and businesses whose spending patterns may be affected by economic,
political, market, health and social events or conditions. Adverse macroeconomic conditions within
the U.S. or internationally, including but not limited to recessions, inflation, rising interest
rates, high unemployment, currency fluctuations, actual or anticipated large-scale defaults or
failures, rising energy prices, or a slowdown of global trade, and reduced consumer, small business,
government, and corporate spending, have a direct impact on our volumes, transactions and net
revenue. Furthermore, in efforts to deal with adverse macroeconomic conditions, governments may
introduce new or additional initiatives or requests to reduce or eliminate payment fees or other
costs. In an overall soft global economy, such pricing measures could result in additional financial
pressures on our business.
In addition, outbreaks of illnesses, pandemics like COVID-19, or other local or global health issues,
political uncertainties, international hostilities, armed conflicts, wars, civil unrest, climate-
related events, including the increasing frequency of extreme weather events, impacts to the power
grid, and natural disasters have to varying degrees negatively impacted our operations, clients,
third-party suppliers, activities, and cross-border travel and spend.
Geopolitical trends towards nationalism, protectionism, and restrictive visa requirements, as well as
continued activity and uncertainty around economic sanctions, tariffs or trade restrictions,
including restrictions on the cross-border flow of data, also limit the expansion of our business in
certain regions and have resulted in us suspending our operations in other regions. During fiscal
2022, economic sanctions were imposed on Russia by the U.S., the EU, United Kingdom and other
jurisdictions and authorities, impacting Visa and its clients. In March 2022, we suspended our
operations in Russia and as a result, are no longer generating revenue from domestic and cross-border
activities related to Russia. The war in Ukraine and any further actions by, or in response to such
actions by, Russia or its allies could have lasting impacts on Ukraine as well as other regional and
global economies, any or all of which could adversely affect our business. The ongoing military
conflict in the Middle East, and any resulting conflicts in the region, could potentially have
similar negative impacts.
A decline in economic, political, market, health and social conditions could impact our clients as
well, and their decisions could reduce the number of cards, accounts, and credit lines of their
account holders, and impact overall consumption by consumers and businesses, which would ultimately
impact our net revenue. Our clients may implement cost-reduction initiatives that reduce or eliminate
marketing budgets, and decrease spending on optional or enhanced value-added services from us. Any
events or conditions that impair the functioning of the financial markets, tighten the credit market,
or lead to a downgrade of our current credit rating could increase our future borrowing costs and
impair our ability to access the capital and credit markets on favorable terms, which could affect
our liquidity and capital resources, or significantly increase our cost of capital.
 28 
Table of Contents
Finally, as governments, investors and other stakeholders face additional pressures to accelerate
actions to address climate change and other environmental, governance and social topics, governments
are implementing regulations and investors and other stakeholders are imposing new expectations or
focusing investments in ways that may cause significant shifts in disclosure, commerce and
consumption behaviors that may have negative impacts on our business. As a result of any of these
factors, any decline in cross-border travel and spend would impact our cross-border volumes, the
number of cross-border transactions we process and our currency exchange activities, which in turn
would reduce our international transaction revenue.
Our aspirations to address corporate responsibility and sustainability (CRS) matters and
considerations could adversely affect our business and financial results or negatively impact our
reputation.
We are subject to laws, regulations and other measures that govern a wide range of topics, including
those that are related to matters beyond our core products and services, such as matters that touch
upon sustainability, climate change, human capital, inclusion and diversity, and human rights. A wide
range of stakeholders, including governments, customers, employees, and investors, are increasingly
focused on and are developing expectations regarding these corporate responsibility matters. We have
established CRS-related initiatives, adopted reporting frameworks, and announced several related
goals. These goals may change from time to time, implementation of these goals may require
considerable investments, and ultimately, we cannot guarantee that we will achieve them.
Our ability to achieve any CRS objectives is subject to numerous risks, many of which are outside of
our control, including the evolving legal environment and regulatory requirements for the tracking
and reporting of CRS standards or disclosures and the actions of suppliers, partners, and other third
parties. Certain of our regulators have proposed or adopted, or may propose or adopt, rules or
standards related to these matters that would apply to our business. New regulations have been
enacted and/or are expected in several jurisdictions, including the EU’s Corporate Sustainability
Reporting Directive, the SEC climate-related disclosures that could require disclosure of climate-
related information and the State of California’s legislation requiring broad disclosure of
greenhouse gas emissions and other climate-related information. Prevailing CRS standards and
expectations may also reflect conflicting values or objectives, which can result in our practices
being judged by standards that are continually evolving and are not always clear. From time to time,
the methodologies for reporting our CRS data may be updated and previously reported data may be
adjusted to reflect an improvement in the availability and quality of data, changing assumptions,
changes in the nature and scope of our operations, and other changes in circumstances. This may
result in a lack of consistent or meaningful comparative data from period to period or between us and
other companies in the same industry. Further, where new laws or regulations are more stringent than
current legal or regulatory requirements, we may experience increased compliance burdens and costs to
meet such obligations.
Our stakeholders often hold differing views on our CRS-related goals and initiatives, which may
result in negative attention in traditional and social media or a negative perception of our response
to concerns regarding these matters. In addition, we also face potentially conflicting supervisory
directives as certain U.S. regulatory and non-U.S. authorities have prioritized CRS-related issues
while Congress and certain U.S. state governments have signaled pursuing potentially conflicting
priorities. These circumstances, among others, may result in pressure from investors, unfavorable
reputational impacts, including inaccurate perceptions or a misrepresentation of our actual CRS
practices, diversion of management’s attention and resources, and proxy fights, among other material
adverse impacts on our business. Any failure, or perceived failure, by us to adhere to our public
statements, comply fully with developing interpretations of CRS laws and regulations, or meet
evolving and varied stakeholder expectations and standards could negatively impact our business,
reputation, financial condition, and operating results.
Our indemnification obligation to fund settlement losses of our clients exposes us to significant
risk of loss and may reduce our liquidity.
We indemnify issuers and acquirers for settlement losses they may suffer due to the failure of
another issuer or acquirer to honor its settlement obligations in accordance with the Visa operating
rules. In certain instances, we may indemnify issuers or acquirers in situations in which a
transaction is not processed by our system. This indemnification creates settlement risk for us due
to the timing difference between the date of a payment transaction and the date of subsequent
settlement. Our indemnification exposure is generally limited to the amount of unsettled Visa card
payment transactions at any point in time and any subsequent amounts that may fall due relating to
adjustments for previously processed transactions. Changes in the credit standing of our clients or
concurrent settlement failures or insolvencies involving more than one of our largest clients,
several of our smaller clients, significant sponsor banks through which non-financial institutions
participate in the Visa network, or systemic operational failures could expose us to liquidity risk,
and negatively impact our financial position. Even if we have sufficient liquidity to cover a
settlement failure or insolvency, we may be unable to recover the amount of such
 29 
Table of Contents
payment. This could expose us to significant losses and harm our business. See Note 12—Settlement
Guarantee Management to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report.
 Technology and Cybersecurity Risks 
Failure to anticipate, adapt to, or keep pace with, new technologies in the payments industry could
harm our business and impact future growth.
The global payments industry is undergoing significant and rapid technological change, including
increased proliferation of mobile and other proximity and in-app payment technologies, ecommerce,
tokenization, cryptocurrencies, distributed ledger and blockchain technologies, cloud-based
encryption and authorization, and new authentication technologies such as biometrics, FIDO 2.0, 3D
Secure 2.0 and dynamic cardholder verification values or dCVV2. As a result, we expect new services
and technologies to continue to emerge and evolve, including those developed by Visa such as our new
flows offerings. For example, generative AI solutions have emerged as an opportunity for Visa, its
clients, suppliers, merchants, and partners to innovate more quickly and better serve consumers.
Rapid adoption and novel uses of generative AI across the marketplace may also introduce unique and
unpredictable security risks to our systems, information, and the payments ecosystem. In addition to
our own initiatives and innovations, we work closely with third parties, including potential
competitors, for the development of, and access to, new technologies. It is difficult, however, to
predict which technological developments or innovations will become widely adopted and how those
technologies may be regulated. Moreover, some of the new technologies could be subject to
intellectual property-related lawsuits or claims, potentially impacting our development efforts
and/or requiring us to obtain licenses, implement design changes or discontinue our use. If we or our
partners fail to adapt and keep pace with new technologies in the payments space in a timely manner,
it could harm our ability to compete, decrease the value of our products and services to our clients,
impact our intellectual property or licensing rights, harm our business and impact our future growth.
A disruption, failure or breach of our networks or systems, including as a result of cyber incidents
or attacks, could harm our business.
Our cybersecurity and processing systems, as well as those of financial institutions, merchants and
third-party service providers, have experienced and may continue to experience errors, interruptions,
delays or damage from a number of causes, including power outages, hardware, software and network
failures, computer viruses, ransomware, malware or other destructive software, AI technologies by bad
actors, internal design, manual or user errors, cyber attacks, terrorism, political tensions, war or
other military conflicts, or civil unrest, security breaches of our physical premises, workplace
violence or wrongdoing, catastrophic events, natural disasters, severe weather conditions and other
effects from climate change. In addition, there is risk that third-party suppliers of hardware and
infrastructure required to operate our data centers and support employee productivity could be
impacted by supply chain disruptions, such as manufacturing, shipping delays, and service disruption
due to cyber attacks. An extended supply chain or service disruption could also impact processing or
delivery of technology services.
Furthermore, our visibility and role in the global payments industry also puts our company at a
greater risk of being targeted by hackers. In the normal course of our business, we have been the
target of malicious cyber activity. We have been, and may continue to be, impacted by attacks and
data security breaches of financial institutions, merchants, and third-party service providers. We
are also aware of instances where governments have directed or sponsored attacks against some of our
financial institution clients, and other instances where merchants and issuers have encountered
substantial data security breaches affecting their customers, some of whom were Visa account holders.
Given the increase in online banking, ecommerce and other online activity, we continue to see
increased cyber and payment fraud activity, as cybercriminals attempt phishing and social engineering
scams, distributed denial of service attacks and other disruptive actions. Overall, such attacks and
breaches have resulted, and may continue to result in, fraudulent activity and ultimately, financial
losses to Visa’s financial institution clients, merchants or third-party service providers.
Numerous and evolving cybersecurity threats, including advanced and persistent cyber attacks,
targeted attacks against our employees and trusted partners, insider threats, social engineering
threats, such as phishing or deepfake schemes, including those using synthetic media, could
compromise the confidentiality, availability and integrity of data in our systems, particularly on
our internet-facing applications, or the systems of our third-party service providers. Because the
tactics, techniques and procedures used to obtain unauthorized access, or to disable or degrade
systems change frequently, have become increasingly more complex and sophisticated, and may be
difficult to detect for periods of time, we may not anticipate these acts or respond adequately or
timely. For example, cybercriminals have increasingly demonstrated advanced capabilities, such as use
of zero-day
 30 
Table of Contents
vulnerabilities, and rapid integration of new technology such as generative AI are being used by
threat actors to create sophisticated attacks that are increasingly automated, targeted, and more
difficult to defend against. The security measures and procedures we, our financial institution and
merchant clients, other merchants and third-party service providers in the payments ecosystem have in
place to protect sensitive consumer data and other information may not be implemented effectively,
may differ in scope and complexity across different ecosystem participants, or may not be successful
or sufficient to counter all data security breaches, cyber incidents and attacks or system failures.
In some cases, the mitigation efforts may be dependent on third parties who may not follow the
required contractual standards, who may not be able to timely patch vulnerabilities or fix security
defects, or whose hardware, software or network services may be subject to error, defect, delay,
outage or lack appropriate malware prevention to prevent breaches or data exfiltration incidents.
Cyber incidents and attacks can have cascading impacts that unfold with increasing speed across our
internal networks and systems and those of our partners and clients. Despite our security measures
and programs to protect our systems and data, and prevent, detect and respond to data security
incidents, there can be no assurance that our efforts will prevent all such threats.
In addition, as a global financial services company, Visa is increasingly subject to complex and
varied cybersecurity regulations and cyber incident reporting requirements across numerous
jurisdictions. With the often short timeframes required for cyber incident reporting, there is a risk
that Visa or its third-party service providers will fail to meet the reporting deadlines for any
given incident. It may take considerable time for us to investigate and evaluate the full impact of
cyber incidents, particularly for sophisticated attacks. These factors may inhibit our ability to
provide prompt, full, and reliable information about the cyber incident to our clients, partners, and
regulators, as well as to the public. In the event we are found to be out of compliance, we could be
subject to monetary damages, civil and criminal penalties, litigation, investigations and
proceedings, and damage to our reputation and brand.
Any of these events, individually or in the aggregate, could significantly disrupt our operations;
result in the unauthorized disclosure, release, gathering, monitoring, misuse, loss or destruction of
confidential, proprietary, sensitive and personal information (including account data information) or
data security compromises; impact our clients and consumers; damage our reputation and brand; result
in litigation or claims, violations of applicable privacy and other laws, and increased regulatory
review or scrutiny, investigations, actions, fines or penalties; result in damages or changes to our
business practices; decrease the overall use and acceptance of our products; decrease our volume, net
revenue and future growth prospects; and be costly, time consuming and difficult to remedy. In the
event of damage or disruption to our business due to these occurrences, we may not be able to
successfully and quickly recover all of our critical business functions, assets, and data through our
business continuity program. Furthermore, while we maintain insurance, our coverage may not
sufficiently cover all types of losses or claims that may arise.
 Structural and Organizational Risks 
We may not achieve the anticipated benefits of our acquisitions, joint ventures or strategic
investments, and may face risks and uncertainties as a result.
As part of our overall business strategy, we make acquisitions and strategic investments, and enter
into joint ventures. We may not achieve the anticipated benefits of our current and future
acquisitions, joint ventures or strategic investments and they may involve significant risks and
uncertainties, including:
• disruption to our ongoing business, including diversion of resources and management’s attention
from our existing business;
• greater than expected investment of resources or operating expenses;
• failure to adequately develop or integrate our acquired entities or joint ventures;
• the data security, cybersecurity and operational resilience posture of our acquired entities, joint
ventures or companies we invest in or partner with, may not be adequate and may be more susceptible
to a system failure, service disruption or cyber incident or attack;
• difficulty, expense or failure of implementing controls, procedures and policies at our acquired
entities or joint ventures;
• challenges of integrating new employees, business cultures, business systems and technologies;
• failure to retain employees, clients or partners of our acquired entities or joint ventures;
 31 
Table of Contents
• in the case of foreign acquisitions, risks related to the integration of operations across
different cultures and languages;
• disruptions, costs, liabilities, judgments, settlements or business pressures resulting from
litigation matters, investigations or legal proceedings involving our acquisitions, joint ventures or
strategic investments;
• the inability to pursue aspects of our acquisitions or joint ventures due to outcomes in litigation
matters, investigations or legal proceedings;
• failure to obtain the necessary government or other approvals at all, on a timely basis or without
the imposition of burdensome conditions or restrictions;
• the economic, political, regulatory and compliance risks associated with our acquisitions, joint
ventures or strategic investments, including when entering into a new business or operating in new
regions or countries. For more information on regulatory risks, please see Item 1—Government
Regulation and Item 1A—Regulatory Risks above;
• discovery of unidentified issues and related liabilities after our acquisitions, joint ventures or
investments were made;
• failure to mitigate the deficiencies and liabilities of our acquired entities or joint ventures;
• dilutive issuance of equity securities, if new securities are issued;
• the incurrence of debt;
• negative impact on our financial position and/or statement of operations; and
• anticipated benefits, synergies or value of our acquisitions, joint ventures or investments not
materializing or taking longer than expected to materialize.
In addition, we may pursue additional strategic objectives, such as additional exchange offers, which
can divert resources and management’s attention from our existing business and, if unsuccessful, may
harm our business and reputation.
We may be unable to attract, hire and retain a highly qualified and diverse workforce, including key
management.
The talents and efforts of our employees, particularly our key management, are vital to our success.
The market for highly skilled workers and leaders in our industry, especially in fintech, technology,
cybersecurity and other specialized areas, is extremely competitive. Our management team has
significant industry experience and would be difficult to replace. We may be unable to retain them or
to attract, hire or retain other highly qualified employees, particularly if we do not offer
employment terms that are competitive with the rest of the labor market. Ongoing changes in laws and
policies regarding immigration, travel and work authorizations have made it more difficult for
employees to work in, or transfer among, jurisdictions in which we have operations and could continue
to impair our ability to attract, hire and retain qualified employees. Failure to attract, hire,
develop, motivate and retain highly qualified and diverse employee talent, especially in light of
changing worker expectations and talent marketplace variability regarding flexible work models; to
meet our goals related to fostering an inclusive and diverse culture or to adequately address
potential increased scrutiny of our inclusion and diversity-related programs and initiatives; to
develop and implement an adequate succession plan for the management team; to maintain our strong
corporate culture of fostering innovation, collaboration and inclusion in our current hybrid model;
or to design and successfully implement flexible work models that meet the expectations of employees
and prospective employees could impact our workforce development goals, impact our ability to achieve
our business objectives, and adversely affect our business and our future success.
The conversions of our class B and class C common stock or series A, B and C preferred stock into
shares of class A common stock would result in voting dilution to, and could adversely impact the
market price of, our existing class A common stock.
The market price of our class A common stock could fall as a result of many factors. The value of our
class B-1, B-2 and C common stock and series A, B and C preferred stock is tied to the value of the
class A common stock. Under our U.S. retrospective responsibility plan, upon final resolution of our
U.S. covered litigation, all class
 32 
Table of Contents
B-1 and B-2 common stock will become convertible into class A common stock. Under our Europe
retrospective responsibility plan, Visa will continue to release value from the series B and series C
preferred stock in stages based on developments in current and potential litigation. The series B and
series C preferred stock will become fully convertible to series A preferred stock or class A common
stock no later than 2028 (subject to a holdback to cover any pending claims). Conversion of our class
B-1, B-2 and C common stock into class A common stock, or our series A, B and C preferred stock into
class A common stock, would increase the amount of class A common stock outstanding, which would
dilute the voting power of existing class A common stockholders. In addition, the sale of significant
portions of converted class A common stock could adversely impact the market price of our existing
class A common stock.
Holders of our class B-1, B-2 and C common stock and series A, B and C preferred stock may have
different interests than our class A common stockholders concerning certain significant transactions.
Although their voting rights are limited, holders of our class B-1, B-2 and C common stock and, in
certain specified circumstances, holders of our series A, B and C preferred stock, can vote on
certain significant transactions. With respect to our class B-1, B-2 and C common stock, these
transactions include a proposed consolidation or merger, a decision to exit our core payments
business and any other vote required under Delaware law. With respect to our series A, B and C
preferred stock, voting rights are limited to proposed consolidations or mergers in which holders of
the series A, B and C preferred stock would receive shares of stock or other equity securities with
preferences, rights and privileges that are not substantially identical to the preferences, rights
and privileges of the applicable series of preferred stock; or, in the case of series B and C
preferred stock, holders would receive securities, cash or other property that is different from what
our class A common stockholders would receive. Because the holders of classes of capital stock other
than class A common stock are our current and former financial institution clients, they may have
interests that diverge from our class A common stockholders. As a result, the holders of these
classes of capital stock may not have the same incentive to approve a corporate action that may be
favorable to the holders of class A common stock, and their interests may otherwise conflict with
interests of our class A common stockholders.
Delaware law, provisions in our certificate of incorporation and bylaws, and our capital structure
could make a merger, takeover attempt or change in control difficult.
Provisions contained in our certificate of incorporation and bylaws and our capital structure could
delay or prevent a merger, takeover attempt or change in control that our stockholders may consider
favorable. For example, except for limited exceptions:
• no person may beneficially own more than 15 percent of our class A common stock (or 15 percent of
our total outstanding common stock on an as-converted basis), unless our board of directors approves
the acquisition of such shares in advance;
• no competitor or an affiliate of a competitor may hold more than 5 percent of our total outstanding
common stock on an as-converted basis;
• the affirmative votes of the class B-1, B-2 and C common stock and series A, B and C preferred
stock are required for certain types of consolidations or mergers;
• our stockholders may only take action during a stockholders’ meeting and may not act by written
consent; and
• only our board of directors, Chair, or CEO or any stockholders who have owned continuously for at
least one year not less than 15 percent of the voting power of all shares of class A common stock
outstanding may call a special meeting of stockholders.
 33 
Table of Contents
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments │
Not applicable.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1C. Cybersecurity │
Visa’s Approach to Cybersecurity
As a global company providing payment services to consumers and companies around the world, trust is
an indispensable asset. A strong cybersecurity program is a key element to maintaining this trust. As
a result, we consider cybersecurity risk one of our key enterprise risks and we assess, identify, and
manage such risk as part of our overall enterprise risk management framework. See Item 1A for further
discussion on our overall risk factors, including technology and cybersecurity risks.
Cybersecurity Program
Visa’s cybersecurity program has been established to identify, analyze, mitigate, monitor, and govern
cybersecurity risk and was designed around widely accepted international standards, such as ISO 27002
and the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standards, as well as applicable legal and regulatory
requirements. We implement our cybersecurity program primarily through our Key Controls, which define
the requirements for the protection of Visa information and technology assets. All employees must
complete annual training on our Key Controls and are required to comply with the requirements.
Exceptions to the Key Controls must be approved by an established senior management working group,
which is overseen by our Corporate Risk Committee (CRC), the management committee responsible for
overseeing Visa’s cybersecurity program and other operational risks. The Key Controls are updated and
reviewed annually by our Cybersecurity Governance, Risk and Compliance team and approved by
management committees to ensure they continue to address evolving cybersecurity threats and
associated legal and regulatory obligations.
As part of our overall business strategy, we have acquired a number of companies for which our full
cybersecurity standards may not be appropriate. These designated entities may deliver products and
services using systems which are not fully integrated with our standard technology platforms or
hosted in our data centers. We have established a separate set of Key Controls for designated
entities appropriate to their size and operations that are designed around the same widely accepted
international standards noted above, but tailored to the operational reality and business needs of
these entities. Regular reporting of our acquired entities’ cybersecurity program is provided to our
Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), President of Technology, management committees and the
board of directors. For additional information about our structural and organizational risks, see
Item 1A of this report.
Incident Response Plans
Visa’s global cyber security incident response team provides monitoring of Visa networks and digital
assets across three cyber fusion centers in the U.S., United Kingdom, and Singapore. In addition,
Visa’s threat intelligence and research teams monitor commercial and government intelligence sources
for new and emerging threats. Our cybersecurity awareness team regularly publishes and shares
information with Visa employees on emerging threats, such as deepfake and generative AI-powered
social engineering schemes.
To address significant cybersecurity incidents and other crisis events, we maintain a business
incident response plan, which identifies key stakeholders, defines escalation processes, and sets the
thresholds above which our cybersecurity, legal, and crisis management teams will inform management’s
Executive and Disclosure Committees as well as when the CEO and his designee will inform the board of
directors of an incident. For cybersecurity incidents below these crisis thresholds, we maintain
subordinate incident response plans and standard operating procedures used by our security incident
response team. Like many companies, we, and some third parties on which we rely periodically
experience cybersecurity incidents. However, as of September 30, 2024, we were not aware of any
direct or third-party cybersecurity incidents in the past three fiscal years that have materially
affected our business strategy, results of operations, or financial condition.
Internal and External Testing
We proactively manage our cybersecurity risk by continually seeking to identify and mitigate
potential cybersecurity threats to and vulnerabilities in our information and technology assets, with
both internal and external assessments, as appropriate. For example, public-facing technology assets
are subject to both internal security
 34 
Table of Contents
assessments and external security researcher testing under our vulnerability disclosure and bug
bounty programs. Identified threats and vulnerabilities are required to be remediated within
stringent timelines, for which compliance and exceptions are tracked in reporting to management and
the board of directors.
As further discussed in our risk factors in Item IA of this report, our cybersecurity policies and
controls may not be implemented or followed appropriately to mitigate all of our risks. We employ
three lines of defense designed to address this risk. The first line of defense consists of the
technology teams who develop, build, and deploy our products and services. These teams are trained on
and accountable for following our Key Controls. The second line of defense includes separate internal
security and risk teams that conduct security assessments of our networks and products, overseeing
the remediation of any findings. Finally, our independent internal audit function operates as the
third line of defense, assessing the effectiveness of our policies and controls and implementation
thereof. We are also subject to regular, detailed examinations by financial regulators and external
auditors which often contain a significant cybersecurity component.
Third-party Risk Management
We also apply this same overall framework to our oversight and management of cybersecurity risk from
service providers, vendors, suppliers, and other third parties. Our policies require due diligence on
our service providers, vendors and suppliers prior to engagement and impose audit rights in our
contracts in order to identify cybersecurity risks associated with third-party relationships,
proportionate to the inherent risk associated with the products and services provided and the
criticality and sensitivity of our information and technology assets to which the third party may
have access. As noted in our risk factors in Item IA of this report, our third-party risk management
framework may not be implemented effectively or may not be successful or sufficient to mitigate all
of our risks. When we become aware that a service provider, vendor, supplier, or other third party
has experienced any compromise or failure in the cybersecurity infrastructure owned or controlled by
such third party, we may attempt to mitigate our risk, including by terminating such third party’s
connection to our information and technology assets where appropriate.
Management’s Role and Responsibilities
Our CISO is responsible for day-to-day management and oversight of our information security program
and leads our cybersecurity organization, which comprises approximately 1,000 professionals globally
as of September 30, 2024. Our CISO and President of Technology receive regular reports from our
cybersecurity personnel in connection with monitoring the prevention, detection, mitigation, and
remediation of cybersecurity incidents. Our CISO reports directly to our President of Technology and
provides quarterly reports on our cybersecurity performance to the CRC.
Our current CISO has over 30 years of industry experience leading enterprise cybersecurity teams and
enabling secure and scalable ecommerce and payment platforms at multiple Fortune 500 companies. Since
joining Visa in November 2015, he has been a core part of building Visa's Zero Trust Architecture and
advancing VisaNet's cybersecurity defense capabilities. Our current President of Technology joined
Visa in November 2013 and has over 30 years of experience in leading the development and deployment
of commerce and transaction technologies, which includes overseeing cybersecurity risk and
transformational technology initiatives. At Visa, our President of Technology is responsible for the
Company’s technology innovation and investment strategy, product engineering, cybersecurity, global
IT, and operations infrastructure, and for accelerating the integration of engineering and product
teams.
Board Governance
Visa’s board of directors exercises oversight and control of Visa’s overall enterprise risk
management framework and delegates oversight and control of Visa’s cybersecurity program to our audit
and risk committee (ARC), which is responsible for ensuring that management has risk-based processes
in place designed to assess, identify, and manage cybersecurity risks to which Visa is exposed. As
noted in Item 1A , however, these processes may not be sufficient to mitigate all cybersecurity
risks. Our CISO provides an update on our cybersecurity program to the ARC twice per year and to the
full board of directors annually. The updates to the ARC and the full board of directors provide an
overview of our cybersecurity performance, progress against goals, cybersecurity threat landscape,
and other relevant developments.
 35 
Table of Contents
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 2. Properties │
As of September 30, 2024, we owned or leased 135 office locations in 83 countries around the world,
including four data centers located in the U.S., the United Kingdom and Singapore. Our corporate
headquarters are located in owned and leased premises in the San Francisco Bay Area.
We believe that these facilities are suitable and adequate to support our ongoing business needs.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 3. Legal Proceedings │
Refer to Note 20—Legal Matters to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this
report.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 4. Mine Safety Disclosures │
Not applicable.
 36 
Table of Contents