╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1. Business │
 OVERVIEW 
Visa is one of the world’s leaders in digital payments. Our purpose is to uplift everyone, everywhere
by being the best way to pay and be paid. We facilitate global commerce and money movement across
more than 200 countries and territories among a global set of consumers, merchants, financial
institutions and government entities through innovative technologies.
Since Visa’s early days in 1958, we have been in the business of facilitating payments between
consumers and businesses. We are focused on extending, enhancing and investing in our proprietary
advanced transaction processing network, VisaNet, to offer a single connection point for facilitating
payment transactions to multiple endpoints through various form factors. As a network of networks
enabling global movement of money through all available networks, we are working to provide payment
solutions and services for everyone, everywhere. Through our network, we offer products, solutions
and services that facilitate secure, reliable and efficient money movement for participants in the
ecosystem.
• We facilitate secure, reliable and efficient money movement among consumers, issuing and acquiring
financial institutions and merchants. We have traditionally referred to this structure as the “four-
party” model. Please see Our Core Business discussion below. As the payments ecosystem continues to
evolve, we have broadened this model to include digital banks, digital wallets and a range of
financial technology companies (fintechs), governments and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). We
provide transaction processing services (primarily authorization, clearing and settlement) to our
financial institution and merchant clients through VisaNet. During fiscal year 2023, 276 billion
payments and cash transactions with Visa’s brand were processed by Visa or other networks, equating
to an average of 757 million transactions per day. Of the 276 billion total transactions, 213 billion
were processed by Visa.
• We offer a wide range of Visa-branded payment products that our clients, including 14,500 financial
institutions, use to develop and offer payment solutions or services, including credit, debit,
prepaid and cash access programs for individual, business and government account holders. During
fiscal year 2023, Visa’s total payments and cash volume was $15 trillion, an d 4.3 billion payment
credentials, which are issued Visa card accounts that were available worldwide to be used at more
than 130 million merchant locations. (1)
• We take an open partnership approach and seek to provide value by enabling access to our global
network, including offering our technology capabilities through application programming interfaces
(APIs). We partner with both traditional and emerging players to innovate and expand the payments
ecosystem, allowing them to use the resources of our platform to scale and grow their businesses more
quickly and effectively.
• We are accelerating the migration to digital payments through our network of networks strategy. We
aim to provide a single connection point so that Visa clients can enable money movement for
businesses, governments and consumers, regardless of which network is used to start or complete the
transaction. This model ultimately helps to unify a complex payments ecosystem. Visa’s network of
networks approach creates opportunities by facilitating person-to-person (P2P), business-to-consumer
(B2C), business-to-business (B2B) and government-to-consumer (G2C) payments, in addition to consumer
to business (C2B) payments.
• We provide value added services to our clients, including issuing solutions, acceptance solutions,
risk and identity solutions, open banking and advisory services.
• We invest in and promote our brand to the benefit of our clients and partners through advertising,
promotional and sponsorship initiatives with the International Olympic Committee, the International
Paralympic Committee and the National Football League (NFL), among others. We also use these
sponsorship assets to showcase our payment innovations.
(1) The number includes an estimated 30 million locations through payment facilitators, which are
technology providers that provide payment acceptance services to merchants on behalf of acquirers .
Data provided to Visa by acquiring institutions and other third parties as of June 30, 2023.
 4 
Table of Contents
 FISCAL YEAR 2023 KEY STATISTICS 
(1) Please see Item 7 of this report for a reconciliation of our GAAP to non-GAAP financial results.
 OUR CORE BUSINESS 
In a typical Visa C2B payment transaction, the consumer purchases goods or services from a merchant
using a Visa card or payment product. The merchant presents the transaction data to an acquirer,
usually a bank or third-party processing firm that supports acceptance of Visa cards or payment
products, for verification and processing. Through VisaNet, the acquirer presents the transaction
data to Visa, which in turn sends the transaction data to the issuer to check the account holder’s
account balance or credit line for authorization. After the transaction is authorized, the issuer
posts the transaction to the consumer’s account and effectively pays the acquirer an amount equal to
the value of the transaction, minus the interchange reimbursement fee. The acquirer pays the amount
of the purchase, minus the merchant discount rate (MDR), to the merchant.
Visa earns revenue by facilitating money movement across more than 200 countries and territories
among a global set of consumers, merchants, financial institutions and government entities through
innovative technologies.
 5 
Table of Contents
Our net revenues in fiscal year 2023 consisted of the following:
 OTHER REVENUES 
 SERVICEREVENUES Consist mainly of value added services related 
 Earned for services provided in support of to advisory, marketing and certain card 
 client usage of Visa payment services benefits; license fees for use of the Visa 
 brand or technology; and fees for account 
 holder services, certification and licensing 
 DATA PROCESSING REVENUES 
 Earned for authorization, clearing, 
 settlement; value added services related to 
 issuing, acceptance, and risk and identity 
 solutions; network access; and other 
 maintenance and support services that 
 facilitate transaction and information 
 processing among our clients globally 
 CLIENT INCENTIVES 
 Paid to financial institution clients, 
 merchants and other business partners to grow 
 payments volume; increase Visa product 
 acceptance; win merchant routing transactions 
 over to our network; and drive innovation 
 INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTION REVENUES 
 Earned for cross-border transaction processing 
 and currency conversion activities 
(1) Figure may not recalculate exactly due to rounding.
Please see Item 7 and Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies included in Item 8 of this
report, which include disclosures on how we earn and recognize our revenues.
Visa provides payment processing for both non-Visa-branded and Visa-branded card transactions. In the
context of non-Visa-branded card transactions, we facilitate payment processing by providing gateway
routing services to other payment networks. At the client’s request, we may provide authorization,
clearing or settlement services on our network before or after we route the transaction to the other
payments network. In those instances, Visa may earn data processing revenues for the specific
services provided. In the context of Visa-branded card transactions on our network, we provide
authorization, clearing and settlement services and may earn service, data processing, international
transaction, or other revenues. Depending on applicable regulations, some payment processors may or
may not use our network to process Visa-branded card transactions. If they use our network, we may
earn service revenues and data processing revenues. If they do not use our network, we earn only
service revenues.
Visa is not a financial institution. We do not issue cards, extend credit or set rates and fees for
account holders of Visa products nor do we earn revenues from, or bear credit risk with respect to,
any of these activities. Interchange reimbursement fees reflect the value merchants receive from
accepting our products and play a key role in balancing the costs and benefits that account holders
and merchants derive from participating in our payments networks. Generally, interchange
reimbursement fees are paid by acquirers to issuers. We establish default interchange reimbursement
fees that apply absent other established settlement terms. These default interchange reimbursement
fees are set independently from the revenues we receive from issuers and acquirers. Our acquiring
clients are responsible for setting the fees they charge to merchants for the MDR and for soliciting
merchants. Visa sets fees to acquirers independently from any fees that acquirers may charge
merchants. Therefore, the fees we receive from issuers and acquirers are not derived from interchange
reimbursement fees or MDRs.
 6 
Table of Contents
Visa’s strategy is to accelerate our revenue growth in consumer payments, new flows and value added
services, and fortify the key foundations of our business model.
We seek to accelerate revenue growth in three primary areas — consumer payments, new flows and value
added services.
 Consumer Payments 
We remain focused on moving trillions of dollars of consumer spending in cash and checks to cards and
digital accounts on Visa’s network of networks.
 Core Products 
Visa’s growth has been driven by the strength of our core products — credit, debit and prepaid.
Credit: Credit cards and digital credentials allow consumers and businesses to access credit to pay
for goods and services. Credit cards are affiliated with programs operated by financial institution
clients, co-brand partners, fintechs and affinity partners.
Debit: Debit cards and digital credentials allow consumers and small businesses to purchase goods and
services using funds held in their deposit accounts. Debit cards enable account holders to transact
in person, online or via mobile without needing cash or checks and without accessing a line of
credit. The Visa/PLUS Global ATM network also provides debit, credit and prepaid account holders with
cash access, and other banking capabilities, in more than 200 countries and territories worldwide
through issuing and acquiring partnerships with both financial institutions and independent ATM
operators.
 7 
Table of Contents
Prepaid: Prepaid cards and digital credentials draw from a designated balance funded by individuals,
businesses or governments. Prepaid cards address many use cases and needs, including general purpose
reloadable, payroll, government and corporate disbursements, healthcare, gift and travel. Visa-
branded prepaid cards also play an important part in financial inclusion, bringing payment solutions
to those with limited or no access to traditional banking products.
 Enablers 
We enable consumer payments and help our clients grow as digital commerce, new technologies and new
participants continue to transform the payments ecosystem. Some examples include:
 Tap to Pay 
As we seek to improve the user experience in the face-to-face environment, contactless payments or
tap to pay, which is the process of tapping a contactless card or mobile device on a terminal to make
a payment, has emerged as a preferred way to pay among consumers in many countries around the world.
Tap to pay adoption is growing and many consumers have come to expect touchless payment experiences.
Globally, we have 50 countries and territories with more than 90 percent contactless penetration and
more than 100 countries and territories where tap to pay is more than 50 percent of face-to-face
transactions. Excluding the United States, 76 percent of face-to-face transactions globally were
contactless in fiscal year 2023. In the U.S., Visa has surpassed 40 percent contactless penetration
and more than 520 million tap-to-pay-enabled Visa cards. We have activated more than 750 contactless
public transport projects worldwide. In addition, we processed more than 1.6 billion contactless
transactions on global transit systems in fiscal year 2023, an increase of more than 30 percent year
over year.
 Tokenization 
Visa Token Service (VTS) brings trust to digital commerce innovation. As consumers increasingly rely
on digital transactions, VTS is designed to enhance the digital ecosystem through improved
authorization, reduced fraud and improved consumer experience. VTS helps protect digital transactions
by replacing 16-digit Visa account numbers with a token that includes a surrogate account number,
cryptographic information and other data to protect the underlying account information. This security
technology can work for a variety of payment transactions, both in person or online.
The provisioning of network tokens continues to accelerate. As of the end of fiscal year 2023, Visa
provisioned more than 7.5 billion network tokens, surpassing the number of physical cards in
circulation. The milestone reinforces Visa’s commitment to secure, reliable and efficient money
movement, in person and online.
 Click to Pay 
Click to Pay provides a simplified and more consistent cardholder checkout experience online by
removing time-consuming key entry of personal information and enabling consumer and transaction data
to be passed securely between payments network participants. Based on the EMV ® Secure Remote
Commerce industry standard, Click to Pay brings a standardized and streamlined approach to online
checkout and meets the needs of consumers shopping across a growing number of connected devices. The
goal of Click to Pay is to make digital payments as secure, reliable and interoperable as the
checkout experience in person.
 8 
Table of Contents
 New Flows 
New flows focus on facilitating commercial and global money movement across Visa’s network of
networks. This approach creates opportunities to capture new sources of money movement through card
and non-card flows for consumers, businesses and governments around the world by facilitating P2P,
B2C, B2B and G2C payments .
 Visa Direct 
Visa Direct is part of Visa’s strategy beyond C2B payments and helps facilitate the delivery of funds
to eligible cards, deposit accounts and digital wallets across more than 190 countries and
territories. Visa Direct supports multiple use cases, such as P2P payments and account-to-account
transfers, business and government payouts to individuals or small businesses, merchant settlements
and refunds.
Visa Direct utilizes more than 70 domestic payment schemes, 10 real-time payments schemes, 15 card-
based networks and five payment gateways, with the potential to reach more than 8.5 billion cards,
deposit accounts and digital wallets. In fiscal year 2023, Visa Direct processed more than 7.5
billion transactions across more than 2,800 global programs. Visa Direct solutions supported more
than 500 partners across more than 65 use cases. We also announced in fiscal year 2023 Visa’s
partnership with DailyPay, i2C, PayPal, TabaPay, Venmo and Western Union to pilot Visa+, an
innovative service that aims to help individuals send money quickly and securely between different
participating P2P digital payment apps.
We continue to build on our network of networks strategy by investing in our own capabilities with
Visa+ and Visa Alias Directory Service, which offers capabilities to our clients to link aliases,
such as mobile numbers or email addresses, to payment credentials, as well as strategically
collaborating with digital and mobile payment providers to expand the reach of Visa Direct and
deliver even stronger domestic and cross-border payment and connection capabilities to our clients.
 Visa Commercial Solutions 
We are also expanding our network with B2B payments. Our three strategic areas of focus include
investing in and growing card-based payments, accelerating our efforts in non-card, cross-border
payments and digitizing domestic accounts payable and accounts receivable processes. We offer a
portfolio of commercial payment solutions, including small business, corporate (travel) cards,
purchasing cards, virtual cards and digital credentials, non-card cross-border B2B payment options
and disbursement accounts, covering most major industry segments around the world. These solutions
are designed to bring efficiency, controls and automation to small businesses, commercial and
government payment processes, ranging from employee travel to fully integrated, invoice-based
payables.
Visa B2B Connect is a multilateral B2B cross-border payments network designed to facilitate
transactions from the bank of origin directly to the beneficiary bank, helping streamline settlement
and optimize payments for financial institutions’ corporate clients. The network delivers B2B cross-
border payments that are reliable, flexible, data-rich, secure and cost-effective. Visa B2B Connect
continues to scale and is available in more than 100 countries and territories.
 Visa Cross-Border Solutions 
Formerly Treasury as a Service, Visa Cross-Border Solutions aligns with our global network of
networks strategy, as we are focused on building the infrastructure that enables our clients of all
sizes to deliver cross-border products with visibility, speed and security. This includes a series of
solutions for our established cross-border consumer payments business, as well as use cases enabled
by our digitally native Currencycloud platform, which includes real-time foreign exchange rates,
virtual accounts, and enhanced liquidity and settlement capabilities.
 9 
Table of Contents
 Value Added Services 
Value added services represent an opportunity for us to diversify our revenue with products and
solutions that differentiate our network, deepen our client relationships and deliver innovative
solutions across other networks.
 Issuing Solutions 
Visa DPS is one of the largest issuer processors of Visa debit transactions in the world. In addition
to multi-network transaction processing, Visa DPS also provides a wide range of value added services,
including fraud mitigation, dispute management, data analytics, campaign management, a suite of
digital solutions and contact center services. Our capabilities in API-based issuer processing
solutions, like DPS Forward, allow our clients to create new payments use cases and provide them with
modular capabilities for digital payments.
We also provide a range of other services and digital solutions to issuers, such as account controls,
digital issuance, and branded consumer experiences. Additionally, Visa provides loyalty and benefits
solution to issuers aimed at creating compelling and differentiated cardholder experiences, as well
as Buy Now, Pay Later (BNPL) capabilities. BNPL or installment payments allow shoppers the
flexibility to pay for a purchase in equal payments over a defined period of time. Visa is investing
in installments as a payments strategy — by offering a portfolio of BNPL solutions for traditional
clients, as well as installments providers, who use our cards and services to support a wide variety
of installment options before, during or after checkout, in person and online.
 Acceptance Solutions 
Visa Acceptance Solutions, which includes Cybersource, provides modular, value added services in
addition to the traditional gateway function of connecting merchants to payment processing. Using the
platform, acquirers, payment service providers, independent software vendors, and merchants of all
sizes can improve the way their consumers engage and transact; help to mitigate fraud and lower
operational costs; and adapt to changing business requirements. They can also connect with other
fintechs through a global payment management platform to use their services. Visa Acceptance
Solutions’ capabilities provide new and enhanced payment integrations with ecommerce platforms,
enabling sellers and acquirers to provide tailored commerce experiences with payments seamlessly
embedded. Visa Acceptance Solutions enables an omnichannel solution with a cloud-based architecture
to deliver more innovation at the point of sale.
In addition, Visa provides secure, reliable services for merchants and acquirers that reduce friction
and drive acceptance. Examples include Global Urban Mobility, which supports transit operators to
accept Visa contactless payments in addition to closed-loop payment solutions; and Visa Account
Updater, which provides updated account information for merchants to help strengthen customer
relationships and retention. Visa also offers dispute management services, including a network-
agnostic solution from Verifi that enables merchants to prevent and resolve disputes with a single
connection.
 Risk and Identity Solutions 
Visa’s risk and identity solutions transform data into insights for near real-time decisions and
facilitate account holder authentication to help clients prevent fraud and protect account holder
data. With the increasing popularity of omnichannel commerce and digital payments among consumers,
fraud prevention helps increase trust in digital payments. Solutions such as Visa Advanced
Authorization, Visa Secure, Visa Risk Manager and Decision Manager, Visa Consumer Authentication
Service, and payment-decisioning solutions from CardinalCommerce empower financial institutions and
merchants with tools that help automate and simplify fraud prevention and enhance payment security.
Aligned to our network of networks strategy, Visa is increasingly bringing our expertise and
capabilities to emerging fraud challenges, working with network operators and financial institutions
to help mitigate fraud. These value-added fraud prevention tools layer on top of a suite of our
network programs that protect the safety and integrity of the payment ecosystem, and along with our
investments in intelligence and technology, help to prevent, detect and mitigate threats. These
programs and Visa’s fraud prevention expertise are among the core benefits of
 10 
Table of Contents
being part of the Visa network. Through the combined efforts of security and identity tools and
services, payment and cyber intelligence, insights and learnings from client or partner breach
investigations, and law enforcement engagement, Visa helps protect financial institutions and
merchants from fraud and solve payment security challenges.
 Open Banking 
In March 2022, Visa acquired Tink AB, an open banking platform, to catalyze fintech innovation and
accelerate the development and adoption of open banking securely and at scale. Visa’s open banking
capabilities range from data access use cases, such as account verification, balance check and
personal finance management, to payment initiation capabilities, such as account-to-account
transactions and merchant payments. These capabilities can help our partner businesses deliver
valuable services to their customers.
 Advisory Services 
Visa Consulting and Analytics (VCA) is the payments consulting advisory arm of Visa. The combination
of our deep payments expertise, proprietary analytical models applied to a breadth of data and our
economic intelligence allows us to identify actionable insights, make recommendations and help
implement solutions that can drive better business decisions and measurable outcomes for clients. VCA
offers consulting services for issuers, acquirers, merchants, fintechs and other partners, spanning
the entire customer journey from acquisition to retention. Further, VCA Managed Services, our
dedicated execution arm within the consulting division, is being increasingly utilized by clients to
implement our recommendations and wider value added services product enablement.
We are fortifying the key foundations of our business model, which consist of becoming a network of
networks, our technology platforms, security, brand and talent.
 Network of Networks 
Our network of networks strategy means moving money to all endpoints and to all form factors, using
all available networks and being a single connection point for our partners; and providing our value
added services on all transactions, no matter the network. The key component of our network of
networks strategy is interoperability. We are opening up our network and increasingly using other
networks to reach accounts we could not otherwise reach and enabling new types of money movement.
Visa B2B Connect, Visa Direct, and Visa+ are examples of our strategy.
 Technology Platforms 
Visa’s leading technology platforms comprise software, hardware, data centers and a large
telecommunications infrastructure. Visa’s four data centers are a critical part of our global
processing environment and have a high redundancy of network connectivity, power and cooling designed
to provide continuous availability of systems. Together, these systems deliver the secure, convenient
and reliable service that our clients and consumers expect from the Visa brand.
 Security 
Our in-depth, multi-layer security approach includes a formal program to devalue sensitive and/or
personal data through various cryptographic means; embedded security in the software development
lifecycle; identity and access management controls to protect against unauthorized access; and
advanced cyber detection and response capabilities. We deploy security tools that help keep our
clients and consumers safe. We also invest significantly in our comprehensive approach to
cybersecurity. We deploy security technologies to protect data confidentiality, the integrity of our
network and service availability to strengthen our core cybersecurity capabilities to minimize risk.
Our
 11 
Table of Contents
payments fraud disruption team continually monitors threats to the payments ecosystem to help ensure
attacks are detected and prevented efficiently and effectively.
 Brand 
Visa’s strong brand helps deliver added value to our clients and their customers, financial
institutions, merchants and partners through compelling brand expressions, a wide range of products
and services as well as innovative brand and marketing efforts. In line with our commitment to an
expansive and diverse range of partnerships for the benefit of our stakeholders, Visa is a sponsor of
top entertainment and sports events including the FIFA Women’s World Cup 2023 TM , the Olympic and
Paralympic Games, and the Super Bowl.
 Talent 
Attracting, developing and advancing the best talent globally is critical to our continued success.
This year we grew our total workforce from approximately 26,500 in fiscal year 2022 to approximately
28,800 employees in fiscal year 2023, an increase of 9 percent year over year. Voluntary workforce
turnover (rolling 12-month attrition) was 6 percent as of September 30, 2023. Visa employees are
located in more than 80 countries and territories, with 55 percent located outside the U.S. At the
end of fiscal year 2023, Visa’s global workforce was 58 percent men and 42 percent women, and women
represented 36 percent of Visa’s leadership (defined as vice president level and above). In the U.S.,
ethnicity of our workforce was 42 percent Asian, 8 percent Black, 13 percent Hispanic, 3 percent
Other and 35 percent White. For our U.S. leadership, the breakdown was 18 percent Asian, 6 percent
Black, 13 percent Hispanic, 3 percent Other and 60 percent White.
Given Visa’s ambitious growth agenda and efforts to achieve our purpose, we have focused on enhancing
our employees’ expertise across our business. This includes an enhanced development program for our
senior leaders and a formal technology apprenticeship program to help us broaden and strengthen our
talent channels and pipelines. We have also committed to providing employees with the tools they need
to do their work more quickly and easily, including an artificial intelligence or AI-driven portal
with a searchable knowledge base to create customized results and bespoke solutions. We enhanced our
mental well-being and retirement benefits, which is reflective of our key priority to take care of
our employees.
We also are dedicated to ensuring that employees feel valued in their day-to-day work. During our
global employee engagement survey last year, we learned that our employees wanted more opportunities
to recognize and be recognized, in more informal ways. In response, Visa developed a program that
better enabled employees to provide peer-to-peer recognition for each other’s contributions. Using
UPLIFT, Visa’s new recognition platform, employees can celebrate their peers’ achievements, send
e-cards to celebrate the employee journey (from welcoming new hires to recognizing service
anniversaries), use an automated internal networking tool that matches employees based on smart
algorithms, and more. Importantly, all our recognition categories are grounded in behaviors that
reflect our employee value proposition or Visa’s Leadership Principles – further reinforcing that at
Visa, it is not only about what you achieve, but how you do it. Employee engagement in peer
recognition has significantly increased since the launch, with monthly active users reaching 78
percent in September 2023, compared to 45 percent in September 2022. With this enhanced platform,
employees are encouraged to recognize and uplift each other.
Visa is committed to pay equity, regardless of gender or race/ethnicity, and conducts pay equity
analyses on an annual basis. We are also committed to transparency – this year, we launched total
rewards statements in the United Kingdom in addition to those already provided in Asia, to drive a
deeper understanding and appreciation of total rewards value to the individual. We plan to introduce
statements in the U.S. as well. For additional information regarding our human capital management,
please see the section titled “Talent and Human Capital Management” in Visa’s 2023 Proxy Statement as
well as our website at visa.com/esg , which includes enhanced workforce disclosures that include our
2022 Consolidated EEO-1 Report and our 2022 Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) Report. See
Available Information below.
 FINTECH AND DIGITAL PARTNERSHIPS 
Fintechs are a vital growth engine for Visa and a key driver in realizing our purpose – to uplift
everyone, everywhere by being the best way to pay and be paid. Fintechs are key enablers of new
payment experiences and new flows. Our work with fintechs is one of our greatest opportunities and
has opened new points of acceptance, extended credit at the point of sale, made cross-border money
flows more efficient, moved B2B spend onto Visa’s network, expedited payroll and provided digital
wallet customers access to our services. Our portfolio of fintech partners is diverse and continues
to grow and scale. We signed more than 500 commercial partnerships with
 12 
Table of Contents
fintechs globally, from early stage companies to growing and mature players, an increase of 25
percent year over year.
To better serve fintechs, Visa has a suite of streamlined commercial programs and digital onboarding
tools. Fintech Fast Track, our flagship program for fintechs is designed to help launch new financial
features quickly, such as launching a new card program or enabling the movement of money with Visa
Direct. We provide streamlined onboarding and turnkey access to hundreds of ecosystem partners. The
program has welcomed hundreds of fintechs who are actively engaged in the program.
Visa Ready, our certification program, helps technology companies build and launch payment solutions
that meet Visa's global standards around security and functionality. Fintech Partner Connect helps
build pathways between Visa’s issuing clients and fintech providers. With our startup engagement
programs, like the Visa Everywhere Initiative that launched in 2022, early-stage companies can build
payment solutions based on our capabilities. Visa also manages programs including She’s Next,
Empowered by Visa, a global women’s entrepreneurship initiative, and Africa Fintech Accelerator
Program to uplift underrepresented communities.
MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS, JOINT VENTURES AND STRATEGIC INVESTMENTS
Visa continually explores opportunities to augment our capabilities and provide meaningful value to
our clients. Mergers and acquisitions, joint ventures and strategic investments complement our
internal development and enhance our partnerships to align with Visa’s priorities. Visa applies a
rigorous business analysis to our acquisitions, joint ventures and investments to ensure they will
differentiate our network, provide value added services and accelerate growth.
In fiscal year 2023, we signed a definitive agreement to acquire Pismo, a cloud-native issuer
processing and core banking platform with operations in Latin America, Asia Pacific and Europe. The
transaction is subject to customary closing conditions, including applicable regulatory reviews and
approvals.
 CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY AND SUSTAINABILITY 
Visa is committed to operating as a responsible, ethical, inclusive and sustainable company. As one
of the global leaders in digital payments, Visa strives to join with clients, partners and other
stakeholders to empower people, businesses and communities to thrive, to be an industry leader in
addressing the corporate responsibility and sustainability (CRS) topics most significant to our role
as a payments technology company, and to meet and exceed our expectations for performance and
transparency. Visa’s purpose is to uplift everyone, everywhere by being the best way to pay and be
paid. We believe deeply in our purpose, and we are focused on empowering people and economies;
securing commerce and protecting customers; investing in our workforce; protecting the planet; and
operating responsibly. Our 2022 ESG Report, as well as other CRS-related resources are available on
our website at visa.com/esg . See Available Information below.
 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
We own and manage the Visa brand, which stands for acceptance, security, convenience, speed and
reliability. Our portfolio of Visa-owned trademarks is important to our business. Generally,
trademark registrations are valid indefinitely as long as they are in use and/or maintained. We give
our clients access to these assets through agreements with our issuers and acquirers, which authorize
the use of our trademarks in connection with their participation in our payments network.
Additionally, we own a number of patents and patent applications related to our business and continue
to pursue patents in emerging technologies that may have applications in our business. We rely on a
combination of patent, trademark, copyright and trade secret laws in the U.S. and other
jurisdictions, as well as confidentiality procedures and contractual provisions, to protect our
proprietary technology.
 COMPETITION 
The global payments industry continues to undergo dynamic change. Existing and emerging competitors
compete with Visa’s network and payment solutions for consumers and for participation by financial
institutions and merchants. Technology and innovation are shifting consumer habits and driving growth
opportunities in ecommerce, mobile payments, blockchain technology and digital currencies. These
advances are enabling new entrants, many
 13 
Table of Contents
of which depart from traditional network payment models. In certain countries, the evolving
regulatory landscape is creating local networks or enabling additional processing competition.
We compete against all forms of payment. This includes paper-based payments, primarily cash and
checks, and all forms of electronic payments. Our electronic payment competitors principally include:
Global or Multi-Regional Networks: These networks typically offer a range of branded, general purpose
card payment products that consumers can use at millions of merchant locations around the world.
Examples include American Express, Discover, JCB, Mastercard and UnionPay. These competitors may be
more concentrated in specific geographic regions, such as Discover in the U.S. and JCB in Japan, or
have a leading position in certain countries, such as UnionPay in China. See Item 1A—Regulatory
Risks—Government-imposed obligations and/or restrictions on international payments systems may
prevent us from competing against providers in certain countries, including significant markets such
as China and India . Based on available data, Visa is one of the largest retail electronic funds
transfer networks used throughout the world.
The following chart compares our network with these network competitors for calendar year 2022 (1) :
 Visa American Express Diners Club / JCB Mastercard 
 Discover 
 Payments Volume ($B) 11,668 1,540 243 312 6,568 
 Total Volume ($B)(2) 14,108 1,553 258 320 8,177 
 Total Transactions 260 10 4 6 150 
 (B) 
 Cards (M) 4,160 133 80 153 2,713 
(1) American Express, Diners Club / Discover, JCB and Mastercard data sourced from The Nilson Report
issue 1241 (May 2023). Includes all consumer, small business and commercial credit, debit and prepaid
cards. American Express, Diners Club / Discover, and JCB include business from third-party issuers.
JCB figures include other payment-related products and some figures are estimates. Mastercard
excludes Maestro and Cirrus figures.
(2) Total volume is the sum of payments volume and cash volume. Cash volume generally consists of
cash access transactions, balance access transactions, balance transfers and convenience checks .
Local and Regional Networks: Operated in many countries, these networks often have the support of
government influence or mandate. In some cases, they are owned by financial institutions or payment
processors. These networks typically focus on debit payment products, and may have strong local
acceptance, and recognizable brands. Examples include NYCE, Pulse and STAR in the U.S., Interac in
Canada and eftpos in Australia.
Alternative Payments Providers: These providers, such as closed commerce ecosystems, BNPL solutions
and cryptocurrency platforms, often have a primary focus of enabling payments through ecommerce and
mobile channels; however, they are expanding or may expand their offerings to the physical point of
sale. These companies may process payments using in-house account transfers between parties,
electronic funds transfer networks like the ACH, global or local networks like Visa, or some
combination of the foregoing. In some cases, these entities can be both a partner and a competitor to
Visa.
Real-time Payment (RTP) Networks: RTP networks have launched in multiple markets and continue to be
driven by strong government sponsorship and regulatory initiatives to enable and drive adoption
(e.g., FedNow in the U.S., PIX in Brazil and United Payments Interface (UPI) in India), increasing
their position as an alternative to payment card schemes. These networks primarily focus on domestic
transactions, with adoption varying by use cases and geographies. However, with linkages such as
PayNow in Singapore and UPI in India, cross-border RTP networks are advancing and will compete with
our cross-border business. RTP networks can compete with Visa on consumer payments and other payment
flows (e.g., B2B and P2P) but can also be customers for value added services, such as risk
management.
Digital Wallet Providers: They continue to expand payment capabilities in person and online for
consumers and merchants and provide consumers with additional ways to pay. While digital wallets can
help drive Visa volumes, they can also be funded by non-card payment options. Digital wallet
providers who utilize RTP networks provide additional competition.
Payment Processors: Payment processors may perform processing services on third-party payments
networks on behalf of issuers or acquirers . We compete with payment processors for the processing of
Visa transactions. These processors may benefit from mandates requiring them to handle processing
under local
 14 
Table of Contents
regulation. For example, as a result of regulation in Europe under the Interchange Fee Regulation
(IFR), we may face competition from other networks, processors and other third parties who could
process Visa transactions directly with issuers and acquirers.
New Flows Providers: We compete with alternative solutions to our new flows (e.g., Visa Direct and
Visa B2B Connect) such as ACH, RTP and wires. We compete with other global and local card networks
for commercial card portfolios. Additionally, we may face competition from financial institution
clients who are experimenting with B2B blockchain payments.
Value Added Service Providers: We face competition from companies that provide alternatives to our
value added services. This includes a wide range of players, such as technology companies,
information services and consulting firms, governments and merchant services companies. The
integration of technology like generative AI can create new and better offerings that compete with
our value added services, such as strengthened risk monitorization and managing digital
identification. Regulatory initiatives could also lead to increased competition in these areas.
We believe our fundamental value proposition of security, convenience, speed and reliability as well
as the number of credentials and our acceptance footprint help us to succeed. In addition, we
understand the needs of the individual markets in which we operate and partner with local financial
institutions, merchants, fintechs, governments, NGOs and business organizations to provide tailored
and innovative solutions. We will continue to utilize our network of networks strategy to facilitate
the movement of money. We believe Visa is well-positioned competitively due to our global brand, our
broad set of payment products, new flows offerings and value added services, and our proven track
record of processing payment transactions securely and reliably.
 GOVERNMENT REGULATION 
As a global payments technology company, we are subject to complex and evolving global regulations in
the various jurisdictions in which our products and services are used. The most significant
government regulations that impact our business are discussed below. For further discussion of how
global regulations may impact our business, see Item 1A — Regulatory Risks .
Anti-Corruption, Anti-Money Laundering, Anti-Terrorism and Sanctions: We are subject to anti-
corruption laws and regulations, including the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA), the UK
Bribery Act and other laws that generally prohibit the making or offering of improper payments to
foreign government officials and political figures for the purpose of obtaining or retaining business
or to gain an unfair business advantage. We are also subject to anti-money laundering and anti-
terrorist financing laws and regulations, including the U.S. Bank Secrecy Act. In addition, we are
subject to economic and trade sanctions programs administered by the Office of Foreign Assets Control
(OFAC) in the U.S. Therefore, we do not permit financial institutions or other entities that are
domiciled in countries or territories subject to comprehensive OFAC trade sanctions (currently, Cuba,
Iran, North Korea, Syria, Crimea, and the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic
regions of Ukraine), or that are included on OFAC’s list of Specially Designated Nationals and
Blocked Persons, to issue or acquire Visa cards or engage in transactions using our products and
services.
Government-Imposed Market Participation Restrictions: Certain governments, including China, India,
Indonesia, Thailand and Vietnam, have taken actions to promote domestic payments systems and/or
certain issuers, payments networks or processors, by imposing regulations that favor domestic
providers, impose local ownership requirements on processors, require data localization or mandate
that domestic processing be done in that country.
Interchange Rates and Fees: An increasing number of jurisdictions around the world regulate or
influence debit and credit interchange reimbursement rates in their regions. For example, the U.S.
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Act (Dodd-Frank Act) limits interchange reimbursement
rates for certain debit card transactions in the U.S.; the European Union (EU) IFR limits interchange
rates in the European Economic Area (EEA) (as discussed below); and the Reserve Bank of Australia
(RBA) and the Central Bank of Brazil regulate average permissible levels of interchange.
Internet Transactions: Many jurisdictions have adopted regulations that require payments system
participants to monitor, identify, filter, restrict or take other actions with regard to certain
types of payment transactions on the Internet, such as gambling, digital currencies, the purchase of
cigarettes or alcohol and other controversial transaction types.
 15 
Table of Contents
Network Exclusivity and Routing: In the U.S., the Dodd-Frank Act limits network exclusivity and
restrictions on merchant routing choice for the debit and prepaid market segments. Other
jurisdictions impose similar limitations, such as the IFR’s prohibition in Europe on restrictions
that prevent multiple payment brands or functionality on the same card.
No-surcharge Rules: We have historically enforced rules that prohibit merchants from charging higher
prices to consumers who pay using Visa products instead of other means. However, merchants’ ability
to surcharge varies by geographic market as well as Visa product type, and continues to be impacted
by litigation, regulation and legislation.
Privacy and Data Protection: Aspects of our operations or business are subject to privacy, data use
and data security regulations, which impact the way we use and handle data, operate our products and
services and even impact our ability to offer a product or service. In addition, regulators are
proposing new laws or regulations that could require Visa to adopt certain cybersecurity and data-
handling practices, create new individual privacy rights and impose increased obligations on
companies handling personal data.
Supervisory Oversight of the Payments Industry: Visa is subject to financial sector oversight and
regulation in substantially all of the jurisdictions in which we operate. In the U.S., for example,
the Federal Banking Agencies (FBA) (formerly known as the Federal Financial Institutions Examination
Council) has supervisory oversight over Visa under applicable federal banking laws and policies as a
technology service provider to U.S. financial institutions. The federal banking agencies comprising
the FBA are the Federal Reserve Board, the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation and the National Credit Union Administration. Visa also may be separately examined by the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau as a service provider to the banks that issue Visa-branded
consumer credit and debit card products. Central banks in other countries/regions, including Canada,
Europe, India, Ukraine and the UK (as discussed below), have recognized or designated Visa as a
retail payment system under various types of financial stability regulations. Visa is also subject to
oversight by banking and financial sector authorities in other jurisdictions, such as Brazil and Hong
Kong.
European and United Kingdom Regulations and Supervisory Oversight: Visa in Europe continues to be
subject to complex and evolving regulation in the EEA and the UK.
There are a number of EU regulations that impact our business. As discussed above, the IFR regulates
interchange rates within the EEA, requires Visa Europe to separate its payment card scheme activities
from processing activities for accounting, organization and decision-making purposes within the EEA,
and imposes limitations on network exclusivity and routing. National competent authorities in the EEA
are responsible for monitoring and enforcing the IFR in their markets. We are also subject to
regulations governing areas such as privacy and data protection, anti-bribery, anti-money laundering,
anti-terrorism and sanctions. Other regulations in Europe, such as the second Payment Services
Directive (PSD2), require, among other things, that our financial institution clients provide certain
customer account access rights to emerging non-financial institution players. PSD2 also includes
strong customer authentication requirements for certain transactions that could impose both
operational complexity on Visa and impact consumer payment experiences. Visa Europe is also subject
to supervisory oversight by the European Central Bank and certain competent authorities in Europe.
In the UK, Visa Europe is designated as a Recognized Payment System, bringing it within the scope of
the Bank of England’s supervisory powers and subjecting it to various requirements, including on
issues such as governance and risk management designed to maintain the stability of the UK’s
financial system. Visa Europe is also regulated by the UK’s Payment Systems Regulator (PSR), which
has wide-ranging powers and authority to review our business practices, systems, rules and fees with
respect to promoting competition and innovation in the UK, and ensuring payment systems take care of,
and promote, the interests of service-users. Post-Brexit, the UK has adopted various European
regulations, including regulations that impact the payments ecosystem, such as the IFR and PSD2. The
PSR is responsible for monitoring Visa Europe’s compliance with the IFR as adopted in the UK.
Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability: Certain governments around the world are adopting laws
and regulations pertaining to corporate responsibility and sustainability performance, transparency
and reporting. Regulations may include mandated corporate reporting (e.g., Corporate Sustainability
Reporting Directive) or in individual areas, such as mandated reporting on climate-related financial
disclosures.
Additional Regulatory Developments: Various regulatory agencies across the world also continue to
examine a wide variety of other issues, including mobile payment transactions, tokenization, access
rights for non-financial institutions, money transfer services, identity theft, account management
guidelines, disclosure rules, security and marketing that could affect our financial institution
clients and our business. Furthermore, following the
 16 
Table of Contents
passage of PSD2 in Europe, several countries, including Australia, Brazil, Canada, Hong Kong and
Mexico, are contemplating granting or have already granted various types of access rights to third-
party processors, including access to consumer account data maintained by our financial institution
clients. These changes could have negative implications for our business depending on how the
regulations are framed and implemented.
 AVAILABLE INFORMATION 
Our corporate website is visa.com/ourbusiness . Our annual reports on Form 10-K, our quarterly
reports on Form 10-Q, our current reports on Form 8-K, proxy statements and any amendments to those
reports filed or furnished pursuant to the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, can be
viewed at sec.gov and our investor relations website at investor.visa.com as soon as reasonably
practicable after these materials are electronically filed with or furnished to the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC). In addition, we routinely post financial and other information, which
could be deemed to be material to investors, on our investor relations website. Information regarding
our corporate responsibility and sustainability initiatives is also available on our website at
visa.com/esg. The content of any of our websites referred to in this report is not incorporated by
reference into this report or any other filings with the SEC.
 17 
Table of Contents
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1A. Risk Factors │
 Regulatory Risks 
We are subject to complex and evolving global regulations that could harm our business and financial
results.
As a global payments technology company, we are subject to complex and evolving regulations that
govern our operations. See Item 1 — Government Regulation for more information on the most
significant areas of regulation that affect our business. The impact of these regulations on us, our
clients, and other third parties could limit our ability to enforce our payments system rules;
require us to adopt new rules or change existing rules; affect our existing contractual arrangements;
increase our compliance costs; and require us to make our technology or intellectual property
available to third parties, including competitors, in an undesirable manner. As discussed in more
detail below, we may face differing rules and regulations in matters like interchange reimbursement
rates, preferred routing, domestic processing and localization requirements, currency conversion,
point-of-sale transaction rules and practices, privacy, data use or protection, licensing
requirements, and associated product technology. As a result, the Visa operating rules and our other
contractual commitments may differ from country to country or by product offering. Complying with
these and other regulations increases our costs and reduces our revenue opportunities.
If widely varying regulations come into existence worldwide, we may have difficulty rapidly adjusting
our product offerings, services, fees and other important aspects of our business to comply with the
regulations. Our compliance programs and policies are designed to support our compliance with a wide
array of regulations and laws, such as regulations regarding anti-money laundering, anti-corruption,
competition, money transfer services, privacy and sanctions, and we continually adjust our compliance
programs as regulations evolve. However, we cannot guarantee that our practices will be deemed
compliant by all applicable regulatory authorities. In the event our controls should fail or we are
found to be out of compliance for other reasons, we could be subject to monetary damages, civil and
criminal penalties, litigation, investigations and proceedings, and damage to our global brands and
reputation. Furthermore, the evolving and increased regulatory focus on the payments industry could
negatively impact or reduce the number of Visa products our clients issue, the volume of payments we
process, our revenues, our brands, our competitive positioning, our ability to use our intellectual
property to differentiate our products and services, the quality and types of products and services
we offer, the countries in which our products are used, and the types of consumers and merchants who
can obtain or accept our products, all of which could harm our business and financial results.
Increased scrutiny and regulation of the global payments industry, including with respect to
interchange reimbursement fees, merchant discount rates, operating rules, risk management protocols
and other related practices, could harm our business.
Regulators around the world have been establishing or increasing their authority to regulate various
aspects of the payments industry. See Item 1—Government Regulation for more information . In the U.S.
and many other jurisdictions, we have historically set default interchange reimbursement fees. Even
though we generally do not receive any revenue related to interchange reimbursement fees in a payment
transaction (in the context of credit and debit transactions, those fees are paid by the acquirers to
the issuers; the reverse is true for certain transactions like ATM), interchange reimbursement fees
are a factor on which we compete with other payments providers and are therefore an important
determinant of the volume of transactions we process. Consequently, changes to these fees, whether
voluntarily or by mandate, can substantially affect our overall payments volumes and revenues.
Interchange reimbursement fees, certain operating rules and related practices continue to be subject
to increased government regulation globally, and regulatory authorities and central banks in a number
of jurisdictions have reviewed or are reviewing these fees, rules and practices. For example:
• Regulations adopted by the U.S. Federal Reserve cap the maximum U.S. debit interchange
reimbursement rate received by large financial institutions at 21 cents plus 5 basis points per
transaction, plus a possible fraud adjustment of 1 cent. Additionally, the Dodd-Frank Act limits
issuers’ and our ability to adopt network exclusivity and preferred routing in the debit and prepaid
area, which also impacts our business. In response to merchant requests, the Federal Reserve has
recently taken actions to revisit its regulations that implement these aspects of the Dodd-Frank Act.
For example, in October 2022, the Federal Reserve published a final rule effectively requiring
issuers to ensure that at least two unaffiliated networks are available for routing card not present
debit transactions by July 1, 2023. In October 2023, the Federal
 18 
Table of Contents
Reserve issued a proposal for comment which would further lower debit interchange rates, with a
mechanism for automatic adjustment every two years. Separately, there continues to be interest in
regulation of credit interchange fees and routing practices by members of Congress and state
legislators in the U.S. In June 2023, legislation was reintroduced in the U.S. House of
Representatives and Senate, which among other things, would require large issuing banks to offer a
choice of at least two unaffiliated networks over which electronic credit transactions may be
processed. Similar legislation was introduced in the previous Congress in 2022 but failed to advance
and become law. The current legislation has additional bipartisan support, and while the ultimate
outcome of the legislation remains unclear, its sponsors continue to strongly advocate for its
passage.
• In Europe, the EU’s IFR places an effective cap on consumer credit and consumer debit interchange
fees for both domestic and cross-border transactions within the EEA (30 basis points and 20 basis
points, respectively). EU member states have the ability to further reduce these interchange levels
within their territories. The European Commission has announced its intention to conduct another
impact assessment of the IFR, which could result in even lower caps on interchange rates and the
expansion of regulation to other types of products, services and fees.
• Several countries in Latin America continue to explore regulatory measures against payments
networks and have either adopted or are exploring interchange caps, including Argentina, Brazil,
Chile and Costa Rica. In Asia Pacific, the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) completed its review of
the country’s payment system regulations and adopted a series of measures, which include lower
interchange rates for debit transactions. The RBA also continues to assess the potential merits of
mandating co-badging and merchant routing choice on dual network debit cards. In addition, the New
Zealand Parliament passed legislation capping domestic interchange rates for debit and credit
products. Finally, many governments, including but not limited to governments in India, Costa Rica,
and Turkey, are using regulation to further drive down MDR, which could negatively affect the
economics of our transactions.
• While the focus of interchange and MDR regulation has primarily been on domestic rates
historically, there is increasing focus on cross-border rates in recent years. For example, in 2019,
we settled certain cross-border interchange rates with the European Commission. In 2020, Costa Rica
became the first country to formally regulate cross-border interchange rates by direct regulation.
Cross-border MDR is also regulated in Costa Rica and Turkey. Finally, in June 2022, the UK’s PSR
initiated two market reviews: one focusing on post-Brexit increases in interchange rates for
transactions between the UK and Europe, and another focusing on increases in the UK in what are
referred to as scheme and processing fees.
• As referenced above, with increased lobbying by merchants and other industry participants, we are
also beginning to see regulatory interest in network fees in the UK, Europe and Chile. In addition,
industry participants in some countries like Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic,
Paraguay, Peru and South Africa have sought intervention from competition regulators or filed claims
relating to certain network rules, including Visa’s restrictions on cross-border acquiring. Other
countries, like New Zealand, are adopting regulations that require us to seek government pre-approval
of our network rules, which could also impact the way we operate in certain markets.
• Government regulations or pressure may also impact our rules and practices and require us to allow
other payments networks to support Visa products or services, to have the other network’s
functionality or brand marks on our products, or to share our intellectual property with other
networks. As innovations in payment technology have enabled us to expand into new products and
services, they have also expanded the potential scope of regulatory influence. For instance, new
products and capabilities, including tokenization, push payments, and new flows (e.g., Visa B2B
Connect) could bring increased licensing or authorization requirements in the countries where the
product or capability is offered. Furthermore, certain of our businesses are regulated as payment
institutions or as money transmitters, subjecting us to various licensing, supervisory, and other
requirements. In addition, the EU’s requirement to separate scheme and processing adds costs and
impacts the execution of our commercial, innovation and product strategies.
Regulators around the world increasingly take note of each other’s approaches to regulating the
payments industry. Consequently, a development in one jurisdiction may influence regulatory
approaches in another. The risks created by a new law, regulation or regulatory outcome in one
jurisdiction have the potential to be replicated and to negatively affect our business in another
jurisdiction or in other product offerings. For example, our settlement with the European Commission
on cross-border interchange rates has drawn preliminary attention from some regulators in other parts
of the world. Similarly, new regulations involving one product offering may prompt regulators to
extend
 19 
Table of Contents
the regulations to other product offerings. For example, credit payments could become subject to
similar regulation as debit payments (or vice versa). The RBA initially capped credit interchange,
but subsequently capped debit interchange as well.
When we cannot set default interchange reimbursement rates at optimal levels, issuers and acquirers
may find our payments system less attractive. This may increase the attractiveness of other payments
systems, such as our competitors’ closed-loop payments systems with direct connections to both
merchants and consumers. We believe some issuers may react to such regulations by charging new or
higher fees, or reducing certain benefits to consumers, which make our products less appealing to
consumers. Some acquirers may elect to charge higher MDR regardless of the Visa interchange
reimbursement rate, causing merchants not to accept our products or to steer customers to alternative
payments systems or forms of payment. In addition, in an effort to reduce the expense of their
payment programs, some issuers and acquirers have obtained, and may continue to obtain, incentives
from us, including reductions in the fees that we charge, which directly impacts our revenues.
In addition, we are also subject to central bank oversight in a growing number of countries,
including Brazil, India, the UK and within the EU. Some countries with existing oversight frameworks
are looking to further enhance their regulatory powers while regulators in other jurisdictions are
considering or adopting approaches based on these regulatory principles. This oversight could result
in new governance, reporting, licensing, cybersecurity, processing infrastructure, capital, or credit
risk management requirements. We could also be required to adopt policies and practices designed to
mitigate settlement and liquidity risks, including increased requirements to maintain sufficient
levels of capital and financial resources locally, as well as localized risk management or
governance. Increased oversight could also include new criteria for member participation and merchant
access to our payments system.
Finally, policymakers and regulatory bodies in the U.S., Europe, and other parts of the world are
exploring ways to reform existing competition laws to meet the needs of the digital economy,
including restricting large technology companies from engaging in mergers and acquisitions, requiring
them to interoperate with potential competitors, and prohibiting certain kinds of self-preferencing
behaviors. While the focus of these efforts remains primarily on increasing regulation of large
technology, e-commerce and social media companies, they could also have implications for other types
of companies including payments networks, which could constrain our ability to effectively manage our
business or potentially limit how we make our products and services available.
Government-imposed obligations and/or restrictions on international payments systems may prevent us
from competing against providers in certain countries, including significant markets such as China
and India.
Governments in a number of jurisdictions shield domestic payments providers, including card networks,
brands, and processors, from international competition by imposing market access barriers and
preferential domestic regulations. To varying degrees, these policies and regulations affect the
terms of competition in the marketplace and impair the ability of international payments networks to
compete. Public authorities may also impose regulatory requirements that favor domestic providers or
mandate that domestic payments or data processing be performed entirely within that country, which
could prevent us from managing the end-to-end processing of certain transactions.
In China, UnionPay remains the predominant processor of domestic payment card transactions and
operates the predominant domestic acceptance mark. Although we filed an application with the People’s
Bank of China (PBOC) in May 2020 to operate a Bank Card Clearing Institution (BCCI) in China, the
timing and the procedural steps for approval remain uncertain. There is no guarantee that the license
to operate a BCCI will be approved or, if we obtain such license, that we will be able to
successfully compete with domestic payments networks. Co-badging and co-residency regulations also
pose additional challenges in markets where Visa competes with national networks for issuance and
routing. Certain banks have issued dual-branded cards for which domestic transactions in China are
processed by UnionPay and transactions outside of China are processed by Visa or other international
payments networks. The PBOC is contemplating that dual-branded cards be phased out over time as new
licenses are issued to international companies to participate in China’s domestic payments market.
Accordingly, we have been working with Chinese issuers to issue Visa-only branded cards for
international travel, and later for domestic transactions should we obtain a BCCI license. However,
notwithstanding such efforts, the phase out of dual-branded cards have decreased our payment volumes
and impacted the revenue we generate in China.
UnionPay has grown rapidly in China and is actively pursuing international expansion plans, which
could potentially lead to regulatory pressures on our international routing rule (which requires that
international
 20 
Table of Contents
transactions on Visa cards be routed over VisaNet). Furthermore, although regulatory barriers shield
UnionPay from competition in China, alternative payments providers such as Alipay and WeChat Pay have
rapidly expanded into ecommerce, offline, and cross-border payments, which could make it difficult
for us to compete even if our license is approved in China. NetsUnion Clearing Corp, a Chinese
digital transaction routing system, and other such systems could have a competitive advantage in
comparison with international payments networks .
Regulatory initiatives in India, including a data localization mandate passed by the government that
suggest growing nationalistic priorities, has cost implications for us and could affect our ability
to effectively compete with domestic payments providers. Furthermore, any inability to meet the
requirements of the data localization mandate could impact our ability to do business in India. In
Europe, with the support of the European Central Bank, a group of European banks have announced their
intent to launch a pan-European payment system, the European Payments Initiative (EPI). While EPI
subsequently announced a focus on account-to-account instant payments across a range of use cases, it
is noteworthy that the purported motivation behind EPI is to reduce the risks of disintermediation of
European providers by international technology companies and continued reliance on international
payments networks for intra-Europe card transactions. Furthermore, regional groups of countries, such
as the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) and a number of countries in Southeast Asia (e.g., Malaysia),
have adopted or may consider, efforts to restrict our participation in the processing of regional
transactions. The African Development Bank has also indicated an interest in supporting national
payment systems in its efforts to expand financial inclusion and strengthen regional financial
stability. Finally, some countries such as South Africa are mandating on-shore processing of domestic
transactions. Geopolitical events, including sanctions, trade tensions or other types of activities
have intensified any or all of these activities, which could adversely affect our business. For
example, in the aftermath of U.S. and European sanctions against Russia and the decision by U.S.
payments networks, including Visa to suspend operations in the country, some countries have expressed
concerns about their reliance on U.S. financial services companies, including payments networks, and
have taken steps to bolster the development of domestic solutions. Separately, Russia has called for
the BRICS countries (a five-country bloc made up of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa,
and which recently extended invitations to Argentina, Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and the
United Arab Emirates), to lessen dependence on Western payments systems by, among other things,
integrating payments systems and cards across member countries.
Central banks in a number of countries, including those in Argentina, Australia, Canada, Brazil,
Europe and Mexico, are in the process of developing or expanding national RTP networks and instant
payment solutions with the goal of driving a greater number of domestic transactions onto these
systems. In July 2023, the U.S. Federal Reserve launched its FedNow Service with core clearing and
settlement functionality, and expects to add more features and enhancements over time. Some countries
are also exploring cross-border connectivity of their respective RTP systems. Finally, an increasing
number of jurisdictions are exploring the concept of building central bank digital currencies for
retail payments. If successfully deployed, these national payment platforms and digital currencies
could have significant implications for Visa’s domestic and cross-border payments, including
potential disintermediation.
Due to our inability to manage the end-to-end processing of transactions for cards in certain
countries (e.g., Thailand), we depend on our close working relationships with our clients or third-
party service providers to ensure transactions involving our products are processed effectively. Our
ability to do so may be adversely affected by regulatory requirements and policies pertaining to
transaction routing or on-shore processing. In general, national laws that protect or otherwise
support domestic providers or processing may increase our costs; decrease our payments volumes and
impact the revenue we generate in those countries; decrease the number of Visa products issued or
processed; impede us from utilizing our global processing capabilities and controlling the quality of
the services supporting our brands; restrict our activities; limit our growth and the ability to
introduce new products, services and innovations; force us to leave countries or prevent us from
entering new markets; and create new competitors, all of which could harm our business.
Laws and regulations regarding the handling of personal data and information may impede our services
or result in increased costs, legal claims, or fines against us .
Our business relies on the movement of data across national borders. Legal requirements relating to
the collection, storage, handling, use, disclosure, transfer and security of personal data continue
to evolve, and we are subject to an increasing number of privacy and data protection requirements
around the world. For example, our ongoing efforts to comply with complex U.S. state privacy and data
protection regulations, and emerging international privacy and data protection laws, may increase the
complexity of our compliance operations, entail substantial expenses, divert resources from other
initiatives and projects, and limit the services we are able to offer.
 21 
Table of Contents
Additionally, privacy laws in other regions, such as China’s Personal Information Protection Law and
India’s Personal Data Protection Act, have extraterritorial application and include restrictions on
processing sensitive data, extensive notification requirements, and substantial compliance and audit
obligations. The global proliferation of new privacy and data protection laws may lead to
inconsistent and conflicting requirements, which create an uncertain regulatory environment.
Noncompliance could also result in regulatory penalties and significant legal liability. Enforcement
actions and investigations by regulatory authorities into companies related to data security
incidents and privacy violations are generally increasing. In Europe, data protection authorities
continue to apply and enforce the General Data Protection (GDPR), imposing record setting fines.
We are also subject to a variety of laws and regulations governing the development, use, and
deployment of AI technologies. These laws and regulations are still evolving, and there is no single
global regulatory framework for AI. The market is still assessing how regulators may apply existing
consumer protection and other laws in the context of AI. There is thus uncertainty on what new laws
will look like and how existing laws will apply to our development, use, and deployment of AI. In the
midst of this uncertainty, we may face challenges due to the complexity and rapidly changing nature
of AI technology and applicable laws. Our use of AI and machine learning is subject to various risks
at each stage of use. In the context of AI development, risks relate to intellectual property
considerations, the use of personal information, and flaws in algorithms or datasets used for
training. In the context of use and deployment, risks include ethical considerations regarding the
outputs, and our ability to safely deploy AI throughout the organization. Our development and
implementation of governance frameworks for our AI and machine learning systems may not be successful
in mitigating all of these emerging risks.
We may be subject to tax examinations or disputes, or changes in tax laws.
We exercise significant judgment and make estimates in calculating our worldwide provision for income
taxes and other tax liabilities. Although we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, many factors
may limit their accuracy. We are currently under examination by, or in disputes with, the U.S.
Internal Revenue Service, the UK’s HM Revenue and Customs as well as tax authorities in other
jurisdictions, and we may be subject to additional examinations or disputes in the future. Relevant
tax authorities may disagree with our tax treatment of certain material items and thereby increase
our tax liability. Failure to sustain our position in these matters could harm our cash flow and
financial position. In addition, changes in existing laws in the U.S. or foreign jurisdictions,
including unilateral actions of foreign jurisdictions to introduce digital services taxes, or changes
resulting from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development’s Program of Work, related
to the revision of profit allocation and nexus rules and design of a system to ensure multinational
enterprises pay a minimum level of tax to the countries where we earn revenue, may also materially
affect our effective tax rate. A substantial increase in our tax payments could have a material,
adverse effect on our financial results. See also Note 19—Income Taxes to our consolidated financial
statements included in Item 8 of this report.
 Litigation Risks 
We may be adversely affected by the outcome of litigation or investigations.
We are involved in numerous litigation matters, investigations, and proceedings asserted by civil
litigants, governments, and enforcement bodies investigating or alleging, among other things,
violations of competition and antitrust law, consumer protection law, privacy law and intellectual
property law (these are referred to as “actions” in this section). Details of the most significant
actions we face are described more fully in Note 20—Legal Matters to our consolidated financial
statements included in Item 8 of this report. These actions are inherently uncertain, expensive and
disruptive to our operations. In the event we are found liable or reach a settlement in any action,
particularly in a large class action lawsuit, such as one involving an antitrust claim entitling the
plaintiff to treble damages in the U.S., or we incur liability arising from a government
investigation, we may be required to pay significant awards, settlements or fines. In addition,
settlement terms, judgments, orders or pressures resulting from actions may harm our business by
influencing or requiring us to modify, among other things, the default interchange reimbursement
rates we set, the Visa operating rules or the way in which we enforce those rules, our fees or
pricing, or the way we do business. These actions or their outcomes may also influence regulators,
investigators, governments or civil litigants in the same or other jurisdictions, which may lead to
additional actions against Visa. Finally, we are required by some of our commercial agreements to
indemnify other entities for litigation brought against them, even if Visa is not a defendant.
For certain actions like those that are U.S. covered litigation or VE territory covered litigation,
as described in Note 5—U.S. and Europe Retrospective Responsibility Plans and Note 20—Legal Matters
to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report, we have certain financial
protections pursuant to the respective
 22 
Table of Contents
retrospective responsibility plans. The two retrospective responsibility plans are different in the
protections they provide and the mechanisms by which we are protected. The failure of one or both of
the retrospective responsibility plans to adequately insulate us from the impact of such settlements,
judgments, losses, or liabilities could materially harm our financial condition or cash flows, or
even cause us to become insolvent.
 Business Risks 
 We face intense competition in our industry. 
The global payments space is intensely competitive. As technology evolves and consumer expectations
change, new competitors or methods of payment emerge, and existing clients and competitors assume
different roles. Our products compete with cash, checks, electronic payments, virtual currency
payments, global or multi-regional networks, other domestic and closed-loop payments systems, digital
wallets and alternative payments providers primarily focused on enabling payments through ecommerce
and mobile channels. As the global payments space becomes more complex, we face increasing
competition from our clients, other emerging payment providers such as fintechs, other digital
payments, technology companies that have developed payments systems enabled through online activity
in ecommerce, social media, and mobile channels, as well as governments in a number of jurisdictions
(e.g., Brazil and India) as discussed above, that are developing, supporting and/or operating
national schemes, RTP networks and other payment platforms.
Our competitors may acquire, develop, or make better use of substantially better technology, have
more widely adopted delivery channels, or have greater financial resources. They may offer more
effective, innovative or a wider range of programs, products and services. They may use more
effective advertising and marketing strategies that result in broader brand recognition, and greater
use, including with respect to issuance and merchant acceptance. They may also develop better
security solutions or more favorable pricing arrangements. Moreover, even if we successfully adapt to
technological change and the proliferation of alternative types of payment services by developing and
offering our own services in these areas, such services may provide less favorable financial terms
for us than we currently receive from VisaNet transactions, which could hurt our financial results
and prospects.
Certain of our competitors operate with different business models, have different cost structures or
participate in different market segments. Those business models may ultimately prove more successful
or more adaptable to regulatory, technological and other developments. In some cases, these
competitors have the support of government mandates that prohibit, limit or otherwise hinder our
ability to compete for transactions within certain countries and regions. Some of our competitors,
including American Express, Discover, private-label card networks, virtual currency providers,
technology companies that enable the exchange of digital assets, and certain alternative payments
systems like Alipay and WeChat Pay, operate closed-loop payments systems, with direct connections to
both merchants and consumers. Government actions or initiatives such as the Dodd-Frank Act, the IFR
in Europe, or RTP initiatives by governments such as the U.S. Federal Reserve’s FedNow or the Central
Bank of Brazil’s Pix system may provide competitors with increased opportunities to derive
competitive advantages from these business models, and may create new competitors, including in some
cases the government itself. Similarly, regulation in Europe under PSD2 and the IFR may require us to
open up access to, and allow participation in, our network to additional participants, and reduce the
infrastructure investment and regulatory burden on competitors. In addition to the open banking
provisions under PSD2, efforts to implement or facilitate open banking and open finance requirements
are underway across a number of countries, including Australia, Brazil, Canada and the U.S., which
could impose additional requirements on financial institutions or others regarding access to and use
of financial data. We also run the risk of disintermediation due to factors such as emerging
technologies and platforms, including mobile payments, alternative payment credentials, other ledger
technologies or payment forms, and by virtue of increasing bilateral agreements between entities that
prefer not to use our payments network for processing transactions. For example, merchants could
process transactions directly with issuers, or processors could process transactions directly with
issuers and acquirers.
We expect the competitive landscape to continue to shift and evolve. For example:
• We, along with our competitors, clients, network participants, and others are developing or
participating in alternative payments systems or products, such as mobile payment services, ecommerce
payment services, P2P payment services, real-time and faster payment initiatives, and payment
services that permit ACH or direct debits from or to consumer checking accounts, that could either
reduce our role or otherwise disintermediate us from the transaction processing or the value added
services we provide to support such processing. Examples include initiatives from The Clearing House,
an association consisting of large financial institutions that has developed its own faster payments
system; Early Warning Services, which
 23 
Table of Contents
operates Zelle, a bank-offered alternative network that provides another platform for faster funds or
real-time payments across a variety of payment types, including P2P, corporate and government
disbursement, bill pay and deposit check transactions; and cryptocurrency or stablecoin-based
payments initiatives.
• Many countries or regions are developing or promoting domestic networks, switches and RTP systems
(e.g., U.S., Brazil, India and Europe) and in some countries the government itself owns and operates
these RTP systems (e.g., Brazil). To the extent these governments mandate local banks and merchants
to use and accept these systems for domestic or other transactions, prohibit international payments
networks, like Visa, from participating on those systems, and/or impose restrictions or prohibitions,
on international payments networks from offering payment services on such transactions, we could face
the risk of our business being disintermediated in those countries. For example, in some regions
(Latin America, Southeast Asia and the Middle East), including through intergovernmental
organizations such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the GCC, some countries are
looking into cross-border connectivity of such domestic systems. Similarly, India has expressed
interest in expanding its digital public infrastructure, which includes its RTP system, UPI, outside
the country and for cross-border payments. Currently, international payment networks like Visa are
unable to participate in UPI.
• Parties that process our transactions may try to minimize or eliminate our position in the payments
value chain.
• Parties that access our payment credentials, tokens and technologies, including clients, technology
solution providers or others might be able to migrate or steer account holders and other clients to
alternative payment methods or use our payment credentials, tokens and technologies to establish or
help bolster alternate payment methods and platforms.
• Participants in the payments industry may merge, form joint ventures or enable or enter into other
business combinations that strengthen their existing business propositions or create new, competing
payment services.
• New or revised industry standards related to online checkout and web payments, cloud-based
payments, tokenization or other payments-related technologies set by individual countries, regions or
organizations such as the International Organization for Standardization, American National Standards
Institute, World Wide Web Consortium, European Card Standards Group, PCI Co, Nexo and EMVCo may
result in additional costs and expenses for Visa and its clients, or otherwise negatively impact the
functionality and competitiveness of our products and services.
As the competitive landscape is quickly evolving, we may not be able to foresee or respond
sufficiently to emerging risks associated with new businesses, products, services and practices. We
may be asked to adjust our local rules and practices, develop or customize certain aspects of our
payment services, or agree to business arrangements that may be less protective of Visa’s proprietary
technology and interests in order to compete and we may face increasing operational costs and risk of
litigation concerning intellectual property. Our failure to compete effectively in light of any such
developments could harm our business and prospects for future growth.
Our revenues and profits are dependent on our client and merchant base, which may be costly to win,
retain and develop.
Our financial institution clients and merchants can reassess their commitments to us at any time or
develop their own competitive services. While we have certain contractual protections, our clients,
including some of our largest clients, generally have flexibility to issue non-Visa products.
Further, in certain circumstances, our financial institution clients may decide to terminate our
contractual relationship on relatively short notice without paying significant early termination
fees. Because a significant portion of our net revenues is concentrated among our largest clients,
the loss of business from any one of these larger clients could harm our business, results of
operations and financial condition. For more information, please see Note 14—Enterprise-wide
Disclosures and Concentration of Business to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8
of this report.
In addition, we face intense competitive pressure on the prices we charge our financial institution
clients. In certain regions, we are increasingly facing competition from RTP networks and other
payment facilitators offering lower pricing, as well as initiatives to lower costs, such as the G20
Roadmap for Enhancing Cross-border Payments. In order to stay competitive, we may need to adjust our
pricing or offer incentives to our clients to increase payments volume, enter new market segments,
adapt to regulatory changes, and expand their use and acceptance of Visa products and services. These
include up-front cash payments, fee discounts, rebates, credits,
 24 
Table of Contents
performance-based incentives, marketing and other support payments that impact our revenues and
profitability. In addition, we offer incentives to certain merchants and acquirers to win routing
preference in relation to other network options or forms of payment. Market pressures on pricing,
incentives, fee discounts and rebates could moderate our growth. If we are not able to implement cost
containment and productivity initiatives in other areas of our business or increase our volumes in
other ways to offset or absorb the financial impact of these incentives, fee discounts and rebates,
it may harm our net revenues and profits.
In addition, it may be difficult or costly for us to acquire or conduct business with financial
institutions or merchants that have longstanding exclusive, or nearly exclusive, relationships with
our competitors. These financial institutions or merchants may be more successful and may grow more
quickly than our existing clients or merchants. In addition, if there is a consolidation or
acquisition of one or more of our largest clients or co-brand partners by a financial institution
client or merchant with a strong relationship with one of our competitors, it could result in our
business shifting to a competitor, which could put us at a competitive disadvantage and harm our
business.
Merchants’ and processors’ continued push to lower acceptance costs and challenge industry practices
could harm our business.
We rely in part on merchants and their relationships with our clients or their agents to maintain and
expand the use and acceptance of Visa products. Certain merchants and merchant-affiliated groups have
been exerting their influence in the global payments system in certain jurisdictions, such as the
U.S., Canada and Europe, to attempt to lower acceptance costs paid by merchants to acquirers or their
agents to accept payment products or services, by lobbying for new legislation, seeking regulatory
intervention, filing lawsuits and in some cases, surcharging or refusing to accept Visa products. If
they are successful in their efforts, we may face increased compliance and litigation expenses,
issuers may decrease their issuance of our products, and consumer usage of our products could be
adversely impacted. For example, in the U.S., certain stakeholders have raised concerns regarding how
payment security standards and rules may impact debit routing choice and the cost of payment card
acceptance. In addition to ongoing litigation related to the U.S. migration to EMV-capable cards and
point-of-sale terminals, U.S. merchant-affiliated groups and processors have expressed concerns
regarding the EMV certification process and some policymakers have expressed concerns about the roles
of industry bodies such as EMVCo and the Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council in the
development of payment card standards. Additionally, many merchants have advocated for lower
acceptance costs in the form of reduced interchange rates, which could result in some issuers
eliminating or reducing their promotion or use of Visa’s products and services, eliminating or
reducing cardholder benefits such as rewards programs, or charging account holders increased or new
fees for using Visa-branded products, all of which could negatively impact Visa’s transaction volumes
and related revenues. Finally, some merchants and processors have advocated for changes to industry
practices and Visa acceptance requirements at the point of sale, including the ability for merchants
to accept only certain types of Visa products, to mandate only PIN authenticated transactions, to
differentiate or steer among Visa product types issued by different financial institutions, and to
impose surcharges on customers presenting Visa products as their form of payment. If successful,
these efforts could adversely impact consumers’ usage of our products and decrease our overall
transaction volumes and fee revenues, lead to regulatory enforcement and/or litigation that increases
our compliance and litigation expenses, and ultimately harm our business.
We depend on relationships with financial institutions, acquirers, processors, merchants, payment
facilitators, ecommerce platforms, fintechs and other third parties.
As noted above, our relationships with industry participants are complex and require us to balance
the interests of multiple third parties. For instance, we depend significantly on relationships with
our financial institution clients and on their relationships with account holders and merchants to
support our programs and services, and thereby compete effectively in the marketplace. We provide
incentives to merchants, acquirers, ecommerce platforms and processors to promote routing preference
and acceptance growth. We also engage in many payment card co-branding efforts with merchants, who
receive incentives from us. As emerging participants such as fintechs enter the payments industry, we
engage in discussions to address the role they may play in the ecosystem, whether as, for example, an
issuer, merchant, ecommerce platform or digital wallet provider. As these and other relationships
become more prevalent and take on a greater importance to our business, our success will increasingly
depend on our ability to sustain and grow these relationships. In addition, we depend on our clients
and third parties, including network partners, vendors and suppliers, to submit, facilitate and
process transactions properly, provide various services associated with our payments network on our
behalf, and otherwise adhere to our operating rules and applicable laws. To the extent that such
parties fail to perform or deliver adequate services, it may result in negative
 25 
Table of Contents
experiences for account holders or others when using their Visa-branded payment products, which could
harm our business and reputation.
Our business could be harmed if we are not able to maintain and enhance our brand, if events occur
that have the potential to damage our brand or reputation, or if we experience brand
disintermediation.
Our brand is globally recognized and is a key asset of our business. We believe that our clients and
their account holders associate our brand with acceptance, security, convenience, speed, and
reliability. Our success depends in large part on our ability to maintain the value of our brand and
reputation of our products and services in the payments ecosystem, elevate the brand through new and
existing products, services and partnerships, and uphold our corporate reputation. The popularity of
products that we have developed in partnership with technology companies and financial institutions
as well as government actions that mandate other networks to process Visa-branded card transactions
may have the potential to cause brand disintermediation at the point of sale, in ecommerce and mobile
channels, and decrease the presence of our brand. Our brand reputation may also be negatively
impacted by a number of factors, including authorization, clearing and settlement service
disruptions; data security breaches; compliance failures by Visa, including by our employees, agents,
clients, partners or suppliers; failure to meet expectations of our clients, consumers, or other
stakeholders; negative perception of our industry, the industries of our clients, Visa-accepting
merchants, or our clients’ customers and agents, including third-party payments providers; ill-
perceived actions or affiliations by clients, partners or other third parties, such as sponsorship or
co-brand partners; and fraudulent, or illegal activities using our payment products or services, and
which we may not always be in a position to detect and/or prevent from occurring over our network.
Our brand could also be negatively impacted when our products are used to facilitate payment for
legal, but controversial, products and services, including, but not limited to, adult content,
cryptocurrencies, firearms and gambling activities. Additionally, these risks could be exacerbated if
our financial institution partners and/or merchants fail to maintain necessary controls to ensure the
legality of these transactions, if any legal liability associated with such goods or services is
extended to ancillary participants in the value chain like payments networks, or if our network and
industry become entangled in political or social debates concerning such legal, but controversial,
commerce. If we are unable to maintain our reputation, the value of our brand may be impaired, which
could harm our relationships with clients, account holders, employees, prospective employees,
governments and the public, as well as impact our business.
Global economic, political, market, health and social events or conditions may harm our business.
More than half of our net revenues are earned outside the U.S. International cross-border transaction
revenues represent a significant part of our revenue and are an important part of our growth
strategy. Our revenues are dependent on the volume and number of payment transactions made by
consumers, governments, and businesses whose spending patterns may be affected by economic,
political, market, health and social events or conditions. Adverse macroeconomic conditions within
the U.S. or internationally, including but not limited to recessions, inflation, rising interest
rates, high unemployment, currency fluctuations, actual or anticipated large-scale defaults or
failures, rising energy prices, or a slowdown of global trade, and reduced consumer, small business,
government, and corporate spending, have a direct impact on our volumes, transactions and revenues.
Furthermore, in efforts to deal with adverse macroeconomic conditions, governments may introduce new
or additional initiatives or requests to reduce or eliminate payment fees or other costs. In an
overall soft global economy, such pricing measures could result in additional financial pressures on
our business.
In addition, outbreaks of illnesses, pandemics like COVID-19, or other local or global health issues,
political uncertainties, international hostilities, armed conflicts, wars, civil unrest, climate-
related events, including the increasing frequency of extreme weather events, impacts to the power
grid, and natural disasters have to varying degrees negatively impacted our operations, clients,
third-party suppliers, activities, and cross-border travel and spend. Although the World Health
Organization and the federal government declared an end to COVID-19 as a global and national health
emergency, respectively, risks related to COVID-19 have adversely affected and may continue to
adversely affect our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial condition. The ongoing
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic remain difficult to predict due to numerous uncertainties, including
the resumption of international travel, and the indirect impact of the pandemic on global economic
activity. In addition, a number of countries took steps during the pandemic to temporarily cap
interchange or other fees on electronic payments as part of their COVID-19 economic relief measures.
While most have been rescinded or have expired, it
 26 
Table of Contents
is possible that proponents of interchange and/or MDR regulation may try to position government
intervention as necessary to support potential future economic relief initiatives.
Geopolitical trends towards nationalism, protectionism, and restrictive visa requirements, as well as
continued activity and uncertainty around economic sanctions, tariffs or trade restrictions also
limit the expansion of our business in certain regions and have resulted in us suspending our
operations in other regions. During fiscal 2022, economic sanctions were imposed on Russia by the
U.S., European Union, United Kingdom and other jurisdictions and authorities, impacting Visa and its
clients. In March 2022, we suspended our operations in Russia and as a result, are no longer
generating revenue from domestic and cross-border activities related to Russia. For fiscal 2022 and
2021, total net revenues from Russia, including revenues driven by domestic as well as cross-border
activities, were approximately 2% and 4% of our consolidated net revenues, respectively. The war in
Ukraine and any further actions by, or in response to such actions by, Russia or its allies could
have lasting impacts on Ukraine as well as other regional and global economies, any or all of which
could adversely affect our business.
A decline in economic, political, market, health and social conditions could impact our clients as
well, and their decisions could reduce the number of cards, accounts, and credit lines of their
account holders, and impact overall consumption by consumers and businesses, which would ultimately
impact our revenues. Our clients may implement cost-reduction initiatives that reduce or eliminate
marketing budgets, and decrease spending on optional or enhanced value added services from us. Any
events or conditions that impair the functioning of the financial markets, tighten the credit market,
or lead to a downgrade of our current credit rating could increase our future borrowing costs and
impair our ability to access the capital and credit markets on favorable terms, which could affect
our liquidity and capital resources, or significantly increase our cost of capital.
Finally, as governments, investors and other stakeholders face additional pressures to accelerate
actions to address climate change and other environmental, governance and social topics, governments
are implementing regulations and investors and other stakeholders are imposing new expectations or
focusing investments in ways that may cause significant shifts in disclosure, commerce and
consumption behaviors that may have negative impacts on our business. As a result of any of these
factors, any decline in cross-border travel and spend would impact our cross-border volumes, the
number of cross-border transactions we process and our currency exchange activities, which in turn
would reduce our international transaction revenues.
Our aspirations to address corporate responsibility and sustainability (CRS) matters and
considerations could adversely affect our business and financial results or negatively impact our
reputation.
We are subject to laws, regulations and other measures that govern a wide range of topics, including
those that are related to matters beyond our core products and services, such as matters that touch
upon sustainability, climate change, human capital, inclusion and diversity, and human rights. A wide
range of stakeholders, including governments, customers, employees, and investors are increasingly
focused on and are developing expectations regarding these corporate responsibility matters. We have
established CRS-related initiatives, adopted reporting frameworks, and announced several related
goals. These goals may change from time to time, implementation of these goals may require
considerable investments, and ultimately, we cannot guarantee that we will achieve them.
Our ability to achieve any CRS objectives is subject to numerous risks, many of which are outside of
our control, including the evolving legal environment and regulatory requirements for the tracking
and reporting of CRS standards or disclosures and the actions of suppliers, partners, and other third
parties. Certain of our regulators have proposed or adopted, or may propose or adopt, rules or
standards related to these matters that would apply to our business. Prevailing CRS standards and
expectations may also reflect conflicting values or objectives, which can result in our practices
being judged by standards that are continually evolving and are not always clear. From time to time,
the methodologies for reporting our CRS data may be updated and previously reported data may be
adjusted to reflect an improvement in the availability and quality of data, changing assumptions,
changes in the nature and scope of our operations, and other changes in circumstances. This may
result in a lack of consistent or meaningful comparative data from period to period or between us and
other companies in the same industry. Further, where new laws or regulations are more stringent than
current legal or regulatory requirements, we may experience increased compliance burdens and costs to
meet such obligations.
Our stakeholders often hold differing views on our CRS-related goals and initiatives, which may
result in negative attention in traditional and social media or a negative perception of our response
to concerns regarding these matters. In addition, we also face potentially conflicting supervisory
directives as certain U.S. regulatory and non-U.S. authorities have prioritized CRS-related issues
while Congress and certain U.S. state governments have signaled pursuing potentially conflicting
priorities. These circumstances, among others, may result in pressure from
 27 
Table of Contents
investors, unfavorable reputational impacts, including inaccurate perceptions or a misrepresentation
of our actual CRS practices, diversion of management's attention and resources, and proxy fights,
among other material adverse impacts on our businesses. Any failure, or perceived failure, by us to
adhere to our public statements, comply fully with developing interpretations of CRS laws and
regulations, or meet evolving and varied stakeholder expectations and standards could negatively
impact our business, reputation, financial condition, and operating results.
Our indemnification obligation to fund settlement losses of our clients exposes us to significant
risk of loss and may reduce our liquidity.
We indemnify issuers and acquirers for settlement losses they may suffer due to the failure of
another issuer or acquirer to honor its settlement obligations in accordance with the Visa operating
rules. In certain instances, we may indemnify issuers or acquirers in situations in which a
transaction is not processed by our system. This indemnification creates settlement risk for us due
to the timing difference between the date of a payment transaction and the date of subsequent
settlement. Our indemnification exposure is generally limited to the amount of unsettled Visa card
payment transactions at any point in time and any subsequent amounts that may fall due relating to
adjustments for previously processed transactions. Changes in the credit standing of our clients or
concurrent settlement failures or insolvencies involving more than one of our largest clients,
several of our smaller clients, significant sponsor banks through which non-financial institutions
participate in the Visa network, or systemic operational failures could expose us to liquidity risk,
and negatively impact our financial position. Even if we have sufficient liquidity to cover a
settlement failure or insolvency, we may be unable to recover the amount of such payment. This could
expose us to significant losses and harm our business. See Note 12—Settlement Guarantee Management to
our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report.
 Technology and Cybersecurity Risks 
Failure to anticipate, adapt to, or keep pace with, new technologies in the payments industry could
harm our business and impact future growth.
The global payments industry is undergoing significant and rapid technological change, including
increased proliferation of mobile and other proximity and in-app payment technologies, ecommerce,
tokenization, cryptocurrencies, distributed ledger and blockchain technologies, cloud-based
encryption and authorization, and new authentication technologies such as biometrics, FIDO 2.0, 3D
Secure 2.0 and dynamic cardholder verification values or dCVV2. As a result, we expect new services
and technologies to continue to emerge and evolve, including those developed by Visa such as our new
flows offerings. For example, in the past year generative AI solutions have emerged as an opportunity
for Visa, its clients, suppliers, merchants, and partners to innovate more quickly and better serve
consumers. Rapid adoption and novel uses of generative AI across the marketplace may also introduce
unique and unpredictable security risks to our systems, information, and the payments ecosystem. In
addition to our own initiatives and innovations, we work closely with third parties, including
potential competitors, for the development of, and access to, new technologies. It is difficult,
however, to predict which technological developments or innovations will become widely adopted and
how those technologies may be regulated. Moreover, some of the new technologies could be subject to
intellectual property-related lawsuits or claims, potentially impacting our development efforts
and/or requiring us to obtain licenses, implement design changes or discontinue our use. If we or our
partners fail to adapt and keep pace with new technologies in the payments space in a timely manner,
it could harm our ability to compete, decrease the value of our products and services to our clients,
impact our intellectual property or licensing rights, harm our business and impact our future growth.
A disruption, failure or breach of our networks or systems, including as a result of cyber-attacks,
could harm our business.
Our cybersecurity and processing systems, as well as those of financial institutions, merchants and
third-party service providers, have experienced and may continue to experience errors, interruptions,
delays or damage from a number of causes, including power outages, hardware, software and network
failures, computer viruses, ransomware, malware or other destructive software, internal design,
manual or user errors, cyber-attacks, terrorism, workplace violence or wrongdoing, catastrophic
events, natural disasters, severe weather conditions and other effects from climate change. In
addition, there is risk that third party suppliers of hardware and infrastructure required to operate
our data centers and support employee productivity could be impacted by supply chain disruptions,
such as manufacturing, shipping delays, and service disruption due to cyber-attacks. An extended
supply chain or service disruption could also impact processing or delivery of technology services.
 28 
Table of Contents
Furthermore, our visibility and role in the global payments industry also puts our company at a
greater risk of being targeted by hackers. In the normal course of our business, we have been the
target of malicious cyber-attack attempts. We have been, and may continue to be, impacted by attacks
and data security breaches of financial institutions, merchants, and third-party service providers.
We are also aware of instances where nation states have sponsored attacks against some of our
financial institution clients, and other instances where merchants and issuers have encountered
substantial data security breaches affecting their customers, some of whom were Visa account holders.
Given the increase in online banking, ecommerce and other online activity, as well as more employees
working remotely as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to see increased cyber and payment
fraud activity, as cybercriminals attempt DDoS related attacks, phishing and social engineering scams
and other disruptive actions. Overall, such attacks and breaches have resulted, and may continue to
result in, fraudulent activity and ultimately, financial losses to Visa’s clients.
Numerous and evolving cybersecurity threats, including advanced and persistent cyber-attacks,
targeted attacks against our employees and trusted partners (i.e., insider threats), synthetic media
threats such as phishing, deepfake or social engineering schemes, particularly on our internet-facing
applications, could compromise the confidentiality, availability and integrity of data in our systems
or the systems of our third-party service providers. Because the tactics, techniques and procedures
used to obtain unauthorized access, or to disable or degrade systems change frequently, have become
increasingly more complex and sophisticated, and may be difficult to detect for periods of time, we
may not anticipate these acts or respond adequately or timely. For example, cybercriminals have
increasingly demonstrated advanced capabilities, such as use of zero-day vulnerabilities, and rapid
integration of new technology such as generative AI. The security measures and procedures we, our
financial institution and merchant clients, other merchants and third-party service providers in the
payments ecosystem have in place to protect sensitive consumer data and other information may not be
successful or sufficient to counter all data security breaches, cyber-attacks or system failures. In
some cases, the mitigation efforts may be dependent on third parties who may not deliver to the
required contractual standards, who may not be able to timely patch vulnerabilities or fix security
defects, or whose hardware, software or network services may be subject to error, defect, delay,
outage or lack appropriate malware prevention to prevent breaches or data exfiltration incidents.
Despite our security measures and programs to protect our systems and data, and prevent, detect and
respond to data security incidents, there can be no assurance that our efforts will prevent these
threats.
In addition, as a global financial services company, Visa is increasingly subject to complex and
varied cybersecurity regulations and cyber incident reporting requirements across numerous
jurisdictions. With the often short timeframes required for cyber incident reporting, there is a risk
that Visa or its suppliers will fail to meet the reporting deadlines for any given incident. In the
event we are found to be out of compliance, we could be subject to monetary damages, civil and
criminal penalties, litigation, investigations and proceedings, and damage to our reputation and
brand.
Any of these events could significantly disrupt our operations; impact our clients and consumers;
damage our reputation and brand; result in litigation or claims, violations of applicable privacy and
other laws, and increased regulatory review or scrutiny, investigations, actions, fines or penalties;
result in damages or changes to our business practices; decrease the overall use and acceptance of
our products; decrease our volume, revenues and future growth prospects; and be costly, time
consuming and difficult to remedy. In the event of damage or disruption to our business due to these
occurrences, we may not be able to successfully and quickly recover all of our critical business
functions, assets, and data through our business continuity program. Furthermore, while we maintain
insurance, our coverage may not sufficiently cover all types of losses or claims that may arise.
 Structural and Organizational Risks 
We may not achieve the anticipated benefits of our acquisitions, joint ventures or strategic
investments, and may face risks and uncertainties as a result.
As part of our overall business strategy, we make acquisitions and strategic investments, and enter
into joint ventures. We may not achieve the anticipated benefits of our current and future
acquisitions, joint ventures or strategic investments and they may involve significant risks and
uncertainties, including:
• disruption to our ongoing business, including diversion of resources and management’s attention
from our existing business;
 29 
Table of Contents
• greater than expected investment of resources or operating expenses;
• failure to adequately develop or integrate our acquired entities or joint ventures;
• the data security, cybersecurity and operational resilience posture of our acquired entities, joint
ventures or companies we invest in or partner with, may not be adequate and may be more susceptible
to cyber incidents;
• difficulty, expense or failure of implementing controls, procedures and policies at our acquired
entities or joint ventures;
• challenges of integrating new employees, business cultures, business systems and technologies;
• failure to retain employees, clients or partners of our acquired entities or joint ventures;
• in the case of foreign acquisitions, risks related to the integration of operations across
different cultures and languages;
• disruptions, costs, liabilities, judgments, settlements or business pressures resulting from
litigation matters, investigations or legal proceedings involving our acquisitions, joint ventures or
strategic investments;
• the inability to pursue aspects of our acquisitions or joint ventures due to outcomes in litigation
matters, investigations or legal proceedings;
• failure to obtain the necessary government or other approvals at all, on a timely basis or without
the imposition of burdensome conditions or restrictions;
• the economic, political, regulatory and compliance risks associated with our acquisitions, joint
ventures or strategic investments, including when entering into a new business or operating in new
regions or countries. For more information on regulatory risks, please see Item 1—Government
Regulations and Item 1A—Regulatory Risks above;
• discovery of unidentified issues and related liabilities after our acquisitions, joint ventures or
investments were made;
• failure to mitigate the deficiencies and liabilities of our acquired entities or joint ventures;
• dilutive issuance of equity securities, if new securities are issued;
• the incurrence of debt;
• negative impact on our financial position and/or statement of operations; and
• anticipated benefits, synergies or value of our acquisitions, joint ventures or investments not
materializing or taking longer than expected to materialize.
In addition, we may pursue additional strategic objectives, such as the potential exchange offer
program, which can divert resources and management’s attention from our existing business and, if
unsuccessful, may harm our business and reputation.
We may be unable to attract, hire and retain a highly qualified and diverse workforce, including key
management.
The talents and efforts of our employees, particularly our key management, are vital to our success.
The market for highly skilled workers and leaders in our industry, especially in fintech, technology,
cybersecurity and other specialized areas, is extremely competitive. Our management team has
significant industry experience and would be difficult to replace. We may be unable to retain them or
to attract, hire or retain other highly qualified employees, particularly if we do not offer
employment terms that are competitive with the rest of the labor market. Ongoing changes in laws and
policies regarding immigration, travel and work authorizations have made it more difficult for
employees to work in, or transfer among, jurisdictions in which we have operations and could continue
to impair our ability to attract, hire and retain qualified employees. Failure to attract, hire,
develop, motivate and retain highly qualified and diverse employee talent, especially in light of
changing worker expectations and talent marketplace variability regarding flexible work models; to
meet our goals related to fostering an inclusive and
 30 
Table of Contents
diverse culture or to adequately address potential increased scrutiny of our inclusion and diversity-
related programs and initiatives; to develop and implement an adequate succession plan for the
management team; to maintain our strong corporate culture of fostering innovation, collaboration and
inclusion in our current hybrid model; or to design and successfully implement flexible work models
that meet the expectations of employees and prospective employees could impact our workforce
development goals, impact our ability to achieve our business objectives, and adversely affect our
business and our future success.
The conversions of our class B and class C common stock or series A, B and C preferred stock into
shares of class A common stock would result in voting dilution to, and could adversely impact the
market price of, our existing class A common stock.
The market price of our class A common stock could fall as a result of many factors. The value of our
class B and C common stock and series A, B and C preferred stock is tied to the value of the class A
common stock. Under our U.S. retrospective responsibility plan, upon final resolution of our U.S.
covered litigation, all class B common stock will become convertible into class A common stock. Under
our Europe retrospective responsibility plan, Visa will continue to release value from the series B
and series C preferred stock in stages based on developments in current and potential litigation. The
series B and series C preferred stock will become fully convertible to series A preferred stock or
class A common stock no later than 2028 (subject to a holdback to cover any pending claims).
Conversion of our class B and class C common stock into class A common stock, or our series A, B and
C preferred stock into class A common stock, would increase the amount of class A common stock
outstanding, which would dilute the voting power of existing class A common stockholders. In
addition, the sale of significant portions of converted class A common stock could adversely impact
the market price of our existing class A common stock.
Holders of our class B and C common stock and series A, B and C preferred stock may have different
interests than our class A common stockholders concerning certain significant transactions.
Although their voting rights are limited, holders of our class B and C common stock and, in certain
specified circumstances, holders of our series A, B and C preferred stock, can vote on certain
significant transactions. With respect to our class B and C common stock, these transactions include
a proposed consolidation or merger, a decision to exit our core payments business and any other vote
required under Delaware law, such as the proposed certificate of incorporation amendments. Please see
Item 7 of this report for more information regarding the potential exchange offer program. With
respect to our series A, B and C preferred stock, voting rights are limited to proposed
consolidations or mergers in which holders of the series A, B and C preferred stock would receive
shares of stock or other equity securities with preferences, rights and privileges that are not
substantially identical to the preferences, rights and privileges of the applicable series of
preferred stock; or, in the case of series B and C preferred stock, holders would receive securities,
cash or other property that is different from what our class A common stockholders would receive.
Because the holders of classes of capital stock other than class A common stock are our current and
former financial institution clients, they may have interests that diverge from our class A common
stockholders. As a result, the holders of these classes of capital stock may not have the same
incentive to approve a corporate action that may be favorable to the holders of class A common stock,
and their interests may otherwise conflict with interests of our class A common stockholders.
Delaware law, provisions in our certificate of incorporation and bylaws, and our capital structure
could make a merger, takeover attempt or change in control difficult.
Provisions contained in our certificate of incorporation and bylaws and our capital structure could
delay or prevent a merger, takeover attempt or change in control that our stockholders may consider
favorable. For example, except for limited exceptions:
• no person may beneficially own more than 15 percent of our class A common stock (or 15 percent of
our total outstanding common stock on an as-converted basis), unless our board of directors approves
the acquisition of such shares in advance;
• no competitor or an affiliate of a competitor may hold more than 5 percent of our total outstanding
common stock on an as-converted basis;
• the affirmative votes of the class B and C common stock and series A, B and C preferred stock are
required for certain types of consolidations or mergers;
• our stockholders may only take action during a stockholders’ meeting and may not act by written
consent; and
 31 
Table of Contents
• only our board of directors, Chairperson, or CEO or any stockholders who have owned continuously
for at least one year not less than 15 percent of the voting power of all shares of class A common
stock outstanding may call a special meeting of stockholders.
 32 
Table of Contents
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments │
Not applicable.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 2. Properties │
As of September 30, 2023, we owned or leased 144 office locations in 82 countries around the world,
including four data centers located in the U.S., the United Kingdom and Singapore. Our corporate
headquarters are located in owned and leased premises in the San Francisco Bay Area.
We believe that these facilities are suitable and adequate to support our ongoing business needs.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 3. Legal Proceedings │
Refer to Note 20—Legal Matters to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this
report.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 4. Mine Safety Disclosures │
Not applicable.
 33 
Table of Contents