╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1. Business │
 OVERVIEW 
Visa is one of the world’s leaders in digital payments. Our mission is to connect the world through
the most innovative, reliable and secure payments network — enabling individuals, businesses and
economies to thrive. We facilitate global commerce and money movement across more than 200 countries
and territories among a global set of consumers, merchants, financial institutions, businesses,
strategic partners and government entities through innovative technologies.
Since Visa’s inception in 1958, Visa has been in the business of facilitating payments between
consumers and businesses. With new ways to pay, we have evolved into a global company that is a
trusted engine of commerce, working to provide payment solutions for everyone, everywhere. We are
focused on extending, enhancing and investing in our proprietary network, VisaNet, while seeking new
ways to offer products and services and become a single connection point for facilitating any payment
transaction, using our network, other networks, or a combination of networks. We offer products and
solutions that facilitate secure, reliable and efficient money movement for all participants in the
ecosystem.
• We facilitate secure, reliable and convenient transactions among financial institutions, merchants
and consumers. We have traditionally referred to this as the “four-party” model. As the payments
ecosystem continues to evolve, we have broadened this model to include digital banks, digital wallets
and a range of financial technology companies (fintechs), governments and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). We provide transaction processing services (primarily authorization, clearing
and settlement) to our financial institution and merchant clients through VisaNet, our advanced
transaction processing network. During fiscal year 2021, we saw 232 billion payments and cash
transactions with Visa’s brand, equating to an average of 637 million transactions per day. Of the
232 billion total transactions, 165 billion were processed by Visa.
• We offer a wide range of Visa-branded payment products that our 15,100 financial institution
clients use to develop and offer core business solutions, including credit, debit, prepaid and cash
access programs for individual, business and government account holders. During fiscal year 2021,
Visa’s total payments and cash volume was $13 trillion, and 3.7 billion credentials were available
worldwide to be used at more than 80 million (1) merchant locations.
• We take an open partnership approach and seek to provide value by enabling access to our global
network, including offering our technology capabilities through application programming interfaces
(APIs). We partner with both traditional and emerging players to innovate and expand the payments
ecosystem, allowing them to leverage the resources of our platform to scale and grow their businesses
more quickly and effectively.
• We are accelerating the migration to digital payments and evolving Visa to be a “network of
networks” to enable the movement of money through all available networks. We aim to provide a single
connection point so that Visa clients can enable money movement for businesses, governments, and
consumers regardless of which network is used to start or complete the transaction; ultimately,
helping to unify a complex payments ecosystem. Visa’s network of networks approach creates
opportunities by facilitating person-to-person (P2P), business-to-consumer (B2C), business-to-
business (B2B), business-to-small business (B2b) and government-to-consumer (G2C) payments, in
addition to consumer to business (C2B) payments.
• We provide value added services to our clients, including issuer solutions; acceptance solutions;
risk and identity solutions; and advisory services.
• We invest in and promote our brand to the benefit of our clients and partners through advertising,
promotional and sponsorship initiatives with FIFA, the International Olympic Committee, the
International Paralympic Committee and the National Football League (NFL), among others. We also use
these sponsorship assets to showcase our payment innovations.
(1) Data provided to Visa by acquiring institutions and other third parties.
 4 
Table of Contents
 FISCAL YEAR 2021 KEY STATISTICS 
(1) Please see Item 7–Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations for a reconciliation of our GAAP to non-GAAP financial results.
 OUR CORE BUSINESS 
In an example of a typical Visa C2B payment transaction, the consumer purchases goods or services
from a merchant using a Visa card or payment product. The merchant presents the transaction data to
an acquirer, usually a bank or third-party processing firm that supports acceptance of Visa cards or
payment products, for verification and processing. Through VisaNet, the acquirer presents the
transaction data to Visa, which in turn contacts the issuer to check the account holder’s account or
credit line for authorization. After the transaction is authorized, the issuer effectively pays the
acquirer an amount equal to the value of the transaction, minus the interchange reimbursement fee,
and then posts the transaction to the consumer’s account. The acquirer pays the amount of the
purchase, minus the merchant discount rate (MDR), to the merchant.
Visa earns revenue by facilitating money movement across more than 200 countries and territories
among a global set of consumers, merchants, financial institutions, businesses, strategic partners
and government entities through innovative technologies. Net revenues consist of service revenues,
data processing revenues, international transaction revenues and other revenues, minus client
incentive arrangements we have with our clients. We have one reportable segment, which is Payment
Services. We generally do not experience any pronounced seasonality in our business.
Visa is not a financial institution. We do not issue cards, extend credit, or set rates and fees for
account holders of Visa products nor do we earn revenues from, or bear credit risk with respect to,
any of these activities. Interchange reimbursement fees reflect the value merchants receive from
accepting our products and play a key role in balancing the costs and benefits that account holders
and merchants derive from participating in our payments networks. Generally, interchange
reimbursement fees are collected from acquirers and paid to issuers. We establish default interchange
reimbursement fees that apply absent other established settlement terms. In addition, we do not earn
revenues from the fees that merchants are charged by acquirers for acceptance, including
 5 
Table of Contents
the MDR. Our acquiring clients are generally responsible for soliciting merchants as well as
establishing and earning these fees.
Our net revenues in fiscal year 2021 consisted of the following:
 6 
Table of Contents
Visa’s strategy is to accelerate our revenue growth in consumer payments, new flows and value added
services, and fortify the key foundations of our business model.
We seek to accelerate revenue growth in three primary areas — consumer payments, new flows and value
added services.
 Consumer Payments 
We are accelerating efforts to move approximately $18 trillion (2) in consumer spending still
exchanged in cash and check to cards and digital accounts on Visa’s network of networks.
 Core Products 
Visa’s growth has been driven by the strength of our core products — credit, debit and prepaid
products.
Credit: Credit cards and digital credentials allow consumers and businesses to access credit to pay
for goods and services. Credit cards are affiliated with programs operated by financial institution
clients, co-brand partners, fintechs and affinity partners.
Debit: Debit cards and digital credentials allow consumers and small businesses to purchase goods and
services using funds held in their bank accounts. Debit cards enable account holders to transact in
person, online or via mobile without needing cash or checks and without accessing a line of credit.
The Visa/PLUS Global ATM network also provides debit, credit and prepaid account holders with cash
access, and other banking capabilities, in more than 200 countries and territories worldwide through
issuing and acquiring partnerships with both financial institutions and independent ATM operators.
(2) Estimate as of December 2018.
 7 
Table of Contents
Prepaid: Prepaid cards and digital credentials draw from a designated balance funded by individuals,
businesses or governments. Prepaid cards address many use cases and needs, including general purpose
reloadable, payroll, government and corporate disbursements, healthcare, gift and travel. Visa-
branded prepaid cards also play an important part in financial inclusion, bringing payment solutions
to those with limited or no access to traditional banking products.
 Capabilities 
We offer capabilities, tools and solutions that enable consumer payments and help our clients grow as
digital commerce, new technologies and new participants continue to transform the payments ecosystem.
Some of our offerings include:
 Tap to Pay 
As we seek to improve the user experience in the face-to-face environment, contactless payments or
tap to pay, which is tapping a contactless card or mobile device on a terminal to make a payment, has
emerged as a preferred way to pay among consumers in many countries around the world. Tap to pay
adoption is growing and many consumers have come to expect touchless payment experiences. In
addition, Visa continues to work with payments industry partners and governments to support raising
contactless payment limits.
Globally we have more than 20 countries with more than 90 percent contactless penetration and nearly
70 countries where tap to pay is more than 50 percent of face-to-face transactions. Excluding the
United States, nearly 70 percent of face-to-face transactions globally were contactless. In the U.S.,
Visa has more than 15 percent contactless penetration. We have 400 million tap-to-pay-enabled Visa
cards, and now three cities have above 25 percent face-to-face tap-to-pay penetration: New York, San
Francisco and San Jose. We have activated nearly 500 contactless public transport projects worldwide
and have nearly 750 projects in our pipeline.
 Tokenization 
Visa Token Service (VTS) brings trust to digital commerce innovation. As consumers increasingly rely
on digital transactions, VTS is designed to enhance the digital ecosystem through improved
authorization, reduced fraud and improved customer experience. VTS helps protect digital transactions
by replacing 16-digit Visa account numbers with a token protecting the underlying account
information. This security technology can work for a variety of payment transactions, both in the
physical and online space.
The issuance of network tokens continues to accelerate. In the past 17 months, we have more than
doubled the number of network tokens issued from one billion to 2.6 billion. By comparison, it took
nearly six years to reach our first one billion network tokens.
 Click to Pay 
Click to Pay provides a simplified and more consistent cardholder checkout experience online by
removing time-consuming key entry of personal information and enabling consumer and transaction data
to be passed securely between payments network participants. Based on the EMV® Secure Remote Commerce
industry standard, Click to Pay brings a standardized and streamlined approach to online checkout and
meets the needs of consumers shopping across a growing number of connected devices. The goal of Click
to Pay is to make digital payments safe, consistent, and interoperable like the checkout experience
in physical stores.
 Cryptocurrency 
We enable cryptocurrencies for everyday payments through our global presence, partnership approach
and trusted brand. We want to serve as the bridge between the crypto ecosystem and our global
network, which would enable our clients to provide consumers the ability to easily convert
cryptocurrencies into fiat and access our global network of more than 80 million merchant locations
and 15,100 financial institutions. In fiscal year 2021, we had $3.5 billion in payments volume on
crypto-linked card programs, which are crypto wallets linked to Visa credentials
 8 
Table of Contents
where cryptocurrencies are converted to fiat currency before funds can be accessed through the Visa
credential. We are advancing this effort through our partnerships with nearly 60 crypto platforms on
crypto-linked Visa card programs. We are also building infrastructure capabilities and value added
services to support crypto use cases, including future settlement in digital currencies, a new Visa
Crypto API platform to help financial institutions create a cryptocurrency offering, assisting
central banks as they evaluate digital currencies and a growing number of other services and
infrastructure capabilities.
 New Flows 
New flows represent a $185 trillion (3) volume opportunity. Visa’s network of networks approach
creates opportunities to capture new sources of money movement through card and non-card flows for
consumers, businesses and governments around the world by facilitating P2P, B2C, B2B, B2b and G2C
payments.
 Visa Direct 
Visa Direct is Visa’s global, real-time (4) push payments platform, which reverses the traditional
card payment flow by allowing payment originators, through their acquirer, to push funds directly to
eligible debit and prepaid cards or accounts. It helps facilitate fast, simple and secure money
movement around the world, enabling businesses and consumers to send money directly to a bank account
or card, including domestic or cross-border payouts and payments, P2P, payments to small businesses,
and corporate, worker, insurance and government payouts.
In fiscal year 2021, we had 5.2 billion Visa Direct transactions, an increase of 50 percent year over
year, and more than 20 use cases and 500 programs. Visa Direct connected 16 card-based networks, 66
automated clearing house (ACH) schemes, seven real time payment (RTP) networks and five gateways.
With the addition of Visa Direct Payouts, Visa Direct provides access to almost 6 billion credentials
across more than 200 countries and territories.
 Visa Business Solutions 
We are also extending our network with B2B payments. Our three strategic areas of focus include
investing and growing card-based payments, accelerating our efforts in non-card, cross-border
payments and digitizing domestic accounts payable and accounts receivable processes. We offer a
portfolio of business payment solutions, including small business, corporate (travel) cards,
purchasing cards, virtual cards and digital credentials, non-card cross-border B2B payment options
and disbursement accounts, covering most major industry segments around the world. Business solutions
are designed to bring efficiency, controls and automation to small businesses, commercial and
government payment processes, ranging from employee travel to fully integrated, invoice-based
payables.
Visa B2B Connect is a multilateral B2B cross-border payments network designed to facilitate
transactions from the bank of origin directly to the beneficiary bank, helping streamline settlement
and optimize payments for financial institutions’ corporate client base. The network delivers B2B
cross-border payments that are predictable, flexible, data-rich, secure and cost-effective. Visa B2B
Connect continues to scale, with the ability to operate in more than 100 countries and territories.
(3) McKinsey Global Payments Map and Visa Analysis, 2018.
(4) Actual fund availability varies by receiving financial institution, receiving account type,
region and whether the transaction is domestic or cross-border.
 9 
Table of Contents
 Value Added Services 
Value added services represent an opportunity for us to diversify our revenue with products and
solutions that differentiate our network, deepen our client relationships and deliver innovative
solutions across other networks.
 Issuer Solutions 
Visa Debit Processing Service (DPS) is one of the largest issuer processors of Visa debit
transactions in the world and is able to deliver agility at scale. Visa DPS provides a wide range of
debit, prepaid and credit value added services to clients including call center services, data
analytics, campaign management, fraud and risk solutions, and a white-label branded mobile app. Visa
DPS continues to extend and expand our capabilities in modern, API-based issuer processing solutions
called DPS Forward, which will be used for both the U.S. and international markets. We have expanded
Visa DPS into Europe, providing European issuers in select countries access to a comprehensive and
end-to-end solution, from core processing services to value added services.
We also provide a range of other services and digital solutions to issuers, such as account controls,
digital issuance, branded consumer experiences and buy now pay later (BNPL) capabilities. BNPL or
installment payments allow shoppers the flexibility to pay for a purchase in equal payments over a
defined period of time. Visa is investing in installments as a payments strategy — by offering our
own solution, Visa Installments — and by partnering with innovative installments providers who use
our cards and services to support a wider variety of installment options. Visa Installments offers
issuing banks the opportunity to offer Visa cardholders the option to divide their total purchase
amount into smaller payments during or after checkout, at the store and online at participating
merchants.
 Acceptance Solutions 
Cybersource is a global payment management platform that provides modular, digital capabilities in
addition to the traditional gateway function of connecting merchants to payment processing. Using
Cybersource, merchants of all sizes can improve the way their consumers engage and transact, mitigate
fraud and security risk, lower operational costs and adapt to changing business requirements.
Cybersource white-labeled capabilities provide new and enhanced payment integrations with ecommerce
platforms, enabling sellers and acquirers to provide tailored commerce experiences with payments
seamlessly embedded. Cybersource enables an omnichannel solution with a cloud-based architecture to
deliver more innovation at the point-of-sale.
In addition, we provide secure, reliable services for merchants and acquirers that reduce friction
and drive acceptance. Examples include Global Urban Mobility, which allows transit operators to
accept Visa contactless payments in addition to proprietary closed-loop payment solutions; Rapid
Seller Onboarding, which enables digital onboarding of small businesses and acquirers; and Visa
Account Updater, which provides updated account information to merchants to strengthen customer
relationships and retention. Visa also offers dispute management services, including a network
agnostic solution with Verifi that enables merchants to prevent and resolve disputes with a single
connection.
 Risk and Identity Solutions 
Visa’s risk and identity solutions transform data into insights for near real-time decisions and
facilitate account holder authentication to help clients prevent fraud and protect account holder
data. With the increasing popularity of omnichannel commerce among consumers, preventing fraud helps
increase trust in digital payments. Solutions such as Visa Advanced Authorization, Visa Secure, Visa
Advanced Identity Score, Visa Consumer Authentication Service, and payment-decisioning solutions from
CardinalCommerce empower financial institutions and merchants with tools that help automate and
simplify fraud prevention and enhance payment security.
These value added payment security tools layer on top of a suite of programs that protect the safety
and integrity of the payment ecosystem, and along with our investments in intelligence and
technology, help to prevent, detect and mitigate threats. These programs and Visa’s fraud prevention
expertise are among the core benefits of being part of the Visa network. Through the combined efforts
of security and identity tools and services, payment and cyber intelligence, insights and learnings
from client/partner breach investigations and law enforcement
 10 
Table of Contents
engagement, Visa helps protect financial institutions and merchants from fraud and solve payment
security challenges.
 Advisory Services 
Visa Consulting and Analytics is the payments consulting advisory arm of Visa. The combination of our
deep payments expertise, proprietary analytical models applied to a breadth of data and our economic
intelligence allows us to identify actionable insights, make recommendations and help implement
solutions that can drive better business decisions and measurable outcomes for clients. Visa
Consulting and Analytics offers consulting services for issuers, acquirers, merchants, fintechs and
other partners, spanning the entire customer journey from acquisition to retention.
We are fortifying the key foundations of our business model, which consist of becoming a network of
networks, our technology platforms, security, brand and talent.
 Network of Networks 
Visa strives to become a network of networks, offering a single connection point for senders and
receivers to enable money movement to all endpoints and to all form factors, using all available
networks.
 Technology Platforms 
Visa’s technology platforms include software, hardware, data centers and a large telecommunications
infrastructure, each with a distinct architecture and operational footprint wrapped with several
layers of security and protection technologies. Visa’s three data centers are a critical part of our
global processing environment and have a high redundancy of network connectivity, power and cooling
designed to provide continuous availability of systems. Together, these systems deliver the secure,
convenient and reliable service that our clients and consumers expect from the Visa brand.
 Security 
Our in-depth, multi-layer security approach includes a formal program to devalue sensitive and/or
personal data through various cryptographic means; embedded security in the software development
lifecycle; identity and access management controls to protect against unauthorized access; and
advanced cyber detection and response capabilities. We deploy security tools that help keep our
clients and consumers safe, while providing buyer and seller solutions that help make Visa the best
way to pay and be paid. We also invest significantly in our comprehensive approach to cybersecurity.
We deploy security technologies to strengthen data confidentiality, integrity and service
availability, emphasizing core cybersecurity capabilities to minimize risk.
 Brand 
Visa’s brand strength helps deliver added value to our clients and their customers, financial
institutions, merchants and partners through compelling brand expressions, a wide range of products
and services as well as innovative brand and marketing efforts. In line with our commitment to an
expansive and diverse range of partnerships for the benefit of our stakeholders, Visa is the only
brand in the world that is a top sponsor of FIFA, the Olympic Games, and the NFL and is one of the
most active sponsors of women’s football around the world.
This year, we launched a multi-year brand initiative to spotlight the diverse capabilities of our
network and our commitment to enabling global economic inclusion. The “Meet Visa” campaign
reintroduced Visa as a network working for everyone.
 11 
Table of Contents
 Talent 
Attracting, developing and retaining the best talent globally is critical to our continued success.
Our workforce grew from approximately 20,500 in fiscal year 2020 to approximately 21,500 employees in
fiscal year 2021. Visa employees are located in more than 80 countries, with more than 49 percent
located outside the U.S. Voluntary workforce turnover (rolling 12-month attrition) was 9.3 percent as
of September 30, 2021. At the end of fiscal year 2021, Visa’s global workforce was 58 percent male
and 42 percent female, and women represented 35 percent of Visa’s leadership (defined as vice
president level and above). In the U.S., ethnicity of our workforce was 41 percent Asian, 7 percent
Black, 12 percent Hispanic, 3 percent Other and 37 percent White. For our U.S. leadership, the
breakdown was 20 percent Asian, 6 percent Black, 12 percent Hispanic, 2 percent Other and 59 percent
White.
At Visa, we have an unwavering commitment to inclusion and diversity, and we foster an inclusive
workplace to encourage diversity of thought, culture and background. In 2020, we established “Stand
Together” goals in support of social justice and racial equality in the U.S. focused on our people,
our community and our company. We are proud of the progress we made in fiscal year 2021, including
the launch of the Visa Black Scholars and Jobs Program in the U.S. with the inaugural class of 50
Visa Black Scholars who will participate in year-round programs and training aimed at developing
their professional and technical skills. Upon graduation, all Scholars who have met their commitments
will be offered a full-time job with Visa.
We have also increased the number of underrepresented employees in the U.S. We are supporting Visa’s
commitment to recruit and retain diverse talent by launching employee development programs and
partnering with several non-profit and community organizations, as well as historically black
colleges and a generally more diverse set of universities to develop our talent pipeline. Visa is
committed to pay equity, regardless of gender or race/ethnicity, and conducts pay equity analyses on
an annual basis. More details regarding our human capital management, as well as enhanced workforce
disclosures that include our 2020 Consolidated EEO-1 Report and our 2020 Environmental, Social and
Governance (ESG) Report can be found on our website at usa.visa.com/about-visa/esg.html .
For additional information, please see the section titled “Talent and Human Capital Management” in
Visa’s 2021 Proxy Statement.
 FINTECH AND DIGITAL PARTNERSHIPS 
Fintechs are key enablers of new payment experiences and new flows. Our work with fintechs has opened
new points of acceptance, extended credit at the point of sale, made cross-border money flows more
efficient, moved B2B spend onto Visa’s network, expedited payroll and provided digital wallet
customers access to our services.
To better serve fintechs, Visa has a suite of streamlined commercial programs and digital onboarding
tools. Our Fintech Fast Track program enables qualifying fintechs to quickly launch and scale their
programs. The program has welcomed hundreds of fintechs who are actively engaged in the program.
With our startup engagement programs, the Visa Everywhere Initiative and the Inclusive Fintech 50,
early-stage companies can build payment solutions based on our capabilities. With Visa Fintech
Partner Connect, a program launched globally this year, we are helping our clients tap into
innovations emerging from the fintech community. The program is designed to help financial
institutions quickly connect with a vetted and curated set of technology providers, helping Visa’s
issuing partners create digital-first experiences without the cost and complexity of building the
back-end technology in-house.
 MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS AND STRATEGIC INVESTMENTS 
Visa continually explores opportunities to augment our capabilities and provide meaningful value to
our clients. Mergers and acquisitions and strategic investments complement our internal development
and enhance our partnerships to align with Visa’s priorities. Visa applies a rigorous business
analysis to our acquisitions and investments to ensure they will differentiate our network, provide
value added services and accelerate growth.
In fiscal year 2021, we acquired YellowPepper to accelerate our network of networks strategy in Latin
America and the Caribbean by becoming a single point of access for initiating multiple transaction
types and significantly reducing the time-to-market and cost for issuers and processors to launch
card and account agnostic payments solutions.
 12 
Table of Contents
On June 24, 2021, we signed a definitive agreement to acquire Tink AB (Tink), a European open banking
platform that enables financial institutions, fintechs and merchants to build tailored financial
management tools, products and services for European consumers and businesses based on their
financial data.
On July 22, 2021, we signed a definitive agreement to acquire The Currency Cloud Group Limited
(Currencycloud), a UK-based global platform that enables banks and fintechs to provide innovative
foreign exchange solutions for cross-border payments. The Tink and Currencycloud transactions are
subject to regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions.
 Environmental, Social and Governance 
As a trusted brand, Visa has an opportunity and responsibility to contribute to a more inclusive,
equitable and sustainable world. We believe that economies that include everyone everywhere, uplift
everyone everywhere. As we build business resilience and long-term value, we are committed to
managing the risks and opportunities that arise from ESG issues. We are focused on empowering people
and economies; securing commerce and protecting customers; investing in our workforce; protecting the
planet; and operating responsibly. Our 2020 ESG report, which provides enhanced ESG disclosures is
available on our website at usa.visa.com/about-visa/esg.html .
 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
We own and manage the Visa brand, which stands for acceptance, security, convenience, speed and
reliability. Our portfolio of Visa-owned trademarks is important to our business. Generally,
trademark registrations are valid indefinitely as long as they are in use and/or maintained. We give
our clients access to these assets through agreements with our issuers and acquirers, which authorize
the use of our trademarks in connection with their participation in our payments network.
Additionally, we have filed patent applications in the U.S. and international jurisdictions covering
certain aspects of our proprietary technology and new innovations, and own a number of patents,
patent applications and other intellectual property relating to our business. We rely on a
combination of patent, trademark, copyright and trade secret laws in the U.S. and other
jurisdictions, as well as confidentiality procedures and contractual provisions, to protect our
proprietary technology.
 COMPETITION 
The global payments industry continues to undergo dynamic change. Existing and emerging competitors
compete with Visa’s network and payment solutions for consumers and for participation by financial
institutions and merchants. Technology and innovation are shifting consumer habits and driving growth
opportunities in ecommerce, mobile payments, blockchain technology and digital currencies. These
advances are enabling new entrants, many of which depart from traditional network payment models. In
certain countries, the evolving regulatory landscape is creating local networks or enabling
additional processing competition.
We compete against all forms of payment. This includes paper-based payments, primarily cash and
checks, and all forms of electronic payments. Our electronic payment competitors principally include:
Global or Multi-Regional Networks: These networks typically offer a range of branded, general purpose
card payment products that consumers can use at millions of merchant locations around the world.
Examples include Mastercard, American Express, Discover, JCB and UnionPay. These competitors may be
more concentrated in specific geographic regions, such as JCB in Japan and Discover in the U.S., or
have a leading position in certain countries, such as UnionPay in China. See Item 1A—Risk
Factors—Regulatory Risks—Government-imposed obligations and/or restrictions on international payment
systems may prevent us from competing against providers in certain countries, including significant
markets such as China, India and Russia . Based on available data, Visa is one of the largest retail
electronic funds transfer networks used throughout the world.
 13 
Table of Contents
The following chart compares our network with these network competitors for calendar year 2020 (1) :
 Visa Mastercard American Express JCB Diners Club 
 Payments Volume ($B) 8,911 4,743 1,005 308 166 
 Total Volume ($B) 11,383 6,337 1,011 317 178 
 Total Transactions (B) 205 126 9 5 3 
 Cards (M) 3,586 2,334 112 141 65 
(1) Mastercard, American Express, JCB and Diners Club / Discover data sourced from The Nilson Report
issue 1199 (June 2021). Mastercard excludes Maestro and Cirrus figures. American Express, Diners Club
/ Discover, and JCB include business from third-party issuers. JCB figures include other payment-
related products and some figures are estimates.
Local and Regional Networks: Operated in many countries, these networks often have the support of
government influence or mandate. In some cases, they are owned by financial institutions or payment
processors. These networks typically focus on debit payment products, and may have strong local
acceptance, and recognizable brands. Examples include STAR, NYCE, and Pulse in the U.S., Interac in
Canada, EFTPOS in Australia and Mir in Russia.
Alternative Payment Providers: These providers such as digital wallets, closed commerce ecosystems,
BNPL solutions, cryptocurrency platforms, and account-to-account systems often have a primary focus
of enabling payments through ecommerce and mobile channels; however, they are expanding or may expand
their offerings to the physical point of sale. These companies may process payments using in-house
account transfers between parties, electronic funds transfer networks like the ACH, global or local
networks like Visa, or some combination of the foregoing. In some cases, these entities are both a
partner and a competitor to Visa.
ACH and RTP Networks: These networks are often governed by local regulations. Primarily focused on
interbank transfers, many are adding capabilities that may make them more competitive for retail
payments. We also compete with closed-loop payment systems, emerging payments networks, wire
transfers and electronic benefit transfers.
Payment Processors: We compete with payment processors for the processing of Visa transactions. These
processors may benefit from mandates requiring them to handle processing under local regulation. For
example, as a result of regulation in Europe under the Interchange Fee Regulation (IFR), we may face
competition from other networks, processors and other third parties who could process Visa
transactions directly with issuers and acquirers.
Value Added Products and Service Providers: We face competition from companies that provide
alternatives to our value added products and services, including information services and consulting
firms that provide consulting services and insights to financial institutions, merchants and
governments and technology companies that provide cyber and fraud solutions. Regulatory initiatives
could also lead to increased competition in this space.
We believe our fundamental value proposition of security, convenience, speed and reliability as well
as the number of credentials and our acceptance footprint help us to succeed. In addition, we
understand the needs of the individual markets in which we operate and partner with local financial
institutions, merchants, fintechs, governments, NGOs and business organizations to provide tailored
and innovative solutions. Our network of networks strategy implies that we have and we will continue
to utilize other networks to facilitate the movement of money. We believe Visa is well-positioned
competitively due to our global brand, our broad set of payment products and value added services,
and our proven track record of processing payment transactions securely and reliably.
 GOVERNMENT REGULATION 
As a global payments technology company, we are subject to complex and evolving global regulations in
the various jurisdictions in which our products and services are used. The most significant
government regulations that impact our business are discussed below. For further discussion of how
global regulations may impact our business, see Item 1A-Risk Factors-Regulatory Risks .
Anti-Corruption, Anti-Money Laundering, Anti-Terrorism and Sanctions: We are subject to anti-
corruption laws and regulations, including the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA), the UK
Bribery Act and other laws that generally prohibit the making or offering of improper payments to
foreign government officials and political figures for the purpose of obtaining or retaining business
or to gain an unfair business advantage. We are also
 14 
Table of Contents
subject to anti-money laundering and anti-terrorist financing laws and regulations, including the
U.S. Bank Secrecy Act. In addition, we are subject to economic and trade sanctions programs
administered by the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) in the U.S. Therefore, we do not permit
financial institutions or other entities that are domiciled in countries or territories subject to
comprehensive OFAC trade sanctions (currently, Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Syria and Crimea), or that
are included on OFAC’s list of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons, to issue or
acquire Visa cards or engage in transactions using our services.
Government-Imposed Market Participation Restrictions: Certain governments, including China, India,
Indonesia, Russia, Thailand and Vietnam, have taken actions to promote domestic payments systems
and/or certain issuers, payments networks or processors, by imposing regulations that favor domestic
providers, impose local ownership requirements on processors, require data localization or mandate
that domestic processing be done in that country.
Interchange Rates and Fees: An increasing number of jurisdictions around the world regulate or
influence debit and credit interchange reimbursement rates in their regions. For example, the U.S.
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Act (Dodd-Frank Act) limits interchange reimbursement
rates for certain debit card transactions in the U.S., the European Union (EU) IFR limits interchange
rates in Europe (as discussed below), and the Reserve Bank of Australia and the Central Bank of
Brazil regulate average permissible levels of interchange.
Internet Transactions: Many jurisdictions have adopted regulations that require payment system
participants to monitor, identify, filter, restrict or take other actions with regard to certain
types of payment transactions on the Internet, such as gambling, digital currencies, the purchase of
cigarettes or alcohol and other controversial transaction types.
Network Exclusivity and Routing: In the U.S., the Dodd-Frank Act limits network exclusivity and
restrictions on merchant routing choice for the debit and prepaid market segments. Other
jurisdictions impose similar limitations, such as the IFR’s prohibition in Europe on restrictions
that prevent multiple payment brands or functionality on the same card.
No-surcharge Rules: We have historically enforced rules that prohibit merchants from charging higher
prices to consumers who pay using Visa products instead of other means. However, merchants’ ability
to surcharge varies by geographic market as well as Visa product type, and continues to be impacted
by litigation, regulation and legislation.
Privacy and Data Protection: Aspects of our operations or business are subject to privacy, data use
and data security regulations, which impact the way we use and handle data, operate our products and
services and even impact our ability to offer a product or service. In addition, regulators are
proposing new laws or regulations that could require Visa to adopt certain cybersecurity and data-
handling practices, create new individual privacy rights and impose increased obligations on
companies handling personal data.
Supervisory Oversight of the Payments Industry: Visa is subject to financial sector oversight and
regulation in substantially all of the jurisdictions in which we operate. In the U.S., for example,
the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) has supervisory oversight over Visa
under applicable federal banking laws and policies as a technology service provider to U.S. financial
institutions. The federal banking agencies comprising the FFIEC are the Federal Reserve Board, the
Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the National Credit Union
Administration. Visa also may be separately examined by the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection
as a service provider to the banks that issue Visa-branded consumer credit and debit card products.
Central banks in other countries/regions, including Europe, India, Russia, Ukraine and the United
Kingdom (as discussed below), have recognized or designated Visa as a retail payment system under
various types of financial stability regulations. Visa is also subject to oversight by banking and
financial sector authorities in other jurisdictions, such as Brazil and Hong Kong.
European and United Kingdom Regulations and Supervisory Oversight: Visa in Europe continues to be
subject to complex and evolving regulation in the United Kingdom and the European Economic Area
(EEA). Specifically, in the United Kingdom, Visa Europe is designated as a Recognized Payment System,
bringing it within the scope of the Bank of England’s supervisory powers and subject to various
requirements, including on issues such as governance and risk management designed to maintain the
stability of the United Kingdom’s financial system. Visa Europe is also regulated by the United
Kingdom’s Payment Systems Regulator (PSR), which has wide-ranging powers and authority to review our
business practices, systems, rules and fees with respect to promoting competition and innovation in
the United Kingdom, and ensuring payments meet account holder needs.
 15 
Table of Contents
Furthermore, there are a number of EU regulations that impact our business. As discussed above, the
IFR regulates interchange rates within Europe, requires Visa Europe to separate its payment card
scheme activities from processing activities for accounting, organization, and decision-making
purposes within the EU and imposes limitations on network exclusivity and routing. National competent
authorities in the EU are responsible for monitoring and enforcing the IFR in their markets. We are
also subject to regulations governing privacy and data protection, anti-bribery, anti-money
laundering, anti-terrorism and sanctions. Other regulations in Europe, such as the second Payment
Services Directive (PSD2), require, among other things, that our financial institution clients
provide certain customer account access rights to emerging non-financial institution players. PSD2
also includes strong customer authentication requirements for certain transactions that could impose
both operational complexity on Visa and negatively impact consumer payment experiences.
Post-Brexit, the United Kingdom has adopted various European regulations, including regulations that
impact the payments ecosystem such as the IFR and PSD2. The PSR is responsible for monitoring Visa
Europe’s compliance with the IFR as adopted in the United Kingdom.
ESG and Sustainability: Certain governments around the world are adopting laws and regulations
pertaining to ESG performance, transparency and reporting. Regulations may include mandated corporate
reporting on ESG overall (e.g., EU Sustainable Reporting Directive) or in individual areas such as
mandated reporting on climate-related financial disclosures.
Additional Regulatory Developments: Various regulatory agencies across the world also continue to
examine a wide variety of other issues, including mobile payment transactions, tokenization, access
rights for non-financial institutions, money transfer services, identity theft, account management
guidelines, disclosure rules, security and marketing that could affect our financial institution
clients and our business. Furthermore, following the passage of PSD2 in Europe, several countries,
including Australia, Brazil, Canada, Hong Kong and Mexico, are contemplating granting or have already
granted various types of access rights to third party processors, including access to consumer
account data maintained by our financial institution clients. These changes could have negative
implications for our business depending on how the regulations are framed and implemented.
 AVAILABLE INFORMATION 
Our corporate website is usa.visa.com/about-visa.html . Our annual reports on Form 10-K, our
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, our current reports on Form 8-K, proxy statements and any amendments
to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended,
can be viewed at www.sec.gov and our investor relations website at investor.visa.com as soon as
reasonably practicable after these materials are electronically filed with or furnished to the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). In addition, we routinely post financial and other
information, which could be deemed to be material to investors, on our investor relations website.
Information regarding our ESG, corporate responsibility and sustainability initiatives is also
available on our website at usa.visa.com/about-visa/esg.html. The content of any of our websites
referred to in this report is not incorporated by reference into this report or any other filings
with the SEC.
 16 
Table of Contents
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1A. Risk Factors │
 Regulatory Risks 
We are subject to complex and evolving global regulations that could harm our business and financial
results.
As a global payments technology company, we are subject to complex and evolving regulations that
govern our operations. See Item 1 — Business — Government Regulation for more information on the most
significant areas of regulation that affect our business. The impact of these regulations on us, our
clients, and other third parties could limit our ability to enforce our payments system rules;
require us to adopt new rules or change existing rules; affect our existing contractual arrangements;
increase our compliance costs; require us to make our technology or intellectual property available
to third parties, including competitors, in an undesirable manner; and reduce our revenue
opportunities. As discussed in more detail below, we may face differing rules and regulations in
matters like interchange reimbursement rates, preferred routing, domestic processing requirements,
currency conversion, point-of-sale transaction rules and practices, privacy, data use or protection,
licensing requirements, and associated product technology. As a result, the Visa operating rules and
our other contractual commitments may differ from country to country or by product offering.
Complying with these and other regulations increases our costs and could reduce our revenue
opportunities. Our diversification into new product offerings and participation in new flows could
also introduce new licensing and other regulatory obligations that impact our business.
If widely varying regulations come into existence worldwide, we may have difficulty rapidly adjusting
our product offerings, services, fees and other important aspects of our business in the regions
where we operate. Our compliance programs and policies are designed to support our compliance with a
wide array of regulations and laws, such as anti-money laundering, anti-corruption, competition,
money transfer services, privacy and sanctions, and we continually enhance our compliance programs as
regulations evolve. However, we cannot guarantee that our practices will be deemed compliant by all
applicable regulatory authorities. In the event our controls should fail or we are found to be out of
compliance for other reasons, we could be subject to monetary damages, civil and criminal penalties,
litigation, investigations and proceedings, and damage to our global brands and reputation.
Furthermore, the evolving and increased regulatory focus on the payments industry could negatively
impact or reduce the number of Visa products our clients issue, the volume of payments we process,
our revenues, our brands, our competitive positioning, our ability to use our intellectual property
to differentiate our products and services, the quality and types of products and services we offer,
the countries in which our products are used, and the types of consumers and merchants who can obtain
or accept our products, all of which could harm our business.
Increased scrutiny and regulation of the global payments industry, including with respect to
interchange reimbursement fees, merchant discount rates, operating rules, risk management protocols
and other related practices, could harm our business.
Regulators around the world have been establishing or increasing their authority to regulate certain
aspects of the payments industry. See Item 1 — Business —Government Regulation for more information .
In the U.S. and many other jurisdictions, we have historically set default interchange reimbursement
fees. Even though we generally do not receive any revenue related to interchange reimbursement fees
in a payment transaction (in the context of credit and debit transactions, those fees are paid by the
acquirers to the issuers; the reverse is true for certain transactions like ATM), interchange
reimbursement fees are a factor on which we compete with other payments providers and are therefore
an important determinant of the volume of transactions we process. Consequently, changes to these
fees, whether voluntarily or by mandate, can substantially affect our overall payments volumes and
revenues.
Interchange reimbursement fees, certain operating rules and related practices continue to be subject
to increased government regulation globally, and regulatory authorities and central banks in a number
of jurisdictions have reviewed or are reviewing these fees, rules, and practices. For example,
regulations adopted by the U.S. Federal Reserve cap the maximum U.S. debit interchange reimbursement
rate received by large financial institutions at 21 cents plus 5 basis points per transaction, plus a
possible fraud adjustment of 1 cent. The Dodd-Frank Act also limits issuers’ and our ability to adopt
network exclusivity and preferred routing in the debit and prepaid area, which also impacts our
business. Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve issued a notice of proposed rulemaking that would,
among other things, require issuers to ensure that at least two networks are available for routing
card not present debit transactions. Various stakeholder groups are also advocating that the Federal
Reserve further lower interchange fees on debit transactions and restrict the ability of payments
networks to enter
 17 
Table of Contents
into certain incentive and growth agreements with issuers. In addition, there continues to be
interest in further regulation of interchange fees and routing practices by members of Congress and
state legislators in the U.S. The EU’s IFR places an effective cap on consumer credit and consumer
debit interchange fees for both domestic and cross-border transactions within the EEA (30 basis
points and 20 basis points, respectively). EU member states have the ability to further reduce these
interchange levels within their territories. The European Commission concluded its impact assessment
of the IFR, indicating that while it does not intend to expand the legislation at this time, it will
continue to monitor market dynamics. Countries in other parts of the world, including the Latin
America region, have either adopted or are exploring interchange caps. For example, in March 2017,
Argentina’s central bank passed regulations that cap interchange fees on credit and debit
transactions. In March 2018, Brazil adopted interchange caps on debit transactions and in March 2020,
the Congress in Costa Rica passed legislation allowing the Central Bank to regulate interchange and
other fees. This trend to regulate pricing continued in Latin America in 2021, when the President in
Chile signed legislation to create a committee to set interchange caps. Finally, in Australia, the
Reserve Bank completed its review of the country’s payment system regulations and made a series of
preliminary recommendations including, to further lower interchange rates for debit transactions, and
set expectations for issuers and acquirers in the country to support greater issuance and acceptance
of dual-badged debit cards and allow merchant choice routing on certain transactions.
When we cannot set default interchange reimbursement rates at optimal levels, issuers and acquirers
may find our payments system less attractive. This may increase the attractiveness of other payments
systems, such as our competitors’ closed-loop payments systems with direct connections to both
merchants and consumers. We believe some issuers may react to such regulations by charging new or
higher fees, or reducing certain benefits to consumers, which make our products less appealing to
consumers. Some acquirers may elect to charge higher MDR regardless of the Visa interchange
reimbursement rate, causing merchants not to accept our products or to steer customers to alternative
payments systems or forms of payment. In addition, in an effort to reduce the expense of their
payment programs, some issuers and acquirers have obtained, and may continue to obtain, incentives
from us, including reductions in the fees that we charge, which may directly impact our revenues.
In addition to the regulation of interchange reimbursement fees, a number of regulators impose
restrictions on other aspects of our payments business. For example, many governments including, but
not limited to governments in India and Turkey are using regulation to further drive down MDR, which
could negatively affect the economics of our transactions. Some countries in Latin America, like Peru
and Chile are relying on antitrust-driven regulatory actions that can have implications for how the
payments ecosystem and four party model operate. The PSR’s review of the acquiring market in the
United Kingdom could lead to additional regulatory pressure on our business. With increased merchant
lobbying, we could also begin to see regulatory interest in network fees. Government regulations or
pressure may also require us to allow other payments networks to support Visa products or services,
or to have the other network’s functionality or brand marks on our products. As innovations in
payment technology have enabled us to expand into new products and services, they have also expanded
the potential scope of regulatory influence. For instance, new products and capabilities, including
tokenization, push payments, and non-card based payment flows (e.g., Visa B2B Connect) could bring
increased licensing or authorization requirements in the countries where the product or capability is
offered. In addition, the EU’s requirement to separate scheme and processing adds costs and impacts
the execution of our commercial, innovation and product strategies.
We are also subject to central bank oversight in a growing number of countries, including, Brazil,
India, Russia, the United Kingdom and within the EU. Furthermore, some countries with existing
oversight frameworks are looking to further enhance their regulatory powers. This oversight could
result in new governance, reporting, licensing, cybersecurity, processing infrastructure, capital, or
credit risk management requirements. We could also be required to adopt policies and practices
designed to mitigate settlement and liquidity risks, including increased requirements to maintain
sufficient levels of capital and financial resources locally, as well as localized risk management or
governance. Increased oversight could also include new criteria for member participation and merchant
access to our payments system. Additionally, regulators in other jurisdictions are considering or
adopting approaches based on similar regulatory principles.
Regulators around the world increasingly take note of each other’s approaches to regulating the
payments industry. Consequently, a development in one jurisdiction may influence regulatory
approaches in another. The risks created by a new law, regulation or regulatory outcome in one
jurisdiction have the potential to be replicated and to negatively affect our business in another
jurisdiction or in other product offerings. For example, our settlement with the European Commission
on cross-border interchange rates has drawn some preliminary attention of regulators in other parts
of the world. Similarly, new regulations involving one product offering may prompt regulators to
extend the regulations to other product offerings. For example, credit payments could become subject
to similar regulation
 18 
Table of Contents
as debit payments (or vice versa). For instance, the Reserve Bank of Australia initially capped
credit interchange, but subsequently capped debit interchange as well.
Government-imposed obligations and/or restrictions on international payment systems may prevent us
from competing against providers in certain countries, including significant markets such as China,
India and Russia.
Governments in a number of jurisdictions shield domestic payment card networks, brands, and
processors from international competition by imposing market access barriers and preferential
domestic regulations. To varying degrees, these policies and regulations affect the terms of
competition in the marketplace and undermine the competitiveness of international payments networks.
Public authorities may impose regulatory requirements that favor domestic providers or mandate that
domestic payments or data processing be performed entirely within that country, which could prevent
us from managing the end-to-end processing of certain transactions.
In Russia, legislation effectively prevents us from processing domestic transactions. The central
bank controlled national payment card system (NSPK) is the only entity allowed to process
domestically. In China, UnionPay remains the sole processor of domestic payment card transactions and
operates the sole domestic acceptance mark. Although we have filed an application with the People’s
Bank of China (PBOC) to operate a Bank Card Clearing Institution (BCCI) in China, the timing and the
procedural steps for approval remain uncertain. The approval process might require several years, and
there is no guarantee that the license to operate a BCCI will be approved or, if we obtain such
license, that we will be able to successfully compete with domestic payments networks.
Regulatory initiatives in India also suggest growing nationalistic priorities, including a data
localization mandate passed by the government, which has cost implications for us and could affect
our ability to effectively compete with domestic payment providers. Furthermore, any inability to
meet the requirements of the data localization mandate could impact our ability to do business in
India. In Europe, with the support of the European Central Bank, a group of European banks have
announced their intent to launch a pan-European payment system, the European Payments Initiative or
EPI, with the purported intent to reduce the risks of disintermediation by international technology
companies and continued reliance on international payments networks for intra-Europe card
transactions. Furthermore, regional groups of countries, such as the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
and a number of countries in Southeast Asia, are considering, or may consider, efforts to restrict
our participation in the processing of regional transactions. The African Development Bank has also
indicated an interest in supporting national payment systems in its efforts to expand financial
inclusion and strengthen regional financial stability. Finally, some countries such as South Africa
are mandating on-shore processing of domestic transactions. Geopolitical events, including sanctions,
trade tensions or other types of activities could potentially intensify any or all of these
activities, which could adversely affect our business.
Due to our inability to manage the end-to-end processing of transactions for cards in certain
countries (e.g., Russia and Thailand), we depend on our close working relationships with our clients
or third-party processors to ensure transactions involving our products are processed effectively.
Our ability to do so may be adversely affected by regulatory requirements and policies pertaining to
transaction routing or on-shore processing.
Co-badging and co-residency regulations may pose additional challenges in markets where Visa competes
with national networks for issuance and routing. For example, in China, certain banks have issued
dual-branded cards for which domestic transactions in China are processed by UnionPay and
transactions outside of China are processed by us or other international payments networks. The PBOC
is contemplating that dual-branded cards could be phased out over time as new licenses are issued to
international companies to participate in China’s domestic payments market. Accordingly, we have been
working with Chinese issuers to issue Visa-only branded cards for international travel, and later for
domestic transactions after we obtain a BCCI license. However, notwithstanding such efforts, the
phase out of dual-branded cards may decrease our payment volumes and impact the revenue we generate
in China. Furthermore, as discussed above, Australia is contemplating additional requirements to
mandate dual-badged or co-badged cards that support the local domestic debit network, Eftpos.
Mir and UnionPay have grown rapidly in Russia and China, respectively, and are actively pursuing
international expansion plans, which could potentially lead to regulatory pressures on our
international routing rule (which requires that international transactions on Visa cards be routed
over VisaNet). Furthermore, although regulatory barriers shield Mir and UnionPay from competition in
Russia and China, respectively, alternative payment providers such as Alipay and WeChat Pay have
rapidly expanded into ecommerce, offline, and cross-border payments, which could make it difficult
for us to compete even if our license is approved in China. NetsUnion Clearing Corp, a
 19 
Table of Contents
Chinese digital transaction routing system, and other such systems could have a competitive advantage
in comparison with international payments networks .
Finally, central banks in a number of countries, including those in Argentina, Australia, Brazil,
Canada and Russia, are in the process of developing or expanding national real-time payments networks
with the goal of driving a greater number of domestic transactions onto these systems. Similarly, an
increasing number of jurisdictions are exploring the concept of building central bank digital
currencies for retail payments. If successfully deployed, these national payment platforms and
digital currencies could have significant implications for Visa’s domestic and cross-border payments,
including potential disintermediation.
In general, national laws that protect or otherwise support domestic providers or processing may
increase our costs; decrease our payments volumes and impact the revenue we generate in those
countries; decrease the number of Visa products issued or processed; impede us from utilizing our
global processing capabilities and controlling the quality of the services supporting our brands;
restrict our activities; limit our growth and the ability to introduce new products, services and
innovations; force us to leave countries or prevent us from entering new markets; and create new
competitors, all of which could harm our business.
Laws and regulations regarding the handling of personal data and information may impede our services
or result in increased costs, legal claims, or fines against us .
Our business relies on the processing of data in many jurisdictions and the movement of data across
national borders. Legal requirements relating to the collection, storage, handling, use, disclosure,
transfer, and security of personal data continue to evolve, and regulatory scrutiny in this area is
increasing around the world. For example, in July 2020 the Court of Justice of the European Union
(CJEU) ruled to invalidate the U.S./EU Privacy Shield — a legal framework that allowed participating
companies to transfer personal data from EU member states to the U.S. Visa has never used the Privacy
Shield framework for its transfers, and relies instead on standard contractual clauses. However, the
CJEU ruling made clear that these transfer mechanisms will be subject to additional scrutiny as well.
Significant uncertainty exists as privacy and data protection laws may be interpreted and applied
differently from country to country and may create inconsistent or conflicting requirements. For
example, the EU’s and UK’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) extends the scope of the EU and
UK data protection law to all companies processing data of EU and UK residents, regardless of the
company’s location. The law requires companies to comply with a broad range of requirements regarding
the handling of personal information. Although we have a global data privacy program that addresses
the requirements applicable to our international business, our ongoing efforts to comply with GDPR
and rapidly emerging privacy and data protection laws in countries such as India or states in the
U.S. such as Colorado and Virginia may increase the complexity of our compliance operations, entail
substantial expenses, divert resources from other initiatives and projects, and could limit the
services we are able to offer.
Furthermore, inconsistent local and regional regulations restricting location, movement, collection,
use and management of data may limit our ability to innovate or compete in certain jurisdictions. For
example, China adopted its first comprehensive privacy law, the Personal Information Protection Law
(PIPL), which took effect in November 2021. Although certain details of PIPL may require further
regulatory clarification or guidance, Visa could be impacted more significantly if our license is
approved and we begin conducting domestic bank card clearing activity in China. Lastly, enforcement
actions and investigations by regulatory authorities related to data security incidents and privacy
violations continue to increase. The enactment of more restrictive laws, rules, regulations, or
future enforcement actions or investigations could impact us through increased costs or restrictions
on our business, and noncompliance could result in regulatory penalties and significant legal
liability.
We may be subject to tax examinations or disputes, or changes in tax laws.
We exercise significant judgment and make estimates in calculating our worldwide provision for income
taxes and other tax liabilities. Although we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, many factors
may limit their accuracy. We are currently under examination by, or in disputes with, the U.S.
Internal Revenue Service, the UK’s HM Revenue and Customs as well as tax authorities in other
jurisdictions, and we may be subject to additional examinations or disputes in the future. Relevant
tax authorities may disagree with our tax treatment of certain material items and thereby increase
our tax liability. Failure to sustain our position in these matters could harm our cash flow and
financial position. In addition, changes in existing laws in the U.S. or foreign jurisdictions,
including unilateral actions of foreign jurisdictions to introduce digital services taxes, or changes
resulting from the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development’s Programme of Work, related
to the revision of profit allocation and nexus rules and design of a system to ensure multinational
enterprises pay a minimum level of tax to
 20 
Table of Contents
the countries where we earn revenue, may also materially affect our effective tax rate. A substantial
increase in our tax payments could have a material, adverse effect on our financial results. See also
Note 19—Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8—Financial Statements
and Supplementary Data of this report.
 Litigation Risks 
We may be adversely affected by the outcome of litigation or investigations, despite certain
protections that are in place.
We are involved in numerous litigation matters, investigations, and proceedings asserted by civil
litigants, governments, and enforcement bodies investigating or alleging, among other things,
violations of competition and antitrust law, consumer protection law, privacy law and intellectual
property law (these are referred to as “actions” in this section). Details of the most significant
actions we face are described more fully in Note 20—Legal Matters to our consolidated financial
statements included in Item 8—Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report. These
actions are inherently uncertain, expensive and disruptive to our operations. In the event we are
found liable in any material action, particularly in a large class action lawsuit, such as one
involving an antitrust claim entitling the plaintiff to treble damages in the U.S., or we incur
liability arising from a government investigation, we may be required to pay significant awards,
settlements or fines. In addition, settlement terms, judgments, orders or pressures resulting from
actions may harm our business by influencing or requiring us to modify, among other things, the
default interchange reimbursement rates we set, the Visa operating rules or the way in which we
enforce those rules, our fees or pricing, or the way we do business. These actions or their outcomes
may also influence regulators, investigators, governments or civil litigants in the same or other
jurisdictions, which may lead to additional actions against Visa. Finally, we are required by some of
our commercial agreements to indemnify other entities for litigation brought against them, even if
Visa is not a defendant.
For certain actions like those that are U.S. covered litigation or VE territory covered litigation,
as described in Note 5—U.S. and Europe Retrospective Responsibility Plans and Note 20—Legal Matters
to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8—Financial Statements and Supplementary
Data of this report, we have certain financial protections pursuant to the respective retrospective
responsibility plans. The two retrospective responsibility plans are different in the protections
they provide and the mechanisms by which we are protected. The failure of one or both of the
retrospective responsibility plans to adequately insulate us from the impact of such settlements,
judgments, losses, or liabilities could materially harm our financial condition or cash flows, or
even cause us to become insolvent.
 Business Risks 
 We face intense competition in our industry. 
The global payments space is intensely competitive. As technology evolves, new competitors or methods
of payment emerge, and existing clients and competitors assume different roles. Our products compete
with cash, checks, electronic funds, virtual currency payments, global or multi-regional networks,
other domestic and closed-loop payments systems, and alternative payment providers primarily focused
on enabling payments through ecommerce and mobile channels. As the global payments space becomes more
complex, we face increasing competition from our clients, other emerging payment providers such as
fintechs, other digital payments, technology companies that have developed payments systems enabled
through online activity in ecommerce, social media, and mobile channels, as well as governments in a
number of jurisdictions (e.g. Brazil, India and Russia), that are developing, supporting and/or
operating national schemes, real time payments networks and other payment platforms.
Our competitors may acquire or develop substantially better technology, have more widely adopted
delivery channels or have greater financial resources. They may offer more effective, innovative or a
wider range of programs, products and services. They may use more effective advertising and marketing
strategies that result in broader brand recognition, and greater use, including with respect to
issuance and merchant acceptance. They may also develop better security solutions or more favorable
pricing arrangements. Moreover, even if we successfully adapt to technological change and the
proliferation of alternative types of payment services by developing and offering our own services in
these areas, such services may provide less favorable financial terms for us than we currently
receive from VisaNet transactions, which could hurt our financial results and prospects.
Certain of our competitors operate with different business models, have different cost structures or
participate in different market segments. Those business models may ultimately prove more successful
or more adaptable to
 21 
Table of Contents
regulatory, technological and other developments. In some cases, these competitors have the support
of government mandates that prohibit, limit or otherwise hinder our ability to compete for
transactions within certain countries and regions. Some of our competitors, including American
Express, Discover, private-label card networks, virtual currency providers, technology companies that
enable the exchange of digital assets, and certain alternative payments systems like Alipay and
WeChat Pay, operate closed-loop payments systems, with direct connections to both merchants and
consumers. Government actions or initiatives such as the Dodd-Frank Act, the IFR in Europe, or real
time payment initiatives by governments such as the U.S. Federal Reserve’s FedNow or the Central Bank
of Brazil’s Pix system may provide competitors with increased opportunities to derive competitive
advantages from these business models, and may create new competitors, including in some cases the
government itself. Similarly, regulation in Europe under PSD2 and the IFR may require us to open up
access to, and allow participation in, our network to additional participants, and reduce the
infrastructure investment and regulatory burden on competitors. We also run the risk of
disintermediation due to factors such as emerging technologies and platforms, including mobile
payments, alternative payment credentials, other ledger technologies or payment forms, and by virtue
of increasing bilateral agreements between entities that prefer not to use our payments network for
processing transactions. For example, merchants could process transactions directly with issuers, or
processors could process transactions directly with issuers and acquirers.
We expect the competitive landscape to continue to shift and evolve. For example:
• we, along with our competitors, clients, network participants, and others are developing or
participating in alternative payments systems or products, such as mobile payment services, ecommerce
payment services, P2P payment services, real-time and faster payment initiatives, and payment
services that permit ACH or direct debits from or to consumer checking accounts, that could either
reduce our role or otherwise disintermediate us from the transaction processing or the value added
services we provide to support such processing. Examples include initiatives from The Clearing House,
an association consisting of large financial institutions that has developed its own faster payments
system; Early Warning Services, which operates Zelle, a bank-offered alternative network that
provides another platform for faster funds or real-time payments across a variety of payment types,
including P2P, corporate and government disbursement, bill pay and deposit check transactions; and
cryptocurrency or stablecoin-based payments initiatives.
• similarly, many countries are developing or promoting domestic networks, switches and real-time
payment systems (e.g. India, Russia, as well as Europe). To the extent these governments mandate
local banks and merchants to use and accept these systems for domestic or other transactions,
prohibit international payments networks, like Visa, from participating on those systems, and/or
impose restrictions or prohibitions, on international payments networks from offering payment
services on such transactions, we could face the risk of our business being disintermediated in those
countries. For example, in Argentina, the government has mandated local acquirers to use debit card
credentials to initiate payment transactions on a government-sponsored national real-time payment
system. Furthermore, in some regions (e.g., Southeast Asia; the Middle East), through
intergovernmental organizations such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the GCC, some
countries are looking into cross-border connectivity of such domestic systems;
• parties that process our transactions may try to minimize or eliminate our position in the payments
value chain;
• parties that access our payment credentials, tokens and technologies, including clients, technology
solution providers or others might be able to migrate or steer account holders and other clients to
alternative payment methods or use our payment credentials, tokens and technologies to establish or
help bolster alternate payment methods and platforms;
• participants in the payments industry may merge, form joint ventures or enable or enter into other
business combinations that strengthen their existing business propositions or create new, competing
payment services; and
• new or revised industry standards related to online checkout and web payments, cloud-based
payments, tokenization or other payments-related technologies set by individual countries, regions or
organizations such as the International Organization for Standardization, American National Standards
Institute, World Wide Web Consortium, European Card Standards Group, PCI Co, Nexo and EMVCo may
result in additional costs and expenses for Visa and its clients, or otherwise negatively impact the
functionality and competitiveness of our products and services.
 22 
Table of Contents
As the competitive landscape is quickly evolving, we may not be able to foresee or respond
sufficiently to emerging risks associated with new businesses, products, services and practices. We
may be asked to adjust our local rules and practices, develop or customize certain aspects of our
payment services, or agree to business arrangements that may be less protective of Visa’s proprietary
technology and interests in order to compete and we may face increasing operational costs and risk of
litigation concerning intellectual property. Our failure to compete effectively in light of any such
developments could harm our business and prospects for future growth.
Our revenues and profits are dependent on our client and merchant base, which may be costly to win,
retain, and develop.
Our financial institution clients and merchants can reassess their commitments to us at any time or
develop their own competitive services. While we have certain contractual protections, our clients,
including some of our largest clients, generally have flexibility to issue non-Visa products.
Further, in certain circumstances, our financial institution clients may decide to terminate our
contractual relationship on relatively short notice without paying significant early termination
fees. Because a significant portion of our net revenues is concentrated among our largest clients,
the loss of business from any one of these larger clients could harm our business, results of
operations, and financial condition. For more information, please see Note 14—Enterprise-wide
Disclosures and Concentration of Business to our consolidated financial statements included in Item
8—Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report.
In addition, we face intense competitive pressure on the prices we charge our financial institution
clients. In order to stay competitive, we may need to adjust our pricing or offer incentives to our
clients to increase payments volume, enter new market segments, adapt to regulatory changes, and
expand their use and acceptance of Visa products and services. These include up-front cash payments,
fee discounts, rebates, credits, performance-based incentives, marketing, and other support payments
that impact our revenues and profitability. In addition, we offer incentives to certain merchants or
acquirers to win routing preference in relation to other network options or forms of payment. Market
pressures on pricing, incentives, fee discounts, and rebates could moderate our growth. If we are not
able to implement cost containment and productivity initiatives in other areas of our business or
increase our volumes in other ways to offset or absorb the financial impact of these incentives, fee
discounts, and rebates, it may harm our net revenues and profits.
In addition, it may be difficult or costly for us to acquire or conduct business with financial
institutions or merchants that have longstanding exclusive, or nearly exclusive, relationships with
our competitors. These financial institutions or merchants may be more successful and may grow more
quickly than our existing clients or merchants. In addition, if there is a consolidation or
acquisition of one or more of our largest clients or co-brand partners by a financial institution
client or merchant with a strong relationship with one of our competitors, it could result in our
business shifting to a competitor, which could put us at a competitive disadvantage and harm our
business.
Merchants’ and processors’ continued push to lower acceptance costs and challenge industry practices
could harm our business.
We rely in part on merchants and their relationships with our clients to maintain and expand the use
and acceptance of Visa products. Certain merchants and merchant-affiliated groups have been exerting
their influence in the global payments system in certain jurisdictions, such as the U.S., Canada and
Europe, to attempt to lower their acceptance costs by lobbying for new legislation, seeking
regulatory intervention, filing lawsuits and in some cases, refusing to accept Visa products. If they
are successful in their efforts, we may face increased compliance and litigation expenses, issuers
may decrease their issuance of our products, and consumer usage of our products could be adversely
impacted. For example, in the U.S., certain stakeholders have raised concerns regarding how payment
security standards and rules may impact debit routing choice and the cost of payment card acceptance.
In addition to ongoing litigation related to the U.S. migration to EMV-capable cards and point-of-
sale terminals, U.S. merchant-affiliated groups and processors have expressed concerns regarding the
EMV certification process and some policymakers have expressed concerns about the roles of industry
bodies such as EMVCo and the Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council in the development of
payment card standards. Additionally, some merchants and processors have advocated for changes to
industry practices and Visa acceptance requirements at the point of sale, including the ability for
merchants to accept only certain types of Visa products, to mandate only PIN authenticated
transactions, to differentiate or steer among Visa product types issued by different financial
institutions, and to impose surcharges on customers presenting Visa products as their form of
payment. If successful, these efforts could adversely impact consumers’ usage of our products, lead
to regulatory enforcement and/or litigation, increase our compliance and litigation expenses, and
harm our business.
 23 
Table of Contents
We depend on relationships with financial institutions, acquirers, processors, merchants, payment
facilitators, ecommerce platforms, fintechs and other third parties.
As noted above, our relationships with industry participants are complex and require us to balance
the interests of multiple third parties. For instance, we depend significantly on relationships with
our financial institution clients and on their relationships with account holders and merchants to
support our programs and services, and thereby compete effectively in the marketplace. We engage in
discussions with merchants, acquirers, ecommerce platforms and processors to provide incentives to
promote routing preference and acceptance growth. We also engage in many payment card co-branding
efforts with merchants, who receive incentives from us. As emerging participants such as fintechs
enter the payments industry, we engage in discussions to address the role they may play in the
ecosystem, whether as, for example, an issuer, merchant, ecommerce platform or digital wallet
provider. As these and other relationships become more prevalent and take on a greater importance to
our business, our success will increasingly depend on our ability to sustain and grow these
relationships. In addition, we depend on our clients and third parties, including network partners,
vendors and suppliers, to submit, facilitate and process transactions properly, provide various
services associated with our payments network on our behalf, and otherwise adhere to our operating
rules and applicable laws. To the extent that such parties fail to perform or deliver adequate
services, it may result in negative experiences for account holders or others when using their Visa-
branded payment products, which could harm our business and reputation.
Our business could be harmed if we are not able to maintain and enhance our brand, if events occur
that have the potential to damage our brand or reputation, or if we experience brand
disintermediation.
Our brand is globally recognized and is a key asset of our business. We believe that our clients and
account holders associate our brand with acceptance, security, convenience, speed, and reliability.
Our success depends in large part on our ability to maintain the value of our brand and reputation of
our products and services in the payments ecosystem, elevate the brand through new and existing
products, services and partnerships, and uphold our corporate reputation. The popularity of products
that we have developed in partnership with technology companies and financial institutions may have
the potential to cause consumer confusion or brand disintermediation at the point-of-sale and
decrease the value of our brand. Our brand reputation may be negatively impacted by a number of
factors, including authorization, clearing and settlement service disruptions; data security
breaches; compliance failures by Visa, including our employees, agents, clients, partners or
suppliers; failure to meet our environmental, social and governance goals; negative perception of our
industry, the industries of our clients, Visa-accepting merchants, or our clients’ customers,
including third party payments providers; ill-perceived actions or affiliations by clients, partners
or other third parties, such as sponsorship or co-brand partners; and fraudulent, controversial or
illegal activities using our payment products. If we are unable to maintain our reputation, the value
of our brand may be impaired, which could harm our relationships with clients, account holders,
governments and the public, as well as impact our business.
Global economic, political, market, health and social events or conditions, including the ongoing
effects of the coronavirus pandemic, may harm our business.
More than half of our net revenues are earned outside the U.S. International cross-border transaction
revenues represent a significant part of our revenue and are an important part of our growth
strategy. Our revenues are dependent on the volume and number of payment transactions made by
consumers, governments, and businesses whose spending patterns may be affected by prevailing
economic, political, market, health and social events or conditions. Adverse macroeconomic
conditions, including recessions, inflation, high unemployment, currency fluctuations, actual or
anticipated large-scale defaults or failures, or a slowdown of global trade could decrease consumer
and corporate confidence and reduce consumer, small business, government, and corporate spending
which have a direct impact on our revenues. In addition, outbreaks of illnesses, pandemics like
COVID-19, or other local or global health issues, political uncertainties, international hostilities,
armed conflict, or unrest, climate-related events, including the increasing frequency of extreme
weather events, and natural disasters could have similar impacts on our operations, clients, third-
party suppliers, activities in a particular location or globally, and cross-border travel and spend.
Geopolitical trends towards nationalism, protectionism, and restrictive visa requirements, as well as
continued activity and uncertainty around economic sanctions, tariffs or trade restrictions could
limit the expansion of our business in those regions. In addition, as governments, investors and
other stakeholders face additional pressures to accelerate actions to address climate change and
other environmental, governance and social topics, governments may implement regulations or investors
and other stakeholders may impose new expectations or focus investments in ways that cause
significant shifts in disclosure, commerce and consumption behaviors that may have negative impacts
on our business. As a result of any of these factors, any decline in cross-
 24 
Table of Contents
border travel and spend could impact the number of cross-border transactions we process and our
currency exchange activities, which in turn would reduce our international transaction revenues.
A decline in economic, political, market, health and social conditions could impact our clients as
well, and their decisions could reduce the number of cards, accounts, and credit lines of their
account holders, which ultimately impact our revenues. They may also implement cost-reduction
initiatives that reduce or eliminate marketing budgets, and decrease spending on optional or enhanced
value added services from us. Any events or conditions that impair the functioning of the financial
markets, tighten the credit market, or lead to a downgrade of our current credit rating could
increase our future borrowing costs and impair our ability to access the capital and credit markets
on favorable terms, which could affect our liquidity and capital resources, or significantly increase
our cost of capital. If clients default on their settlement obligations, it may also impact our
liquidity. Any of these events could adversely affect our volumes and revenue.
The ongoing effects of the coronavirus pandemic remain difficult to predict due to numerous
uncertainties, including the transmissibility, severity, duration and resurgence of the outbreak; new
variants of the virus; the uptake and effectiveness of health and safety measures or actions that are
voluntarily adopted by the public or required by governments or public health authorities, including
vaccines and treatments; the speed and strength of an economic recovery, including the reopening of
borders and the resumption of international travel; and the impact to our employees and our
operations, the business of our clients, suppliers and business partners; and other factors such as:
• third party disruptions, including potential outages at network providers, call centers and other
suppliers;
• increased consumer dispute volumes due to travel or event cancellations and the speed or accuracy
in processing refunds;
• increased cyber and payment fraud risk, as cybercriminals attempt DDoS related attacks, phishing
scams and other disruptive actions, given the shift to online banking, ecommerce and other online
activity, as well as more employees working remotely as a result of the ongoing pandemic;
• challenges to the availability and reliability of our network due to changes to normal operations,
including the possibility of one or more clusters of COVID-19 cases occurring at our data centers,
affecting our employees, or affecting the systems or employees of our issuers, acquirers or
merchants;
• additional regulatory requirements, including, for example, government initiatives or requests to
reduce or eliminate payments fees or other costs. A number of countries have taken steps to
temporarily cap interchange or other fees on electronic payments as part of their COVID-19 economic
relief measures. It is possible that some or all of these caps may become permanent over time, or
that we see governments introduce additional and/or new pricing caps in future economic relief
initiatives. In addition, proponents of interchange and/or MDR regulation may try to position
government intervention as necessary to support recovery efforts. In an overall soft global economy,
such pricing measures could result in additional financial pressures on our business; and
• workforce impacts, such as difficulty recruiting, retaining, training, motivating and developing
employees due to evolving health and safety protocols; changing worker expectations and talent
marketplace variability regarding flexible work models; restrictions on immigration, travel and
employee mobility; and the challenges of maintaining our strong corporate culture, which values
communication, collaboration and connections, despite a majority of employees working from home.
Our indemnification obligation to fund settlement losses of our clients exposes us to significant
risk of loss and may reduce our liquidity.
We indemnify issuers and acquirers for settlement losses they may suffer due to the failure of
another issuer or acquirer to honor its settlement obligations in accordance with the Visa operating
rules. In certain instances, we may indemnify issuers or acquirers in situations in which a
transaction is not processed by our system. This indemnification creates settlement risk for us due
to the timing difference between the date of a payment transaction and the date of subsequent
settlement. Our indemnification exposure is generally limited to the amount of unsettled Visa card
payment transactions at any point in time and any subsequent amounts that may fall due relating to
adjustments for previously processed transactions. Concurrent settlement failures or insolvencies
involving more than one of our largest clients, several of our smaller clients, or systemic
operational failures could negatively impact our financial position. Even if we have sufficient
liquidity to cover a settlement failure or insolvency, we may
 25 
Table of Contents
be unable to recover the amount of such payment. This could expose us to significant losses and harm
our business. See Note 12—Settlement Guarantee Management to our consolidated financial statements
included in Item 8—Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report.
 Technology and Cybersecurity Risks 
Failure to anticipate, adapt to, or keep pace with, new technologies in the payments industry could
harm our business and impact future growth.
The global payments industry is undergoing significant and rapid technological change, including
mobile and other proximity and in-app payment technologies, ecommerce, tokenization,
cryptocurrencies, distributed ledger and blockchain technologies, and new authentication technologies
such as biometrics, 3D Secure 2.0 and dynamic cardholder verification values or dCVV2. As a result,
we expect new services and technologies to continue to emerge and evolve, including those developed
by Visa such as our cross-border B2B payment service, Visa B2B Connect. In addition to our own
initiatives and innovations, we work closely with third parties, including potential competitors, for
the development of, and access to, new technologies. It is difficult, however, to predict which
technological developments or innovations will become widely adopted and how those technologies may
be regulated. Moreover, some of the new technologies could be subject to intellectual property-
related lawsuits or claims, potentially impacting our development efforts and/or requiring us to
obtain licenses. If we or our partners fail to adapt and keep pace with new technologies in the
payments space in a timely manner, it could harm our ability to compete, decrease the value of our
products and services to our clients, impact our intellectual property or licensing rights, harm our
business and impact our future growth.
A disruption, failure or breach of our networks or systems, including as a result of cyber-attacks,
could harm our business.
Our cybersecurity and processing systems, as well as those of financial institutions, merchants, and
third-party service providers, have experienced in limited instances and may continue to experience
errors, interruptions, delays or damage from a number of causes, including power outages, hardware,
software and network failures, computer viruses, malware or other destructive software, internal
design, manual or user errors, cyber-attacks, terrorism, workplace violence or wrongdoing,
catastrophic events, natural disasters, severe weather conditions and other effects from climate
change. In addition, there is risk that third party suppliers of hardware and infrastructure required
to operate our data centers and support employee productivity could be impacted by supply chain
disruptions, such as manufacturing and shipping delays. An extended supply chain disruption could
also impact processing or delivery of technology services.
Furthermore, our visibility and role in the global payments industry may also put our company at a
greater risk of being targeted by hackers. In the normal course of our business, we have been the
target of malicious cyber-attack attempts. We have been, and may continue to be, impacted by attacks
and data security breaches of financial institutions, merchants, or third-party processors. We are
also aware of instances where nation states have sponsored attacks against some of our financial
institution clients, and other instances where merchants and issuers have encountered substantial
data security breaches affecting their customers, some of whom were Visa account holders. Such
attacks and breaches have resulted, and may continue to result in, fraudulent activity and
ultimately, financial losses to Visa’s clients, and it is difficult to predict the direct or indirect
impact of future attacks or breaches to our business.
Numerous and evolving cybersecurity threats, including advanced and persistent cyber-attacks,
phishing and social engineering schemes, particularly on our internet-facing applications, could
compromise the confidentiality, availability, and integrity of data in our systems or the systems of
our third-party service providers. Because the techniques used to obtain unauthorized access, or to
disable or degrade systems change frequently, have become increasingly more complex and
sophisticated, and may be difficult to detect for periods of time, we may not anticipate these acts
or respond adequately or timely. The security measures and procedures we, our financial institution
and merchant clients, other merchants and third-party service providers in the payments ecosystem
have in place to protect sensitive consumer data and other information may not be successful or
sufficient to counter all data security breaches, cyber-attacks, or system failures. In some cases,
the mitigation efforts may be dependent on third parties who may not deliver to the required
contractual standards, who may not be able to timely patch vulnerabilities or fix security defects,
or whose hardware, software or network services may be subject to error, defect, delay, outage or
lack appropriate malware prevention to prevent breaches or data exfiltration incidents. Although we
devote significant resources to our cybersecurity, acquired entities, and supplier risk management
 26 
Table of Contents
programs and have implemented security measures to protect our systems and data, and to prevent,
detect and respond to data security incidents, there can be no assurance that our efforts will
prevent these threats.
These events could significantly disrupt our operations; impact our clients and consumers; damage our
reputation and brand; result in litigation or claims, violations of applicable privacy and other
laws, and increased regulatory review or scrutiny, investigations, actions, fines or penalties;
result in damages or changes to our business practices; decrease the overall use and acceptance of
our products; decrease our volume, revenues and future growth prospects; and be costly, time
consuming and difficult to remedy. In the event of damage or disruption to our business due to these
occurrences, we may not be able to successfully and quickly recover all of our critical business
functions, assets, and data through our business continuity program. Furthermore, while we maintain
insurance, our coverage may not sufficiently cover all types of losses or claims that may arise.
 Structural and Organizational Risks 
We may not achieve the anticipated benefits of our acquisitions or strategic investments, and may
face risks and uncertainties as a result.
As part of our overall business strategy, we make acquisitions and strategic investments. We may not
achieve the anticipated benefits of our current and future acquisitions and strategic investments and
they may involve significant risks and uncertainties, including:
• disruption to our ongoing business, including diversion of resources and management’s attention
from our existing business;
• greater than expected investment of resources or operating expenses;
• failure to adequately develop our acquired entities;
• the data security, cybersecurity and operational resilience posture of our acquired entities, or
companies we invest in or partner with, may not be adequate and may be more susceptible to cyber
incidents;
• difficulty, expense or failure of implementing controls, procedures and policies at the acquired
entities;
• challenges of integrating new employees, business cultures, business systems and technologies;
• failure to retain employees, clients or partners of our acquired entities;
• in the case of foreign acquisitions, risks related to the integration of operations across
different cultures and languages;
• disruptions, costs, liabilities, judgments, settlements or business pressures resulting from
litigation matters, investigations or legal proceedings involving the acquisitions or strategic
investments;
• the inability to pursue aspects of the acquired entities due to outcomes in litigation matters,
investigations or legal proceedings;
• failure to obtain the necessary government or other approvals at all, on a timely basis or without
the imposition of burdensome conditions or restrictions;
• the economic, political, regulatory and compliance risks associated with entering into a new
business or operating in new regions or countries. For more information on regulatory risks, please
see Item 1—Business—Government Regulations and Item 1A—Risk Factors—Regulatory Risks above;
• discovery of unidentified issues and related liabilities after the acquisition or investment was
made;
• failure to mitigate the deficiencies and liabilities of the acquired entities;
• dilutive issuance of equity securities, if new securities are issued;
• the incurrence of debt;
• negative impact on our financial position and/or statement of operations; and
• anticipated benefits, synergies or value of the investment or acquisition not materializing.
 27 
Table of Contents
We may be unable to attract, hire, and retain a highly qualified and diverse workforce, including key
management.
The talents and efforts of our employees, particularly our key management, are vital to our success.
The market for highly skilled workers and leaders in our industry, especially in fintech, technology
and other specialized areas, is extremely competitive. Our management team has significant industry
experience and would be difficult to replace. We may be unable to retain them or to attract other
highly qualified employees, particularly if we do not offer employment terms that are competitive
with the rest of the labor market. Ongoing changes in laws and policies regarding immigration and
work authorizations have made it more difficult for employees to work in, or transfer among,
jurisdictions in which we have operations and could continue to impair our ability to attract and
retain qualified employees. Failure to attract, hire, develop, motivate, and retain highly qualified
and diverse employee talent; to meet our goals related to fostering an inclusive and diverse culture,
including increasing the number of underrepresented employees in the U.S.; to develop and implement
an adequate succession plan for the management team; to maintain a corporate culture that fosters
innovation, collaboration and inclusion; or to design and successfully implement flexible work models
that meet the expectations of employees and prospective employees could disrupt our operations and
adversely affect our business and our future success. These challenges may be further amplified by
the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.
The conversions of our class B and class C common stock or series A, B and C preferred stock into
shares of class A common stock would result in voting dilution to, and could impact the market price
of, our existing class A common stock.
The market price of our class A common stock could fall as a result of many factors. The value of our
class B and C common stock and series A, B and C preferred stock is tied to the value of the class A
common stock. Under our U.S. retrospective responsibility plan, upon final resolution of our U.S.
covered litigation, all class B common stock will become convertible into class A common stock. In
September 2020, we released $7.3 billion of the as-converted value from our series B and series C
preferred stock and issued series A preferred stock in connection with that release. Visa will
continue to release value from the series B and series C preferred stock in stages based on
developments in current and potential litigation under our Europe retrospective responsibility plan.
The series B and series C preferred stock will become fully convertible to series A preferred stock
or class A common stock no later than 2028 (subject to a holdback to cover any pending claims). Visa
may take action on the class B common stock and series B and C preferred stock at a certain valuation
and due to unforeseen circumstances the overall value of the class B and C common stock and series A,
B and C preferred stock as determined by the class A common stock price, may later decrease.
Conversion of our class B and class C common stock into class A common stock, or our series A, B and
C preferred stock into class A common stock, would increase the amount of class A common stock
outstanding, which could adversely affect the market price of our existing class A common stock and
would dilute the voting power of existing class A common stockholders.
Holders of our class B and C common stock and series A, B and C preferred stock may have different
interests than our class A common stockholders concerning certain significant transactions.
Although their voting rights are limited, holders of our class B and C common stock and, in certain
specified circumstances, holders of our series A, B and C preferred stock, can vote on certain
significant transactions. With respect to our class B and C common stock, these transactions include
a proposed consolidation or merger, a decision to exit our core payments business and any other vote
required under Delaware law. With respect to our series A, B and C preferred stock, voting rights are
limited to proposed consolidations or mergers in which holders of the series A, B and C preferred
stock would receive shares of stock or other equity securities with preferences, rights and
privileges that are not substantially identical to the preferences, rights and privileges of the
applicable series of preferred stock; or, in the case of series B and C preferred stock, holders
would receive securities, cash or other property that is different from what our class A common
stockholders would receive. Because the holders of classes of capital stock other than class A common
stock are our current and former financial institution clients, they may have interests that diverge
from our class A common stockholders. As a result, the holders of these classes of capital stock may
not have the same incentive to approve a corporate action that may be favorable to the holders of
class A common stock, and their interests may otherwise conflict with interests of our class A common
stockholders.
 28 
Table of Contents
Delaware law, provisions in our certificate of incorporation and bylaws, and our capital structure
could make a merger, takeover attempt, or change in control difficult.
Provisions contained in our certificate of incorporation and bylaws and our capital structure could
delay or prevent a merger, takeover attempt, or change in control that our stockholders may consider
favorable. For example, except for limited exceptions:
• no person may beneficially own more than 15 percent of our class A common stock (or 15 percent of
our total outstanding common stock on an as-converted basis), unless our board of directors approves
the acquisition of such shares in advance;
• no competitor or an affiliate of a competitor may hold more than 5 percent of our total outstanding
common stock on an as-converted basis;
• the affirmative votes of the class B and C common stock and series A, B and C preferred stock are
required for certain types of consolidations or mergers;
• our stockholders may only take action during a stockholders’ meeting and may not act by written
consent; and
• only the board of directors, Chairman, or CEO or any stockholders who have owned continuously for
at least one year not less than 15 percent of the voting power of all shares of class A common stock
outstanding may call a special meeting of stockholders.
 29 
Table of Contents
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments │
Not applicable.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 2. Properties │
At September 30, 2021, we owned or leased 123 office locations in 77 countries around the world,
including three global processing centers located in the U.S. and the United Kingdom. Our corporate
headquarters are located in owned and leased premises in the San Francisco Bay Area.
We believe that these facilities are suitable and adequate to support our ongoing business needs.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 3. Legal Proceedings │
Refer to Note 20—Legal Matters to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8—Financial
Statements and Supplementary Data of this report.
╭─ • ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ITEM 4. Mine Safety Disclosures │
Not applicable.
 30 
Table of Contents