UNITED STATES 
 SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
 Washington, D.C. 20549 
 FORM 10-K 
 (Mark one) 
 ☒ ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) 
 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2022 
 OR 
 ☐ TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) 
 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 For the transition period from         to 
 Commission file number: 1-8606 
 Verizon Communications Inc. 
 (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) 
 Delaware 23-2259884 
 (State or other jurisdiction -I.R.S. Employer Identification No. 
 of incorporation or organization) 
 1095 Avenue of the Americas 
 New York, New York 10036 
 (Address of principal executive -Zip Code 
 offices) 
 Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: ( 212) 395-1000 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
 Title of Each Class Trading Symbol(s) Name of Each Exchange on Which 
 Registered 
 Common Stock, par value $0.10 VZ New York Stock Exchange 
 Common Stock, par value $0.10 VZ The Nasdaq Global Select Market 
 1.625% Notes due 2024 VZ 24B New York Stock Exchange 
 4.073% Notes due 2024 VZ 24C New York Stock Exchange 
 0.875% Notes due 2025 VZ 25 New York Stock Exchange 
 3.25% Notes due 2026 VZ 26 New York Stock Exchange 
 1.375% Notes due 2026 VZ 26B New York Stock Exchange 
 0.875% Notes due 2027 VZ 27E New York Stock Exchange 
 1.375% Notes due 2028 VZ 28 New York Stock Exchange 
 1.125% Notes due 2028 VZ 28A New York Stock Exchange 
 2.350% Fixed Rate Notes due 2028 VZ 28C New York Stock Exchange 
 1.875% Notes due 2029 VZ 29B New York Stock Exchange 
 0.375% Notes due 2029 VZ 29D New York Stock Exchange 
 1.250% Notes due 2030 VZ 30 New York Stock Exchange 
 1.875% Notes due 2030 VZ 30A New York Stock Exchange 
 4.250% Notes due 2030 VZ 30D New York Stock Exchange 
 2.625% Notes due 2031 VZ 31 New York Stock Exchange 
 2.500% Notes due 2031 VZ 31A New York Stock Exchange 
 3.000% Fixed Rate Notes due 2031 VZ 31D New York Stock Exchange 
 0.875% Notes due 2032 VZ 32 New York Stock Exchange 
 0.750% Notes due 2032 VZ 32A New York Stock Exchange 
 1.300% Notes due 2033 VZ 33B New York Stock Exchange 
 4.75% Notes due 2034 VZ 34 New York Stock Exchange 
 4.750% Notes due 2034 VZ 34C New York Stock Exchange 
 3.125% Notes due 2035 VZ 35 New York Stock Exchange 
 1.125% Notes due 2035 VZ 35A New York Stock Exchange 
 Securities registered pursuant to 
 Section 12(b) of the Act 
 (continued): 
 Title of Each Class Trading Symbol(s) Name of Each Exchange on Which 
 Registered 
 3.375% Notes due 2036 VZ 36A New York Stock Exchange 
 2.875% Notes due 2038 VZ 38B New York Stock Exchange 
 1.875% Notes due 2038 VZ 38C New York Stock Exchange 
 1.500% Notes due 2039 VZ 39C New York Stock Exchange 
 3.50% Fixed Rate Notes due 2039 VZ 39D New York Stock Exchange 
 1.850% Notes due 2040 VZ 40 New York Stock Exchange 
 3.850% Fixed Rate Notes due 2041 VZ 41C New York Stock Exchange 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of
the Securities Act. ☒ Yes ☐ No
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or
Section 15(d) of the Act. ☐ Yes ☒ No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for
such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject
to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. ☒ Yes ☐ No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data
File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter)
during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit
such files). ☒ Yes ☐ No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the
definitions of "large accelerated filer," "accelerated filer," "smaller reporting company," and
"emerging growth company" in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
 Large accelerated filer ☒ Accelerated filer ☐ 
 Non-accelerated filer ☐ Smaller reporting company ☐ 
 Emerging growth company ☐ 
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the
extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards
provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its
management’s assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting under
Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm
that prepared or issued its audit report. ☒
If securities are registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act, indicate by check mark whether the
financial statements of the registrant included in the filing reflect the correction of an error to
previously issued financial statements. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether any of those error corrections are restatements that required a
recovery analysis of incentive-based compensation received by any of the registrant’s executive
officers during the relevant recovery period pursuant to §240.10D-1(b). ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Act). ☐Yes ☒ No
At June 30, 2022, the aggregate market value of the registrant’s voting stock held by non-affiliates
was approximately $ 213,158,526,305.
At January 31, 2023, 4,199,882,937shares of the registrant’s common stock were outstanding, after
deducting 91,550,709 shares held in treasury.
 Documents Incorporated By Reference: 
Portions of the registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement to be delivered to shareholders in connection
with the registrant’s 2023 Annual Meeting of Shareholders (Part III).
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Item No. Page 
 PART I 
 Item 1. Business 4 
 Item 1A. Risk Factors 14 
 Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments 18 
 Item 2. Properties 19 
 Item 3. Legal Proceedings 19 
 Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures 19 
 PART II 
 Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters 20 
 and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities 
 Item 6. [Reserved] 20 
 Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and 21 
 Results of Operations 
 Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk 48 
 Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 51 
 Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and 107 
 Financial Disclosure 
 Item 9A. Controls and Procedures 107 
 Item 9B. Other Information 107 
 Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent 107 
 Inspections 
 PART III 
 Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance 108 
 Item 11. Executive Compensation 108 
 Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and 108 
 Related Stockholder Matters 
 Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director 109 
 Independence 
 Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services 109 
 PART IV 
 Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules 110 
 Item 16. Form 10-K Summary 114 
 Signatures 114 
 Certifications 
Table of Contents
 PART I 
 Item 1.    Business 
 General 
Verizon Communications Inc. (the Company) is a holding company that, acting through its subsidiaries
(together with the Company, collectively, Verizon), is one of the world’s leading providers of
communications, technology, information and entertainment products and services to consumers,
businesses and government entities. With a presence around the world, we offer data, video and voice
services and solutions on our networks and platforms that are designed to meet customers’ demand for
mobility, reliable network connectivity, security and control.
Our principal executive offices are located at 1095 Avenue of the Americas, New York, New York 10036
(telephone number 212-395-1000).
We have two reportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units - Verizon
Consumer Group (Consumer) and Verizon Business Group (Business).
 Verizon Consumer Group 
Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline communications services and
products. Our wireless services are provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in
the United States (U.S.) under the Verizon brand, TracFone Wireless, Inc. (TracFone) brands and
through wholesale and other arrangements. We also provide fixed wireless access (FWA) broadband
through our wireless networks. Our wireline services are provided in nine states in the Mid-Atlantic
and Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over our 100% fiber-optic network through our
Verizon Fios product portfolio and over a traditional copper-based network to customers who are not
served by Fios.
In 2022, the Consumer segment’s revenues were $103.5 billion, representing approximately 76% of
Verizon’s consolidated revenues. As of December 31, 2022, Consumer had approximately 115 million
wireless retail connections, of which 80% are postpaid connections (including FWA). In addition, at
December 31, 2022 Consumer had approximately 8 million total broadband connections (which includes
Fios internet, Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) and FWA connections), and approximately 3 million Fios
video connections.
 Verizon Business Group 
Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications services and products, including
data, video and conferencing services, corporate networking solutions, security and managed network
services, local and long distance voice services and network access to deliver various Internet of
Things (IoT) services and products. We also provide FWA broadband through our wireless networks. We
provide these products and services to businesses, government customers and wireless and wireline
carriers across the U.S. and select products and services to customers around the world.
In 2022, the Business segment's revenues were $31.1 billion, representing approximately 23% of
Verizon’s consolidated revenues. As of December 31, 2022, Business had approximately 29 million
wireless retail postpaid connections and approximately 1 million total broadband connections (which
includes Fios internet, DSL and FWA connections).
Additional discussion of our reportable segments is included in Item 7. under the headings
"Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Overview"
and - "Segment Results of Operations" and in Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements of
Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries.
 Service and Product Offerings 
Our Consumer segment's wireless and wireline products and services are available to our retail
customers, as well as resellers that purchase wireless network access from us on a wholesale basis.
Our Business segment’s wireless and wireline products and services are organized by the primary
customer groups targeted by these offerings: Small and Medium Business, Global Enterprise, Public
Sector and Other, and Wholesale.
 Wireless 
We offer wireless services and equipment to both Consumer customers and Business customers.
 Wireless Services 
Our Consumer and Business segments provide a wide variety of wireless services accessible on a broad
range of devices. Customers can obtain our wireless services on a postpaid or prepaid basis. Retail
(non-wholesale) postpaid accounts primarily represent retail customers that are directly served and
managed by Verizon and use Verizon branded services. A single account may include monthly wireless
services for a variety of connected devices. Our postpaid service is generally billed one month in
 4 
Table of Contents
advance for a monthly access charge in return for access to and usage of network services. Our
prepaid service is offered only to Consumer customers and enables individuals to obtain wireless
services without credit verification by paying for all services in advance. As of December 31, 2022,
we had 92 million postpaid connections, including FWA, and 23 million prepaid connections,
representing approximately 80% and 20% of our Consumer wireless retail connections, respectively.
Access to the internet is available on all smartphones and nearly all basic phones. In addition, our
customers can access the internet at broadband speeds on notebook computers and tablets that are
either wireless-enabled or that are used in conjunction with separate dedicated devices that provide
a mobile Wi-Fi connection.
Historically, customers on our fixed-term service plans paid higher access fees for their wireless
service in exchange for the ability to purchase their wireless devices at subsidized prices. We no
longer offer Consumer customers new fixed-term, subsidized service plans for devices; however, we
continue to offer subsidized plans to our Business customers.
We also provide FWA broadband through our 5G or 4G LTE wireless networks to our Consumer and Business
customers. FWA enables fixed broadband access using radio frequencies instead of cables and can be
used to connect homes and businesses to the internet. As of December 31, 2022, we had approximately
1.5 million FWA broadband connections.
 Wireless Equipment 
Consumer and Business offer several categories of wireless equipment to customers, including a
variety of smartphones and other handsets, wireless-enabled internet devices, such as tablets, and
other wireless-enabled connected devices, such as smart watches. We permit customers to acquire
equipment from us using device payment plans, which permit the customer to pay for the device in
installments over time.
 Verizon Consumer Group 
In addition to the wireless services and equipment discussed above, the Consumer segment sells
residential fixed connectivity solutions, including internet, video and voice services, and wireless
network access to resellers on a wholesale basis. Consumer also provides non-connectivity services
including device protection, cloud storage, and other products.
Residential Fixed Services . We provide residential fixed connectivity solutions to customers over
our 100% fiber-optic network through our Verizon Fios product portfolio, and over a traditional
copper-based network to customers who are not served by Fios. In addition, our Long-Term Evolution
(LTE) Home fixed wireless access internet service is available in parts of all 50 states across the
U.S.
We offer residential fixed services tailored to the needs of our customers. Depending on those needs
at a particular time, our services may include features related to, among other things: internet
access at different speed tiers using fiber-optic, copper or wireless technology; video services that
may feature a variety of channel options, video on demand products, cloud-based services and digital
video recording capabilities; over-the-top video services; voice services; and other home solutions.
Network Access Services . We sell network access to mobile virtual network operators (MVNOs) on a
wholesale basis, who in turn resell wireless service under their own brand(s) to consumers.
 Verizon Business Group 
In addition to the wireless services and equipment discussed above, our Business segment provides
wireless and wireline communications services and products, including data, video and conferencing
services, corporate networking solutions, security and managed network services, local and long
distance voice services and network access to deliver various IoT services and products.
 Small and Medium Business 
Small and Medium Business offers wireless services and equipment, conferencing services, tailored
voice and networking products, Fios services, Internet Protocol (IP) networking, advanced voice
solutions and security and managed information technology (IT) services to our U.S.-based small and
medium businesses that do not meet the requirements to be categorized as Global Enterprise, as
described below. In 2022, Small and Medium Business revenues were $12.6 billion, representing
approximately 41% of Business’s total revenues.
In addition to the wireless services and equipment discussed above, Small and Medium Business
provides fixed connectivity solutions comparable to the residential fixed services provided by
Consumer, as well as business services and connectivity similar to the products and services offered
by Global Enterprise, in each case with features and pricing designed to address the needs of small
and medium businesses.
 Global Enterprise 
Global Enterprise offers services to large businesses, which are identified based on their size and
volume of business with Verizon, as well as non-U.S. public sector customers. In 2022, Global
Enterprise revenues were $9.7 billion, representing approximately 31% of Business’s total revenues.
 5 
Table of Contents
Global Enterprise offers a broad portfolio of connectivity, security and professional services
designed to enable our customers to optimize their business operations, mitigate business risks and
capitalize on data. These services include the following:
• Network Services . We offer a portfolio of network connectivity products to help our customers
connect with their employees, partners, vendors and customers. These products include private
networking services, private cloud connectivity services, virtual and software defined networking
services and internet access services.
• Advanced Communications Services. We offer a suite of services to our customers to help them
communicate with their employees, partners, vendors, constituents and customers. These products
include IP-based voice and video services, unified communications and collaboration tools and
customer contact center solutions.
• Security services . We offer a suite of management and data security services that help our
customers protect, detect and respond to security threats to their networks, data, applications and
infrastructure.
• Core services . We provide a portfolio of domestic and global voice and data solutions utilizing
traditional telecommunications technology, including voice calling, messaging services, conferencing,
contact center solutions and private line and data access networks. Core services also include the
provision of customer premises equipment, and installation, maintenance and site services.
• IoT services . We provide the network access required to deliver various IoT products and services.
We work with companies that purchase network access from us to connect their devices, bundled
together with their own solutions, which they sell to end users. We are building IoT capabilities by
leveraging business models that monetize usage on our networks at the connectivity, platform and
solution layers.
 Public Sector and Other 
Public Sector and Other offers wireless products and services as well as wireline connectivity and
managed solutions to U.S. federal, state and local governments and educational institutions. These
services include business services and connectivity similar to the products and services offered by
Global Enterprise, in each case, with features and pricing designed to address the needs of
governments and educational institutions. In 2022, Public Sector and Other revenues were $6.1
billion, representing approximately 20% of Business’s total revenues.
Public Sector and Other also includes solutions that support fleet tracking management, compliance
management, field service management, asset tracking and other types of mobile resource management in
the U.S. and around the world.
 Wholesale 
Wholesale offers wireline communications services including data, voice, local dial tone and
broadband services primarily to local, long distance, and wireless carriers that use our facilities
to provide services to their customers. In 2022, Wholesale revenues were $2.6 billion, representing
approximately 8% of Business’s total revenues. A portion of Wholesale revenues are generated by a few
large telecommunications companies, most of which compete directly with us. Wholesale's services
include:
• Data services . We offer a portfolio of data services to enhance our Wholesale customers’ networks
and provide connections to their end users and subscribers.
• Voice services . We provide switched access services that allow carriers to complete their end-user
calls that originate or terminate within our territory. In addition, we provide originating and
terminating voice services throughout the U.S. and globally utilizing our time-division multiplexing
and Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) networks.
• Local services . We offer an array of local dial tone and broadband services to competitive local
exchange carriers, some of which are offered to comply with telecommunications regulations. In
addition, we offer services such as colocation, resale and unbundled network elements in compliance
with applicable regulations.
 Distribution 
We use a combination of direct, indirect and alternative distribution channels to market and
distribute our products and services to Consumer and Business customers.
Our direct channel, including our company-operated stores, is a core component of our distribution
strategy. Our sales and service centers and business direct sales teams also represent significant
distribution channels for our services. In addition, we have a robust digital channel and omni-
channel as a part of the customer experience in order to offer choice and convenience.
Our indirect channel includes agents that sell our wireless and wireline products and services at
retail locations throughout the U.S., as well as through the internet. The majority of these sales
are made under exclusive selling arrangements with us. We
 6 
Table of Contents
also have relationships with high-profile national retailers that sell our wireless and wireline
products and services, as well as convenience store chains that sell our wireless prepaid products
and services.
In addition to our direct channel, our Business segment has additional distribution channels that
include business solution fulfillment provided by resellers, non-stocked device fulfillment performed
by distributors and integrated mobility services provided by system integrators and resellers.
 Global Network and Technology 
Our global network architecture is used by Consumer and Business. Our network technology platforms
include both wireless and wireline technologies.
 Network Evolution 
We are transforming the architecture of our networks into our Intelligent Edge Network, providing
improved efficiency and virtualization, increased automation and opportunities for edge computing
services that will support our fiber-based and radio access network technologies. We expect that this
new architecture will simplify operations by eliminating legacy network elements, speed the
deployment of fifth-generation (5G) wireless technology and create new opportunities in the business
market in a cost-efficient manner. As a part of our evolution, we retired our third-generation (3G)
network in 2022. As a result, approximately 909 thousand wireless retail postpaid connections,
including 392 thousand wireless postpaid phone connections, and 237 thousand retail prepaid
connections, were removed from the customer base.
 5G 
Over the past several years, we have been leading the development of 5G wireless technology industry
standards and the ecosystems for fixed and mobile 5G wireless services. 5G technology enables higher
throughput and lower latency than the fourth-generation (4G) LTE technology and allows our networks
to handle more traffic as the number of internet-connected devices grows.
We provide 5G wireless service utilizing millimeter wave spectrum and other spectrum bands, some of
which use dynamic spectrum sharing (DSS) technology. In January 2022, we began deploying C-Band
spectrum, which has been built out to cover approximately 189 million POPs in the U.S. as of December
31, 2022. We expect to continue deploying C-Band spectrum across the continental U.S. as more and
more of the spectrum becomes available for our use. Our FWA broadband service also leverages the 5G
network and our expanding C-Band footprint, in addition to our 4G FWA offering.
 4G LTE 
The wireless network technology platform that carries the majority of our wireless traffic is 4G LTE.
As of December 31, 2022, our 4G LTE network covers approximately 328 million POPs, including those in
areas served by our LTE in Rural America partners. Under this program, we have collaborated with
wireless carriers in rural areas to build and operate a 4G LTE network using each carrier’s network
assets with our core 4G LTE equipment and 700 Megahertz (MHz) C Block and Advanced Wireless Services
(AWS) spectrum. LTE Home Internet, our home broadband internet service leverages the Verizon 4G LTE
network.
 Wireless Network Reliability and Build-Out 
We consider the reliability, speed, capacity and coverage of our wireless network to be key factors
for our continued success. We believe that steady and consistent network and platform investments
provide the foundation for innovative products and services. As we design and deploy our network, we
focus on the number of successful data sessions the network enables, delivering on our advertised
throughput speeds, and the number of calls that are connected on the first attempt and completed
without being dropped. We utilize three strategies to maintain the quality of our network: increasing
the density of our network elements, deploying new technologies as they are developed and putting
additional wireless spectrum into service.
We have been densifying our network by utilizing small cell technology, in-building solutions and
distributed antenna systems. Network densification enables us to add capacity to address increasing
mobile video consumption and the growing demand for IoT products and services on our 4G LTE and 5G
networks. We are also utilizing existing network capabilities to handle increased traffic without
interrupting the quality of the customer experience. We continue to deploy advanced technologies to
increase both network capacity and data rates.
In order to build and upgrade our existing 4G LTE network and deploy our 5G network, we must secure
rights to a large number of sites and obtain zoning and other governmental approvals and fiber
facilities for our macro and small cells, in-building systems and antennas and related radio
equipment that comprise distributed antenna systems. We have relationships with a wide variety of
vendors that supply various products and services that support our wireless network operations. We
utilize tower site management firms as lessors or managers of a portion of our existing leased and
owned tower sites.
Our networks in the U.S. include various elements of redundancy designed to enhance the reliability
of the services provided to our customers. To mitigate the impact of power disruptions on our
operations, we have battery backup at every switch and every macro cell. We also utilize backup
generators at a majority of our macro cells and at every switch location. In addition, we have a
 7 
Table of Contents
fleet of portable backup generators that can be deployed if needed. We further enhance reliability by
using a fully redundant Multiprotocol Label Switching backbone network in critical locations.
In addition to our own network coverage, we have roaming agreements with a number of wireless service
providers to enable our customers to receive wireless service in nearly all other areas in the U.S.
where wireless service is available. We also offer a variety of international wireless voice and data
services to our customers through roaming arrangements with wireless service providers outside the
U.S.
 Fios 
Residential broadband service has seen significant growth in bandwidth demand over the past several
years, and we believe that demand will continue to grow. We expect that the continued emergence of
new video services, new data applications and the proliferation of IP devices in the home will
continue to drive new network requirements for increased data speeds and throughput. We believe that
the Passive Optical Network (PON) technology underpinning Fios positions us well to meet these
demands in a cost-effective and efficient manner.
While deployed initially as a consumer broadband network, our PON infrastructure is also experiencing
more widespread application in the Business segment, especially as businesses increasingly migrate to
Ethernet-based access services.
 Global IP 
Verizon owns and operates one of the largest global fiber-optic networks in the world, providing
connectivity to Business customers in more than 180 countries. Our global IP network includes long-
haul, metro and submarine assets that enable and support international operations.
Global business is rapidly evolving to an "everything-as-a-service" model in which Business customers
seek cloud-based, converged enterprise solutions delivered securely via managed and professional
services. We are continuing to deploy packet optical transport technology in order to create a global
network platform to meet this demand.
 Spectrum 
The spectrum licenses we hold can be used for mobile and fixed wireless voice, video and data
communications services. We are licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to provide
these wireless services on portions of the 800 MHz band, also known as cellular spectrum, the
1800-1900 MHz band, also known as Personal Communication Services (PCS) spectrum, portions of the 700
MHz upper C block, AWS 1 and 3 spectrum in the 1700 and 2100 MHz bands in areas that collectively
cover nearly all of the population of the U.S., and 3700-3900 MHz, also known as C-Band. We have also
deployed 4G technologies in 3.5 Gigahertz (GHz) shared spectrum, using LTE/Citizens Broadband Radio
Service, and in 5 GHz unlicensed spectrum, using LTE/Licensed Assisted Access. All of this spectrum
is collectively called low and mid-band spectrum. We are using our low and mid-band spectrum to
provide 4G LTE and 5G wireless services. As of December 31, 2022, we retired our 3G service. We are
increasingly reallocating spectrum previously used for 3G service to provide 4G LTE service, and we
completed that transition where needed at the end of 2022. We are also utilizing additional low and
mid-band spectrum for 5G through DSS to complement both our C-Band and our spectrum licenses in the
28 and 39 GHz band, collectively called millimeter wave spectrum.
Millimeter wave spectrum is being used in conjunction with low and mid-band spectrum for our 5G
technology deployment. We own millimeter wave spectrum predominantly in the 28 GHz and 37/39 GHz
bands. Millimeter wave spectrum is currently being used to increase capacity for mobile and fixed
wireless services in areas of high demand. We anticipate that demand will continue to increase over
time, driven by growth in customer connections and the increased usage of wireless broadband services
that use more bandwidth and require faster rates of speed, as well as the wider deployment of 5G
mobile and fixed services. We expect to meet the demand for 4G and 5G spectrum needs with our
existing spectrum assets. If demand continues to increase or if new spectrum is required for a future
generation of technology, we can meet that demand by acquiring licenses or leasing spectrum from
other licensees, or by acquiring new spectrum licenses from the FCC, if and when future FCC spectrum
auctions occur.
We use low and mid-band spectrum and DSS technology, to allow 5G service to run simultaneously with
4G LTE on multiple spectrum bands. With DSS, whenever customers move outside Verizon’s millimeter
wave and C-Band coverage areas, their 5G-enabled devices will remain on 5G technology using the lower
spectrum bands where this network is available. This allows us to more fully and effectively utilize
our current spectrum resources to serve both 4G and 5G customers.
From time to time we have exchanged spectrum licenses with other wireless service providers through
secondary market swap transactions. We expect to continue to pursue similar opportunities to trade
spectrum licenses in order to meet capacity and expansion needs in the future. In certain cases, we
have entered into intra-market spectrum swaps designed to increase the amount of contiguous spectrum
within frequency bands in a specific market. Contiguous spectrum improves network performance and
efficiency. These swaps, as well as any spectrum purchases, require us to obtain governmental
approvals.
 8 
Table of Contents
Information regarding spectrum license transactions is included in Note 3 to the consolidated
financial statements of Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries.
 Competition and Related Trends 
The telecommunications industry is highly competitive. The rapid development of new technologies,
services and products has eliminated many of the traditional distinctions among wireless, cable,
internet and local and long distance communication services and brought new competitors to our
markets. We expect competition to remain intense as traditional and non-traditional participants seek
increased market share.
With respect to our wireless connectivity products and services, we compete against other national
wireless service providers, including AT&T Inc. and T-Mobile US, Inc., as well as various regional
wireless service providers. We also compete for retail activations with resellers that buy bulk
wholesale service from wireless service providers, including Verizon, and resell it to their
customers. Resellers include cable companies, such as Comcast Corporation and Charter Communications,
Inc., and others. Competition remains intense as a result of various factors, including high rates of
smartphone penetration in the wireless market, increased network investment by our competitors, the
development and deployment of new technologies, including 5G, the introduction of new products and
services, offerings that include additional bundled premium content, increased levels of promotions
and service plan discounts, new market entrants, the availability of additional licensed and
unlicensed spectrum and regulatory changes. In addition, increasing government incentives related to
network deployment may enhance the ability of certain of our competitors to compete with us.
Competition may also increase as smaller, stand-alone wireless service providers merge or transfer
licenses to larger, better capitalized wireless service providers and as MVNOs resell wireless
communication services. In addition, DISH Network Corporation has committed to deploy a facilities-
based 5G broadband network in each of its license areas capable of serving at least 70% of the U.S.
population by June 2023, which could result in additional competitive pressures in the U.S. wireless
industry.
We also face competition from other communications and technology companies seeking to increase their
brand recognition and capture customer revenue with respect to the provision of wireless products and
services, in addition to non-traditional offerings in mobile data. For example, Microsoft
Corporation, Alphabet Inc., Apple Inc., Meta Platforms, Inc. and others are offering alternative
means for messaging and making wireless voice calls that, in certain cases, can be used in lieu of
the wireless providers' voice service, as well as alternative means of accessing video content. In
addition, we expect to see increasing competition in the provisioning of internet access by low Earth
orbit satellite companies as well in the area of fixed wireless offerings that provide an alternative
to traditional landline internet service providers.
With respect to our wireline connectivity services, we compete against cable companies, wireless
service providers, domestic and foreign telecommunications providers, satellite television companies,
internet service providers, over-the-top (OTT) providers and other companies that offer network
services and managed enterprise solutions. We also face increasing competition from other providers
of VoIP services as well as internet portal providers. Cable operators have increased the size and
capacity of their networks in order to deliver digital products and services. Several major cable
operators offer bundles with wireless services through strategic relationships. Traditional wireless
carriers are also bundling broadband internet offerings with wireless services while increasing their
broadband internet footprint. Customers have an increasing number of choices for obtaining video
content from various online services. We expect the market will continue to shift from traditional
linear video to OTT offerings. We also expect customer migration from traditional voice services to
wireless services to continue as a growing number of customers place greater value on mobility and
wireless companies position their services as a landline alternative.
We believe that the following are the most important competitive factors and trends in the
telecommunications industry:
• Network reliability, speed, capacity and coverage. We consider networks that consistently provide
high-quality, fast and reliable service to be a key differentiator in the market and driver of
customer satisfaction. With the development of 5G technologies, wireless service providers are
increasingly focusing their marketing efforts on network quality, speed and coverage, sometimes
directly targeting customers of Verizon. In addition, lower prices, improved service quality and new
service offerings, which in many cases include video content, have led to increased customer usage of
connectivity services. We and other network-based providers must ensure that our networks can meet
these increasing capacity usage requirements and offer highly reliable national coverage.
• Pricing. With respect to wireless services and equipment, pricing plays an increasingly important
role in the wireless competitive landscape. As the demand for wireless services continues to grow,
wireless service providers are offering a range of service plans at competitive prices. Many wireless
service providers also bundle wireless service offerings with other content and offer promotional
pricing and incentives, some of which may be targeted specifically to customers of Verizon. We and
other wireless service providers, as well as equipment manufacturers, offer device payment options,
which provide customers with the ability to pay for their device over a period of time, and some
providers offer device leasing arrangements. In addition, aggressive device promotions have become
more common in an effort to gain a greater share of subscribers interested in changing carriers as
well as retaining existing customers. Pricing also plays an important role in the wireline
competitive landscape, as traditional service providers compete aggressively in offerings such as IP
Networking, Core Voice and other legacy products. In addition, as non-traditional modes of providing
wireline communication services emerge, new entrants attempt to capture market share from incumbents
 9 
Table of Contents
using competitive pricing. For example, VoIP and portal-based voice and video calling is often free
or nearly free for customers and supported by advertising revenues.
• Customer service. We believe that high-quality customer service is a key factor in retaining
customers and attracting new customers, including those of other providers. Our customer service,
retention and satisfaction programs are based on providing customers with convenient and easy-to-use
products and services and focusing on their needs in order to promote long-term relationships and
minimize churn.
Customer service is highly valued by our Business customers. We provide Global Enterprise and Public
Sector and Other customers with ready access to their system and performance information, and we
conduct proactive testing of our networks to identify issues before they affect our customers. We
service our Small and Medium Business customers through service representatives and online support,
as well as through store-based representatives for small business customers. For Wholesale customers,
we pursue service improvement through continued system automation initiatives.
• Product differentiation. Customer and revenue growth are increasingly dependent on the development
of new and enhanced products and services, as the delivery of new and innovative products and
services has been accelerating. Customers are shifting their focus from access to applications and
are seeking ways to leverage their broadband, video and wireless connections. To compete effectively,
providers need to continuously review, improve and refine their product portfolio and develop and
rapidly deploy new products and services tailored to the needs of customers. We continue to pursue
the development and rapid deployment of new and innovative products and services, both independently
and in collaboration with application providers, content providers and device manufacturers. Features
such as wireless and wireline inter-operability are becoming increasingly important, driven by both
customer demand and technological advancement.
• Sales and distribution. A key to achieving sales success in the consumer and small and medium
business sectors of the wireless industry is the reach and quality of sales channels and distribution
points. We seek to optimally vary distribution channels among our company-operated stores selling
wireless products and services, web-based sales and fulfillment capabilities, outside sales teams and
telemarketing, our extensive indirect distribution network of retail outlets and our sale of wireless
service to resellers, which resell wireless services to their end users.
In addition to these competitive factors and trends, our competitive position also depends on our
ability to market our products and services effectively, anticipate and respond to various factors
and trends affecting our industries, as well as the availability of capital resources.
Companies with a global presence are increasingly competing with us in our Business segment. A
relatively small number of telecommunications and integrated service providers with global operations
serve customers in the global enterprise market and, to a lesser extent, the global wholesale market.
We compete with these providers for large contracts to provide integrated solutions to global
enterprises and government customers. Many of these companies have strong market presence, brand
recognition and existing customer relationships, all of which contribute to intensifying competition
that may affect our future revenue growth.
In the Small and Medium Business market, customer purchasing behaviors and preferences continue to
evolve. Solution speed and simplicity with user interfaces that have a consumer-like "look and feel"
are becoming key differentiators for customers who are seeking full life-cycle offers that simplify
the process of starting, running and growing their businesses. Several major cable operators also
offer bundles with wireless services through strategic relationships.
In the Global Enterprise and Public Sector and Other markets, competition levels remain high,
primarily as a result of increased industry focus on technology convergence. We compete in this area
with system integrators, carriers, and hardware and software providers. In addition, some of the
largest information technology services companies are making strategic acquisitions, divesting non-
strategic assets and forging new alliances to improve their cost structure. Many new alliances and
acquisitions have focused on emerging fields, such as cloud computing, software defined networking,
communication applications and other computing tasks via networks, rather than by the use of in-house
machines.
Our Wholesale business competes with traditional carriers for long-haul, voice and IP services. In
addition, mobile video and data needs are driving a greater need for wireless backhaul. Network
providers, cable companies and niche players are competitors for this business opportunity.
 Regulatory Trends 
 Regulatory Landscape 
Verizon operates in a regulated and highly competitive market, as described above. Some of our
competitors are subject to fewer regulatory constraints than Verizon. For many services offered by
Verizon, the FCC is our primary regulator. The FCC has jurisdiction over interstate
telecommunications services and other matters under the Communications Act of 1934, as amended
(Communications Act or Act). Other Verizon services are subject to state and local regulation.
 10 
Table of Contents
 Federal, State and Local Regulation 
 Wireless Services 
The FCC regulates several aspects of our wireless operations. Generally, the FCC has jurisdiction
over the construction, operation, acquisition and transfer of wireless communications systems. All
wireless services require use of radio frequency spectrum, the assignment and distribution of which
is subject to FCC oversight. If demand continues to increase or if new spectrum is required for a
future generation of technology, we can meet our needs for licensed spectrum by purchasing licenses
or leasing spectrum from others, or by participating in a competitive bidding process to acquire new
spectrum from the FCC. Those processes are subject to certain reviews, approvals and potential
conditions.
Today, Verizon holds FCC spectrum licenses that allow it to provide a wide range of mobile and fixed
communications services, including both voice and data services. FCC spectrum licenses typically have
a term of 10 years, at which time they are subject to renewal. While the FCC has routinely renewed
all of Verizon’s wireless licenses, challenges could be raised in the future. If a wireless license
was revoked or not renewed, Verizon would not be permitted to provide services on the spectrum
covered by that license. Some of our licenses require us to comply with so-called "open access" FCC
regulations, which generally require licensees of particular spectrum to allow customers to use
devices and applications of their choice, subject to certain technical limitations. The FCC has also
imposed certain specific mandates on wireless carriers, including construction and geographic
coverage requirements, technical operating standards, provision of enhanced 911 services, roaming
obligations and requirements for wireless tower and antenna facilities.
The Act generally preempts regulation by state and local governments of the entry of, or the rates
charged by, wireless carriers. The Act does not prohibit states from regulating the other "terms and
conditions" of wireless service. For example, some states impose reporting and consumer protection
requirements. Several states also have laws or regulations that address safety issues (for example,
use of wireless handsets while driving), universal service funding, and taxation matters. Some states
are also considering new network reliability or service quality requirements that may affect how and
where we provide services if not preempted by federal law. In addition, wireless tower and antenna
facilities are often subject to state and local zoning and land use regulation, and securing
approvals for new or modified facilities is often a lengthy and expensive process.
 Broadband 
Verizon offers many different broadband services. The FCC currently recognizes broadband internet
access services as "information services" subject to a "light touch" regulatory approach rather than
to the traditional, utilities-style regulations. However, the FCC could return to a more utilities-
style regulation of broadband. Additionally, several states have adopted or are considering adopting
laws or executive orders that would regulate broadband. Although some of these have been challenged
in court, the ultimate enforceability and effect of these state rules is uncertain. Regardless of
regulation, Verizon remains committed to the open internet, which provides consumers with competitive
choices and unblocked access to lawful websites and content. Our broadband commitment can be found on
our website at https://www.verizon.com/about/our-company/verizon-broadband-commitment.
 Wireline Voice 
Verizon offers many different wireline voice services, including traditional telephone service and
other services that rely on technologies such as VoIP. For regulatory purposes, legacy telephone
services are generally considered to be "common carrier" services. Common carrier services are
subject to heightened regulatory oversight with respect to rates, terms and conditions and other
aspects of the services. The FCC has not decided the regulatory classification of VoIP but has said
VoIP service providers must comply with certain rules, such as 911 capabilities and law enforcement
assistance requirements.
State public utility commissions regulate Verizon’s telephone operations with respect to certain
telecommunications intrastate matters. Verizon operates as an "incumbent local exchange carrier" in
nine states and the District of Columbia. These incumbent operations are subject to various levels of
pricing flexibility and other state oversight and requirements. Verizon also has other wireline
operations that are more lightly regulated. Some states, including California, impose reporting
requirements and are considering new network reliability or service quality requirements for wireline
voice services, including for VoIP.
 Video 
Verizon offers a multichannel video service that is regulated like traditional cable service. The FCC
has a body of rules that apply to cable operators, and these rules also generally apply to Verizon.
In areas where Verizon offers its facilities-based multichannel video services, Verizon has been
required to obtain a cable franchise from local government entities, or in some cases a state-wide
franchise, and comply with certain one-time and ongoing obligations as a result.
 Privacy and Data Security 
We are subject to local, state, federal, and international laws and regulations relating to privacy
and data security that impact all parts of our business, including wireline, wireless, broadband and
the development and roll out of new products, such as those in the artificial intelligence and IoT
space. At the federal level, our business is governed by the FCC or the Federal Trade Commission
(FTC), depending on the product or service. The California Consumer Privacy Act, Europe's General
Data Protection Regulation and a number of other privacy laws recently adopted by other states and
countries include significant
 11 
Table of Contents
penalties for non-compliance. Generally, attention to privacy and data security requirements is
increasing at all levels of government globally, and privacy-related legislation has been introduced
or is under consideration in many locations. These regulations could have a significant impact on our
businesses.
 Public Safety and Cybersecurity 
The FCC plays a role in addressing public safety concerns by regulating emergency communications
services and mandating widespread availability of both media (broadcast/cable) and wireless emergency
alerting services. In response to cyber attacks that have occurred or could occur in the future,
however, the FCC or other regulators may attempt to increase regulation of the cybersecurity
practices of providers. The FCC is also addressing the use by American companies of equipment
produced by certain companies deemed to cause potential national security risks. Verizon does not
currently use equipment in its networks from vendors under such restrictions. In addition, due to
recent natural disasters, federal and state agencies may attempt to impose regulations to ensure
continuity of service during disasters. For example, the FCC adopted rules requiring wireless
providers to support roaming on each other’s networks during disasters, and the California Public
Utilities Commission has imposed regulations relating to back-up power for communications facilities.
 Intercarrier Compensation and Network Access 
The FCC regulates some of the rates that carriers pay each other for the exchange of voice traffic
(particularly traditional wireline traffic) over different networks and other aspects of
interconnection for some voice services. The FCC also regulates some of the rates and terms and
conditions for certain wireline "business data services" and other services and network facilities.
Verizon is both a seller and a buyer of these services, and both makes and receives interconnection
payments.
 Human Capital Resources 
At Verizon, we know that our people are one of our most valuable assets. In order to realize our core
business strategy, we have developed human capital programs and practices that support, develop and
care for our employees from the time they join our team through the entirety of their careers with
Verizon. These programs are centered on the following principles:
• Attract the right talent for our future and maintain a diverse workforce with high-value skills and
expertise.
• Develop our employees to their full potential through best-in-class educational programs and
exceptional development experiences and create a culture of continuous learning and engagement.
• Inspire individuals to build a career at Verizon by providing meaningful work and upskilling
opportunities and establishing an inclusive work environment for all.
Verizon is committed to being an employer of choice. With approximately 117,100 employees on a full-
time equivalent basis as of December 31, 2022, 89% of whom are based in the U.S., we know that we
need employees with diverse backgrounds, experiences and perspectives to best meet the needs of the
diverse customers and communities we serve. Our human capital programs and practices are designed to
create a workplace where employees are empowered to share their authentic selves and feel seen and
heard as vital contributors to Verizon’s corporate purpose. In addition, Verizon has extensive on-
the-job training opportunities, tuition reimbursement programs and career development support to
enable our employees to maximize their potential and thrive professionally. Our long-standing
commitment to diversity and inclusion has resulted in a strong representation of women and people of
color. As of December 31, 2022, Verizon's global workforce was approximately 66.5% male, 33.3% female
and 0.2% unknown or undeclared, and the race/ethnicity of our U.S. workforce was 52.5% White, 20.0%
Black, 12.9% Hispanic, 8.2% Asian, 0.5% American Indian/Alaskan Native, 0.3% Native Hawaiian/Pacific
Islander, 2.7% two or more races, and 2.9% unknown or undeclared. Women represented 36.4% of U.S.
senior leadership (vice president level and above). People of color represented 32.5% of U.S. senior
leadership.
Verizon respects our employees’ rights to freedom of association and collective bargaining in
compliance with applicable law, including the right to join or not join labor unions. We have a long
history of working with the Communications Workers of America and the International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers—the two unions that in total represent approximately 22.5% of our employees as of
December 31, 2022. The current collective bargaining agreements covering our union-represented
employees who serve customers in our Mid-Atlantic and Northeast service areas extend through August
1, 2026. In addition, where applicable outside of the U.S., we engage with employee representative
bodies such as works council. Verizon meets with U.S. national and local union leaders, as well as
works council leaders outside the U.S., to talk about key business topics, including safety, customer
service, plans to improve operational processes, our business performance and the impacts that
changing technology and competition are having on our customers, employees and business strategy.
For a discussion of the oversight provided by the Company's Board of Directors over Verizon's human
capital management practices, see the section entitled "Governance — Our Governance Framework —
Oversight of human capital management" in our definitive Proxy Statement to be filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission and delivered to shareholders in connection with our 2023 Annual
Meeting of Shareholders.
 12 
Table of Contents
 Patents, Trademarks and Licenses 
We own or have licenses to various patents, copyrights, trademarks, domain names and other
intellectual property rights necessary to conduct our business. We actively pursue the filing and
registration of patents, copyrights, trademarks and domain names to protect our intellectual property
rights within the United States and abroad. We also actively grant licenses, in exchange for
appropriate fees or other consideration and subject to appropriate safeguards and restrictions, to
other companies that enable them to utilize certain of our intellectual property rights and
proprietary technology as part of their products and services. Such licenses enable the licensees to
take advantage of Verizon's brands and the results of Verizon’s research and development efforts.
While these licenses result in valuable consideration for Verizon, we do not believe that the loss of
such consideration, or the expiration of any of our intellectual property rights, would have a
material effect on our results of operations.
We periodically receive offers from third parties to purchase or obtain licenses for patents and
other intellectual property rights in exchange for royalties or other payments. We also periodically
receive notices alleging that our products or services infringe on third-party patents or other
intellectual property rights. These claims, whether against us directly or against third-party
suppliers of products or services that we sell to our customers, if successful, could require us to
pay damages or royalties, rebrand, or cease offering the relevant products or services.
 Information About Our Executive Officers 
See Part III, Item 10. "Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance" of this Annual Report
on Form 10-K for information about our executive officers.
 Information on Our Internet Website 
We make available, free of charge on our website, our annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly reports
on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments to those reports, at
https://www.verizon.com/about/investors as soon as reasonably practicable after such reports are
electronically filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). These reports
and other information are also available on the SEC's website at https://www.sec.gov. We periodically
provide other information for investors on our website, including news and announcements regarding
our financial performance, information on environmental, social and corporate governance matters, and
details related to our annual meeting of shareholders. We encourage investors, the media, our
customers, business partners and other stakeholders to review the information we post on this
channel. Website references in this report are provided as a convenience and do not constitute, and
should not be viewed as, incorporation by reference of the information contained on, or available
through, the websites. Therefore, such information should not be considered part of this report.
 Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking 
 Statements 
In this report we have made forward-looking statements. These statements are based on our estimates
and assumptions and are subject to risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements include the
information concerning our possible or assumed future results of operations. Forward-looking
statements also include those preceded or followed by the words "anticipates," "believes,"
"estimates," "expects," "forecasts," "hopes," "plans" or similar expressions. For those statements,
we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. We undertake no obligation to revise or publicly release
the results of any revision to these forward-looking statements, except as required by law. Given
these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-
looking statements.
The following important factors, along with those discussed elsewhere in this report and in other
filings with the SEC, could affect future results and could cause those results to differ materially
from those expressed in the forward-looking statements:
• the effects of competition in the markets in which we operate, including any inability to
successfully respond to competitive factors such as prices, promotional incentives and evolving
consumer preferences;
• failure to take advantage of, or respond to competitors' use of, developments in technology and
address changes in consumer demand;
• performance issues or delays in the deployment of our 5G network resulting in significant costs or
a reduction in the anticipated benefits of the enhancement to our networks;
• the inability to implement our business strategy;
• adverse conditions in the U.S. and international economies, including inflation in the markets in
which we operate;
• cyber attacks impacting our networks or systems and any resulting financial or reputational impact;
 13 
Table of Contents
• damage to our infrastructure or disruption of our operations from natural disasters, extreme
weather conditions, acts of war, terrorist attacks or other hostile acts and any resulting financial
or reputational impact;
• the impact of public health crises on our operations, our employees and the ways in which our
customers use our networks and other products and services;
• disruption of our key suppliers’ or vendors' provisioning of products or services, including as a
result of geopolitical factors, public health crises or the potential impacts of global climate
change;
• material adverse changes in labor matters and any resulting financial or operational impact;
• changes in the regulatory environment in which we operate, including any increase in restrictions
on our ability to operate our networks or businesses;
• our high level of indebtedness;
• significant litigation and any resulting material expenses incurred in defending against lawsuits
or paying awards or settlements;
• an adverse change in the ratings afforded our debt securities by nationally accredited ratings
organizations or adverse conditions in the credit markets affecting the cost, including interest
rates, and/or availability of further financing;
• significant increases in benefit plan costs or lower investment returns on plan assets;
• changes in tax laws or treaties, or in their interpretation; and
• changes in accounting assumptions that regulatory agencies, including the SEC, may require or that
result from changes in the accounting rules or their application, which could result in an impact on
earnings.
 Item 1A.    Risk Factors 
The following discussion of "Risk Factors" identifies factors that may adversely affect our business,
operations, financial condition or future performance. This information should be read in conjunction
with "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Result of Operations" and the
consolidated financial statements and related notes. The following discussion of risks is not all-
inclusive but is designed to highlight what we believe are the material factors to consider when
evaluating our business and expectations. These factors could cause our future results to differ
materially from our historical results and from expectations reflected in forward-looking statements.
 Economic and Strategic Risks 
We face significant competition that may reduce our profits.
We face significant competition in our industries. The rapid development of new technologies,
services and products has eliminated many of the traditional distinctions among wireless, cable,
internet and local and long distance communication services and brought new competitors to our
markets, including other telecommunications companies, cable companies, wireless service providers,
satellite providers, technology companies and application and device providers. While these changes
have enabled us to offer new types of products and services, they have also allowed other providers
to broaden the scope of their own competitive offerings. If we are unable to compete effectively, we
could experience lower than expected revenues and earnings.
Wireless service providers are significantly altering the financial relationships with their
customers through commercial offers that vary service and device pricing, promotions, incentives and
levels of service provided – in some cases specifically targeting our customers and putting pressure
on pricing and margins. In addition, the wireless industry’s customer growth rate could moderate in
comparison to historical growth rates, leading to increased competition for customers. Our ability to
compete effectively will depend on, among other things, our network quality, capacity and coverage,
the pricing of our products and services, the quality of our customer service, our development of new
and enhanced products and services, the reach and quality of our sales and distribution channels, our
ability to market our products and services effectively and our capital resources. It will also
depend on how successfully we anticipate and respond to various factors affecting our industries,
including new technologies and business models, changes in consumer preferences and demand for
existing services, demographic trends and evolving economic conditions, including inflation. If we
are not able to respond successfully to these competitive challenges, our results of operations and
financial condition could be adversely impacted. In addition, a projected sustained decline in a
reporting unit's revenues and earnings could have a significant negative impact on its fair value and
result in an impairment charge, which could have an adverse impact on our results of operations.
If we are not able to take advantage of developments in technology and address changing consumer
demand on a timely basis, or if the deployment of our 5G network is delayed or hindered for any
reason, we
 14 
Table of Contents
may experience a decline in the demand for our services, be unable to implement our business strategy
and experience reduced profits.
Our industries are rapidly changing as new technologies are developed that offer consumers an array
of choices for their communications needs and allow new entrants into the markets we serve. In order
to grow and remain competitive, we will need to adapt to future changes in technology, enhance our
existing offerings and introduce new offerings to address our customers’ changing demands. If we are
unable to meet future challenges from competing technologies on a timely basis or at an acceptable
cost, we could lose customers to our competitors. We may not be able to accurately predict
technological trends or the success of new services in the market. If our new services fail to gain
acceptance in the marketplace, or if costs associated with the implementation and introduction of
these services materially increase, our ability to retain and attract customers could be adversely
affected.
In addition, the deployment of our 5G network is subject to a variety of risks, including those
related to equipment and spectrum availability, unexpected costs, and regulatory matters that could
cause deployment delays or network performance issues. These issues could result in significant
costs, put us at a competitive disadvantage, or reduce the anticipated benefits of the enhancements
to our networks.
As we introduce new offerings and technologies, such as 5G technology, we must phase out outdated and
unprofitable technologies and services. If we are unable to do so on a cost-effective basis, we could
experience reduced profits. In addition, there could be legal or regulatory restraints on our ability
to phase out current services.
Adverse conditions in the U.S. and international economies could impact our results of operations and
financial condition.
Unfavorable economic conditions, such as a recession or economic slowdown in the U.S. or elsewhere,
or inflation in the markets in which we operate, could negatively affect the affordability of and
demand for some of our products and services and our cost of doing business. In difficult economic
conditions, consumers may seek to reduce discretionary spending by forgoing purchases of our
products, electing to use fewer higher margin services, dropping down in price plans or obtaining
lower-cost products and services offered by other companies. Similarly, under these conditions, the
business customers that we serve may delay purchasing decisions, delay full implementation of service
offerings or reduce their use of services. In addition, adverse economic conditions may lead to an
increased number of our consumer and business customers that are unable to pay for services.
Unfavorable economic conditions could also amplify other risk factors discussed in this section,
including, but not limited to, our competitive position and margins. In 2022, as a result of the
inflationary environment in the U.S., we experienced increases in our direct costs, including
electricity and other energy-related costs for our network operations, and transportation and labor
costs, as well as increased interest expenses related to rising interest rates. We believe that this
inflationary environment and the resulting decline in real wages in the U.S. are altering consumer
preferences and causing consumers to become more price conscious. These factors, along with impacts
of the intense competition in our industries, resulted in increased costs and lower earnings per
share during 2022, and caused us to lower our growth expectations and related financial guidance. We
expect the inflationary environment and these other pressures to continue into 2023. Although we are
taking various measures to improve efficiency and reduce costs, those measures may ultimately be
ineffective or insufficient. If the economic slowdown in the U.S., inflation and other unfavorable
economic conditions continue or worsen, they could have a material adverse effect on our results of
operations and financial condition.
 Operational Risks 
Cyber attacks impacting our networks or systems could have an adverse effect on our business.
Cyber attacks, including through the use of malware, computer viruses, distributed denial of services
attacks, ransomware attacks, credential harvesting, social engineering and other means for obtaining
unauthorized access to or disrupting the operation of our networks and systems and those of our
suppliers, vendors and other service providers, could have an adverse effect on our business. Cyber
attacks may cause equipment failures, loss of information, including sensitive personal information
of customers or employees or valuable technical and marketing information, as well as disruptions to
our or our customers’ operations. Cyber attacks against companies, including Verizon, have increased
in frequency, scope and potential harm in recent years. They may occur alone or in conjunction with
physical attacks, especially where disruption of service is an objective of the attacker. The
development and maintenance of systems to prevent such attacks is costly and requires ongoing
monitoring and updating to address their increasing prevalence and sophistication. While, to date, we
have not been subject to cyber attacks that, individually or in the aggregate, have been material to
Verizon's operations or financial condition, the preventive actions we take to reduce the risks
associated with cyber attacks, including protection of our systems and networks, may be insufficient
to repel or mitigate the effects of a major cyber attack in the future.
The inability to operate or use our networks and systems or those of our suppliers, vendors and other
service providers as a result of cyber attacks, even for a limited period of time, may result in
significant expenses to Verizon and/or a loss of market share to our competitors. The costs
associated with a major cyber attack on Verizon could include expensive incentives offered to
existing customers and business partners to retain their business, increased expenditures on
cybersecurity measures and the use of alternate resources, lost revenues from business interruption
and litigation. Further, certain of Verizon’s businesses, such as those offering security solutions
and infrastructure and cloud services to business customers, could be negatively affected if
 15 
Table of Contents
our ability to protect our own networks and systems is called into question as a result of a cyber
attack. Our presence in the IoT industry, which includes offerings of telematics products and
services, could also increase our exposure to potential costs and expenses and reputational harm in
the event of cyber attacks impacting these products or services. In addition, a compromise of
security or a theft or other compromise of valuable information, such as financial data and sensitive
or private personal information, could result in lawsuits and government claims, investigations or
proceedings. Any of these occurrences could damage our reputation, adversely impact customer and
investor confidence and result in a material adverse effect on Verizon’s results of operation or
financial condition.
Natural disasters, extreme weather conditions, acts of war, terrorist or other hostile acts could
cause damage to our infrastructure and result in significant disruptions to our operations.
Our business operations are subject to interruption by power outages, acts of war, terrorist or other
hostile acts, natural disasters or the potential impacts of climate change, including the increasing
prevalence and intensity of hurricanes, wildfires, flooding, hail and storms. Such events could cause
significant damage to our infrastructure upon which our business operations rely, resulting in
degradation or disruption of service to our customers, as well as significant recovery time and
expenditures to resume operations. Our system redundancy may be ineffective or inadequate to sustain
our operations through all such events. We are implementing, and will continue to implement, measures
to protect our infrastructure and operations from the impacts of these events in the future, but
these measures and our overall disaster recovery planning may not be sufficient for all
eventualities. These events could also damage the infrastructure of the suppliers that provide us
with the equipment and services that we need to operate our business and provide products to our
customers. These occurrences could result in lost revenues from business interruption, damage to our
reputation and reduced profits.
Public health crises could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition and results
of operations.
We are subject to risks related to public health crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, which had an
adverse effect on our operating results in 2020. Our business is based on our ability to provide
products and services to customers throughout the United States and around the world and the ability
of those customers to use and pay for those products and services for their businesses and in their
daily lives. As a result, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be
materially adversely affected by a public health crisis that significantly impacts the way customers
use and are able to pay for our products and services, the way our employees are able to provide
services to our customers, and the ways that our partners and suppliers are able to provide products
and services to us. For example, public and private sector policies and initiatives to reduce the
transmission of COVID-19 and initiatives Verizon took in response to the health crisis to promote the
health and safety of our employees and provide critical infrastructure and connectivity to our
customers, along with the related global slowdown in economic activity, resulted in decreased
revenues, increased costs and lower earnings per share during 2020. In addition, such a crisis could
significantly increase the probability or consequences of the risks our business faces in ordinary
circumstances, such as risks associated with our supplier and vendor relationships, risks of an
economic slowdown, regulatory risks, and the costs and availability of financing.
We depend on key suppliers and vendors to provide equipment that we need to operate our business.
We depend on various key suppliers and vendors to provide us, directly or through other suppliers,
with equipment and services, such as fiber, switch and network equipment, smartphones and other
wireless devices that we need in order to operate our business and provide products and services to
our customers. For example, our smartphone and other device suppliers often rely on one vendor for
the manufacture and supply of critical components, such as chipsets, used in their devices, and there
are a limited number of companies capable of supplying the network infrastructure equipment on which
we depend. These suppliers or vendors could fail to provide equipment or service on a timely basis,
or fail to meet our performance expectations, for a number of reasons, including, for example,
disruption to the global supply chain as a result of geopolitical factors, public health crises,
natural disasters or the potential impacts of global climate change. If such failures occur, we may
be unable to provide products and services as and when requested by our customers, or we may be
unable to continue to maintain or upgrade our networks. Due to the cost and time lag that can be
associated with transitioning from one supplier to another, our business could be substantially
disrupted if we were required to, or chose to, replace the products or services of one or more major
suppliers with products or services from another source, especially if the replacement became
necessary on short notice. Any such disruption could increase our costs, decrease our operating
efficiencies and have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial
condition.
The suppliers and vendors on which we rely may also be subject to litigation with respect to
technology on which we depend, including litigation involving claims of patent infringement. Such
claims are frequently made in the communications industry. We are unable to predict whether our
business will be affected by any such litigation. We expect our dependence on key suppliers to
continue as we develop and introduce more advanced generations of technology.
A significant portion of our workforce is represented by labor unions, and we could incur additional
costs or experience work stoppages as a result of the renegotiation of our labor contracts.
As of December 31, 2022, approximately 22.5% of our workforce is represented by the Communications
Workers of America or the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. While we have labor
contracts in place with these unions, with subsequent negotiations we could incur additional costs
and/or experience work stoppages, which could adversely affect our business
 16 
Table of Contents
operations. In addition, while a small percentage of the workforce outside of our traditional
wireline operations is represented by unions for bargaining, we cannot predict what impact increased
union density in this workforce could have on our operations.
 Regulatory and Legal Risks 
Changes in the regulatory framework under which we operate could adversely affect our business
prospects or results of operations.
Our domestic operations are subject to regulation by the FCC and other federal, state, and local
agencies, and our international operations are regulated by various foreign governments and
international bodies. These regulatory regimes frequently restrict or impose conditions on our
ability to operate in designated areas and provide specified products or services. We are frequently
required to maintain licenses for our operations and conduct our operations in accordance with
prescribed standards. We are often involved in regulatory and other governmental proceedings or
inquiries related to the application of these requirements. It is impossible to predict with any
certainty the outcome of pending federal and state regulatory proceedings relating to our operations,
or the reviews by federal or state courts of regulatory rulings. Without relief, existing laws and
regulations may inhibit our ability to expand our business and introduce new products and services.
Similarly, we cannot guarantee that we will be successful in obtaining the licenses needed to carry
out our business plan or in maintaining our existing licenses. For example, the FCC grants wireless
licenses for terms generally lasting 10 years, subject to renewal. The loss of, or a material
limitation on, certain of our licenses could have a material adverse effect on our business, results
of operations and financial condition.
New laws or regulations or changes to the existing regulatory framework at the federal, state, and
local, or international level, such as those described below, those that incentivize business models
or technologies different from ours or requirements limiting our ability to continue or discontinue
service to customers could restrict the ways in which we manage our wireline and wireless networks
and operate our businesses, impose additional costs, impair revenue opportunities, and potentially
impede our ability to provide services in a manner that would be attractive to us and our customers.
• Privacy and data protection – We are subject to federal, state and international laws related to
privacy and data protection. In particular, the California Consumer Privacy Act, Europe's General
Data Protection Regulation and a number of other privacy laws recently adopted by other states and
countries include significant penalties for non-compliance. Generally, attention to privacy and data
security requirements is increasing at all levels of government globally, and privacy-related
legislation has been introduced or is under consideration in many locations. These regulations could
have a significant impact on our businesses.
• Regulation of broadband internet access services – In its 2015 Title II Order, the FCC nullified
its longstanding "light touch" approach to regulating broadband internet access services and
"reclassified" these services as telecommunications services subject to utilities-style common
carriage regulation. The FCC repealed the 2015 Title II Order in December 2017, and returned to its
traditional light-touch approach for these services. The 2017 order has been affirmed in part by the
D.C. Circuit but may be revisited by the FCC or by Congress. Several states have also adopted or are
considering adopting laws or executive orders that would impose net neutrality and other requirements
on some of our services (in some cases different from the FCC’s 2015 rules). Although some of these
have been challenged in court, the ultimate enforceability and effect of these state rules is
uncertain.
• "Open Access" – We hold certain wireless licenses that require us to comply with so-called "open
access" FCC regulations, which generally require licensees of particular spectrum to allow customers
to use devices and applications of their choice. Moreover, certain services could be subject to
conflicting regulation by the FCC and/or various state and local authorities, which could
significantly increase the cost of implementing and introducing new services.
• Climate-Related Regulation and Policy – Due to the nature of our operations, we have been, and
expect to continue to be impacted by regulatory developments related to climate change, including,
for example, the direct regulation of greenhouse gas emissions or carbon policies that could result
in a tax on such emissions. In addition, policy-driven changes in the prices of fuel or energy in
geographies in which we operate could make it more expensive for us to purchase energy to power our
networks and data centers, and any increase in taxes on fuel could increase our costs associated with
operating those vehicles in our fleet that are dependent on traditional fuels.
These developments and the further regulation of broadband, wireless, and our other activities and
any related court decisions could result in significant increases in costs for us or restrict our
ability to compete in the marketplace and limit the return we can expect to achieve on past and
future investments in our networks.
We are subject to a substantial amount of litigation, which could require us to pay significant
damages or settlements.
We are subject to a substantial amount of litigation and claims in arbitration, including, but not
limited to, shareholder derivative suits, patent infringement lawsuits, wage and hour class actions,
contract and commercial claims, personal injury claims, property claims, environmental claims, and
lawsuits relating to our advertising, sales, billing and collection practices. In addition, our
wireless business also faces personal injury and wrongful death lawsuits relating to alleged health
effects of wireless phones
 17 
Table of Contents
or radio frequency transmitters. We may incur significant expenses in defending these lawsuits. In
addition, we may be required to pay significant awards or settlements.
 Financial Risks 
Verizon has significant debt, which could increase further if Verizon incurs additional debt in the
future and does not retire existing debt.
As of December 31, 2022, Verizon had approximately $130.6 billion of outstanding unsecured
indebtedness, $9.4 billion of unused borrowing capacity under our existing revolving credit facility
and $20.0 billion of outstanding secured indebtedness. Verizon’s debt level and related debt service
obligations could have negative consequences, including:
• requiring Verizon to dedicate significant cash flow from operations to the payment of principal,
interest and other amounts payable on our debt, which would reduce the funds we have available for
other purposes, such as working capital, capital expenditures, dividend payments and acquisitions;
• making it more difficult or expensive for Verizon to obtain any necessary future financing for
working capital, capital expenditures, debt service requirements, debt refinancing, acquisitions or
other purposes and limiting its ability to repurchase common stock;
• reducing Verizon’s flexibility in planning for or reacting to changes in our industries and market
conditions;
• making Verizon more vulnerable in the event of a downturn in our business; and
• exposing Verizon to increased interest rate risk to the extent that our debt obligations are
subject to variable interest rates.
Adverse changes in the financial markets and other factors could increase our borrowing costs and the
availability of financing.
We require a significant amount of capital to operate and grow our business. We fund our capital
needs in part through borrowings in the public and private credit markets. Adverse changes in the
financial markets, including increases in interest rates or changes in exchange rates, could increase
our cost of borrowing, require us to post a significant amount of collateral, and/or make it more
difficult for us to obtain financing for our operations or refinance existing indebtedness. In
addition, our ability to obtain funding under asset-backed debt transactions is subject to our
ability to continue to originate a sufficient amount of assets eligible to be securitized. Our
borrowing costs also can be affected by short- and long-term debt ratings assigned by independent
rating agencies, which are based, in significant part, on our performance as measured by customary
credit metrics. A decrease in these ratings would likely increase our cost of borrowing and/or make
it more difficult for us to obtain financing. A severe disruption in the global financial markets
could impact some of the financial institutions with which we do business, and such instability could
also affect our access to financing.
Increases in costs for pension benefits and active and retiree healthcare benefits may reduce our
profitability and increase our funding commitments.
With approximately 117,100 employees and approximately 186,700 retirees as of December 31, 2022
eligible to participate in Verizon’s benefit plans, the costs of pension benefits and active and
retiree healthcare benefits have a significant impact on our profitability. Our costs of maintaining
these plans, and the future funding requirements for these plans, are affected by several factors,
including increases in healthcare costs, decreases in investment returns on funds held by our pension
and other benefit plan trusts and changes in the discount rate and mortality assumptions used to
calculate pension and other postretirement expenses. If we are unable to limit future increases in
the costs of our benefit plans, those costs could reduce our profitability and increase our funding
commitments.
 Item 1B.    Unresolved Staff Comments 
None.
 18 
Table of Contents
 Item 2.    Properties 
Our principal properties do not lend themselves to simple description by character and location. Our
total gross investment in property, plant and equipment was approximately $308 billion at December
31, 2022 and $290 billion at December 31, 2021, including the effect of retirements, but before
deducting accumulated depreciation. Our gross investment in property, plant and equipment consisted
of the following:
 At December 31, 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Network equipment 77.2 % 76.9 % 
 Land, buildings and building equipment 11.7 % 11.7 % 
 Furniture and other 11.1 % 11.4 % 
 100.0 % 100.0 % 
Network equipment consists primarily of cable (aerial, buried, underground or undersea) and the
related support structures of poles and conduit, wireless plant, switching equipment, network
software, transmission equipment and related facilities. Land, buildings and building equipment
consists of land and land improvements, central office buildings or any other buildings that house
network equipment, and buildings that are used for administrative and other purposes. Substantially
all the switching centers are located on land and in buildings we own due to their critical role in
the networks and high set-up and relocation costs. We also maintain facilities throughout the U.S.
comprised of administrative and sales offices, customer care centers, retail sales locations, garage
work centers, switching centers, cell sites and data centers. Furniture and other consists of
telephone equipment, furniture, data processing equipment, office equipment, motor vehicles,
construction in process, and leasehold improvements.
 Item 3.    Legal Proceedings 
In the ordinary course of business, Verizon is involved in various litigation and regulatory
proceedings at the state and federal level. As of the date of this report, we do not believe that any
pending legal proceedings to which we or our subsidiaries are subject are required to be disclosed as
material legal proceedings pursuant to this item. Verizon is not subject to any administrative or
judicial proceeding arising under any federal, state or local provisions that have been enacted or
adopted regulating the discharge of materials into the environment or primarily for the purpose of
protecting the environment that is likely to result in monetary sanctions of $1 million or more. For
a discussion of our litigation risks, refer to Item 1A Risk Factors.
 Item 4.    Mine Safety Disclosures 
None.
 19 
Table of Contents
 PART II 
 Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, 
 Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases 
 of Equity Securities 
The principal market for trading in the common stock of the Company is the New York Stock Exchange
under the symbol "VZ".
As of December 31, 2022, there were 462,587 shareholders of record. In addition, a significant number
of holders of the Company's common stock are "street name" or beneficial holders, whose shares are
held of record by banks, brokers, and other financial institutions.
 Stock Repurchases 
In February 2020, the Board of Directors of the Company authorized a share buyback program to
repurchase up to 100 million shares of our common stock. The program will terminate when the
aggregate number of shares purchased reaches 100 million, or a new share repurchase plan superseding
the current plan is authorized, whichever is sooner. Under the program, shares may be repurchased in
privately negotiated transactions, on the open market, or otherwise, including through plans
complying with Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act. The timing and number of shares purchased under
the program, if any, will depend on market conditions and our capital allocation priorities.
During the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, Verizon did not repurchase any shares of the
Company's common stock under our authorized share buyback program. At December 31, 2022, the maximum
number of shares that could be purchased by or on behalf of Verizon under our share buyback program
was 100 million.
 Stock Performance Graph 
 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Ve… $ 100… $ 111… $ 126.7 $ 126… $ 117.0 $ 93.6 
 S&P 100… 95.6 125.7 148… 191.5 156… 
 500 
 S&P 
 500 100… 87.5 116.1 143… 174.4 104… 
 Te… 
 Se… 
The graph compares the cumulative total returns of Verizon, the S&P 500 Stock Index and the S&P 500
Telecommunications Services Index over a five-year period. It assumes $100 was invested on December
31, 2017 with dividends being reinvested.
 Item 6. [Reserved] 
 20 
Table of Contents
 Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of 
 Financial Condition and Results of Operations 
 Overview 
Verizon Communications Inc. (the Company) is a holding company that, acting through its subsidiaries
(together with the Company, collectively, Verizon), is one of the world’s leading providers of
communications, technology, information and entertainment products and services to consumers,
businesses and government entities. With a presence around the world, we offer data, video and voice
services and solutions on our networks and platforms that are designed to meet customers’ demand for
mobility, reliable network connectivity, security and control.
To compete effectively in today’s dynamic marketplace, we are focused on the capabilities of our
high-performing networks to drive growth based on delivering what customers want and need in the
digital world. In 2022, we focused on maintaining our network leadership, including by rapidly
deploying C-Band spectrum; retaining and growing our high-quality customer base while balancing
profitability in challenging market conditions; and driving monetization of our networks, platforms
and solutions. We are creating business value by earning the trust of our stakeholders, limiting our
environmental impact and supporting our customer base growth while creating social benefit through
our products and services. Our strategy requires significant capital investments primarily to acquire
wireless spectrum, put the spectrum into service, provide additional capacity for growth in our
networks, invest in the fiber that supports our businesses, evolve and maintain our networks and
develop and maintain significant advanced information technology systems and data system
capabilities. 2022 was a peak year of capital investment for us as we rapidly deployed C-Band
spectrum. We believe that this spectrum, together with our industry leading millimeter wave spectrum
holding, 4G LTE network and fiber infrastructure, will drive innovative products and services and
fuel our growth.
We are consistently deploying new network architecture and technologies to secure our leadership in
both fourth-generation (4G) and fifth-generation (5G) wireless networks. We expect that our next-
generation multi-use platform, which we call the Intelligent Edge Network, will simplify operations
by eliminating legacy network elements, speed the deployment of 5G wireless technology and create new
opportunities in the business market in a cost efficient manner. Our network leadership is the
hallmark of our brand and the foundation for the connectivity, platforms and solutions upon which we
build our competitive advantage.
 Highlights of Our 2022 Financial Results 
(dollars in millions)
 21 
Table of Contents
 Business Overview 
We have two reportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units - Verizon
Consumer Group (Consumer) and Verizon Business Group (Business).
 Revenue by Segment 
———
Note: Excludes eliminations.
 Verizon Consumer Group 
Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline communications services and
products. Our wireless services are provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in
the United States (U.S.) under the Verizon brand, TracFone Wireless, Inc. (TracFone) brands and
through wholesale and other arrangements. We also provide fixed wireless access (FWA) broadband
through our wireless networks. Our wireline services are provided in nine states in the Mid-Atlantic
and Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over our 100% fiber-optic network through our
Verizon Fios product portfolio and over a traditional copper-based network to customers who are not
served by Fios. Our Consumer segment's wireless and wireline products and services are available to
our retail customers, as well as resellers that purchase wireless network access from us on a
wholesale basis.
Customers can obtain our wireless services on a postpaid or prepaid basis. Our postpaid service is
generally billed one month in advance for a monthly access charge in return for access to and usage
of network services. Our prepaid service is offered only to Consumer customers and enables
individuals to obtain wireless services without credit verification by paying for all services in
advance. The Consumer segment also offers several categories of wireless equipment to customers,
including a variety of smartphones and other handsets, wireless-enabled internet devices, such as
tablets, and other wireless-enabled connected devices, such as smart watches.
In addition to the wireless services and equipment discussed above, the Consumer segment sells
residential fixed connectivity solutions, including internet, video and voice services, and wireless
network access to resellers on a wholesale basis. The Consumer segment's operating revenues for the
year ended December 31, 2022 totaled $103.5 billion, an increase of $8.2 billion, or 8.6%, compared
to the year ended December 31, 2021. See "Segment Results of Operations" for additional information
regarding our Consumer segment’s operating performance and selected operating statistics.
 Verizon Business Group 
Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications services and products, including
data, video and conferencing services, corporate networking solutions, security and managed network
services, local and long distance voice services and network access to deliver various Internet of
Things (IoT) services and products, including solutions that support fleet tracking management,
compliance management, field service management, asset tracking and other types of mobile resource
management. We also provide FWA broadband through our wireless networks. We provide these products
and services to businesses, government customers and wireless and wireline carriers across the U.S.
and select products and services to customers around the world. The Business segment's operating
revenues for the year ended December 31, 2022 totaled $31.1 billion and remained relatively flat
compared to the year ended December 31, 2021. See "Segment Results of Operations" for additional
information regarding our Business segment’s operating performance and selected operating statistics.
 Corporate and Other 
Corporate and other primarily includes insurance captives, investments in unconsolidated businesses
and development stage businesses that support our strategic initiatives, as well as unallocated
corporate expenses, certain pension and other employee
 22 
Table of Contents
benefit related costs and interest and financing expenses. Corporate and other also includes the
historical results of divested businesses, including Verizon Media Group (Verizon Media) divested in
September 2021, and other adjustments and gains and losses that are not allocated in assessing
segment performance due to their nature. Although such transactions are excluded from the business
segment results, they are included in reported consolidated earnings. Gains and losses from these
transactions that are not individually significant are included in segment results as these items are
included in the chief operating decision maker’s assessment of segment performance. See "Consolidated
Results of Operations" for additional information regarding Corporate and other results.
 Capital Expenditures and Investments 
We continue to invest in our wireless networks, high-speed fiber and other advanced technologies to
position ourselves at the center of growth trends for the future. During the year ended December 31,
2022, these investments included $23.1 billion for capital expenditures, inclusive of approximately
$6.2 billion in C-Band related capital expenditures. See "Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities"
and "Liquidity and Capital Resources" for additional information. We believe that our investments
aimed at expanding our portfolio of products and services will provide our customers with an
efficient, reliable infrastructure for competing in the information economy.
 Global Network and Technology 
We are focusing our capital spending on adding capacity and density to our 4G Long-Term Evolution
(LTE) network, while also building our next generation 5G network. We are densifying our networks by
utilizing small cell technology, in-building solutions and distributed antenna systems. Network
densification enables us to add capacity to address increasing mobile video consumption and the
growing demand for IoT products and services on our 4G LTE and 5G networks. Over the past several
years, we have been leading the development of 5G wireless technology industry standards and the
ecosystems for fixed and mobile 5G wireless services. 5G technology enables higher throughput and
lower latency than the 4G LTE technology and allows our networks to handle more traffic as the number
of internet-connected devices grows. In January 2022, we began deploying C-Band spectrum, which has
been built out to cover approximately 189 million POPs in the U.S. as of December 31, 2022. We expect
to continue deploying C-Band spectrum across the continental U.S. as more and more of the spectrum
becomes available for our use. We use low and mid-band spectrum and dynamic spectrum sharing (DSS)
technology, to allow 5G service to run simultaneously with 4G LTE on multiple spectrum bands. With
DSS, whenever customers move outside Verizon’s millimeter wave and C-Band coverage areas, their
5G-enabled devices will remain on 5G technology using the lower spectrum bands where this network is
available. This allows us to more fully and effectively utilize our current spectrum resources to
serve both 4G and 5G customers.
To compensate for the shrinking market for traditional copper-based products, we continue to build
fiber-based networks supporting data, video and advanced business services - areas where demand for
reliable high-speed connections is growing. We are transforming the architecture of our networks into
our Intelligent Edge Network, providing improved efficiency and virtualization, increased automation
and opportunities for edge computing services that will support our fiber-based and radio access
network technologies. We expect that this new architecture will simplify operations by eliminating
legacy network elements, speed the deployment of 5G wireless technology and create new opportunities
in the business market in a cost-efficient manner.
 Consolidated Results of Operations 
In this section, we discuss our overall results of operations and highlight special items that are
not included in our segment results. In "Segment Results of Operations," we review the performance of
our two reportable segments in more detail. A detailed discussion of 2020 items and year-over-year
comparisons between 2021 and 2020 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in the
"Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021.
 Consolidated Operating Revenues 
 (dollars in 
 Years Ended millions) 
 December 31, 2022 2021 2022 vs. 2021 Increase/(Dec… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer $ 103,506 $ 95,300 $ 8,206 8.6 % 
 Business 31,072 31,042 30 0.1 
 Corporate 2,510 7,722 -5,212 -67.5 
 and other 
 Eliminations -253 -451 198 43.9 
 Consolidated 
 Operating $ 136,835 $ 133,613 $ 3,222 2.4 
 Revenues 
Consolidated operating revenues increased during 2022 compared to 2021, due to increases in our
Consumer and Business segments, partially offset by a decrease in Corporate and other.
 23 
Table of Contents
Corporate and other revenues decreased during 2022 compared to 2021, primarily due to the sale of
Verizon Media, which was completed in September 2021. Verizon Media's total operating revenues were
approximately $5.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021. See Note 3 to the consolidated
financial statements for additional information on the sale of Verizon Media.
Revenues for our segments are discussed separately below under the heading "Segment Results of
Operations."
 Consolidated Operating Expenses 
 (dollars in 
 Years Ended millions) 
 December 31, 2022 2021 2022 vs. 2021 Increase/(Dec… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cost of $ 28,637 $ 31,234 $ -2,597 -8.3 % 
 services 
 Cost of 
 wireless 30,496 25,067 5,429 21.7 
 equipment 
 Selling, 
 general and 30,136 28,658 1,478 5.2 
 administrati… 
 expense 
 Depreciation 
 and 17,099 16,206 893 5.5 
 amortization 
 expense 
 Consolidated 
 Operating $ 106,368 $ 101,165 $ 5,203 5.1 
 Expenses 
Operating expenses for our segments are discussed separately below under the heading "Segment Results
of Operations."
 Cost of Services 
Cost of services includes the following costs directly attributable to a service: salaries and wages,
benefits, materials and supplies, content costs, contracted services, network access and transport
costs, customer provisioning costs, computer systems support, costs to support our outsourcing
contracts and technical facilities and traffic acquisition costs. Aggregate customer service costs,
which include billing and service provisioning, are allocated between Cost of services and Selling,
general and administrative expense.
Cost of services decreased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• a decrease in traffic acquisition costs of $2.2 billion primarily related to the sale of Verizon
Media;
• a decrease in personnel costs of $745 million primarily related to the sale of Verizon Media;
• a decrease in digital content of $335 million primarily driven by the sale of Verizon Media;
• a decrease in other direct costs of $322 million primarily related to the sale of Verizon Media;
• a decrease in regulatory fees of $201 million due to a lower Federal Universal Service Fund (FUSF)
volume and rate;
• an increase in access costs of $614 million primarily due to the inclusion of TracFone results,
partially offset by a decline in voice services; and
• an increase in rent expense of $212 million related to adding capacity to the networks to support
demand and lease modifications for certain existing cell towers in April 2021 to support the build
out of our 5G wireless network.
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the sale of Verizon
Media and the acquisition of TracFone.
 Cost of Wireless Equipment 
Cost of wireless equipment increased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• an increase of $2.2 billion due to the inclusion of TracFone results;
• an increase of $2.1 billion driven by a higher volume of wireless devices sold primarily related to
upgrades; and
• an increase of $1.3 billion related to a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of wireless
devices sold.
 Selling, General and Administrative Expense 
Selling, general and administrative expense includes salaries and wages and benefits not directly
attributable to a service or product, the provision for credit losses, taxes other than income taxes,
advertising and sales commission costs, call center and information technology costs, regulatory
fees, professional service fees and rent and utilities for administrative space. Also included is a
portion of the aggregate customer care costs as discussed above in "Cost of Services."
Selling, general and administrative expense increased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• an increase in the provision for credit losses of $822 million driven by increased device payment
loan volume and an increase in the expected loss rate primarily as a result of the change in device
payment plan terms to 36 months, as well as actions taken in prior years in response to the COVID-19
pandemic;
• the $706 million net gain on the sale of Verizon Media in 2021;
• an increase in personnel costs of $603 million primarily related to the inclusion of TracFone
results and increases in third-party employee costs due to contracted services , partially offset by
a decrease due to the sale of Verizon Media;
• a decrease of $367 million in other general expenses driven by lease terminations primarily due to
the sale of Verizon Media ; and
• the $223 million loss resulting from agreements entered into to sell certain wireless licenses in
2021.
 24 
Table of Contents
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the sale of Verizon
Media, the acquisition of TracFone and spectrum license transactions.
 Depreciation and Amortization Expense 
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during 2022 compared to 2021, primarily due to the
change in the mix of net depreciable and amortizable assets, including acquisition-related intangible
assets, as well as the deployment of C-Band spectrum.
 Other Consolidated Results 
 Other Income (Expense), Net 
Additional information relating to Other income (expense), net is as follows:
 (dollars in 
 Years Ended millions) 
 December 31, 2022 2021 2022 vs. 2021 Increase/(Dec… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest $ 146 $ 48 $ 98 nm 
 income 
 Other 
 components of 
 net periodic 2,386 3,785 -1,399 -37.0 % 
 benefit 
 income 
 Net debt 
 extinguishment -1,077 -3,541 2,464 69.6 
 losses 
 Other, net -82 20 -102 nm 
 Total $ 1,373 $ 312 $ 1,061 nm 
nm - not meaningful
Other income (expense), net reflects certain items not directly related to our core operations,
including interest income, gains and losses from non-operating asset dispositions, debt
extinguishment costs, components of net periodic pension and postretirement benefit cost and income
and certain foreign exchange gains and losses.
Other income (expense), net changed during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• a net pension and postretirement benefits remeasurement gain of $1.7 billion recorded during 2022,
compared with a net pension and postretirement benefits remeasurement gain of $2.4 billion recorded
during 2021; and
• net debt extinguishment losses of $1.1 billion primarily related to tender offers in 2022, compared
with losses of $3.5 billion in connection with tender offers, the redemptions of securities issued by
Verizon and open market repurchases of various Company and subsidiary notes in 2021.
See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the other
components of net periodic pension and postretirement benefit income.
 Interest Expense 
 (dollars in 
 Years Ended millions) 
 December 31, 2022 2021 2022 vs. 2021 Increase/(Dec… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total 
 interest $ 5,643 $ 5,326 $ 317 6.0 % 
 costs on debt 
 balances 
 Less 
 capitalized 2,030 1,841 189 10.3 
 interest 
 costs 
 Total $ 3,613 $ 3,485 $ 128 3.7 
 Average debt 
 outstanding(… $ 151,226 $ 147,035 
 (3) 
 Effective 
 interest 3.7 % 3.6 % 
 rate(2) (3) 
(1) The average debt outstanding is a financial measure and is calculated by applying a simple
average of prior thirteen-month end balances of total short-term and long-term debt, net of
discounts, premiums and unamortized debt issuance costs.
(2) The effective interest rate is the rate of actual interest incurred on debt. It is calculated by
dividing the total interest costs on debt balances by the average debt outstanding.
(3) We believe that this measure is useful to management, investors and other users of our financial
information in evaluating our debt financing cost and trends in our debt leverage management.
Total interest expense increased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• an increase in interest costs due to a combination of higher average interest rates and higher
average debt balances; partially offset by
• an increase in capitalized interest costs as a result of a full year of capitalized interest on
C-Band licenses in 2022 compared to a partial year in 2021.
See Note 4 and Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on spectrum
licenses and debt transactions, respectively.
 25 
Table of Contents
 Provision for Income Taxes 
 (dollars in 
 Years Ended millions) 
 December 31, 2022 2021 2022 vs. 2021 Increase/(Decre… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Provision for $ 6,523 $ 6,802 $ -279 -4.1 % 
 income taxes 
 Effective 23.1 % 23.1 % 
 income tax rate 
The effective income tax rate is calculated by dividing the provision for income taxes by income
before the provision for income taxes. The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31,
2022 was comparable to the similar period in 2021. The decrease in the provision for income taxes was
primarily due to the decrease in income before income taxes in 2022.
A reconciliation of the statutory federal income tax rate to the effective income tax rate for each
period is included in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated Net Income, Consolidated EBITDA and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA
Consolidated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization expense (Consolidated
EBITDA) and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, which are presented below, are non-generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP) measures that we believe are useful to management, investors and other
users of our financial information in evaluating operating profitability on a more variable cost
basis as they exclude the depreciation and amortization expense related primarily to capital
expenditures and acquisitions that occurred in prior years, as well as in evaluating operating
performance in relation to Verizon’s competitors. Consolidated EBITDA is calculated by adding back
interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization expense to net income.
Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is calculated by excluding from Consolidated EBITDA the effect of the
following non-operational items: equity in earnings of unconsolidated businesses and other income and
expense, net, as well as the effect of certain special items. We believe that this measure is useful
to management, investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating the effectiveness
of our operations and underlying business trends in a manner that is consistent with management’s
evaluation of business performance. We believe that Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is widely used by
investors to compare a company’s operating performance to its competitors by minimizing impacts
caused by differences in capital structure, taxes, and depreciation and amortization policies.
Further, the exclusion of non-operational items and special items enables comparability to prior
period performance and trend analysis. See "Special Items" for additional information.
It is management’s intent to provide non-GAAP financial information to enhance the understanding of
Verizon’s GAAP financial information, and it should be considered by the reader in addition to, but
not instead of, the financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. Each non-GAAP financial
measure is presented along with the corresponding GAAP measure so as not to imply that more emphasis
should be placed on the non-GAAP measure. We believe that providing these non-GAAP measures in
addition to the GAAP measures allows management, investors and other users of our financial
information to more fully and accurately assess both consolidated and segment performance. The non-
GAAP financial information presented may be determined or calculated differently by other companies
and may not be directly comparable to that of other companies.
 26 
Table of Contents
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2022 2021 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consolidated Net Income $ 21,748 $ 22,618 
 Add: 
 Provision for income taxes 6,523 6,802 
 Interest expense 3,613 3,485 
 Depreciation and amortization expense(1) 17,099 16,206 
 Consolidated EBITDA $ 48,983 $ 49,111 
 Add (Less): 
 Other (income) expense, net(2) (3) $ -1,373 $ -312 
 Equity in earnings of unconsolidated -44 -145 
 businesses(4) 
 Severance charges 304 209 
 Loss on spectrum licenses — 223 
 Net gain from sale of Media — -706 
 Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA $ 47,870 $ 48,380 
(1) Includes Amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets, which were $826 million and $594
million during the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. See "Special Items" for
additional information.
(2) Includes Pension and benefits remeasurement credits of $1.7 billion and $2.4 billion during the
years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. See "Special Items" and "Other Income
(Expense), Net" for additional information.
(3) Includes Early debt redemption costs, which were $1.2 billion and $3.5 billion during the years
ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. See "Special Items" for additional information.
(4) Includes Net gain from disposition of asset, which was $131 million during the year ended
December 31, 2021. See "Special Items" for additional information.
The changes in Consolidated Net Income, Consolidated EBITDA and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA in the
table above during 2022 compared to 2021, were primarily a result of the factors described in
connection with operating revenues and operating expenses.
 Segment Results of Operations 
We have two reportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units - Consumer and
Business. We measure and evaluate our segments based on segment operating income. The use of segment
operating income is consistent with the chief operating decision maker’s assessment of segment
performance.
To aid in the understanding of segment performance as it relates to segment operating income,
management uses the following operating statistics to evaluate the overall effectiveness of our
segments. We believe these operating statistics are useful to investors and other users of our
financial information because they provide additional insight into drivers of our segments’ operating
results, key trends and performance relative to our peers. These operating statistics may be
determined or calculated differently by other companies and may not be directly comparable to those
statistics of other companies.
Wireless retail connections are retail customer device postpaid and prepaid connections as of the end
of the period. Retail connections under an account may include those from smartphones and basic
phones (collectively, phones), as well as tablets and other internet devices, including FWA,
wearables and retail IoT devices. Wireless retail connections are calculated by adding total retail
postpaid and prepaid new connections in the period to prior period retail connections, and
subtracting total retail postpaid and prepaid disconnects in the period.
Wireless retail postpaid connections are retail postpaid customer device connections as of the end of
the period. Retail postpaid connections under an account may include those from phones, as well as
tablets and other internet devices, including postpaid FWA, wearables and retail IoT devices.
Wireless retail postpaid connections are calculated by adding retail postpaid new connections in the
period to prior period retail postpaid connections, and subtracting retail postpaid disconnects in
the period.
Wireless retail prepaid connections are retail prepaid customer device connections as of the end of
the period. Retail prepaid connections may include those from phones, as well as tablets and other
internet devices, including prepaid FWA, and wearables. Wireless retail prepaid connections are
calculated by adding retail prepaid new connections in the period to prior period retail prepaid
connections, and subtracting retail prepaid disconnects in the period.
Fios internet connections are the total number of connections to the internet using Fios internet
services as of the end of the period. Fios internet connections are calculated by adding Fios
internet new connections in the period to prior period Fios internet connections, and subtracting
Fios internet disconnects in the period.
 27 
Table of Contents
Fios video connections are the total number of connections to traditional linear video programming
using Fios video services as of the end of the period. Fios video connections are calculated by
adding Fios video net additions in the period to prior period Fios video connections. Fios video net
additions are calculated by subtracting the Fios video disconnects from the Fios video new
connections.
Total broadband connections are the total number of connections to the internet using Fios internet
services, Digital Subscriber Line (DSL), and postpaid, prepaid and IoT FWA as of the end of the
period. Total broadband connections are calculated by adding total broadband connections, net
additions in the period to prior period total broadband connections.
Wireless retail connections, net addition s are the total number of additional retail customer device
postpaid and prepaid connections, less the number of device disconnects in the period. Wireless
retail connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the total
retail postpaid and prepaid disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the total retail postpaid
and prepaid new connections in the period.
Wireless retail postpaid connections, net additions are the total number of additional retail
customer device postpaid connections, less the number of device disconnects in the period. Wireless
retail postpaid connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the
retail postpaid disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the retail postpaid new connections in
the period.
Wireless retail prepaid connections, net additions are the total number of additional retail customer
device prepaid connections, less the number of device disconnects in the period. Wireless retail
prepaid connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the retail
prepaid disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the retail prepaid new connections in the
period.
Wireless retail postpaid phone connections, net additions are the total number of additional retail
customer postpaid phone connections, less the number of phone disconnects in the period. Wireless
retail postpaid phone connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by
subtracting the retail postpaid phone disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the retail
postpaid phone new connections in the period.
Total broadband connections, net additions are the total number of additional total broadband
connections, less the number of total broadband disconnects in the period. Total broadband
connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the total broadband
disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the total broadband new connections in the period.
Wireless Churn is the rate at which service to retail, retail postpaid, or retail postpaid phone
connections is terminated on average in the period. The churn rate in each period presented is
calculated by dividing retail disconnects, retail postpaid disconnects, or retail postpaid phone
disconnects by the average retail connections, average retail postpaid connections, or average retail
postpaid phone connections, respectively, in the period.
Wireless retail postpaid ARPA is the calculated average retail postpaid service revenue per account
(ARPA) from retail postpaid accounts in the period. Wireless retail postpaid service revenue does not
include recurring device payment plan billings related to the Verizon device payment program, plan
billings related to device warranty and insurance or regulatory fees. Wireless retail postpaid ARPA
in each period presented is calculated by dividing retail postpaid service revenue by the average
retail postpaid accounts in the period.
Wireless retail postpaid accounts are wireless retail customers that are directly served and managed
under the Verizon brand and use its services as of the end of the period. Accounts include unlimited
plans, shared data plans and corporate accounts, as well as legacy single connection plans and multi-
connection family plans. A single account may include monthly wireless services for a variety of
connected devices. Wireless retail postpaid accounts are calculated by adding retail postpaid new
accounts to the prior period retail postpaid accounts.
Wireless retail postpaid connections per account is the calculated average number of retail postpaid
connections per retail postpaid account as of the end of the period. Wireless retail postpaid
connections per account is calculated by dividing the total number of retail postpaid connections by
the number of retail postpaid accounts as of the end of the period.
Segment operating income margin reflects the profitability of the segment as a percentage of revenue.
Segment operating income margin is calculated by dividing total segment operating income by total
segment operating revenues.
Segment earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (Segment EBITDA) , which is
presented below, is a non-GAAP measure and does not purport to be an alternative to operating income
(loss) as a measure of operating performance. We believe this measure is useful to management,
investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating operating profitability on a
more variable cost basis as it excludes the depreciation and amortization expense related primarily
to capital expenditures and acquisitions that occurred in prior years, as well as in evaluating
operating performance in relation to our competitors. Segment EBITDA is calculated by adding back
depreciation and amortization expense to segment operating income (loss). Segment EBITDA margin is
calculated by dividing Segment EBITDA by total segment operating revenues. See Note 13 to the
consolidated financial statements for additional information.
 28 
Table of Contents
 Verizon Consumer Group 
Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline communications services and
products. Our wireless services are provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in
the U.S. under the Verizon brand, TracFone brands and through wholesale and other arrangements. We
also provide FWA broadband through our wireless networks. Our wireline services are provided in nine
states in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over our 100% fiber-
optic network through our Verizon Fios product portfolio and over a traditional copper-based network
to customers who are not served by Fios.
Operating Revenues and Selected Operating Statistics
 (dollars in 
 millions, 
 Years Ended except ARPA) 
 December 31, 2022 2021 2022 vs. 2021 Increase/(De… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service $ 73,139 $ 67,733 $ 5,406 8.0 % 
 Wireless 23,168 19,781 3,387 17.1 
 equipment 
 Other 7,199 7,786 -587 -7.5 
 Total 
 Operating $ 103,506 $ 95,300 $ 8,206 8.6 
 Revenues 
 Connections 
 (‘000):(1) 
 Wireless 
 retail 91,856 91,543 313 0.3 
 postpaid(2) 
 Wireless 
 retail 22,664 23,852 -1,188 -5.0 
 prepaid(2)(3) 
 Total 
 wireless 114,520 115,395 -875 -0.8 
 retail 
 Fios internet 6,740 6,541 199 3.0 
 Fios video 3,234 3,573 -339 -9.5 
 Total 7,900 6,989 911 13.0 
 broadband 
 Net Additions 
 in Period 
 (‘000):(4) 
 Wireless 
 retail 965 1,114 -149 -13.4 
 postpaid(2) 
 Wireless 
 retail -445 -52 -393 nm 
 prepaid(2)(3) 
 Total 
 wireless 520 1,062 -542 -51.0 
 retail 
 Wireless 
 retail -655 575 -1,230 nm 
 postpaid 
 phones(2) 
 Total 904 328 576 nm 
 broadband 
 Churn 
 Rate:(2) 
 Wireless 1.63 % 1.10 % 
 retail(4) 
 Wireless 
 retail 1.01 % 0.89 % 
 postpaid 
 Wireless 
 retail 0.81 % 0.71 % 
 postpaid 
 phones 
 Account 
 Statistics: 
 Wireless 
 retail $ 125.97 $ 122.30 $ 3.67 3.0 
 postpaid ARPA 
 Wireless 
 retail 
 postpaid 33,183 33,651 -468 -1.4 
 accounts 
 (‘000)(1) 
 Wireless 
 retail 
 postpaid 2.77 2.72 0.05 1.8 
 connections 
 per 
 account(1) 
(1) As of end of period
(2) The number of wireless retail connections as of December 31, 2022 reflects a decline in our
customer base related to the shutdown of our third-generation (3G) network in the fourth quarter of
2022 of approximately 576,000 wireless retail postpaid connections, including 180,000 wireless retail
postpaid phone connections, and 237,000 wireless retail prepaid connections. In addition, the
shutdown of our competitors' 3G network in the second and third quarter of 2022 resulted in a
reduction to our customer base of 402,000 wireless retail prepaid connections and 102,000 wireless
retail prepaid connections as of June 30, 2022 and September 30, 2022, respectively. The impact of
the 3G network shutdowns has been excluded for purposes of calculating wireless retail net additions
and wireless churn for the respective periods.
(3) Acquisition of TracFone was completed on November 23, 2021. See Note 3 to the consolidated
financial statements for additional information.
(4) Includes certain adjustments
nm - not meaningful
 29 
Table of Contents
Consumer's total operating revenues increased during 2022 compared to 2021, as a result of increases
in Service and Wireless equipment revenues, partially offset by a decrease in Other revenue.
 Service Revenue 
Service revenue increased during 2022 compared to 2021, primarily driven by increases in wireless and
Fios service revenues.
Wireless service revenue increased $5.4 billion during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• an increase of $4.0 billion, representing the net impact of the acquisition of TracFone in the
fourth quarter of 2021;
• an increase of $769 million in access revenues related to our postpaid plans driven by mobile
security products included in certain device protection packages such that a larger amount of the
overall device protection revenue is recognized in Service revenue, pricing actions implemented in
the second half of 2022, cloud services, and additional connections and migrations to higher priced
plans, partially offset by related promotions as well as declines in our postpaid phone customer
base;
• an increase of $352 million in TravelPass revenues due to an increase in customer international
travel; and
• an increase of $253 million related to growth in non-retail service revenue.
For the year ended December 31, 2022, Fios service revenue totaled $10.9 billion, representing an
increase of $127 million compared to 2021, primarily resulting from an increase in Fios internet
connections, reflecting increased demand for higher broadband speeds, partially offset by a decrease
in Fios video and voice revenues.
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the acquisition of
TracFone.
 Wireless Equipment Revenue 
Wireless equipment revenue increased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• an increase of $1.4 billion related to a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of wireless
devices sold;
• an increase of $1.2 billion driven by a higher volume of wireless devices primarily related to a
higher rate of upgrades, partially offset by related promotions; and
• an increase of $780 million due to the inclusion of TracFone results.
 Other Revenue 
Other revenue includes fees that partially recover the direct and indirect costs of complying with
regulatory and industry obligations and programs, revenues associated with certain products included
in our device protection offerings, leasing and interest when equipment is sold to the customer by an
authorized agent under a device payment plan agreement.
Other revenue decreased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• a decrease of $481 million that resulted from a change in the product mix within the device
protection offering such that a smaller amount of the overall device protection revenue is recognized
in Other revenue;
• a decrease of $77 million related to interest recognition on equipment sold to the customer by an
authorized agent under a device payment plan agreement, mainly due to an increase in contract terms
to 36 months; and
• a decrease of $51 million in other regulatory surcharges.
 Operating Expenses 
 (dollars in 
 Years Ended millions) 
 December 31, 2022 2021 2022 vs. 2021 Increase/(Decr… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cost of $ 17,746 $ 16,581 $ 1,165 7.0 % 
 services 
 Cost of 
 wireless 25,134 20,523 4,611 22.5 
 equipment 
 Selling, 
 general and 19,064 16,562 2,502 15.1 
 administrative 
 expense 
 Depreciation 
 and 12,716 11,679 1,037 8.9 
 amortization 
 expense 
 Total 
 Operating $ 74,660 $ 65,345 $ 9,315 14.3 
 Expenses 
 Cost of Services 
Cost of services increased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• an increase in access costs of $848 million primarily due to the inclusion of TracFone results; and
• an increase in rent expense of $198 million related to adding capacity to the networks to support
demand and lease modifications for certain existing cell towers in April 2021 in connection with the
build out of our 5G wireless network.
 Cost of Wireless Equipment 
Cost of wireless equipment increased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• an increase of $2.2 billion due to the inclusion of TracFone results ;
 30 
Table of Contents
• an increase of $1.5 billion driven by a higher volume of wireless devices sold, primarily related
to a higher rate of upgrades; and
• an increase of $1.0 billion related to a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of wireless
devices sold.
 Selling, General and Administrative Expense 
Selling, general and administrative expense increased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• an increase in personnel costs of $1.3 billion primarily due to the inclusion of TracFone results
and increased third-party employee costs due to contracted services;
• an increase in provision for credit losses of $745 million driven by increased device payment loan
volume and an increase in the expected loss rate primarily as a result of the change in device
payment plan terms to 36 months, as well as actions taken in prior years in response to the COVID-19
pandemic; and
• an increase in advertising expense of $454 million primarily due to the inclusion of TracFone
results and brand marketing, including the launch of the 5G Ultra campaign in early 2022.
 Depreciation and Amortization Expense 
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during 2022 compared to 2021, driven by the change in
the mix of total Verizon depreciable and amortizable assets and Consumer's usage of those assets.
 Segment Operating Income and EBITDA 
 (dollars in 
 Years Ended millions) 
 December 31, 2022 2021 2022 vs. 2021 Increase/(Decr… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Segment 
 Operating $ 28,846 $ 29,955 $ -1,109 -3.7 % 
 Income 
 Add 
 Depreciation 
 and 12,716 11,679 1,037 8.9 
 amortization 
 expense 
 Segment EBITDA $ 41,562 $ 41,634 $ -72 -0.2 
 Segment 
 operating 27.9 % 31.4 % 
 income margin 
 Segment EBITDA 40.2 % 43.7 % 
 margin 
The changes in the table above during the periods presented were primarily a result of the factors
described in connection with operating revenues and operating expenses.
 Verizon Business Group 
Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications services and products, including
data, video and conferencing services, corporate networking solutions, security and managed network
services, local and long distance voice services and network access to deliver various IoT services
and products. We also provide FWA broadband through our wireless networks. We provide these products
and services to businesses, government customers and wireless and wireline carriers across the U.S.
and select products and services to customers around the world. The Business segment is organized in
four customer groups: Small and Medium Business, Global Enterprise, Public Sector and Other, and
Wholesale.
 31 
Table of Contents
Operating Revenues and Selected Operating Statistics
 (dollars in 
 Years Ended millions) 
 December 31, 2022 2021 2022 vs. 2021 Increase/(Decr… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Small and 
 Medium $ 12,613 $ 11,774 $ 839 7.1 % 
 Business 
 Global 9,734 10,224 -490 -4.8 
 Enterprise 
 Public Sector 6,118 6,324 -206 -3.3 
 and Other 
 Wholesale 2,607 2,720 -113 -4.2 
 Total 
 Operating $ 31,072 $ 31,042 $ 30 0.1 
 Revenues(1) 
 Connections 
 (‘000):(2) 
 Wireless 
 retail 28,733 27,411 1,322 4.8 
 postpaid(3) 
 Fios internet 373 356 17 4.8 
 Fios video 67 71 -4 -5.6 
 Total 1,036 599 437 73.0 
 broadband 
 Net Additions 
 in Period 
 ('000):(4) 
 Wireless 
 retail 1,640 1,001 639 63.8 
 postpaid(3) 
 Wireless 
 retail 856 509 347 68.2 
 postpaid 
 phones(3) 
 Total 386 81 305 nm 
 broadband 
 Churn Rate:(3) 
 Wireless 
 retail 1.38 % 1.27 % 
 postpaid 
 Wireless 
 retail 1.07 % 1.03 % 
 postpaid 
 phones 
(1) Service and other revenues included in our Business segment amounted to approximately $27.0
billion and $27.7 billion for the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Wireless
equipment revenues included in our Business segment amounted to approximately $4.0 billion and $3.4
billion for the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
(2) As of end of period
(3) The number of wireless retail connections as of December 31, 2022 reflects a decline in our
customer base related to the shutdown of our 3G network in the fourth quarter of 2022 of
approximately 333,000 wireless retail postpaid connections, including 212,000 wireless retail
postpaid phone connections. The impact of the 3G network shutdown has been excluded for purposes of
calculating wireless retail net additions and wireless churn for the respective periods.
(4) Includes certain adjustments
nm - not meaningful
Business's total operating revenues increased during 2022 compared to 2021, as a result of an
increase in Small and Medium Business revenue, partially offset by decreases in Global Enterprise,
Public Sector and Other and Wholesale revenues.
 Small and Medium Business 
Small and Medium Business offers wireless services and equipment, conferencing services, tailored
voice and networking products, Fios services, Internet Protocol (IP) networking, advanced voice
solutions and security and managed information technology services to our U.S.-based small and medium
businesses that do not meet the requirements to be categorized as Global Enterprise, as described
below.
Small and Medium Business revenues increased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• an increase in wireless equipment revenue of $507 million driven by a higher volume of devices sold
and a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of devices sold, partially offset by an increase in
promotions;
• an increase in wireless service revenue of $395 million primarily driven by an increase in the
amount of wireless retail postpaid connections as well as the economic adjustment charge that took
effect in the second quarter of 2022; and
• a decrease of $85 million related to the loss of voice and DSL service connections.
Fios revenues totaled $1.0 billion, which represents an increase of $41 million during 2022 compared
to 2021. The increase was primarily related to increases in total connections, as well as increased
demand for higher broadband speeds.
 Global Enterprise 
Global Enterprise offers services to large businesses, which are identified based on their size and
volume of business with Verizon, as well as non-U.S. public sector customers.
 32 
Table of Contents
Global Enterprise revenues decreased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• a decrease of $544 million in networking revenue and traditional data and voice communication
services related to secular pressures in the marketplace;
• a decrease of $118 million due to lower FUSF volume and rate along with resulting surcharges;
• an increase of $117 million in wireless equipment revenue driven by a shift to higher priced
equipment in the mix of devices sold and higher volume of devices sold;
• an increase of $89 million in wireless service revenue primarily driven by an increase in the
amount of wireless retail postpaid connections as well as the economic adjustment charge that took
effect in the second quarter of 2022; and
• an increase of $34 million in customer premise equipment primarily due to higher volumes.
 Public Sector and Other 
Public Sector and Other offers wireless products and services as well as wireline connectivity and
managed solutions to U.S. federal, state and local governments and educational institutions. These
services include business services and connectivity similar to the products and services offered by
Global Enterprise, in each case, with features and pricing designed to address the needs of
governments and educational institutions.
Public Sector and Other revenues decreased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• a decrease of $169 million in networking revenue and traditional data and voice communication
services related to secular pressures in the marketplace; and
• a decrease of $44 million related to lower FUSF volume and rate along with resulting surcharges.
 Wholesale 
Wholesale offers wireline communications services including data, voice, local dial tone and
broadband services primarily to local, long distance, and wireless carriers that use our facilities
to provide services to their customers.
Wholesale revenues decreased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• a decrease of $113 million related to declines in traditional voice communication and network
connectivity as a result of technology substitution and rationalization of international traffic, as
well as a decrease in core data.
 Operating Expenses 
 (dollars in 
 Years Ended millions) 
 December 31, 2022 2021 2022 vs. 2021 Increase/(Decr… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cost of $ 10,483 $ 10,653 $ -170 -1.6 % 
 services 
 Cost of 
 wireless 5,362 4,544 818 18.0 
 equipment 
 Selling, 
 general and 8,284 8,324 -40 -0.5 
 administrative 
 expense 
 Depreciation 
 and 4,312 4,084 228 5.6 
 amortization 
 expense 
 Total 
 Operating $ 28,441 $ 27,605 $ 836 3.0 
 Expenses 
 Cost of Services 
Cost of services decreased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• a decrease in regulatory fees of $226 million primarily related to lower FUSF volume and rate;
• a decrease in access costs of $219 million resulting from a decline in voice services;
• an increase in network and equipment maintenance of $66 million primarily related to fleet
maintenance;
• an increase of $65 million in customer premise equipment primarily due to higher volumes; and
• an increase in personnel expense of $54 million related to rate and actuarial assumption changes in
connection with certain post-employment benefits.
 Cost of Wireless Equipment 
Cost of wireless equipment increased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• an increase of $527 million driven by a higher volume of wireless devices sold; and
• an increase of $360 million related to a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of wireless
devices sold.
 Selling, General and Administrative Expense 
Selling, general and administrative expense decreased during 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to:
• a decrease of $88 million primarily due to gains recognized in connection with a non-strategic
divestiture and other activity;
• a decrease of $78 million primarily due to taxes other than income mainly driven by a one-time
international tax benefit;
• a decrease in other general expenses of $72 million partly related to rent and lease expenses;
• an increase in personnel expense of $148 million primarily related to increased third-party
employee costs due to contracting services; and
 33 
Table of Contents
• an increase of $73 million in provision for credit losses driven by increased device payment loan
volume and an increase in the expected loss rate primarily as a result of the change in device
payment plan terms to 36 months.
 Depreciation and Amortization Expense 
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during 2022 compared to 2021, driven by the change in
the mix of total Verizon depreciable and amortizable assets and Business usage of those assets.
 Segment Operating Income and EBITDA 
 (dollars in 
 Years Ended millions) 
 December 31, 2022 2021 2022 vs. 2021 Increase/(Decre… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Segment 
 Operating $ 2,631 $ 3,437 $ -806 -23.5 % 
 Income 
 Add 
 Depreciation 
 and 4,312 4,084 228 5.6 
 amortization 
 expense 
 Segment EBITDA $ 6,943 $ 7,521 $ -578 -7.7 
 Segment 
 operating 8.5 % 11.1 % 
 income margin 
 Segment EBITDA 22.3 % 24.2 % 
 margin 
The changes in the table above during the periods presented were primarily a result of the factors
described in connection with operating revenues and operating expenses.
 Special Items 
Special items included in Income Before Provision For Income Taxes were as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2022 2021 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Amortization of acquisition-related 
 intangible assets(1) (2) 
 Depreciation and amortization expense $ 826 $ 594 
 Severance, pension and benefits charges 
 (credits) 
 Selling, general and administrative 304 209 
 expense 
 Other (income) expense, net -1,675 -2,379 
 Early debt redemption costs 
 Other (income) expense, net 1,241 3,541 
 Net gain from disposition of asset and 
 business 
 Selling, general and administrative — -706 
 expense 
 Equity in (earnings) losses of — -131 
 unconsolidated businesses 
 Loss on spectrum licenses 
 Selling, general and administrative — 223 
 expense 
 Total $ 696 $ 1,351 
(1) Certain amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current period presentation.
(2) Amounts are included in segment results of operations.
The Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA non-GAAP measure presented in the Consolidated Net Income,
Consolidated EBITDA and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA discussion (see "Consolidated Results of
Operations") excludes all of the amounts included above, as described below.
The income and expenses related to special items included in our consolidated results of operations
were as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2022 2021 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Within Total Operating Expenses(1) $ 1,130 $ 320 
 Within Other (income) expense, net -434 1,162 
 Within Equity in (earnings) losses of — -131 
 unconsolidated businesses 
 Total $ 696 $ 1,351 
(1) Certain amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current period presentation.
 34 
Table of Contents
Amortization of Acquisition-Related Intangible Assets
During 2022 and 2021, we recorded pre-tax amortization expense of $826 million and $594 million,
respectively, related to acquired intangible assets.
 Severance, Pension and Benefits Charges (Credits) 
During 2022, in accordance with our accounting policy to recognize actuarial gains and losses in the
period in which they occur, we recorded net pre-tax pension and benefits credits of $1.7 billion in
our pension and postretirement benefit plans. The credits were recorded in Other income (expense),
net in our consolidated statement of income and were primarily driven by a credit of $7.0 billion due
to an increase in our discount rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities of our
pension plans ($4.1 billion) and postretirement benefit plans ($2.9 billion) from a weighted-average
of 2.9% at December 31, 2021 to a weighted-average of 5.2% at December 31, 2022, a charge of $5.5
billion due to the difference between our estimated and our actual return on assets and a credit of
$206 million due to other actuarial assumption adjustments. During 2022, we also recorded net pre-tax
severance charges of $304 million, related to involuntary separations under our existing plans, in
Selling, general and administrative expense in our consolidated statement of income.
During 2021, in accordance with our accounting policy to recognize actuarial gains and losses in the
period in which they occur, we recorded net pre-tax pension and benefits credits of $2.4 billion in
our pension and postretirement benefit plans. The credits were recorded in Other income (expense),
net in our consolidated statement of income and were primarily driven by a credit of $1.1 billion due
to an increase in our discount rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities of our
pension plans and postretirement benefit plans from a weighted-average of 2.6% at December 31, 2020
to a weighted-average of 2.9% at December 31, 2021, a credit of $847 million due to the difference
between our estimated and our actual return on assets and a credit of $453 million due to other
actuarial assumption adjustments. During 2021, we also recorded net pre-tax severance charges of $209
million related to voluntary separations under our existing plans in Selling, general and
administrative expense in our consolidated statement of income.
Due to the presentation of the other components of net periodic benefit cost, we recognize a portion
of the pension and benefits charges (credits) in Other income (expense), net in our consolidated
statements of income.
See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to severance,
pension and benefits charges (credits).
 Early Debt Redemption Costs 
During 2022, we recorded pre-tax early debt redemption costs of $1.2 billion primarily in connection
with tender offers.
During 2021, we recorded pre-tax early debt redemption costs of $3.5 billion in connection with
tender offers, the redemptions of securities issued by Verizon and open market repurchases of various
Company and subsidiary notes.
See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to our early
debt redemptions.
 Net Gain from Disposition of Asset and Business 
During 2021, we recorded a pre-tax net gain of $837 million, in connection with the sale of an
investment and the sale of Verizon Media.
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
 Loss on Spectrum Licenses 
During 2021, we recognized a pre-tax loss of $223 million as a result of signing two agreements to
sell certain wireless licenses.
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
 Operating Environment and Trends 
The telecommunications industry is highly competitive. The rapid development of new technologies,
services and products has eliminated many of the traditional distinctions among wireless, cable,
internet and local and long distance communication services and brought new competitors to our
markets. We expect competition to remain intense as traditional and non-traditional participants seek
increased market share. Our high-quality customer base and networks differentiate us from our
competitors and give us the ability to plan and manage through changing economic and competitive
conditions. We remain focused on executing on the fundamentals of the business: maintaining a high-
quality customer base, delivering strong financial and operating results and strengthening our
balance sheet. We continue to lead in 4G LTE performance while aggressively building out our 5G
network.
The U.S. wireless market has achieved a high penetration of smartphones, which reduces the
opportunity for new phone connection growth for the industry. We expect future revenue growth in the
industry to be driven by expanding existing customer
 35 
Table of Contents
relationships, increasing the number of ways customers can connect with wireless networks and
services and increasing the penetration of FWA and connected devices including wearables, tablets and
IoT devices. Although certain use cases for 5G technologies and related ecosystems are in early
development stages, we expect this technology will provide a significant opportunity for growth in
the coming years. With respect to our wireless connectivity products and services, we compete against
other national wireless service providers, including AT&T Inc. and T-Mobile US, Inc., as well as
various regional wireless service providers. We also compete for retail activations with resellers
that buy bulk wholesale service from wireless service providers, including Verizon, and resell it to
their customers. Resellers include cable companies, such as Comcast Corporation and Charter
Communications, Inc., and others. We face competition from other communications and technology
companies seeking to increase their brand recognition and capture customer revenue with respect to
the provision of wireless products and services, in addition to non-traditional offerings in mobile
data. For example, Microsoft Corporation, Alphabet Inc., Apple Inc., Meta Platforms, Inc. and others
are offering alternative means for messaging and making wireless voice calls that, in certain cases,
can be used in lieu of the wireless providers' voice service, as well as alternative means of
accessing video content. In addition, we expect to see increasing competition in the provisioning of
internet access by low Earth orbit satellite companies as well in the area of fixed wireless
offerings that provide an alternative to traditional landline internet service providers.
With respect to wireless services and equipment, pricing plays an increasingly important role in the
wireless competitive landscape. We compete in this area by offering our customers services and
devices that we believe they will regard as the best available value for the price. As the demand for
wireless services continues to grow, wireless service providers are offering a range of service plans
at competitive prices. These service offerings will vary from time to time based on customer needs,
technology changes and market conditions and may be provided as standard plans or as part of limited
time promotional offers. In addition, aggressive device promotions have become more common in an
effort to gain a greater share of subscribers interested in changing carriers as well as retaining
existing customers.
We expect future service revenue growth opportunities to arise from increased access revenue as
customer demand for 5G connectivity continues to expand and customers shift to higher access plans,
driven in part by attractive bundled content with premium brands, as well as from increased
connections per account. Future service revenue growth opportunities will be dependent on expanding
the penetration of our services, increasing the number of ways that our customers can connect with
our networks and services and the development of new ecosystems. We and other wireless service
providers, as well as equipment manufacturers, offer device payment options, which provide customers
with the ability to pay for their device over a period of time, and some providers offer device
leasing arrangements.
Current and potential competitors in the wireline service market include cable companies, wireless
service providers, domestic and foreign telecommunications providers, satellite television companies,
internet service providers, over-the-top providers and other companies that offer network services
and managed enterprise solutions. We also face increasing competition from other providers of VoIP
services as well as internet portal providers.
In addition, companies with a global presence are increasingly competing with us in our wireline
services. A relatively small number of telecommunications and integrated service providers with
global operations serve customers in the global enterprise market and, to a lesser extent, the global
wholesale market. We compete with these providers for large contracts to provide integrated solutions
to global enterprises and government customers. Many of these companies have strong market presence,
brand recognition and existing customer relationships, all of which contribute to intensifying
competition that may affect our future revenue growth.
Despite this challenging environment, we expect that we will be able to grow key aspects of our
wireline services. We continue to provide network reliability and offer products, which include
fiber-optic internet access, several video services, and voice services. Further, we will continue to
offer our business and government customers a converged-enterprise environment for voice and data
services as well as more robust IP products and services, and advance our IoT strategies by
leveraging business models that monetize usage on our networks at the connectivity, platform and
solution layers.
We will also continue to focus on cost efficiencies to allow us to have flexibility to adjust to
changes in the competitive and economic environments and increase shareholder value.
 Macroeconomic Environment 
In 2022, as a result of the inflationary environment in the U.S., we experienced increases in our
direct costs, including electricity and other energy-related costs for our network operations, and
transportation and labor costs, as well as increased interest expenses related to rising interest
rates. We believe that this inflationary environment and the resulting decline in real wages in the
U.S. are altering consumer preferences, and causing certain consumers to become more price conscious.
We expect the inflationary environment and the resulting pressures to continue in 2023. For a
discussion of the risks relating to unfavorable economic conditions and inflation to our business,
refer to Item 1A Risk Factors.
 2023 Connection Trends 
In our Consumer segment, we expect to continue to attract new customers and maintain high-quality
retail postpaid customers, capitalizing on demand for data services and providing our customers new
ways of using wireless services in their daily lives. We expect that future connection growth will be
driven by FWA, as well as smartphones, tablets and other connected devices such as wearables. We
believe the combination of our wireless network performance and service offerings provides a superior
 36 
Table of Contents
customer experience, supporting increased penetration of data services and the continued attraction
and retention of higher valued retail postpaid connections. For our prepaid business, we expect to
continue to operate in a competitive environment while making investments to achieve long-term
success in this space.
We expect to continue to grow our Fios internet connections as we seek to increase our penetration
rates within our Fios service areas, further supported by the demand for higher speed internet
connections. At the same time, we expect accelerating fixed wireless access connections to complement
strong Fios results as demand for broadband services continues to grow. In Fios video, the business
continues to face ongoing pressure as observed throughout the linear television market. Given these
trends, we provide standalone Fios internet plans in addition to the choice of Fios video or a
streaming service provided by a partner. We have experienced continuing access line and DSL losses as
customers have disconnected both primary and secondary lines and switched to alternative technologies
such as wireless, Voice over Internet Protocol, and cable for voice and data services.
In our Business segment, we offer wireless products and services to business and government customers
across the U.S. We continue to grow our retail connections while operating in a highly competitive
environment. We expect that this connection growth, combined with our industry-leading network
assets, will provide additional opportunities to sell solutions, such as those around security,
advanced communications and professional services. We also expect to expand our existing services
offered to business customers through our Intelligent Edge Network, our multi-use platform.
In addition, in both our Consumer and our Business segments, we expect to support connection growth
in part by adding capacity and further expanding our wireless coverage, and by continuing the build-
out of our 5G network.
 2023 Operating Revenue Trends 
In our Consumer segment, we expect to see a continuation of service revenue growth in 2023 as
customers shift to higher access plans with additional services and increase the number of devices
they connect with our networks and services. We expect continued growth in wireless service revenue,
driven by migrations to higher priced plans, increases in fixed wireless access connections, and the
pricing actions implemented in the second quarter of 2022. We expect Fios revenue to benefit in 2023
as growth in our broadband customer base and increases in demand for higher speed internet
connections offset the impact of the shift from the bundling of wireline services to standalone
Internet service.
In our Business segment, we expect wireless revenue to expand, driven by growth from increases in
wireless volumes and fixed wireless access contributions. We expect that Fios, through increased
penetration, will also contribute to revenue growth and legacy traditional wireline services will
continue to face secular pressures.
2023 Operating Expense and Cash Flow from Operations Trends
We expect our consolidated operating income margin and adjusted consolidated EBITDA margin to remain
strong as we continue to drive revenue growth and undertake initiatives to reduce our overall cost
structure. We expect that our ability to generate cash flows will benefit from our anticipated
reduction in capital expenditures as we reach the end of our dedicated C-Band spending program, as
well as our actions to better monetize our assets which increase our return on invested capital. We
created the Verizon Global Services group, an organization that is expected to drive efficiencies by
centralizing key functions and strategically delivering key services across Verizon.
We create value for our shareholders by investing the cash flows generated by our business in
opportunities and transactions that support continued profitable growth, thereby increasing customer
satisfaction and usage of our products and services. In addition, we have used our cash flows to
maintain and grow our dividend payout to shareholders. Our Board of Directors increased the quarterly
dividend by 2.0% during 2022, making this the sixteenth consecutive year in which we have raised our
dividend.
Our goal is to use our cash to create long-term value for our shareholders. We will continue to look
for investment opportunities that will help us to grow the business, strengthen our balance sheet,
acquire spectrum licenses (see "Cash Flows from Investing Activities"), pay dividends to our
shareholders and, when appropriate, buy back shares of our outstanding common stock (see "Cash Flows
from Financing Activities").
 Liquidity and Capital Resources 
We use the net cash generated from our operations to fund expansion and modernization of our
networks, service and repay external financing, pay dividends, invest in new businesses and spectrum
and, when appropriate, buy back shares of our outstanding common stock. Our sources of funds,
primarily from operations and, to the extent necessary, from external financing arrangements, are
sufficient to meet ongoing operating and investing requirements over the next 12 months and beyond.
Our cash and cash equivalents balance is $2.6 billion as of December 31, 2022. Our cash and cash
equivalents are held both domestically and internationally, and are invested to maintain principal
and provide liquidity. See "Market Risk" for additional information regarding our foreign currency
risk management strategies.
 37 
Table of Contents
We expect that our capital spending requirements will continue to be financed primarily through
internally generated funds. Debt or equity financing may be needed to fund additional investments or
development activities, or to maintain an appropriate capital structure to ensure our financial
flexibility. Our external financing arrangements include credit facilities and other bank lines of
credit, an active commercial paper program, vendor financing arrangements, issuances of registered
debt or equity securities, U.S. retail medium-term notes and other securities that are privately-
placed or offered overseas. In addition, we monetize certain receivables through asset-backed debt
transactions.
 Capital Expenditures 
Our 2023 capital program includes capital to fund advanced networks and services, including expanding
our core networks, adding capacity and density to our 5G network in order to stay ahead of our
customers’ increasing data demands and deploying C-Band, transforming our structure to deploy the
Intelligent Edge Network while reducing the cost to deliver services to our customers, and pursuing
other opportunities to drive operating efficiencies. We expect that our network architecture will
simplify operations by eliminating legacy network elements, improve our 4G LTE coverage, speed the
deployment of 5G technology, and create new enterprise opportunities in the business market. We
anticipate cash requirements for our 2023 capital program to be between $18.25 billion and $19.25
billion, inclusive of the final $1.75 billion of the incremental $10 billion related to our
accelerated C-Band deployment program.
 Contractual Obligations and Commitments 
We have various contractual obligations and commitments. The following represent our anticipated
material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations as of December 31, 2022:
• Long-term debt, including current maturities, commitments of $149.4 billion, of which $9.3 billion
are expected to be due within the next twelve months. Related interest payments are $73.6 billion, of
which $5.6 billion, are expected to be due within the next twelve months. Items included in long-term
debt with variable coupon rates exclude unamortized debt issuance costs, and are described in Note 7
to the consolidated financial statements.
• Operating lease obligations of $29.8 billion and Finance lease obligations of $1.8 billion, of
which $4.6 billion and $586 million, respectively, are expected to be due within the next twelve
months. In addition, Verizon has an obligation of $675 million representing future minimum payments
under the sublease arrangement for our cell towers, of which $297 million is expected to be due
within the next twelve months. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for additional
information.
• Unconditional purchase obligations, with terms in excess of one year, amount to $24.5 billion, of
which $9.4 billion is expected to be due within the next twelve months. Items included in
unconditional purchase obligations are primarily commitments to purchase network equipment, software
and services, content, marketing services and other items which will be used or sold in the ordinary
course of business. These amounts do not represent our entire anticipated purchases in the future,
but represent only those items that are the subject of contractual obligations. We also purchase
products and services as needed with no firm commitment. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial
statements for additional information.
• Estimated commitments for our allocable share of clearing costs incurred by, and incentive payments
due to, the incumbent license holders associated with C-Band wireless spectrum acquired under Auction
107. The remaining commitment is estimated to be $4.8 billion, all of which is expected to be due
within the next twelve months.
• Other long-term liabilities, including current maturities, of $4.1 billion, of which $827 million
is expected to be due within the next twelve months. Other long-term liabilities represent estimated
postretirement benefit and qualified pension plan contributions. Qualified pension plan contributions
include estimated minimum funding contributions. We expect that there will be no required pension
funding through 2026, subject to changes in market conditions. Postretirement benefit payments
include future postretirement benefit payments. These estimated amounts: (1) are subject to change
based on changes to assumptions and future plan performance, which could impact the timing and/or
amounts of these payments; and (2) exclude expectations beyond 5 years due to uncertainty of the
timing and amounts.
• We are not able to make a reasonable estimate of when the unrecognized tax benefits balance of $2.8
billion and related interest and penalties will be settled with the respective taxing authorities
until the related tax audits are further developed or resolved. See Note 12 to the consolidated
financial statements for additional information.
 Consolidated Financial Condition 
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2022 2021 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash Flows Provided By (Used In) 
 Operating activities $ 37,141 $ 39,539 
 Investing activities -28,662 -67,153 
 Financing activities -8,529 8,277 
 Decrease in cash, cash equivalents and $ -50 $ -19,337 
 restricted cash 
 38 
Table of Contents
 Cash Flows Provided By Operating Activities 
Our primary source of funds continues to be cash generated from operations. Net cash provided by
operating activities decreased by $2.4 billion during 2022 compared to 2021, primarily driven by
higher device payment receivables as our device payment portfolio increased over the comparative
period, which was partially due to the change in device payment plan terms to 36 months. This
decrease was further driven by a decrease in earnings. We expect to make approximately $200 million
of discretionary pension contributions in 2023. Additionally, we expect that there will be no
required pension funding through 2026, subject to changes in market conditions.
 Cash Flows Used In Investing Activities 
 Capital Expenditures 
Capital expenditures continue to relate primarily to the use of capital resources to increase the
operating efficiency and productivity of our networks, maintain our existing infrastructure,
facilitate the introduction of new products and services and enhance responsiveness to competitive
challenges.
Capital expenditures, including capitalized software, were $23.1 billion and $20.3 billion for 2022
and 2021, respectively. Capital expenditures increased approximately $2.8 billion during 2022,
compared to 2021, primarily due to accelerating our 5G technology deployment. See "Global Network and
Technology" for more details.
 Acquisitions of Wireless Licenses 
In February 2021, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) completed an auction, Auction 107, for
mid-band spectrum known as C-Band. During 2021, we paid approximately $45.9 billion for spectrum
licenses in connection with this auction and related costs, of which $1.3 billion was primarily paid
for certain obligations related to projected clearing costs. During 2022, we made additional payments
of $1.6 billion for obligations related to accelerated clearing incentives and clearing costs
associated with the auction.
In March 2022, Verizon signed agreements with satellite operators in which operators agreed to clear
C-Band spectrum in certain markets and frequencies ahead of the previously expected December 2023
timeframe. During 2022, Verizon made payments of approximately $310 million associated with these
agreements.
During 2022 and 2021, we recorded capitalized interest related to wireless licenses of $1.7 billion
and $1.6 billion, respectively.
During 2022 and 2021, we entered into and completed various other wireless license acquisitions for
cash consideration of an insignificant amount and $95 million, respectively.
Cash Received (Paid) Related to Acquisitions of Businesses, Net of Cash Acquired
In September 2020, we entered into a purchase agreement to acquire TracFone, a provider of prepaid
and value mobile services in the U.S. The transaction closed on November 23, 2021 (the Acquisition
Date). The aggregate cash consideration paid by Verizon at the closing of the transaction was
approximately $3.6 billion, net of cash acquired, approximately 57.6 million shares of our common
stock valued at approximately $3.0 billion, and up to an additional $650 million in future cash
contingent consideration. During 2022, Verizon received net cash proceeds of $248 million for the
final settlement of working capital, which was included in our consideration as of the Acquisition
Date. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
In October 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire certain assets of Bluegrass
Cellular (Bluegrass), a rural wireless operator serving central Kentucky. The transaction closed in
March 2021. The aggregate cash consideration paid by Verizon at the closing of the transaction was
approximately $412 million, net of cash acquired.
During 2022 and 2021, we completed various other acquisitions for cash consideration of an
insignificant amount and approximately $51 million, respectively.
See "Acquisitions and Divestitures" for information on our acquisitions.
Collateral Payments Related to Derivative Contracts, Net of Repayments
During 2022 and 2021, we made payments of $2.3 billion and an insignificant amount, respectively, of
derivative collateral, net of repayments. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional information.
 Proceeds from Disposition of Business 
During 2021, we received cash proceeds of $4.1 billion, net of cash transferred, in connection with
the sale of Verizon Media. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional
information.
 39 
Table of Contents
 Other, Net 
During 2021, we received cash of $321 million in connection with the settlement of a note receivable
related to TracFone and net cash proceeds of $98 million in connection with the sale of an
investment.
Cash Flows Provided By (Used In) Financing Activities
We seek to maintain a mix of fixed and variable rate debt to lower borrowing costs within reasonable
risk parameters and to protect against earnings and cash flow volatility resulting from changes in
market conditions. During 2022, net cash used in financing activities was $8.5 billion. During 2021,
net cash provided by financing activities was $8.3 billion.
 2022 
During 2022, our net cash used in financing activities of $8.5 billion was primarily driven by $13.6
billion used for repayments, redemptions and repurchases of long-term borrowings (secured and
unsecured) as well as finance lease obligations, $10.8 billion used for dividend payments and $2.1
billion used for other financing activities. These cash flows used in financing activities were
partially offset by $17.8 billion provided by proceeds from long-term borrowings, which included
$10.7 billion of proceeds from our asset-backed debt transactions.
Proceeds from and Repayments, Redemptions, and Repurchases of Long-Term Borrowings
At December 31, 2022, our total debt decreased to $150.6 billion compared to $150.9 billion at
December 31, 2021. Our effective interest rate was 3.7% and 3.6% during the years ended December 31,
2022 and 2021, respectively. We have entered into interest rate swaps to achieve a targeted mix of
fixed and variable rate debt, managing our exposure to changes in interest rates. See also "Market
Risk" and Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
At December 31, 2022, approximately $34.0 billion, or 22.5%, of the aggregate principal amount of our
total debt portfolio consisted of foreign denominated debt, primarily Euro and British Pound
Sterling. We have entered into cross currency swaps on our foreign denominated debt in order to fix
our future interest and principal payments in U.S. dollars and mitigate the impact of foreign
currency transaction gains or losses. See "Market Risk" for additional information.
Verizon may acquire debt securities issued by Verizon and its affiliates through open market
purchases, redemptions, privately negotiated transactions, tender offers, exchange offers, or
otherwise, upon such terms and at such prices as Verizon may from time to time determine, for cash or
other consideration.
 Other, Net 
Other, net financing activities during 2022 includes the cash consideration payments to acquire
additional interests in certain controlled wireless partnerships and early debt redemption costs. See
Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on noncontrolling
interests. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the
early debt redemption costs.
 Dividends 
The Board of Directors of the Company assesses the level of our dividend payments on a periodic basis
taking into account such factors as long-term growth opportunities, internal cash requirements and
the expectations of our shareholders. During the third quarter of 2022, our Board of Directors
increased our quarterly dividend payment by 2.0% to $0.6525 from $0.6400 per share in the preceding
quarter. This is the sixteenth consecutive year that Company’s Board of Directors has approved a
quarterly dividend increase.
As in prior periods, dividend payments were a significant use of capital resources. During 2022, we
paid $10.8 billion in dividends.
 2021 
During 2021, our net cash provided by financing activities of $8.3 billion was primarily driven by
$41.4 billion provided by proceeds from long-term borrowings, which included $8.4 billion of proceeds
from our asset-backed debt transactions. These cash flows provided by financing activities were
partially offset by $18.9 billion used for repayments, redemptions and repurchases of long-term
borrowings (secured and unsecured) as well as finance lease obligations, $10.4 billion used for
dividend payments and $3.8 billion used for other financing activities.
Proceeds from and Repayments, Redemptions, and Repurchases of Long-Term Borrowings
At December 31, 2021, our total debt was $150.9 billion, and during the year ended December 31, 2021,
our effective interest rate was 3.6%. The substantial majority of our total debt portfolio consisted
of fixed rate indebtedness, therefore, changes in interest rates did not have a material effect on
our interest payments. See "Market Risk" and Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional information.
 40 
Table of Contents
At December 31, 2021, approximately $33.5 billion, or 22.2%, of the aggregate principal amount of our
total debt portfolio consisted of foreign denominated debt, primarily Euro and British Pound
Sterling. We have entered into cross currency swaps on our foreign denominated debt in order to fix
our future interest and principal payments in U.S. dollars and mitigate the impact of foreign
currency transaction gains or losses. See "Market Risk" for additional information.
 Other, Net 
Other, net financing activities during 2021 includes $320 million in payments related to vendor
financing arrangements, $161 million in postings of derivative collateral and early debt redemption
costs. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the early
debt redemption costs.
 Dividends 
During the third quarter of 2021, our Board of Directors increased our quarterly dividend payment by
2.0% to $0.6400 per share.
As in prior periods, dividend payments were a significant use of capital resources. During 2021, we
paid $10.4 billion in dividends.
 Asset-Backed Debt 
As of December 31, 2022, the carrying value of our asset-backed debt was $20.0 billion. Our asset-
backed debt includes Asset-Backed Notes (ABS Notes) issued to third-party investors (Investors) and
loans (ABS Financing Facilities) received from banks and their conduit facilities (collectively, the
Banks). Our consolidated asset-backed debt bankruptcy remote legal entities (each, an ABS Entity or
collectively, the ABS Entities) issue the debt or are otherwise party to the transaction
documentation in connection with our asset-backed debt transactions. Under the terms of our asset-
backed debt, Cellco Partnership (Cellco), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, and certain other
Company affiliates (collectively, the Originators) transfer device payment plan agreement receivables
and certain other receivables (collectively referred to as certain receivables) to one of the ABS
Entities, which in turn transfers such receivables to another ABS Entity that issues the debt.
Verizon entities retain the equity interests and residual interests, as applicable, in the ABS
Entities, which represent the rights to all funds not needed to make required payments on the asset-
backed debt and other related payments and expenses.
Our asset-backed debt is secured by the transferred receivables and future collections on such
receivables. These receivables transferred to the ABS Entities and related assets, consisting
primarily of restricted cash, will only be available for payment of asset-backed debt and expenses
related thereto, payments to the Originators in respect of additional transfers of certain
receivables, and other obligations arising from our asset-backed debt transactions, and will not be
available to pay other obligations or claims of Verizon’s creditors until the associated asset-backed
debt and other obligations are satisfied. The Investors or Banks, as applicable, which hold our
asset-backed debt have legal recourse to the assets securing the debt, but do not have any recourse
to Verizon with respect to the payment of principal and interest on the debt. Under a parent support
agreement, the Company has agreed to guarantee certain of the payment obligations of Cellco and the
Originators to the ABS Entities.
Cash collections on the receivables collateralizing our asset-backed debt securities are required at
certain specified times to be placed into segregated accounts. Deposits to the segregated accounts
are considered restricted cash and are included in Prepaid expenses and other and Other assets in our
consolidated balance sheets.
Proceeds from our asset-backed debt transactions are reflected in Cash flows from financing
activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows. The asset-backed debt issued is included in
Debt maturing within one year and Long-term debt in our consolidated balance sheets.
See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
 Long-Term Credit Facilities 
 At 
 December 
 31, 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (dollars Facility Unused Principal 
 in Maturiti… Capacity Capacity Amount 
 million… Outstandi… 
 Verizon 
 revolvi… 2026 $ 9,500 $ 9,436 $ — 
 credit 
 facilit… 
 Various 
 export 2024 - 11,000 1,000 6,735 
 credit 2031 
 facilit… 
 Total $ 20,500 $ 10,436 $ 6,735 
(1) The revolving credit facility does not require us to comply with financial covenants or maintain
specified credit ratings, and it permits us to borrow even if our business has incurred a material
adverse change. The revolving credit facility provides for the issuance of letters of credit . As of
December 31, 2022, there have been no drawings against the $9.5 billion revolving credit facility
since its inception.
(2) During 2022 and 2021, we drew down $3.0 billion and $1.0 billion, respectively, from these
facilities. Borrowings under certain of these facilities are amortized semi-annually in equal
installments up to the applicable maturity dates. Maturities reflect
 41 
Table of Contents
maturity dates of principal amounts outstanding. Any amounts borrowed under these facilities and
subsequently repaid cannot be reborrowed.
 Common Stock 
Common stock has been used from time to time to satisfy some of the funding requirements of employee
and shareholder plans. During both the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, we issued 2.1 million
shares of common stock from treasury stock, which had aggregate values of $91 million.
In connection with our acquisition of TracFone in November 2021, we issued approximately 57.6 million
shares of common stock from treasury stock valued at approximately $3.0 billion. See Note 3 to the
consolidated financial statements for additional information.
In February 2020, the Board of Directors of the Company authorized a share buyback program to
repurchase up to 100 million shares of our common stock. The program will terminate when the
aggregate number of shares purchased reaches 100 million, or a new share repurchase plan superseding
the current plan is authorized, whichever is sooner. The program permits Verizon to repurchase shares
over time, with the amount and timing of repurchases depending on market conditions and corporate
needs. There were no repurchases of common stock during 2022 and 2021 under our authorized share
buyback program.
 Credit Ratings 
Verizon’s credit ratings did not change in 2022 or 2021.
Securities ratings assigned by rating organizations are expressions of opinion and are not
recommendations to buy, sell or hold securities. A securities rating is subject to revision or
withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization. Each rating should be evaluated
independently of any other rating.
 Covenants 
Our credit agreements contain covenants that are typical for large, investment grade companies. These
covenants include requirements to pay interest and principal in a timely fashion, pay taxes, maintain
insurance with responsible and reputable insurance companies, preserve our corporate existence, keep
appropriate books and records of financial transactions, maintain our properties, provide financial
and other reports to our lenders, limit pledging and disposition of assets and mergers and
consolidations, and other similar covenants.
We and our consolidated subsidiaries are in compliance with all of our restrictive covenants in our
debt agreements.
Change In Cash, Cash Equivalents and Restricted Cash
Our Cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2022 totaled $2.6 billion, a $316 million decrease
compared to December 31, 2021, primarily as a result of the factors discussed above.
Restricted cash at December 31, 2022 totaled $1.5 billion, a $266 million increase compared to
restricted cash at December 31, 2021, primarily related to cash collections on certain receivables
that are required at certain specified times to be placed into segregated accounts. The increase was
primarily driven by the completion of asset-backed debt transactions during the year ended December
31, 2022.
 Free Cash Flow 
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that reflects an additional way of viewing our
liquidity that, we believe, when viewed with our GAAP results, provides management, investors and
other users of our financial information with a more complete understanding of factors and trends
affecting our cash flows. Free cash flow is calculated by subtracting capital expenditures (including
capitalized software) from net cash provided by operating activities. We believe it is a more
conservative measure of cash flow since capital expenditures are necessary for ongoing operations.
Free cash flow has limitations due to the fact that it does not represent the residual cash flow
available for discretionary expenditures. For example, free cash flow does not incorporate payments
made on finance lease obligations or cash payments for business acquisitions or wireless licenses.
Therefore, we believe it is important to view free cash flow as a complement to our entire
consolidated statements of cash flows.
The following table reconciles net cash provided by operating activities to free cash flow:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2022 2021 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net cash provided by operating $ 37,141 $ 39,539 
 activities 
 Less Capital expenditures (including 23,087 20,286 
 capitalized software) 
 Free cash flow $ 14,054 $ 19,253 
The decrease in free cash flow during 2022 is a reflection of the decrease in operating cash flows,
as well as the increase in capital expenditures, both of which are discussed above.
 42 
Table of Contents
Employee Benefit Plans Funded Status and Contributions
 Employer Contributions 
We operate numerous qualified and nonqualified pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans.
These plans primarily relate to our domestic business units. We made no discretionary contribution to
our qualified pension plan in either 2022 or 2021. During 2022 and 2021, we made contributions of $53
million and $58 million to our nonqualified pension plans, respectively.
Our overall investment strategy is to achieve a mix of assets that allows us to meet projected
benefit payments while taking into consideration risk and return. In an effort to reduce the risk of
our portfolio strategy and better align assets with liabilities, we have adopted a liability driven
pension strategy that seeks to better match the interest rate sensitivity of the liability hedging
assets with the interest rate sensitivity of the liability. We expect that the strategy will reduce
the likelihood that assets will decline at a time when liabilities increase (referred to as liability
hedging), with the goal to reduce the risk of underfunding to the plan and its participants and
beneficiaries. Over time, as the asset allocation shifts to more liability hedging assets, this
strategy will generally result in lower expected asset returns. In 2023, we expect discretionary
qualified pension plan contributions to be approximately $200 million and nonqualified pension plan
contributions to be insignificant.
Contributions to our other postretirement benefit plans generally relate to payments for benefits on
an as-incurred basis since these other postretirement benefit plans do not have funding requirements
similar to the pension plans. We contributed $692 million and $885 million to our other
postretirement benefit plans in 2022 and 2021, respectively. Contributions to our other
postretirement benefit plans are estimated to be approximately $820 million in 2023.
 Leasing Arrangements 
See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to leasing
arrangements.
 Guarantees 
We guarantee the debentures of our operating telephone company subsidiaries. See Note 7 to the
consolidated financial statements for additional information.
In connection with the execution of agreements for the sale of businesses and investments, Verizon
ordinarily provides representations and warranties to the purchasers pertaining to a variety of
nonfinancial matters, such as ownership of the securities being sold, as well as financial losses.
See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
As of December 31, 2022, letters of credit totaling approximately $834 million, which were executed
in the normal course of business and support several financing arrangements and payment obligations
to third parties, were outstanding. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional information.
 Other Future Obligations 
During 2022, Verizon entered into four renewable energy purchase agreements (REPAs) with third
parties, in addition to 20 signed in previous years. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial
statements for additional information. Under the REPAs, we plan to purchase up to an aggregate of
approximately 3.0 gigawatts of capacity across multiple states, including Arizona, Illinois, Indiana,
Iowa, Maryland, Nebraska, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Texas and West
Virginia.
 Critical Accounting Estimates and Recently Issued 
 Accounting Standards 
 Critical Accounting Estimates 
A summary of the critical accounting estimates used in preparing our financial statements are as
follows:
 Wireless Licenses and Goodwill 
Wireless licenses and Goodwill are a significant component of our consolidated assets. Both our
wireless licenses and goodwill are treated as indefinite-lived intangible assets and, therefore are
not amortized, but rather are tested for impairment annually in the fourth fiscal quarter, unless
there are events requiring an earlier assessment or changes in circumstances during an interim period
suggesting impairment indicators are present. We believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable
and represent appropriate marketplace considerations as of the valuation date. Although we use
consistent methodologies in developing the assumptions and estimates underlying the fair value
calculations used in our impairment tests, these estimates and assumptions are uncertain by nature,
may change over time and can vary from actual results. It is possible that in the future there may be
changes in our estimates and assumptions, including the timing and amount of future cash flows,
margins, growth rates, market participant assumptions, comparable benchmark companies and related
multiples and discount rates, which could result in different fair value estimates. Significant and
adverse changes to any one or more of the above-noted estimates and assumptions could result in an
impairment to our wireless licenses and goodwill impairment for one or more of our reporting units.
 43 
Table of Contents
 Wireless Licenses 
The carrying value of our wireless licenses was approximately $149.8 billion as of December 31, 2022.
We aggregate our wireless licenses into one single unit of accounting, as we utilize our wireless
licenses on an integrated basis as part of our nationwide wireless network. Our wireless licenses
provide us with the exclusive right to utilize certain radio frequency spectrum to provide wireless
communication services. There are currently no legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic
or other factors that limit the useful life of our wireless licenses.
We test our wireless licenses for potential impairment annually or more frequently if impairment
indicators are present. We have the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine
whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. However, we may elect to bypass
the qualitative assessment in any period and proceed directly to performing the quantitative
impairment test. It is our policy to perform quantitative impairment assessment at least every three
years.
During the fourth quarter of 2022, we performed a qualitative impairment assessment as our annual
impairment test to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our wireless
licenses was less than the carrying amount. As part of our qualitative assessment we considered
several factors including the business enterprise value of our combined wireless business,
macroeconomic conditions (including changes in interest rates and discount rates), industry and
market considerations (including industry revenue and EBITDA margin results, projections and recent
merger and acquisition activity), the recent and projected financial performance of our combined
wireless business as a whole, as well as other factors including the result of our last quantitative
assessment. Our annual impairment test in 2022 indicated that it is more likely than not that the
fair value of our wireless licenses remained above their carrying value and, therefore, did not
result in an impairment.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment, which indicated
that the fair value of our wireless licenses is substantially in excess of their carrying value and,
therefore, did not result in an impairment. Our quantitative impairment assessment consisted of
comparing the estimated fair value of our aggregate wireless licenses to the aggregated carrying
amount as of the test date. Under our quantitative assessment, we estimated the fair value of our
wireless licenses using the Greenfield approach. The Greenfield approach is an income based valuation
approach that values the wireless licenses by calculating the cash flow generating potential of a
hypothetical start-up company that goes into business with no assets except the wireless licenses to
be valued. A discounted cash flow analysis is used to estimate what a marketplace participant would
be willing to pay to purchase the aggregated wireless licenses as of the valuation date. As a result,
we were required to make significant estimates about future cash flows and profitability specifically
associated with our wireless licenses, an appropriate discount rate based on the risk associated with
those estimated cash flows and assumed terminal value and growth rates. We considered current and
expected future economic conditions, current and expected availability of wireless network technology
and infrastructure and related equipment and the costs thereof as well as other relevant factors in
estimating future cash flows and profitability. The discount rate represented our estimate of the
weighted-average cost of capital (WACC), or expected return, that a marketplace participant would
have required as of the valuation date. We developed the discount rate based on our consideration of
the cost of debt and equity of a group of guideline companies as of the valuation date. Accordingly,
our discount rate incorporated our estimate of the expected return a marketplace participant would
have required as of the valuation date, including the risk premium associated with the current and
expected economic conditions as of the valuation date. The terminal value growth rate represented our
estimate of the marketplace’s long-term growth rate.
 Goodwill 
At December 31, 2022, the balance of our goodwill was approximately $28.7 billion, of which $21.1
billion was in our Consumer reporting unit and $7.5 billion was in our Business reporting unit.
To determine if goodwill is potentially impaired, we have the option to perform a qualitative
assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is
less than its carrying value. If we elect not to conduct the qualitative assessment or if indications
of a potential impairment exist, the determination of whether an impairment has occurred requires the
fair value of each reporting unit to be assessed. It is our policy to perform quantitative impairment
assessments at least every three years.
Under the qualitative assessment, we consider several factors, including the business enterprise
value of the reporting unit from the last quantitative test and the excess of fair value over
carrying value from this test, macroeconomic conditions (including changes in interest rates and
discount rates), industry and market considerations (including industry revenue and EBITDA margin
results, projections and recent merger and acquisition activity), the recent and projected financial
performance of the reporting unit, as well as other factors.
Under the quantitative assessment, the fair value of the reporting unit is calculated using a market
approach and a discounted cash flow method, as a form of the income approach. The market approach
includes the use of comparative multiples to complement discounted cash flow results. The discounted
cash flow method is based on the present value of two components-projected cash flows and a terminal
value. The terminal value represents the expected normalized future cash flows of the reporting unit
beyond the cash flows from the discrete projection period. The fair value of the reporting unit is
calculated based on the sum of the present value of the cash flows from the discrete period and the
present value of the terminal value. The discount rate represented our estimate of the WACC, or
expected return, that a marketplace participant would have required as of the valuation date. The
application of our goodwill impairment test required key assumptions underlying our valuation model.
 44 
Table of Contents
The discounted cash flow analysis factored in assumptions on discount rates and terminal growth rates
to reflect risk profiles of key strategic revenue and cost initiatives, as well as revenue and EBITDA
growth relative to history and market trends and expectations. The market multiples approach
incorporated significant judgment involved in the selection of comparable public company multiples
and benchmarks. The selection of companies and multiples was influenced by differences in growth and
profitability, and volatility in market prices of peer companies. These valuation inputs are
inherently judgmental, and an adverse change in one or a combination of these inputs could trigger a
goodwill impairment loss in the future.
During the fourth quarter of 2022, we performed a qualitative impairment assessment for our Consumer
reporting unit. Our qualitative assessment indicated that it was more likely than not that the fair
value of our Consumer reporting unit exceeded its carrying value and, therefore, did not result in an
impairment.
During the fourth quarter of 2022, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment for our Business
reporting unit given it has continued to experience increased market pressures resulting in lower
than expected revenues and earnings that may continue to persist over the near term. At the goodwill
impairment measurement date of October 31, 2022, our Business reporting unit had a fair value that
exceeded its carrying amount by approximately 8% and, therefore, did not result in an impairment. We
do not anticipate reasonable changes in significant estimates to change the outcome of the
quantitative impairment assessment. For instance, if either the terminal value growth rate declined
by 50 basis points, or if the discount rate increased by 50 basis points, the fair value of our
Business reporting unit would still exceed its carrying value. However, as a result of our 2022
goodwill assessment, management believes there is an increasing risk that our Business reporting unit
may be required to recognize an impairment charge in the future. See Note 4 to the consolidated
financial statements for additional information.
A projected sustained decline in a reporting unit's revenues and earnings could have a significant
negative impact on its fair value and may result in impairment charges. Such a decline could be
driven by, among other things: (1) decreases in sales volumes or long-term growth rate as a result of
competitive pressures or other factors; or (2) the inability to achieve or delays in achieving the
goals in strategic initiatives. Also, adverse changes to macroeconomic factors, such as increases in
long-term interest rates, would also negatively impact the fair value of the reporting unit.
At December 31, 2021, the balance of our goodwill was approximately $28.6 billion, of which $21.0
billion was in our Consumer reporting unit and $7.5 billion was in our Business reporting unit. We
performed quantitative impairment assessments for both our Consumer and Business reporting units
during the fourth quarter of 2021. At the goodwill impairment measurement date of October 31, 2021,
our quantitative assessments indicated that the fair values for our Consumer and Business reporting
units were substantially in excess of their carrying values and, therefore, did not result in
impairment.
 Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans 
We maintain benefit plans for most of our employees, including, for certain employees, pension and
other postretirement benefit plans. Benefit plan assumptions, including the discount rate used, the
long-term rate of return on plan assets, the determination of the substantive plan and health care
trend rates are periodically updated and impact the amount of benefit plan income, expense, assets
and obligations. Changes to one or more of these assumptions could significantly impact our
accounting for pension and other postretirement benefits.
In determining pension and other postretirement obligations, the weighted-average discount rate was
selected to approximate the composite interest rates available on a selection of high-quality bonds
available in the market at December 31, 2022. The bonds selected had maturities that coincided with
the time periods during which benefit payments are expected to occur, were non-callable and available
in sufficient quantities to ensure marketability (at least $300 million par outstanding). Bond yields
are subject to uncertainty for a number of reasons including corporate performance, credit rating
downgrades and upgrades, government fiscal policy decisions, and general market volatility. The
expected long-term rates of return on plan assets used in determining Verizon’s pension and other
postretirement obligations are based on expectations for future investment returns for the plans’
asset allocation. The rates are subject to uncertainty for a number of reasons including corporate
performance, credit ratings, monetary policy, inflation, exchange rates, investor behavior and
general market volatility.
A sensitivity analysis of the impact of changes in the discount rate and the long-term rate of return
on plan assets on the benefit obligations and expense (income) recorded, as well as an increase or a
decrease in the actual versus expected return on plan assets as of December 31, 2022 and for the year
then ended pertaining to Verizon’s pension and postretirement benefit plans, is provided in the table
below. The amounts in the table below related to discount rate changes are gross impacts on benefit
obligations and expense, and do not reflect changes in asset values as a result of interest rate
changes, for which our pension plan is highly hedged.
 45 
Table of Contents
 Percentage point Increase/(decrease) at December 
 (dollars in millions) change 31, 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Pension plans discount rate +0.50 $ -676 
 -0.50 740 
 Rate of return on pension plan +1.00 -168 
 assets 
 -1.00 168 
 Postretirement plans discount rate +0.50 -507 
 -0.50 552 
 Rate of return on postretirement 
 plan +1.00 -5 
 assets 
 -1.00 5 
In addition to our liability hedging assets, we also employ an interest rate hedging strategy to
further minimize the impact of discount rate changes on the funded ratio of the pension plan. While
the target hedge ratio varies depending on the funded status of the plan and the level of interest
rates, the target hedge ratio was greater than 80% at December 31, 2022, significantly limiting
volatility.
The annual measurement date for both our pension and other postretirement benefits is December 31. We
use the full yield curve approach to estimate the interest cost component of net periodic benefit
cost for pension and other postretirement benefits. The full yield curve approach refines our
estimate of interest cost by applying the individual spot rates from a yield curve composed of the
rates of return on several hundred high-quality fixed income corporate bonds available at the
measurement date. These individual spot rates align with the timing of each future cash outflow for
benefit payments and therefore provide a more precise estimate of interest cost.
See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
 Income Taxes 
Our current and deferred income taxes and associated valuation allowances are impacted by events and
transactions arising in the normal course of business as well as in connection with the adoption of
new accounting standards, changes in tax laws and rates, acquisitions and dispositions of businesses
and non-recurring items. As a global commercial enterprise, our income tax rate and the
classification of income taxes can be affected by many factors, including estimates of the timing and
realization of deferred income tax assets and the timing and amount of income tax payments. We
account for tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in our tax returns in accordance with the
accounting standard relating to the uncertainty in income taxes, which requires the use of a two-step
approach for recognizing and measuring tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We
review and adjust our liability for unrecognized tax benefits based on our best judgment given the
facts, circumstances and information available at each reporting date. To the extent that the final
outcome of these tax positions is different than the amounts recorded, such differences may impact
income tax expense and actual tax payments. We recognize any interest and penalties accrued related
to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. Actual tax payments may materially differ from
estimated liabilities as a result of changes in tax laws as well as unanticipated transactions
impacting related income tax balances. See Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional information.
 Property, Plant and Equipment 
Our Property, plant and equipment balance represents a significant component of our consolidated
assets. We record property, plant and equipment at cost. We depreciate property, plant and equipment
on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the assets. The estimated useful life is
subject to change due to a variety of factors such as change in asset capacity or performance,
technical obsolescence, market expectations and competition impacts. In connection with our ongoing
review of the estimated useful lives of property, plant and equipment during 2022, we determined that
the estimated useful life of our property, plant and equipment would remain unchanged. We expect that
a one year increase in estimated useful lives of our property, plant and equipment would result in a
decrease to our 2022 depreciation expense of $2.2 billion and that a one year decrease would result
in an increase of approximately $3.5 billion in our 2022 depreciation expense.
 Accounts Receivable 
Accounts receivable are recorded at amortized cost less an allowance for credit losses that are not
expected to be recovered. The gross amount of accounts receivable and corresponding allowance for
credit losses are presented separately in the consolidated balance sheets. We maintain allowances for
credit losses resulting from the expected failure or inability of our customers to make required
payments. We recognize the allowance for credit losses at inception and reassess quarterly based on
management’s expectation of the asset’s collectability. The allowance is based on multiple factors
including historical experience with bad debts, the credit quality of the customer base, the aging of
such receivables and current macroeconomic conditions, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as
management’s expectations of conditions in the future, as applicable. The impact of these factors on
the allowance involves significant level of estimation and is subject to uncertainty. Our allowance
for credit losses is based on management’s assessment of the collectability of assets pooled together
with similar risk characteristics.
 46 
Table of Contents
We record an allowance to reduce the receivables to the amount that is expected to be collectible.
For device payment plan agreement receivables, we record bad debt expense based on a default and loss
calculation using our proprietary loss model. The expected loss rate is determined based on customer
credit scores and other qualitative factors as noted above. The loss rate is assigned individually on
a customer by customer basis and the custom credit scores are then aggregated by vintage and used in
our proprietary loss model to calculate the weighted-average loss rate used for determining the
allowance balance. The weighted-average expected loss rate increased 0.44% at December 31, 2022 as
compared to at December 31, 2021. We expect that an increase or decrease of 0.25% in the weighted-
average loss rate would result in a change of $111 million in the allowance.
We monitor the collectability of our wireless service receivables as one overall pool. Wireline
service receivables are disaggregated and pooled by the following customer groups: consumer, small
and medium business, global enterprise, public sector and wholesale. For wireless service receivables
and wireline consumer and small and medium business receivables, the allowance is calculated based on
a 12 month rolling average write-off balance multiplied by the average life-cycle of an account from
billing to write-off. The risk of loss is assessed over the contractual life of the receivables and
we adjust the historical loss amounts for current and future conditions based on management’s
qualitative considerations. For global enterprise, public sector and wholesale wireline receivables,
the allowance for credit losses is based on historical write-off experience and individual customer
credit risk, as applicable. We consider multiple factors in determining the allowance as discussed
above.
If there is a deterioration of our customers’ financial condition or if future actual default rates
on receivables in general differ from those currently anticipated, we may have to adjust our
allowance for credit losses, which would affect earnings in the period the adjustments are made. See
Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
 Acquisitions and Divestitures 
 Spectrum License Transactions 
From time to time, we enter into agreements to buy, sell or exchange spectrum licenses. We believe
these spectrum license transactions have allowed us to continue to enhance the reliability of our
wireless network while also resulting in a more efficient use of spectrum.
In March 2020, the FCC's incentive auction, Auction 103, for spectrum licenses in the upper 37 GHz,
39 GHz, and 47 GHz bands concluded. Verizon participated in this incentive auction and was the high
bidder on 4,940 licenses, which primarily consisted of 37 GHz and, to a lesser extent, 39 GHz
spectrum. As an incumbent licensee, our 39 GHz licenses provided us with incentive payments that were
applied towards the purchase price of spectrum in the auction. The value of the licenses won by
Verizon amounted to $3.4 billion, of which $1.8 billion was settled with the relinquished 39 GHz
licenses.
In February 2021, the FCC concluded Auction 107 for C-Band wireless spectrum. Verizon paid $45.5
billion for the licenses it won, of which $44.6 billion was paid in the first quarter of 2021. In
accordance with the rules applicable to the auction, Verizon is required to make additional payments
to acquire the licenses. The payments are for our allocable share of clearing costs incurred by, and
incentive payments due to, the incumbent license holders associated with the auction, which are
estimated to be $7.7 billion. During 2021, we made payments of $1.3 billion primarily related to
certain obligations for projected clearing costs. During 2022, we made additional payments of $1.6
billion for obligations related to accelerated clearing incentives and clearing costs. We expect to
continue to make payments related to clearing cost and incentive payment obligations through 2024,
which we expect to be $4.8 billion. These payments are dependent on the incumbent license holders
accelerated clearing of the spectrum for Verizon’s use and, therefore, the final timing and amounts
could differ based on the incumbent holders’ execution of their clearing process. In accordance with
the FCC order, the clearing must be completed by December 2025. The carrying value of the wireless
spectrum won in Auction 107 consists of all payments required to participate and purchase licenses in
the auction, including Verizon’s allocable share of clearing costs incurred by, and incentive
payments due to, the incumbent license holders associated with the auction that we are obligated to
pay in order to acquire the licenses, as well as capitalized interest to the extent qualifying
activities have occurred.
In March 2022, Verizon signed agreements with satellite operators in which operators agreed to clear
C-Band spectrum in certain markets and frequencies ahead of the previously expected December 2023
timeframe. During 2022, Verizon incurred costs associated with these agreements of approximately $340
million, of which $310 million was paid as of the year ended December 31, 2022. This early clearance
accelerated Verizon's access to more spectrum in a number of key markets to support its 5G technology
deployment.
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our spectrum
license transactions.
 TracFone Wireless, Inc. 
In September 2020, we entered into a purchase agreement (TracFone Purchase Agreement) with América
Móvil to acquire TracFone, a leading provider of prepaid and value mobile services in the U.S. The
transaction closed on November 23, 2021. In accordance with the terms of the TracFone Purchase
Agreement, Verizon acquired all of TracFone's outstanding stock in exchange for approximately $3.5
billion in cash, net of cash acquired and working capital and other adjustments, 57,596,544 shares of
our common stock valued at approximately $3.0 billion, and up to an additional $650 million in future
cash contingent
 47 
Table of Contents
consideration related to the achievement of certain performance measures and other commercial
arrangements. The fair value of the common stock was determined on the basis of its closing market
price on the Acquisition Date. The estimated fair value of the contingent consideration as of the
Acquisition Date was approximately $560 million calculated using a probability-weighted discounted
cash flow model and significant unobservable inputs, thus representing a Level 3 measurement. The
contingent consideration payable is based on the achievement of certain revenue and operational
targets, measured over a two-year earn out period, as defined in the TracFone Purchase Agreement.
During 2022, Verizon made payments of $188 million related to the contingent consideration, which is
reflected in Cash flows from financing activities in our consolidated statement of cash flows for the
twelve months ended December 31, 2022. Payments related to the contingent consideration are expected
to continue through 2024. As of December 31, 2022, the fair value of the contingent consideration was
$317 million. During 2022, we recorded gains of $57 million related to fair value adjustments for the
contingent consideration within Selling, general and administrative expense in our consolidated
statement of income. See Note 3 and Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for additional
information.
 Bluegrass Cellular 
In October 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire certain assets of Bluegrass, a
rural wireless operator serving central Kentucky. The transaction closed in March 2021. The aggregate
cash consideration paid by Verizon at the closing of the transaction was approximately $412 million,
net of cash acquired. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
 Verizon Media Divestiture 
On May 2, 2021, Verizon entered into a definitive agreement with an affiliate of Apollo Global
Management Inc. (the Apollo Affiliate) pursuant to which we agreed to sell Verizon Media in return
for consideration of $4.3 billion in cash, subject to customary adjustments, $750 million in non-
convertible preferred limited partnership units of the Apollo Affiliate, and 10% of the fully-diluted
common limited partnership units of the Apollo Affiliate.
On September 1, 2021, we completed the sale of Verizon Media. As of the close of the transaction,
cash proceeds, the fair value of the non-convertible preferred limited partnership units of the
Apollo Affiliate, and the fair value of 10% of the fully-diluted common limited partnership units of
the Apollo Affiliate were $4.3 billion, $496 million, and $124 million, respectively. We recorded a
pre-tax gain on sale of approximately $1.0 billion (after-tax $1.0 billion) in Selling general and
administrative expense in our consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2021.
In addition, we incurred $346 million of various costs associated with this disposition which are
primarily recorded in Selling general and administrative expense in our consolidated statement of
income for the year ended December 31, 2021. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional information.
 Other 
From time to time, we enter into strategic agreements to acquire various other businesses and
investments. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
In connection with a non-strategic divestiture and other activity, we recorded a pre-tax net gain of
an insignificant amount in our consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2022.
In December 2021, we completed the sale of an investment. In connection with this transaction, we
recorded a pre-tax gain of $131 million in Equity in earnings (losses) of unconsolidated businesses
in our consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2021.
 Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures 
 About Market Risk 
We are exposed to various types of market risk in the normal course of business, including the impact
of interest rate changes, foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, changes in investment, equity
and commodity prices and changes in corporate tax rates. We employ risk management strategies, which
may include the use of a variety of derivatives including cross currency swaps, forward starting
interest rate swaps, interest rate swaps, interest rate caps, treasury rate locks and foreign
exchange forwards. We do not hold derivatives for trading purposes.
It is our general policy to enter into interest rate, foreign currency and other derivative
transactions only to the extent necessary to achieve our desired objectives in optimizing exposure to
various market risks. Our objectives include maintaining a mix of fixed and variable rate debt to
lower borrowing costs within reasonable risk parameters and to protect against earnings and cash flow
volatility resulting from changes in market conditions. We do not hedge our market risk exposure in a
manner that would completely eliminate the effect of changes in interest rates and foreign exchange
rates on our earnings.
Counterparties to our derivative contracts are major financial institutions with whom we have
negotiated derivatives agreements (ISDA master agreements) and credit support annex (CSA) agreements
which provide rules for collateral exchange. The CSA agreements contain rating based thresholds such
that we or our counterparties may be required to hold or post collateral based upon changes in
outstanding positions as compared to established thresholds and changes in credit ratings. We do not
offset fair value amounts recognized for derivative instruments and fair value amounts recognized for
the right to reclaim cash collateral or
 48 
Table of Contents
the obligation to return cash collateral arising from derivative instruments recognized at fair
value. At December 31, 2022, we did not hold any collateral. At December 31, 2022, we posted $2.3
billion of collateral related to derivative contracts under collateral exchange agreements, which was
recorded as Prepaid expenses and other in our consolidated balance sheet. At December 31, 2021, we
held and posted $0.1 billion and an insignificant amount, respectively, of collateral related to
derivative contracts under collateral exchange arrangements, which were recorded as Other current
liabilities and Prepaid expenses and other, respectively, in our consolidated balance sheet. While we
may be exposed to credit losses due to the nonperformance of our counterparties, we consider the risk
remote and do not expect that any such nonperformance would result in a significant effect on our
results of operations or financial condition due to our diversified pool of counterparties. See Note
9 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the derivative
portfolio.
 Interest Rate Risk 
We are exposed to changes in interest rates, primarily on our short-term debt and the portion of
long-term debt that carries floating interest rates. As of December 31, 2022, approximately 74% of
the aggregate principal amount of our total debt portfolio consisted of fixed-rate indebtedness,
including the effect of interest rate swap agreements designated as hedges. The impact of a
100-basis-point change in interest rates affecting our floating rate debt would result in a change in
annual interest expense, including our interest rate swap agreements that are designated as hedges,
of approximately $420 million. The interest rates on our existing long-term debt obligations are
unaffected by changes to our credit ratings.
Certain of our floating rate debt and certain of our interest rate derivative transactions utilize
interest rates that are linked to the London Inter-Bank Offered Rate (LIBOR) as the benchmark rate.
The U.S. dollar LIBOR rates utilized in these transactions will cease publication after June 30,
2023, in accordance with recent U.S. and international regulatory guidance for reform. The
consequences of these developments cannot be entirely predicted but could include an increase in the
cost of our floating rate debt or exposure under our interest rate derivative transactions. We do not
anticipate a significant impact to our financial position given our current mix of variable and
fixed-rate debt and taking into account the impact of our interest rate hedging. In 2021, we began
utilizing interest rates that are linked to the Secured Overnight Financing Rate as the benchmark
rate for various floating rate transactions.
The table that follows summarizes the fair values of our long-term debt, including current
maturities, and interest rate swap derivatives as of December 31, 2022 and 2021. The table also
provides a sensitivity analysis of the estimated fair values of these financial instruments assuming
100-basis-point upward and downward shifts in the yield curve. Our sensitivity analysis does not
include the fair values of our commercial paper and bank loans, if any, because they are not
significantly affected by changes in market interest rates.
 (dollars in 
 millions) 
 Long-term Fair Value  Fair Value  
 debt and assuming assuming 
 related + 100 basis  - 100 basis  
 derivatives Fair Value point shift point shift 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 At December $ 143,648 $ 136,199 $ 152,427 
 31, 2022 
 At December 169,179 156,078 184,496 
 31, 2021 
 Interest Rate Swaps 
We enter into interest rate swaps to achieve a targeted mix of fixed and variable rate debt. We
principally receive fixed rates and pay variable rates, resulting in a net increase or decrease to
Interest expense. These swaps are designated as fair value hedges and hedge against interest rate
risk exposure of designated debt issuances. At December 31, 2022, there was no amount related to the
fair value of the asset and the fair value of the liability of these contracts was $4.6 billion. At
December 31, 2021, the fair value of the asset and liability of these contracts was $473 million and
$666 million, respectively. The increase in the fair value of the liability of these contracts is
primarily due to interest rate changes during the year ended December 31, 2022. At December 31, 2022
and 2021, the total notional amount of the interest rate swaps was $26.1 billion and $19.8 billion,
respectively.
 Forward Starting Interest Rate Swaps 
We have entered into forward starting interest rate swaps designated as cash flow hedges in order to
manage our exposure to interest rate changes on future forecasted transactions. At December 31, 2022,
there was no amount related to the fair value of the asset or liability of these contracts. At
December 31, 2021, there was no amount related to the fair value of the asset and the fair value of
the liability of these contracts was $302 million. At December 31, 2022, there was no outstanding
notional amount for forward starting interest rate swaps. At December 31, 2021, the total notional
amount of the forward starting interest rate swaps was $1.0 billion.
 Treasury Rate Locks 
From time to time we enter into treasury rate locks to mitigate our interest rate risk. There was no
outstanding notional amount for treasury rate locks at December 31, 2022 or 2021.
 49 
Table of Contents
 Foreign Currency Translation 
The functional currency for our foreign operations is primarily the local currency. The translation
of income statement and balance sheet amounts of our foreign operations into U.S. dollars is recorded
as cumulative translation adjustments, which are included in Accumulated other comprehensive loss in
our consolidated balance sheets. Gains and losses on foreign currency transactions are recorded in
the consolidated statements of income. At December 31, 2022, our primary translation exposure was to
the British Pound Sterling, Euro and Australian Dollar.
 Cross Currency Swaps 
We have entered into cross currency swaps to exchange our British Pound Sterling, Euro, Swiss Franc,
Canadian Dollar and Australian Dollar-denominated cash flows into U.S. dollars and to fix our cash
payments in U.S. dollars, as well as to mitigate the impact of foreign currency transaction gains or
losses. On March 31, 2022, we voluntarily elected to de-designate our cross currency swaps previously
designated as cash flow hedges and re-designated the swaps as fair value hedges. Subsequently
executed cross currency swaps are also designated as fair value hedges. The fair value of the asset
of these contracts was $305 million and $589 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. At
December 31, 2022 and 2021, the fair value of the liability of these contracts was $3.6 billion and
$1.6 billion, respectively. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the total notional amount of the cross
currency swaps was $35.0 billion and $32.5 billion, respectively.
 Foreign Exchange Forwards 
We also have foreign exchange forwards which we use as economic hedges but for which we have elected
not to apply hedge accounting. We enter into British Pound Sterling and Euro foreign exchange
forwards to mitigate our foreign exchange rate risk related to non-functional currency denominated
monetary assets and liabilities of international subsidiaries.
At December 31, 2022, the fair value of the asset and liability of these contracts was insignificant.
At December 31, 2021, the fair value of the asset of these contracts was insignificant and there was
no amount related to the liability of these contracts. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the total
notional amount of the foreign exchange forwards was $920 million and $932 million, respectively.
 50 
Table of Contents
 Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary 
 Data 
 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting 
 Firm 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of Verizon Communications Inc.:
Opinion on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
We have audited Verizon Communications Inc. and subsidiaries’ (Verizon) internal control over
financial reporting as of December 31, 2022, based on criteria established in Internal Control –
Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
(2013 framework) (the COSO criteria). In our opinion, Verizon maintained, in all material respects,
effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2022, based on the COSO
criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated balance sheets of Verizon as of December 31, 2022 and
2021, the related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income, cash flows, and changes in
equity for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2022, and the related notes and
the financial statement schedule listed in the Index at Item 15(a) and our report dated February 10,
2023 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
Verizon’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial
reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
included in the accompanying Management's Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on Verizon’s internal control over financial reporting
based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be
independent with respect to Verizon in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the
applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing
the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as
we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis
for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1)
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3)
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition,
use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial
statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
 /s/ Ernst & Young LLP 
 Ernst & Young LLP 
 New York, New York 
 February 10, 2023 
 51 
Table of Contents
 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting 
 Firm 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of Verizon Communications Inc.:
 Opinion on the Financial Statements 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Verizon Communications Inc. and
subsidiaries (Verizon or the Company) as of December 31, 2022 and 2021, the related consolidated
statements of income, comprehensive income, cash flows, and changes in equity for each of the three
years in the period ended December 31, 2022, and the related notes and the financial statement
schedule listed in the Index at Item 15(a) (collectively referred to as the "consolidated financial
statements"). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of Verizon at December 31, 2022 and 2021, and the results of its
operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2022, in
conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), Verizon’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31,
2022, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report dated February
10, 2023 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
These financial statements are the responsibility of Verizon’s management. Our responsibility is to
express an opinion on Verizon’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting
firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to Verizon in
accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements
are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing
procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included
examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial
statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 Critical Audit Matters 
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current period audit of
the financial statements that were communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee
and that: (1) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2)
involved our especially challenging, subjective or complex judgments. The communication of critical
audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements, taken
as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing separate
opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts or disclosures to which they relate.
 Valuation of Employee Benefit Obligations 
 The Company sponsors several pension plans and other post-employment 
 benefit plans. At December 31, 2022, the Company’s aggregate defined 
 benefit pension obligation was $15.3 billion and exceeded the fair 
 value of pension plan assets of $13.7 billion, resulting in an 
 unfunded defined benefit pension obligation of $1.6 billion. Also, 
 at December 31, 2022, the other postretirement benefits obligation 
 was approximately $11.1 billion. As explained in Note 11 of the 
 Description of the Matter consolidated financial statements, the Company updates the estimates 
 used to measure employee benefit obligations and plan assets in the 
 fourth quarter and upon a remeasurement event to reflect the actual 
 return on plan assets and updated actuarial assumptions. 
 Auditing the employee benefit obligations was complex due to the 
 highly judgmental nature of the actuarial assumptions (e.g., 
 discount rate, health care cost trends and per capita claims cost 
 trends) used in the measurement process. These assumptions had a 
 significant effect on the projected benefit obligation. 
 52 
Table of Contents
 We obtained an understanding, evaluated the design 
 and tested the operating effectiveness of controls 
 over the employee benefits obligation valuation 
 process. For example, we tested controls over 
 management’s review of the employee benefit 
 obligation calculations, the significant actuarial 
 assumptions and the data inputs provided to the 
 actuary. 
 To test the employee benefit obligations, our audit 
 procedures included, among others, evaluating the 
 methodologies used, the significant actuarial 
 assumptions discussed above and the underlying data 
 used by the Company. We compared the actuarial 
 assumptions used by management to historical trends, 
 current economic factors and evaluated the change in 
 the employee benefit obligations from prior year due 
 to the change in service cost, interest cost, 
 actuarial gains and losses, benefit payments, 
 How We Addressed the Matter in Our Audit contributions and other activities. In addition, we 
 involved an actuarial specialist to assist in 
 evaluating management’s methodology for determining 
 the discount rate that reflects the maturity and 
 duration of the benefit payments and is used to 
 measure the employee benefit obligations. As part of 
 this assessment, we compared the projected cash flows 
 to prior year projections and compared the current 
 year benefits paid to the prior year projected cash 
 flows. To evaluate the health care cost trends and 
 per capita claims cost trends, we involved an 
 actuarial specialist to assist in evaluating the 
 assumptions and assessed whether the information was 
 consistent with publicly available information, and 
 whether any market data adjusted for entity-specific 
 adjustments were applied. We also tested the 
 completeness and accuracy of the underlying data, 
 including the participant data provided to 
 management’s actuarial specialists. 
 Impairment Evaluation for Verizon Business Group 
 Goodwill 
 At December 31, 2022, the Company’s goodwill related 
 to its Verizon Business Group (Business) reporting 
 unit was $7.5 billion and represented 2.0% of total 
 assets. As discussed in Notes 1 and 4 of the 
 consolidated financial statements, goodwill is not 
 amortized but rather is tested for impairment at the 
 reporting unit level at least annually, or more 
 frequently if impairment indicators are present. The 
 impairment test compares the fair value of the 
 reporting unit (calculated using a combination of a 
 market approach and an income approach) to its 
 carrying amount. 
 Description of the Matter Auditing management’s goodwill impairment test was 
 complex and highly judgmental due to the inherent 
 subjectivity of developing an estimate of the fair 
 value of the reporting unit, which is based on 
 assumptions about future conditions, transactions, or 
 events whose outcome is uncertain and will therefore 
 be subject to change over time. In particular, the 
 fair value estimate was sensitive to significant 
 assumptions such as the discount rate, revenue growth 
 rate and earnings before interest, taxes, 
 depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) margins, which 
 are affected by expected future market or economic 
 conditions. 
 We obtained an understanding, evaluated the design 
 and tested the operating effectiveness of controls 
 over the Company’s goodwill impairment review 
 process. For example, we tested controls over 
 management’s review of the valuation models and the 
 significant assumptions described above. 
 To test the estimated fair value of the Company’s 
 Business reporting unit, our audit procedures 
 included, among others, assessing the suitability and 
 application of the valuation methodologies selected 
 and evaluating the significant assumptions discussed 
 above and underlying data used by the Company in its 
 analysis. We compared the significant assumptions 
 How We Addressed the Matter in Our Audit used by management to current industry and economic 
 trends, market information, and other relevant 
 factors. We performed sensitivity analyses of 
 significant assumptions to determine what changes in 
 assumptions are particularly sensitive when assessing 
 the likelihood of impairment, or when calculating the 
 amount of an impairment. In addition, we involved a 
 valuation specialist to assist in the evaluation of 
 the assumptions and other relevant information that 
 are most significant to the fair value estimate. We 
 also assessed the historical accuracy of management’s 
 forecasts of financial results used in developing 
 prior fair value estimates to assist in evaluating 
 the reliability of the current forecasts. 
 /s/ Ernst & Young LLP 
 Ernst & Young LLP 
 We have served as Verizon's auditor since 2000. 
 New York, New York 
 February 10, 2023 
 53 
Table of Contents
 Consolidated Statements of Income 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
 (dollars in millions, 
 except per share  
 Years Ended December amounts) 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating Revenues 
 Service revenues and $ 109,625 $ 110,449 $ 109,872 
 other 
 Wireless equipment 27,210 23,164 18,420 
 revenues 
 Total Operating 136,835 133,613 128,292 
 Revenues 
 Operating Expenses 
 Cost of services 
 (exclusive of items 28,637 31,234 31,401 
 shown below) 
 Cost of wireless 30,496 25,067 19,800 
 equipment 
 Selling, general and 
 administrative 30,136 28,658 31,573 
 expense 
 Depreciation and 17,099 16,206 16,720 
 amortization expense 
 Total Operating 106,368 101,165 99,494 
 Expenses 
 Operating Income 30,467 32,448 28,798 
 Equity in earnings 
 (losses) of 44 145 -45 
 unconsolidated 
 businesses 
 Other income 1,373 312 -539 
 (expense), net 
 Interest expense -3,613 -3,485 -4,247 
 Income Before 
 Provision For Income 28,271 29,420 23,967 
 Taxes 
 Provision for income -6,523 -6,802 -5,619 
 taxes 
 Net Income $ 21,748 $ 22,618 $ 18,348 
 Net income 
 attributable to $ 492 $ 553 $ 547 
 noncontrolling 
 interests 
 Net income 
 attributable to 21,256 22,065 17,801 
 Verizon 
 Net Income $ 21,748 $ 22,618 $ 18,348 
 Basic Earnings Per 
 Common Share 
 Net income 
 attributable to $ 5.06 $ 5.32 $ 4.30 
 Verizon 
 Weighted-average 
 shares outstanding 4,202 4,148 4,140 
 (in 
 millions) 
 Diluted Earnings Per 
 Common Share 
 Net income 
 attributable to $ 5.06 $ 5.32 $ 4.30 
 Verizon 
 Weighted-average 
 shares outstanding 4,204 4,150 4,142 
 (in 
 millions) 
 See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 54 
Table of Contents
 Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
 Years Ended December  (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net Income $ 21,748 $ 22,618 $ 18,348 
 Other Comprehensive 
 Loss, Net of Tax 
 (Expense) Benefit 
 Foreign currency 
 translation 
 adjustments, net of tax -153 -141 180 
 of $(13), $(17) 
 and $19 
 Unrealized gain (loss) 
 on cash flow 
 hedges, net of tax of 322 -85 -571 
 $(111), $30and 
 $197 
 Unrealized loss on fair 
 value hedges, -431 — — 
 net of tax of $148, 
 $0and $0 
 Unrealized loss on 
 marketable -25 -9 -2 
 securities, net of tax 
 of $8, $3and $(2) 
 Defined benefit pension 
 and 
 postretirement plans, -651 -621 -676 
 net of tax of 
 $221, $205and $221 
 Other comprehensive 
 loss attributable to -938 -856 -1,069 
 Verizon 
 Total Comprehensive $ 20,810 $ 21,762 $ 17,279 
 Income 
 Comprehensive income 
 attributable to $ 492 $ 553 $ 547 
 noncontrolling 
 interests 
 Comprehensive income 
 attributable to 20,318 21,209 16,732 
 Verizon 
 Total Comprehensive $ 20,810 $ 21,762 $ 17,279 
 Income 
 See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 55 
Table of Contents
 Consolidated Balance Sheets 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
 (dollars in millions, except 
 per share amounts) 
 At December 31, 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Assets 
 Current assets 
 Cash and cash equivalents $ 2,605 $ 2,921 
 Accounts receivable 25,332 24,742 
 Less Allowance for credit 826 896 
 losses 
 Accounts receivable, net 24,506 23,846 
 Inventories 2,388 3,055 
 Prepaid expenses and other 8,358 6,906 
 Total current assets 37,857 36,728 
 Property, plant and equipment 307,689 289,897 
 Less Accumulated depreciation 200,255 190,201 
 Property, plant and equipment, 107,434 99,696 
 net 
 Investments in unconsolidated 1,071 1,061 
 businesses 
 Wireless licenses 149,796 147,619 
 Goodwill 28,671 28,603 
 Other intangible assets, net 11,461 11,677 
 Operating lease right-of-use 26,130 27,883 
 assets 
 Other assets 17,260 13,329 
 Total assets $ 379,680 $ 366,596 
 Liabilities and Equity 
 Current liabilities 
 Debt maturing within one year $ 9,963 $ 7,443 
 Accounts payable and accrued 23,977 24,833 
 liabilities 
 Current operating lease 4,134 3,859 
 liabilities 
 Other current liabilities 12,097 11,025 
 Total current liabilities 50,171 47,160 
 Long-term debt 140,676 143,425 
 Employee benefit obligations 12,974 15,410 
 Deferred income taxes 43,441 40,685 
 Non-current operating lease 21,558 23,203 
 liabilities 
 Other liabilities 18,397 13,513 
 Total long-term liabilities 237,046 236,236 
 Commitments and Contingencies 
 (Note 16) 
 Equity 
 Series preferred stock 
 ($0.10par — — 
 value;250,000,000shares 
 authorized;noneissued) 
 Common stock ($0.10par 
 value;6,250,000,000shares 
 authorized in 
 each 429 429 
 period;4,291,433,646shares 
 issued 
 in each period) 
 Additional paid in capital 13,420 13,861 
 Retained earnings 82,380 71,993 
 Accumulated other -1,865 -927 
 comprehensive loss 
 Common stock in treasury, at 
 cost -4,013 -4,104 
 (91,572,258and93,634,725shares 
 outstanding) 
 Deferred compensation – 
 employee stock 793 538 
 ownership plans (ESOPs) and 
 other 
 Noncontrolling interests 1,319 1,410 
 Total equity 92,463 83,200 
 Total liabilities and equity $ 379,680 $ 366,596 
 See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 56 
Table of Contents
 Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
 Years Ended December (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash Flows from 
 Operating Activities 
 Net Income $ 21,748 $ 22,618 $ 18,348 
 Adjustments to 
 reconcile net income 
 to 
 net cash provided by 
 operating 
 activities: 
 Depreciation and 17,099 16,206 16,720 
 amortization expense 
 Employee retirement -2,046 -3,391 840 
 benefits 
 Deferred income 2,973 4,264 1,553 
 taxes 
 Provision for 
 expected credit 1,611 789 1,380 
 losses 
 Equity in losses 
 (earnings) of 
 unconsolidated -10 36 91 
 businesses, net of 
 dividends received 
 Changes in current 
 assets and 
 liabilities, net of 
 effects from 
 acquisition/disposi… 
 of businesses: 
 Accounts receivable -1,978 -1,592 189 
 Inventories 627 -905 -369 
 Prepaid expenses and 928 150 1,202 
 other 
 Accounts payable and 
 accrued liabilities -33 1,457 -966 
 and Other current 
 liabilities 
 Other, net -3,778 -93 2,780 
 Net cash provided by 
 operating 37,141 39,539 41,768 
 activities 
 Cash Flows from 
 Investing Activities 
 Capital expenditures 
 (including -23,087 -20,286 -18,192 
 capitalized 
 software) 
 Cash received (paid) 
 related to 
 acquisitions of 248 -4,065 -520 
 businesses, net of 
 cash 
 acquired 
 Acquisitions of -3,653 -47,596 -3,896 
 wireless licenses 
 Collateral payments 
 related to 
 derivative -2,265 -21 — 
 contracts, net of 
 repayments 
 Proceeds from 
 disposition of 33 4,122 — 
 business 
 Other, net 62 693 -904 
 Net cash used in -28,662 -67,153 -23,512 
 investing activities 
 Cash Flows from 
 Financing Activities 
 Proceeds from 7,074 33,034 25,822 
 long-term borrowings 
 Proceeds from 
 asset-backed 10,732 8,383 5,635 
 long-term 
 borrowings 
 Net proceeds from 
 (repayments of) 106 — -9 
 short-term 
 commercial paper 
 Repayments of 
 long-term borrowings 
 and -8,616 -14,063 -9,775 
 finance lease 
 obligations 
 Repayments of 
 asset-backed -4,948 -4,800 -7,413 
 long-term 
 borrowings 
 Dividends paid -10,805 -10,445 -10,232 
 Other, net -2,072 -3,832 -2,703 
 Net cash provided by 
 (used in) financing -8,529 8,277 1,325 
 activities 
 Increase (decrease) 
 in cash, cash -50 -19,337 19,581 
 equivalents and 
 restricted cash 
 Cash, cash 
 equivalents and 
 restricted 4,161 23,498 3,917 
 cash, beginning of 
 period 
 Cash, cash 
 equivalents and 
 restricted $ 4,111 $ 4,161 $ 23,498 
 cash, end of period 
 (Note 1) 
 See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 57 
Table of Contents
 Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
 (dol… 
 in  
 mill… 
 exce… 
 per  
 share 
 amou… 
 and  
 Ye… shar… 
 En… in  
 De… thou… 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Sha… Amo… Sha… Amo… Sha… Amou… 
 Co… 
 St… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… 4,2… $ 429 4,2… $ 429 4,2… $ 429 
 of 
 ye… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end 4,2… 429 4,2… 429 4,2… 429 
 of 
 ye… 
 Ad… 
 Pa… 
 In 
 Ca… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… 13,… 13,… 13,… 
 of 
 ye… 
 Ot… 
 (N… -441 457 -15 
 14) 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end 13,… 13,… 13,… 
 of 
 ye… 
 Re… 
 Ea… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… 71,… 60,… 53,… 
 of 
 ye… 
 Op… 
 ba… 
 sh… — — -200 
 ad… 
 (N… 
 1) 
 Ad… 
 op… 71,… 60,… 52,… 
 ba… 
 Net 
 in… 
 at… 21,… 22,… 17,… 
 to 
 Ve… 
 Di… 
 de… 
 ($… -10… -10… -10… 
 $2… 
 $2… 
 sh… 
 Ot… -9 -4 — 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end 82,… 71,… 60,… 
 of 
 ye… 
 Ac… 
 Ot… 
 Co… 
 In… 
 (L… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… 
 of -927 -71 998 
 ye… 
 at… 
 to 
 Ve… 
 Fo… 
 cu… -153 -141 180 
 tr… 
 ad… 
 Un… 
 ga… 
 (l… 
 on 322 -85 -571 
 ca… 
 fl… 
 he… 
 Un… 
 lo… 
 on -431 — — 
 fa… 
 va… 
 he… 
 Un… 
 lo… 
 on -25 -9 -2 
 ma… 
 se… 
 De… 
 be… 
 pe… -651 -621 -676 
 and 
 po… 
 pl… 
 Ot… 
 co… -938 -856 -1,… 
 lo… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end 
 of -1,… -927 -71 
 ye… 
 at… 
 to 
 Ve… 
 Tr… 
 St… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… -93… -4,… -15… -6,… -15… -6,… 
 of 
 ye… 
 Em… 
 pl… 2,0… 90 2,0… 90 2,2… 101 
 (N… 
 14) 
 Sh… 
 pl… 15 1 15 1 4 — 
 (N… 
 14) 
 Ac… 
 (N… — — 57,… 2,5… — — 
 3) 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end -91… -4,… -93… -4,… -15… -6,… 
 of 
 ye… 
 De… 
 Co… 
 and 
 Ot… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… 538 335 222 
 of 
 ye… 
 Re… 
 st… 423 369 275 
 eq… 
 gr… 
 Am… -168 -166 -162 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end 793 538 335 
 of 
 ye… 
 No… 
 In… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… 1,4… 1,4… 1,4… 
 of 
 ye… 
 To… 
 co… 492 553 547 
 in… 
 Di… 
 and 
 ot… -583 -573 -557 
 (N… 
 14) 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end 1,3… 1,4… 1,4… 
 of 
 ye… 
 To… $ 92,… $ 83,… $ 69,… 
 Eq… 
 See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 58 
Table of Contents
 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
 Note 1. Description of Business and Summary of 
 Significant Accounting Policies 
Description of Business
Verizon Communications Inc. (the Company) is a holding company that, acting through its subsidiaries
(together with the Company, collectively, Verizon), is one of the world’s leading providers of
communications, technology, information and entertainment products and services to consumers,
businesses and government entities. With a presence around the world, we offer data, video and voice
services and solutions on our networks and platforms that are designed to meet customers’ demand for
mobility, reliable network connectivity, security and control.
We have tworeportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units - Verizon
Consumer Group (Consumer) and Verizon Business Group (Business).
Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline communications services and
products. Our wireless services are provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in
the United States (U.S.) under the Verizon brand, TracFone Wireless, Inc. (TracFone) brands and
through wholesale and other arrangements. We also provide fixed wireless access (FWA) broadband
through our wireless networks. Our wireline services are provided in nine states in the Mid-Atlantic
and Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over our 100% fiber-optic network through our
Verizon Fios product portfolio and over a traditional copper-based network to customers who are not
served by Fios. Our Consumer segment's wireless and wireline products and services are available to
our retail customers, as well as resellers that purchase wireless network access from us on a
wholesale basis.
Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications services and products, including
data, video and conferencing services, corporate networking solutions, security and managed network
services, local and long distance voice services and network access to deliver various Internet of
Things (IoT) services and products. We also provide FWA broadband through our wireless networks. We
provide these products and services to businesses, government customers and wireless and wireline
carriers across the U.S. and select products and services to customers around the world.
Consolidation
The method of accounting applied to investments, whether consolidated or equity, involves an
evaluation of all significant terms of the investments that explicitly grant or suggest evidence of
control or influence over the operations of the investee. The consolidated financial statements
include our controlled subsidiaries, as well as variable interest entities (VIE) where we are deemed
to be the primary beneficiary. For controlled subsidiaries that are not wholly-owned, the
noncontrolling interests are included in Net income and Total equity. Investments in businesses that
we do not control, but have the ability to exercise significant influence over operating and
financial policies, are accounted for using the equity method. Equity method investments are included
in Investments in unconsolidated businesses in our consolidated balance sheets. All significant
intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated.
Basis of Presentation
We have reclassified certain prior year amounts to conform to the current year presentation.
Use of Estimates
We prepare our financial statements using U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), which
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts and disclosures.
These estimates and assumptions take into account historical and forward-looking factors that the
Company believes are reasonable, including but not limited to public health crises, such as the
COVID-19 pandemic, and related economic implications. Actual results could differ significantly from
those estimates.
Examples of significant estimates include the allowance for credit losses, the recoverability of
intangible assets, property, plant and equipment, and other long-lived assets, the incremental
borrowing rate for the lease liability, fair value measurements, including those related to financial
instruments, goodwill, spectrum licenses and intangible assets, unrecognized tax benefits, valuation
allowances on tax assets, pension and postretirement benefit obligations, contingencies and the
identification and valuation of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in connection with business
combinations.
Revenue Recognition
We earn revenue from contracts with customers, primarily through the provision of telecommunications
and other services and through the sale of wireless equipment. These services include a variety of
communication and connectivity services for our Consumer and Business customers including other
carriers that use our facilities to provide services to their customers, as well as professional and
integrated managed services for our large enterprises and government customers. We account for these
revenues under Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2014-09, "Revenue from Contracts with Customers"
(Topic 606).
 59 
Table of Contents
We also earn revenues that are not accounted for under Topic 606 from leasing arrangements (such as
those for towers and equipment), captive reinsurance arrangements primarily related to wireless
device insurance and the interest on equipment financed under a device payment plan agreement when
sold to the customer by an authorized agent.
Nature of Products and Services
Telecommunications
Service
We offer wireless services through a variety of plans on a postpaid or prepaid basis. For wireless
service, we recognize revenue using an output method, either as the service allowance units are used
or as time elapses, because it reflects the pattern by which we satisfy our performance obligation
through the transfer of service to the customer. Monthly service is generally billed in advance,
which results in a contract liability. See Note 2 for additional information. For postpaid plans,
where monthly usage exceeds the allowance, the overage usage represents options held by the customer
for incremental services and the usage-based fee is recognized when the customer exercises the option
(typically on a month-to-month basis).
For our contracts related to wireline communication and connectivity services, in general, fixed
monthly fees for service are billed one month in advance, which results in a contract liability, and
service revenue is recognized over the enforceable contract term as the service is rendered, as the
customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the services through network access and
usage. While substantially all of our wireline service revenue contracts are the result of providing
access to our networks, revenue from services that are not fixed in amount and, instead, are based on
usage are generally billed in arrears and recognized as the usage occurs.
Equipment
We sell wireless devices and accessories under the Verizon brand and other brands. Equipment revenue
is generally recognized when the products are delivered to and accepted by the customer, as this is
when control passes to the customer. In addition to offering the sale of equipment on a standalone
basis, we have twoprimary offerings through which customers pay for a wireless device, in connection
with a service contract: fixed-term plans and device payment plans.
Under a fixed-term plan, the customer is sold the wireless device without any upfront charge or at a
discounted price in exchange for entering into a fixed-term service contract (typically for a term of
24months or less).
Under a device payment plan, the customer is sold the wireless device in exchange for a non-interest-
bearing installment note, which is repaid by the customer, typically over a 36-month term, and
concurrently enters into a month-to-month contract for wireless service. We may offer certain
promotions that provide billing credits applied over a specified term, contingent upon the customer
maintaining service. The credits are included in the transaction price, which are allocated to the
performance obligations based on their relative selling price and are recognized when earned.
A financing component exists in both our fixed-term plans and device payment plans because the timing
of the payment for the device, which occurs over the contract term, differs from the satisfaction of
the performance obligation, which occurs at contract inception upon transfer of the device to the
customer. We periodically assess, at the contract level, the significance of the financing component
inherent in our fixed-term and device payment plan receivable based on qualitative and quantitative
considerations related to our customer classes. These considerations include assessing the commercial
objective of our plans, the term and duration of financing provided, interest rates prevailing in the
marketplace, and credit risks of our customer classes, all of which impact our selection of
appropriate discount rates. Based on current facts and circumstances, we determined that the
financing component in our existing wireless device payments and fixed-term contracts sold through
the direct channel is not significant and therefore is not accounted for separately. See Note 8 for
additional information on the interest on equipment financed on a device payment plan agreement when
sold to the customer by an authorized agent in our indirect channel.
Wireless Contracts
For our wireless contracts, total contract revenue, which represents the transaction price for
wireless service and wireless equipment, is allocated between service and equipment revenue based on
their estimated standalone selling prices. We estimate the standalone selling price of the device or
accessory to be its retail price excluding subsidies or conditional purchase discounts. We estimate
the standalone selling price of wireless service to be the price that we offer to customers on month-
to-month contracts that can be cancelled at any time without penalty (i.e., when there is no fixed-
term for service) or when service is procured without the concurrent purchase of a wireless device.
In addition, we also assess whether the service term is impacted by certain legally enforceable
rights and obligations in our contract with customers, such as penalties that a customer would have
to pay to early terminate a fixed-term contract or billing credits that would cease if the month-to-
month wireless service is canceled. The assessment of these legally enforceable rights and
obligations involves judgment and impacts our determination of the transaction price and related
disclosures.
From time to time, we may offer certain promotions that provide our customers on device payment plans
with the right to upgrade to a new device after paying a specified portion of their device payment
plan agreement amount and trading in their device in good working order. We account for this trade-in
right as a guarantee obligation. The full amount of the trade-in right's fair value
 60 
Table of Contents
is recognized as a guarantee liability and results in a reduction to the revenue recognized upon the
sale of the device. The guarantee liability was $ 54million and $ 77million at December 31, 2022 and
2021, respectively. The total transaction price is reduced by the guarantee, which is accounted for
outside the scope of Topic 606, and the remaining transaction price is allocated between the
performance obligations within the contract.
Our fixed-term plans generally include the sale of a wireless device at subsidized prices. This
results in the creation of a contract asset at the time of sale, which represents the recognition of
equipment revenue in excess of amounts billed.
For our device payment plans, billing credits are accounted for as consideration payable to a
customer and are included in the determination of total transaction price, resulting in a contract
liability.
We may provide a right of return on our products and services for a short time period after a sale.
These rights are accounted for as variable consideration when determining the transaction price, and
accordingly we recognize revenue based on the estimated amount to which we expect to be entitled
after considering expected returns. Returns and credits are estimated at contract inception and
updated at the end of each reporting period as additional information becomes available. We also may
provide credits or incentives on our products and services for contracts with resellers, which are
accounted for as variable consideration when estimating the amount of revenue to recognize.
Wireline Contracts
Total consideration for wireline services that are bundled in a single contract is allocated to each
performance obligation based on our standalone selling price for each service. While many contracts
include one or more service performance obligations, the revenue recognition pattern is generally not
impacted by the allocation since the services are generally satisfied over the same period of time.
We estimate the standalone selling price to be the price of the services when sold on a standalone
basis without any promotional discount. In addition, we also assess whether the service term is
impacted by certain legally enforceable rights and obligations in our contract with customers such as
penalties that a customer would have to pay to early terminate a fixed-term contract. The assessment
of these legally enforceable rights and obligations involves judgment and impacts our determination
of transaction price and related disclosures.
We may provide performance-based credits or incentives on our products and services for contracts
with our Business customers, which are accounted for as variable consideration when estimating the
transaction price. Credits are estimated at contract inception and are updated at the end of each
reporting period as additional information becomes available.
Wireless and Wireline Contracts
For offers that include third-party providers, we evaluate whether we are acting as the principal or
as the agent with respect to the goods or services provided to the customer. This principal-versus-
agent assessment involves judgment and focuses on whether the facts and circumstances of the
arrangement indicate that the goods or services were controlled by us prior to transferring them to
the customer. To evaluate if we have control, we consider various factors including whether we are
primarily responsible for fulfillment, bear risk of loss and have discretion over pricing.
Other
Advertising revenues are generated through display advertising and search advertising. Display
advertising revenue is generated by the display of graphical advertisements and other performance-
based advertising. Search advertising revenue is generated when a consumer clicks on a text-based
advertisement on the search results page. The divested Verizon Media Group (Verizon Media), primarily
earned revenue through display advertising on Verizon Media properties, as well as on third-party
properties through our advertising platforms, search advertising, and subscription arrangements.
Revenue for display and search advertising contracts is recognized as ads are delivered, while
subscription contracts are recognized over time. We are generally the principal in transactions
carried out through our advertising platforms, and therefore report gross revenue based on the amount
billed to our customers. The control and transfer of digital advertising inventory occurs in a rapid,
real-time environment, where our proprietary technology enables us to identify, enhance, verify and
solely control digital advertising inventory that we then sell to our customers. Our control is
further supported by us being primarily responsible to our customers for fulfillment and the fact
that we can exercise a level of discretion over pricing. We completed the sale of Verizon Media on
September 1, 2021. See Note 3 for additional information on the sale of Verizon Media.
We offer telematics services including smart fleet management and optimization software. Telematics
service revenue is generated primarily through subscription contracts. We recognize revenue over time
for our subscription contracts.
We report taxes collected from customers on behalf of governmental authorities on revenue-producing
transactions on a net basis.
Maintenance and Repairs
We charge the cost of maintenance and repairs, including the cost of replacing minor items not
constituting substantial betterments, principally to Cost of services as these costs are incurred.
 61 
Table of Contents
Advertising Costs
Costs for advertising products and services, as well as other promotional and sponsorship costs, are
charged to Selling, general and administrative expense in the periods in which they are incurred.See
Note 15 for additional information.
Earnings Per Common Share
Basic earnings per common share are based on the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during
the period. Where appropriate, diluted earnings per common share include the dilutive effect of
shares issuable under our stock-based compensation plans.
There were a total of approximately 1.9million, 1.7million and 2.0million outstanding dilutive
securities, primarily consisting of restricted stock units, included in the computation of diluted
earnings per common share for the years ended December 31, 2022 , 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Restricted Cash
We consider all highly liquid investments with an original maturity of 90 days or less when purchased
to be cash equivalents. Cash equivalents are stated at cost, which approximates quoted market value
and includes amounts held in money market funds.
Cash collections on the receivables collateralizing our asset-backed debt securities are required at
certain specified times to be placed into segregated accounts. Deposits to the segregated accounts
are considered restricted cash and are included in Prepaid expenses and other and Other assets in our
consolidated balance sheets.
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash are included in the following line items in the
consolidated balance sheets:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2022 2021 Increase / (Decrease) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and cash equivalents $ 2,605 $ 2,921 $ -316 
 Restricted cash: 
 Prepaid expenses and other 1,343 1,094 249 
 Other assets 163 146 17 
 Cash, cash equivalents and 
 restricted $ 4,111 $ 4,161 $ -50 
 cash 
Investments in Debt and Equity Securities
Investments in equity securities that are not accounted for under equity method accounting or result
in consolidation are to be measured at fair value. For investments in equity securities without
readily determinable fair values, Verizon elects the measurement alternative permitted under GAAP to
measure these investments at cost, less any impairment, plus or minus changes resulting from
observable price changes in orderly transactions for an identical or similar investment of the same
issuer. For investments in debt securities without quoted prices, Verizon uses an alternative matrix
pricing method. Investments in equity securities that do not result in consolidation of the investee
are included in Investments in unconsolidated businesses and debt securities are included in Other
assets in our consolidated balance sheets.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Accounts receivable are recorded at amortized cost less an allowance for credit losses that are not
expected to be recovered. The gross amount of accounts receivable and corresponding allowance for
credit losses are presented separately in the consolidated balance sheets. We maintain allowances for
credit losses resulting from the expected failure or inability of our customers to make required
payments. We recognize the allowance for credit losses at inception and reassess quarterly based on
management’s expectation of the asset’s collectability. The allowance is based on multiple factors
including historical experience with bad debts, the credit quality of the customer base, the aging of
such receivables and current macroeconomic conditions, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as
management’s expectations of conditions in the future, as applicable. Our allowance for credit losses
is based on management’s assessment of the collectability of assets pooled together with similar risk
characteristics.
We pool our device payment plan agreement receivables based on the credit quality indicators and
shared risk characteristics of "new customers" and "existing customers." New customers are defined as
customers who have been with Verizon for less than 210days. Existing customers are defined as
customers who have been with Verizon for 210days or more. We record an allowance to reduce the
receivables to the amount that is expected to be collectible. For device payment plan agreement
receivables, we record bad debt expense based on a default and loss calculation using our proprietary
loss model. The expected loss rate is determined based on customer credit scores and other
qualitative factors as noted above. The loss rate is assigned individually on a customer by customer
basis and the custom credit scores are then aggregated by vintage and used in our proprietary loss
model to calculate the weighted-average loss rate used for determining the allowance balance.
 62 
Table of Contents
We monitor the collectability of our wireless service receivables as one overall pool. Wireline
service receivables are disaggregated and pooled by the following customer groups: consumer, small
and medium business, global enterprise, public sector and wholesale. For wireless service receivables
and wireline consumer and small and medium business receivables, the allowance is calculated based on
a 12 month rolling average write-off balance multiplied by the average life-cycle of an account from
billing to write-off. The risk of loss is assessed over the contractual life of the receivables and
we adjust the historical loss amounts for current and future conditions based on management’s
qualitative considerations. For global enterprise, public sector and wholesale wireline receivables,
the allowance for credit losses is based on historical write-off experience and individual customer
credit risk, as applicable. We consider multiple factors in determining the allowance as discussed
above.
Inventories
Inventory consists of wireless and wireline equipment held for sale, which is carried at the lower of
cost (determined principally on either an average cost or first-in, first-out basis) or net
realizable value.
Plant and Depreciation
We record property, plant and equipment at cost. Property, plant and equipment are generally
depreciated on a straight-line basis.
Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of the estimated life of the improvement or the
remaining term of the related lease, calculated from the time the asset was placed in service.
When depreciable assets are retired or otherwise disposed of, the related cost and accumulated
depreciation are deducted from the property, plant and equipment accounts and any gains or losses on
disposition are recognized in Selling, general and administrative expense.
We capitalize and depreciate network software purchased or developed within property, plant and
equipment assets. We also capitalize interest associated with the acquisition or construction of
network-related assets. Capitalized interest is reported as a reduction in interest expense and
depreciated as part of the cost of the network-related assets.
Computer Software and Cloud Computing Costs
We capitalize the cost of internal-use network and non-network software and defer the costs
associated with cloud computing arrangements that have a useful life and term in excess of one year.
Subsequent additions, modifications or upgrades to internal-use network and non-network software are
capitalized only to the extent that they add significant new functionality. Planning, software
maintenance and training costs for internal-use software and cloud computing arrangements are
expensed in the period in which they are incurred. We capitalize interest associated with the
development of internal-use network and non-network software. Capitalized non-network internal-use
software costs are amortized using the straight-line method over a period of 7years and are included
in Other intangible assets, net in our consolidated balance sheets. Costs incurred in implementing a
cloud computing arrangement are deferred during the application-development stage and recorded as
Prepaid expense and other in our consolidated balance sheets. Once a project is substantially
complete and ready for its intended use, we stop deferring the related cloud computing arrangement
costs.
For a discussion of our impairment policy for capitalized non-network software costs, see "Goodwill
and Other Intangible Assets" below. See Note 4 for additional information of internal-use non-network
software reflected in our consolidated balance sheets. Similar to capitalized software costs,
deferred costs associated with cloud computing arrangements are subject to impairment testing.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill
Goodwill is the excess of the acquisition cost of businesses over the fair value of the identifiable
net assets acquired. Impairment testing for goodwill is performed annually in the fourth quarter or
more frequently if impairment indicators are present.
To determine if goodwill is potentially impaired, we have the option to perform a qualitative
assessment. However, we may elect to bypass the qualitative assessment and perform a quantitative
impairment test even if no indications of a potential impairment exist. It is our policy to perform
quantitative impairment assessment at least every three years.
Under the qualitative assessment, we consider several factors, including the business enterprise
value of the reporting unit from the last quantitative test and the excess of fair value over
carrying value from this test, macroeconomic conditions (including changes in interest rates and
discount rates), industry and market considerations (including industry revenue and Earnings before
interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) margin results, projections and recent merger
and acquisition activity), the recent and projected financial performance of the reporting unit, as
well as other factors.
The quantitative impairment test for goodwill is performed at the reporting unit level and compares
the fair value of the reporting unit (calculated using a combination of a market approach and a
discounted cash flow method, as a form of the income
 63 
Table of Contents
approach) to its carrying value. Estimated fair values of reporting units are Level 3 measures in the
fair value hierarchy, see "Fair Value Measurements" discussion below for additional information. The
market approach includes the use of comparative multiples of guideline companies to complement
discounted cash flow results. The discounted cash flow method is based on the present value of two
components, projected cash flows and a terminal value. The terminal value represents the expected
normalized future cash flows of the reporting unit beyond the cash flows from the discrete projection
period. The fair value of the reporting unit is calculated based on the sum of the present value of
the cash flows from the discrete period and the present value of the terminal value. The discount
rate represents our estimate of the weighted-average cost of capital, or expected return, that a
marketplace participant would have required as of the valuation date. If the carrying value exceeds
the fair value, an impairment charge is booked for the excess carrying value over fair value, limited
to the total amount of goodwill of that reporting unit. During the fourth quarter each year, we
update our five-year strategic planning review for each of our reporting units. Those plans consider
current economic conditions and trends, estimated future operating results, our view of growth-rates
and anticipated future economic and regulatory conditions.
See Note 4 for additional information regarding our goodwill impairment testing.
Intangible Assets Not Subject to Amortization
A significant portion of our intangible assets are wireless licenses that provide our wireless
operations with the exclusive right to utilize designated radio frequency spectrum to provide
wireless communication services. While licenses are issued for only a fixed time, generally ten to
fifteen years, such licenses are subject to renewal by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
License renewals have occurred routinely and at nominal cost. Moreover, we have determined that there
are currently no legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic or other factors that limit
the useful life of our wireless licenses. As a result, we treat the wireless licenses as an
indefinite-lived intangible asset. We re-evaluate the useful life determination for wireless licenses
each year to determine whether events and circumstances continue to support an indefinite useful
life. We aggregate our wireless licenses into one single unit of accounting, as we utilize our
wireless licenses on an integrated basis as part of our nationwide wireless network.
We test our wireless licenses for potential impairment annually or more frequently if impairment
indicators are present. We have the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine
whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. However, we may elect to bypass
the qualitative assessment in any period and proceed directly to performing the quantitative
impairment test. It is our policy to perform quantitative impairment assessment at least every three
years.
As part of our qualitative assessment we consider several factors including the business enterprise
value of our combined wireless business, macroeconomic conditions (including changes in interest
rates and discount rates), industry and market considerations (including industry revenue and EBITDA
margin results, projections and recent merger and acquisition activity), the recent and projected
financial performance of our combined wireless business as a whole, as well as other factors
including the result of our last quantitative assessment. See Note 4 for additional information
regarding our impairment tests.
Our quantitative impairment assessment consists of comparing the estimated fair value of our
aggregate wireless licenses to the aggregated carrying amount as of the test date. Under our
quantitative assessment, we estimate the fair value of our wireless licenses using the Greenfield
approach. The Greenfield approach is an income based valuation approach that values the wireless
licenses by calculating the cash flow generating potential of a hypothetical start-up company that
goes into business with no assets except the wireless licenses to be valued. A discounted cash flow
analysis is used to estimate what a marketplace participant would be willing to pay to purchase the
aggregated wireless licenses as of the valuation date. If the estimated fair value of the aggregated
wireless licenses is less than the aggregated carrying amount of the wireless licenses, then an
impairment charge is recognized.
Interest expense incurred while qualifying activities are performed to ready wireless licenses for
their intended use is capitalized as part of wireless licenses. The capitalization period ends when
the development is discontinued or substantially completed and the license is ready for its intended
use.
Wireless licenses can be purchased through public auctions conducted by the FCC. Deposits required to
participate in these auctions and purchase licenses are recorded within Other assets in our
consolidated balance sheets until the corresponding licenses are received and within Net cash used in
investing activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows.
Intangible Assets Subject to Amortization and Long-Lived Assets
Our intangible assets that do not have indefinite lives (primarily customer lists and non-network
internal-use software) are amortized over their estimated useful lives. All of our intangible assets
subject to amortization and other long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or
changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. If
any indications of impairment are present, we would test for recoverability by comparing the carrying
amount of the asset group to the net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated from the asset
group. If those net undiscounted cash flows do not exceed the carrying amount, we would perform the
next step, which is to determine the fair value of the asset and record an impairment, if any. We re-
evaluate the useful life determinations for these intangible assets each year to determine whether
events and circumstances warrant a revision to their remaining useful lives.
 64 
Table of Contents
See Note 4 for information related to the carrying amount of goodwill, wireless licenses and other
intangible assets, as well as the major components and average useful lives of our other acquired
intangible assets.
Leases
We lease network equipment including towers, distributed antenna systems, small cells, real estate,
connectivity mediums which include dark fiber, equipment, and other various types of assets for use
in our operations under both operating and finance leases. We assess whether an arrangement is a
lease or contains a lease at inception. For arrangements considered leases or that contain a lease
that is accounted for separately, we determine the classification and initial measurement of the
right-of-use asset and lease liability at the lease commencement date, which is the date that the
underlying asset becomes available for use.
For both operating and finance leases, we recognize a right-of-use asset, which represents our right
to use the underlying asset for the lease term, and a lease liability, which represents the present
value of our obligation to make payments arising over the lease term. The present value of the lease
payments is calculated using the incremental borrowing rate for operating and finance leases. The
incremental borrowing rate is determined using a portfolio approach based on the rate of interest
that the Company would have to pay to borrow an amount equal to the lease payments on a
collateralized basis over a similar term. Management uses the unsecured borrowing rate and risk-
adjusts that rate to approximate a collateralized rate, which is updated on a quarterly basis.
In those circumstances where Verizon is the lessee, we account for non-lease components associated
with our leases (e.g., common area maintenance costs) and lease components as a single lease
component for substantially all of our asset classes. Additionally, in arrangements where we are the
lessor, we have customer premise equipment for which we account for non-lease components (e.g.,
service revenue) and lease components as combined components under the revenue recognition guidance
in Topic 606 as the service revenues are the predominant components in the arrangements.
Rent expense for operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease
and is included in either Cost of services or Selling, general and administrative expense in our
consolidated statements of income, based on the use of the facility or equipment on which rent is
being paid. Variable rent payments related to both operating and finance leases are expensed in the
period incurred. Our variable lease payments consist of payments dependent on various external
indicators, including real estate taxes, common area maintenance charges and utility usage.
Operating leases with a term of 12 months or less are not recorded in our consolidated balance
sheets; we recognize rent expense for these leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
We recognize the amortization of the right-of-use asset for our finance leases on a straight-line
basis over the shorter of the lease term or the useful life of the right-of-use asset in Depreciation
and amortization expense in our consolidated statements of income. The interest expense related to
finance leases is recognized using the effective interest method based on the discount rate
determined at lease commencement and is included within Interest expense in our consolidated
statements of income.
See Note 6 for additional information related to leases, including disclosure required under ASU
2016-02, Leases (Topic 842).
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value of financial and non-financial assets and liabilities is defined as an exit price,
representing the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction between market participants. The three-tier hierarchy for inputs used in
measuring fair value, which prioritizes the inputs used in the methodologies of measuring fair value
for assets and liabilities, is as follows:
Level 1 — Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
Level 2 — Observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and
liabilities
Level 3 — Unobservable pricing inputs in the market
Financial assets and financial liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level
of input that is significant to the fair value measurements. Our assessment of the significance of a
particular input to the fair value measurements requires judgment and may affect the valuation of the
assets and liabilities being measured and their categorization within the fair value hierarchy.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate is based on pre-tax income, statutory tax rates, tax laws and regulations and
tax planning strategies available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate.
Deferred income taxes are provided for temporary differences in the basis between financial statement
and income tax assets and liabilities. Deferred income taxes are recalculated annually at tax rates
in effect for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or
settled. We record valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more
likely than not to be realized.
 65 
Table of Contents
We use a two-step approach for recognizing and measuring tax benefits taken or expected to be taken
in a tax return. The first step is recognition: we determine whether it is more likely than not that
a tax position will be sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related appeals or
litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. In evaluating whether a tax
position has met the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, we presume that the position will be
examined by the appropriate taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. The
second step is measurement: a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold
is measured to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The tax
position is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being
realized upon ultimate settlement. Differences between tax positions taken in a tax return and
amounts recognized in the financial statements will generally result in one or more of the following:
an increase in a liability for income taxes payable, a reduction of an income tax refund receivable,
a reduction in a deferred tax asset or an increase in a deferred tax liability.
Significant management judgment is required in evaluating our tax positions and in determining our
effective tax rate.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based compensation awards made to
employees and directors based on estimated fair values.See Note 10 for additional information.
Foreign Currency Translation and Transactions
The functional currency of our foreign operations is generally the local currency. For these foreign
entities, we translate their financial statements into U.S. dollars using average exchange rates for
the period for income statement amounts and using end-of-period exchange rates for assets and
liabilities. We record these translation adjustments in Accumulated other comprehensive loss, a
separate component of Equity, in our consolidated balance sheets. We record exchange gains and losses
resulting from the conversion of transaction currency to functional currency as a component of Other
income (expense), net.
Employee Benefit Plans
Pension and postretirement health care and life insurance benefits earned during the year, as well as
interest on projected benefit obligations, are accrued. Prior service costs and credits resulting
from changes in plan benefits are generally amortized over the average remaining service period of
the employees expected to receive benefits. Expected return on plan assets is determined by applying
the return on assets assumption to the actual fair value of plan assets. Actuarial gains and losses
are recognized in Other income (expense), net in the year in which they occur. These gains and losses
are measured annually as of December 31 or upon a remeasurement event. Verizon management employees
no longer earn pension benefits or earn service towards the Company retiree medical subsidy. See Note
11 for additional information.
We recognize a pension or a postretirement plan’s funded status as either an asset or liability in
the consolidated balance sheets. Also, we measure any unrecognized prior service costs and credits
that arise during the period as a component of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of
applicable income tax.
Derivative Instruments
We enter into derivative transactions primarily to manage our exposure to fluctuations in foreign
currency exchange rates and interest rates. We employ risk management strategies, which may include
the use of a variety of derivatives including cross currency swaps, forward starting interest rate
swaps, interest rate swaps, treasury rate locks, interest rate caps, swaptions and foreign exchange
forwards. We do not hold derivatives for trading purposes.
We measure all derivatives at fair value and recognize them as either assets or liabilities in our
consolidated balance sheets. Our derivative instruments are valued primarily using models based on
readily observable market parameters for all substantial terms of our derivative contracts and thus
are classified as Level 2. Changes in the fair values of derivative instruments applied as economic
hedges are recognized in earnings in the current period. For fair value hedges, the change in the
fair value of the derivative instruments is recognized in earnings, along with the change in the fair
value of the hedged item. Unrealized gains or losses on excluded components of fair value hedges are
recorded in Other comprehensive income (loss) and are recognized into earnings on a systematic and
rational basis through the swap accrual over the life of the hedged item. For cash flow hedges, the
change in the fair value of the derivative instruments is reported in Other comprehensive income
(loss) and recognized in earnings when the hedged item is recognized in earnings. For net investment
hedges of certain of our foreign operations, the change in the fair value of the hedging instruments
is reported in Other comprehensive income (loss) as part of the cumulative translation adjustment and
partially offsets the impact of foreign currency changes on the value of our net investment.
Cash flows from derivatives, which are designated as accounting hedges or applied as economic hedges,
are presented consistently with the cash flow classification of the related hedged items. See Note 9
for additional information.
Variable Interest Entities
VIEs are entities that lack sufficient equity to permit the entity to finance its activities without
additional subordinated financial support from other parties, have equity investors that do not have
the ability to make significant decisions relating to the entity’s
 66 
Table of Contents
operations through voting rights, do not have the obligation to absorb the expected losses, or do not
have the right to receive the residual returns of the entity. We consolidate the assets and
liabilities of VIEs when we are deemed to be the primary beneficiary. The primary beneficiary is the
party that has the power to make the decisions that most significantly affect the economic
performance of the VIE and has the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits that
could potentially be significant to the VIE.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
On January 1, 2020, we adopted ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326) using
the modified retrospective approach. The cumulative after-tax effect of the changes made to our
consolidated financial statements for the adoption of Topic 326 was as follows:
 Adjustments 
 (dollars in At December due to At January 1, 
 millions) 31, 2019 Topic 326 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Retained $ 53,147 $ -200 $ 52,947 
 earnings 
See Note 8 for additional information related to credit losses, including disclosures required under
Topic 326.
 Note 2. Revenue and Contract Costs 
We earn revenue from contracts with customers, primarily through the provision of telecommunications
and other services and through the sale of wireless equipment.
Revenue by Category
We have tworeportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units, Consumer and
Business. Revenue is disaggregated by products and services within Consumer, and customer groups
(Small and Medium Business, Global Enterprise, Public Sector and Other, and Wholesale) within
Business. See Note 13 for additional information on revenue by segment. Corporate and other primarily
includes insurance captive revenues as well as the historical results of divested businesses,
including Verizon Media.
We also earn revenues that are not accounted for under Topic 606 from leasing arrangements (such as
those for towers and equipment), captive reinsurance arrangements primarily related to wireless
device insurance and the interest on equipment financed under a device payment plan agreement when
sold to the customer by an authorized agent. As allowed by the practical expedient within Topic 842,
we have elected to combine the lease and non-lease components for those arrangements of customer
premise equipment where we are the lessor as components accounted for under Topic 606. Revenues from
arrangements that were not accounted for under Topic 606 were approximately $ 3.2billion, $
3.1billion and $ 2.9billion for the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Remaining Performance Obligations
When allocating the total contract transaction price to identified performance obligations, a portion
of the total transaction price may relate to service performance obligations which were not satisfied
or are partially satisfied as of the end of the reporting period. Below we disclose information
relating to these unsatisfied performance obligations. We apply the practical expedient available
under Topic 606 that provides the option to exclude the expected revenues arising from unsatisfied
performance obligations related to contracts that have an original expected duration of one year or
less. This situation primarily arises with respect to certain month-to-month service contracts. At
December 31, 2022, month-to-month service contracts represented approximately 94% of our wireless
postpaid contracts and 92% of our wireline Consumer and Small and Medium Business contracts, compared
to December 31, 2021, for which month-to-month service contracts represented approximately 93% of our
wireless postpaid contracts and 86% of our wireline Consumer and Small and Medium Business contracts
.
Additionally, certain contracts provide customers the option to purchase additional services. The
fees related to these additional services are recognized when the customer exercises the option
(typically on a month-to-month basis).
Contracts for wireless services, with or without promotional credits that require maintenance of
service, are generally either month-to-month and cancellable at any time, or considered to contain
terms ranging from greater than one monthto up to thirty-six months(typically under a device payment
plan), or contain terms ranging from greater than one monthto up to twenty-four months(typically
under a fixed-term plan). Additionally, customers may incur charges based on usage or additional
optional services purchased in conjunction with entering into a contract that can be cancelled at any
time and therefore are not included in the transaction price. The transaction price allocated to
service performance obligations, which are not satisfied or are partially satisfied as of the end of
the reporting period, are generally related to contracts that are not accounted for as month-to-month
contracts.
Our Consumer group customers also include traditional wholesale resellers that purchase and resell
wireless service under their own brands to their respective customers. Reseller arrangements
generally include a stated contract term, which typically
 67 
Table of Contents
extends longer than two yearsand, in some cases, include a periodic minimum revenue commitment over
the contract term for which revenues will be recognized in future periods.
Consumer customer contracts for wireline services are generally month-to-month; however, they may
have a service term of two yearsor shorter than twelve months. Certain contracts with Business
customers for wireline services extend into future periods, contain fixed monthly fees and usage-
based fees, and can include annual commitments in each year of the contract or commitments over the
entire specified contract term; however, a significant number of contracts for wireline services with
our Business customers have a contract term that is twelve monthsor less.
Additionally, there are certain contracts with Business customers for wireline and telematics
services that have a contractual minimum fee over the total contract term. We cannot predict the time
period when revenue will be recognized related to those contracts; thus, they are excluded from the
time bands below. These contracts have varying terms spanning over approximately nine yearsending in
April 2032 and have aggregate contract minimum payments totaling $ 1.6billion.
At December 31, 2022, the transaction price related to unsatisfied performance obligations that are
expected to be recognized for 2023, 2024 and thereafter was $ 22.1billion, $ 14.3billion and $
8.1billion, respectively. Remaining performance obligation estimates are subject to change and are
affected by several factors, including terminations and changes in the timing and scope of contracts,
arising from contract modifications.
Accounts Receivable and Contract Balances
The timing of revenue recognition may differ from the time of billing to our customers. Receivables
presented in our consolidated balance sheets represent an unconditional right to consideration.
Contract balances represent amounts from an arrangement when either Verizon has performed, by
transferring goods or services to the customer in advance of receiving all or partial consideration
for such goods and services from the customer, or the customer has made payment to Verizon in advance
of obtaining control of the goods and/or services promised to the customer in the contract.
The following table presents information about receivables from contracts with customers:
 At December  At December  
 (dollars in 31, 31, At January 1, 
 millions) 2022 2021 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Receivables… $ 11,274 $ 10,758 $ 12,029 
 Device 
 payment plan 16,648 12,888 10,358 
 agreement 
 receivables… 
(1) Balances do not include receivables related to the following contracts: leasing arrangements
(such as those for towers and equipment), captive reinsurance arrangements primarily related to
wireless device insurance and the interest on equipment financed under a device payment plan
agreement when sold to the customer by an authorized agent.
(2) Included in device payment plan agreement receivables presented in Note 8. Receivables derived
from the sale of equipment on a device payment plan through an authorized agent are excluded.
The following table presents information about contract balances:
 (dollars in At December 31, At December 31, At January 1, 
 millions) 2022 2021 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Contract asset $ 863 $ 934 $ 937 
 Contract 8,234 7,229 5,598 
 liability 
Contract assets primarily relate to our rights to consideration for goods or services provided to
customers but for which we do not have an unconditional right at the reporting date. Under a fixed-
term plan, total contract revenue is allocated between wireless service and equipment revenues. In
conjunction with these arrangements, a contract asset is created, which represents the difference
between the amount of equipment revenue recognized upon sale and the amount of consideration received
from the customer when the performance obligation related to the transfer of control of the equipment
is satisfied. The contract asset is reclassified to accounts receivable as wireless services are
provided and billed. We have the right to bill the customer as service is provided over time, which
results in our right to the payment being unconditional. The contract asset balances are presented in
our consolidated balance sheets as Prepaid expenses and other and Other assets. We recognize the
allowance for credit losses at inception and reassess quarterly based on management's expectation of
the asset's collectability.
Contract assets remained relatively flat during the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Contract liabilities arise when we bill our customers and receive consideration in advance of
providing the goods or services promised in the contract. We typically bill service one month in
advance, which is the primary component of the contract liability balance. Contract liabilities are
recognized as revenue when services are provided to the customer. The contract liability balances are
presented in our consolidated balance sheets as Other current liabilities and Other liabilities.
Contract liabilities increased $ 1.0billion during the year ended December 31, 2022. The change in
contract liabilities was primarily due to increases in sales promotions recognized over time and
upfront fees. Contract liabilities increased $ 1.6billion during the year ended December 31, 2021.
The change in contract liabilities was primarily due to increases in sales promotions
 68 
Table of Contents
recognized over time and upfront fees, increases in deferred revenue related to advanced billings, as
well as the acquisition of TracFone, partially offset by the satisfaction of performance obligations
related to wireless and Fios services, as well as the sale of Verizon Media.
Revenue recognized during both the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021 related to contract
liabilities existing at January 1, 2022 and 2021 were $ 5.0billion and $ 4.3billion, respectively, as
performance obligations related to services were satisfied.
The balance of contract assets and contract liabilities recorded in our consolidated balance sheets
were as follows:
 (dollars in millions) At December 31, At December 31, 
 Assets 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Prepaid expenses and other $ 656 $ 739 
 Other assets 207 195 
 Total $ 863 $ 934 
 Liabilities 
 Other current liabilities $ 6,583 $ 6,053 
 Other liabilities 1,651 1,176 
 Total $ 8,234 $ 7,229 
Contract Costs
As discussed in Note 1, Topic 606 requires the recognition of an asset for incremental costs to
obtain a customer contract, which are then amortized to expense over the respective periods of
expected benefit. We recognize an asset for incremental commission expenses paid to internal and
external sales personnel and agents in conjunction with obtaining customer contracts. We only defer
these costs when we have determined the commissions are incremental costs that would not have been
incurred absent the customer contract and are expected to be recoverable. Costs to obtain a contract
are amortized and recorded ratably as commission expense over the period representing the transfer of
goods or services to which the assets relate. Costs to obtain wireless contracts are amortized over
both of our Consumer and Business customers' estimated device upgrade cycles, as such costs are
typically incurred each time a customer upgrades. Costs to obtain wireline contracts are amortized as
expense over the estimated customer relationship period for our Consumer customers. Incremental costs
to obtain wireline contracts for our Business customers are insignificant. Costs to obtain contracts
are recorded in Selling, general and administrative expense.
We also defer costs incurred to fulfill contracts that: (1) relate directly to the contract; (2) are
expected to generate resources that will be used to satisfy our performance obligation under the
contract; and (3) are expected to be recovered through revenue generated under the contract. Contract
fulfillment costs are expensed as we satisfy our performance obligations and recorded in Cost of
services. These costs principally relate to direct costs that enhance our wireline business
resources, such as costs incurred to install circuits.
We determine the amortization periods for our costs incurred to obtain or fulfill a customer contract
at a portfolio level due to the similarities within these customer contract portfolios.
Other costs, such as general costs or costs related to past performance obligations, are expensed as
incurred.
Collectively, costs to obtain a contract and costs to fulfill a contract are referred to as deferred
contract costs, and amortized over a two-to six-yearperiod. Deferred contract costs are classified as
current or non-current within Prepaid expenses and other and Other assets, respectively.
The balances of deferred contract costs included in our consolidated balance sheets were as follows:
 (dollars in millions) At December 31, At December 31, 
 Assets 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Prepaid expenses and other $ 2,629 $ 2,432 
 Other assets 2,475 2,259 
 Total $ 5,104 $ 4,691 
For both the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, we recognized expense of $ 3.0billion associated
with the amortization of deferred contract costs, primarily within Selling, general and
administrative expense in our consolidated statements of income.
We assess our deferred contract costs for impairment on a quarterly basis. We recognize an impairment
charge to the extent the carrying amount of a deferred cost exceeds the remaining amount of
consideration we expect to receive in exchange for the goods and services related to the cost, less
the expected costs related directly to providing those goods and services that have
 69 
Table of Contents
not yet been recognized as expenses. There have been noimpairment charges recognized for the years
ended December 31, 2022 and 2021.
 Note 3. Acquisitions and Divestitures 
Spectrum License Transactions
In March 2020, the FCC's incentive auction, Auction 103, for spectrum licenses in the upper 37 GHz,
39 GHz, and 47 GHz bands concluded. Verizon participated in this incentive auction and was the high
bidder on 4,940licenses, which primarily consisted of 37 GHz and, to a lesser extent, 39 GHz
spectrum. As an incumbent licensee, our 39 GHz licenses provided us with incentive payments that were
applied towards the purchase price of spectrum in the auction. The value of the licenses won by
Verizon amounted to $ 3.4billion, of which $ 1.8billion was settled with the relinquished 39 GHz
licenses. The remaining balance was settled in cash of $ 1.6billion. In connection with the incentive
auction, a pre-tax net loss of $ 1.2billion ($ 914million after-tax) was recorded in Selling, general
and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of income during 2020 because the exchange
of the previously held licenses for new licenses had commercial substance.
In February 2021, the FCC concluded Auction 107 for C-Band wireless spectrum. Verizon paid $
45.5billion for the licenses it won, of which $ 44.6billion was paid in the first quarter of 2021. In
accordance with the rules applicable to the auction, Verizon is required to make additional payments
to acquire the licenses. The payments are for our allocable share of clearing costs incurred by, and
incentive payments due to, the incumbent license holders associated with the auction, which are
estimated to be $ 7.7billion. During 2021, we made payments of $ 1.3billion primarily related to
certain obligations for projected clearing costs. During 2022, we made additional payments of $
1.6billion for obligations related to accelerated clearing incentives and clearing costs, of which $
1.4billion were accrued as of December 31, 2021 in our consolidated balance sheet. We expect to
continue to make payments related to clearing cost and incentive payment obligations through 2024,
which we expect to be $ 4.8billion. These payments are dependent on the incumbent license holders
accelerated clearing of the spectrum for Verizon’s use and, therefore, the final timing and amounts
could differ based on the incumbent holders’ execution of their clearing process. In accordance with
the FCC order, the clearing must be completed by December 2025. The carrying value of the wireless
spectrum won in Auction 107 consists of all payments required to participate and purchase licenses in
the auction, including Verizon’s allocable share of clearing costs incurred by, and incentive
payments due to, the incumbent license holders associated with the auction that we are obligated to
pay in order to acquire the licenses, as well as capitalized interest to the extent qualifying
activities have occurred.
In March 2022, Verizon signed agreements with satellite operators in which operators agreed to clear
C-Band spectrum in certain markets and frequencies ahead of the previously expected December 2023
timeframe. During 2022, Verizon incurred costs associated with these agreements of approximately $
340million, of which $ 310million was paid as of December 31, 2022. This early clearance accelerated
Verizon's access to more spectrum in a number of key markets to support its fifth-generation (5G)
network initiatives.
During 2022 and 2021, we entered into and completed various other wireless license acquisitions for
cash consideration of an insignificant amount and $ 95million, respectively. During 2021, we
recognized a pre-tax loss in connection with the sale of certain wireless licenses of $ 223million ($
167million after tax).
Business Acquisitions and Divestitures
TracFone Wireless, Inc.
In September 2020, we entered into a purchase agreement (TracFone Purchase Agreement) with América
Móvil to acquire TracFone, a leading provider of prepaid and value mobile services in the U.S. The
transaction closed on November 23, 2021 (the Acquisition Date). The acquisition positions Verizon as
the leading prepaid, value and premium wireless carrier by expanding Verizon’s portfolio, bringing
enhanced access of our wireless network and comprehensive suite of mobility products and services to
a new customer base.
In accordance with the terms of the TracFone Purchase Agreement, Verizon acquired all of TracFone's
outstanding stock in exchange for approximately $ 3.5billion in cash, net of cash acquired and
working capital and other adjustments, 57,596,544shares of our common stock valued at approximately $
3.0billion, and up to an additional $ 650million in future cash contingent consideration related to
the achievement of certain performance measures and other commercial arrangements. The fair value of
the common stock was determined on the basis of its closing market price on the Acquisition Date. The
estimated fair value of the contingent consideration as of the Acquisition Date was approximately $
560million and represents a Level 3 measurement as defined in ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and
Disclosures. See Note 9 for additional information. The contingent consideration payable is based on
the achievement of certain revenue and operational targets, measured over a two-yearearn out period,
as defined in the TracFone Purchase Agreement.
In May 2022, Verizon received net cash proceeds of $ 248million for the final settlement of working
capital, which was included in our consideration as of the Acquisition Date. During 2022, Verizon
made payments of $ 188million related to the contingent consideration, which is reflected in Cash
flows from financing activities in our consolidated statement of cash flows for the year ended
December 31, 2022. In January 2023, we made an additional payment of $ 102million related to the
contingent consideration. Contingent consideration payments are expected to continue through 2024.
 70 
Table of Contents
The TracFone acquisition was accounted for as a business combination. The purchase consideration was
allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their fair values as of the
Acquisition Date.
The following table summarizes the allocation of the consideration paid and payable to the identified
assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the Acquisition Date:
 (dollars in Measurement 
 millions) November 23, Period 
 Consideration: 2021 Adjustments(1) Fair Value Adjusted 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash, net of 
 cash acquired 
 and working $ 3,491 $ 7 $ 3,498 
 capital and 
 other 
 adjustments 
 Fair value of 
 Verizon common 2,981 — 2,981 
 stock 
 (57,596,544sha… 
 Fair value of 
 contingent 542 18 560 
 consideration 
 to be paid 
 Total $ 7,014 $ 25 $ 7,039 
 consideration 
 Assets 
 acquired: 
 Current assets $ 1,370 $ 9 $ 1,379 
 Property, plant 
 and equipment, 96 -10 86 
 net 
 Goodwill 3,723 100 3,823 
 Other 
 intangible 4,374 -19 4,355 
 assets 
 Other assets 731 -58 673 
 Total assets $ 10,294 $ 22 $ 10,316 
 acquired 
 Liabilities 
 assumed: 
 Current $ 1,433 $ 70 $ 1,503 
 liabilities 
 Deferred income 1,007 37 1,044 
 taxes 
 Other 840 -110 730 
 liabilities 
 Total 
 liabilities $ 3,280 $ -3 $ 3,277 
 assumed 
 Net assets $ 7,014 $ 25 $ 7,039 
 acquired 
(1) Adjustments to the fair value measurements reflect new information obtained about facts and
circumstances that existed as of the Acquisition Date, that if known, would have affected the
measurement of the amounts recognized as of that date. The most significant adjustments related to
goodwill, deferred income taxes, deferred commission costs and other intangible assets.
During 2022, we recorded a measurement period adjustment resulting in changes to the fair value and
amortization period of certain intangible assets. As such, we recorded an adjustment to the fair
value of certain intangible assets with a corresponding adjustment to goodwill. As a result of the
changes in the provisional fair value and amortization period of certain intangible assets during the
one-year measurement period, amortization expense decreased $ 110million for the year ended December
31, 2022. Other intangible assets include $ 2.4billion related to customer relationships, with a
weighted-average amortization period of 7years, $ 1.1billion related to distribution relationships,
with an amortization period of 5years, $ 740million related to trade names with a weighted-average
amortization period of 17years and $ 145million related to acquired technology, with an amortization
period of 10years. The intangible assets were assigned fair values using an income approach. The
valuations are considered Level 3 fair value measurements due to the use of significant inputs not
observable in the market, which include the discount rate, royalty rate and amount and timing of
future cash flows.
Goodwill is calculated as the difference between the Acquisition Date fair value of the consideration
paid and payable and the fair value of the net assets acquired, representing future economic benefits
that we expect to achieve as a result of the acquisition. The goodwill related to this acquisition is
included within the Consumer segment.
Pursuant to the TracFone Purchase Agreement, América Móvil agreed to indemnify Verizon against
certain pre-acquisition tax matters and other contingencies. We have recorded total contingent
liabilities and offsetting indemnification assets of $ 672million for the expected reimbursement of
these matters that had not been resolved as of the Acquisition Date. The liabilities are presented in
Other liabilities and the indemnification assets are presented in Other assets, within our
consolidated balance sheets. The amounts recognized represent reasonable estimates based on an
evaluation of current facts and circumstances. Actual outcome may differ significantly from these
estimates. We expect that any additional liabilities that may arise related to these indemnified
matters would be indemnified and reimbursed by América Móvil.
Bluegrass Cellular
In October 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire certain assets of Bluegrass
Cellular, a rural wireless operator serving central Kentucky. The transaction closed in March 2021.
The aggregate cash consideration paid by Verizon at the closing of the transaction was approximately
$ 412million, net of cash acquired.
 71 
Table of Contents
Verizon Media Divestiture
On May 2, 2021, Verizon entered into a definitive agreement with an affiliate of Apollo Global
Management Inc. (the Apollo Affiliate) pursuant to which we agreed to sell Verizon Media in return
for consideration of $ 4.3billion in cash, subject to customary adjustments, $ 750million in non-
convertible preferred limited partnership units of the Apollo Affiliate and 10% of the fully-diluted
common limited partnership units of the Apollo Affiliate.
On September 1, 2021, we completed the sale of Verizon Media. As of the close of the transaction,
cash proceeds, the fair value of the non-convertible preferred limited partnership units of the
Apollo Affiliate and the fair value of 10% of the fully-diluted common limited partnership units of
the Apollo Affiliate were $ 4.3billion, $ 496million, and $ 124million, respectively. We recorded a
pre-tax gain on sale of approximately $ 1.0billion (after-tax $ 1.0billion) in Selling general and
administrative expense in our consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2021.
In addition, we incurred $ 346million of various costs associated with this disposition which are
primarily recorded in Selling general and administrative expense in our consolidated statement of
income for the year ended December 31, 2021.
During 2022 and 2021, the Apollo Affiliate redeemed $ 37million and $ 100million, respectively, of
Verizon’s preferred limited partnership interest reducing the carrying value of our preferred
interest as of December 31, 2022 to $ 359million. The redemptions are reflected within Net cash used
in investing activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended December 31,
2022 and December 31, 2021, respectively. Verizon’s 10% common interest in the Apollo Affiliate is
accounted for as an equity method investment. The post-sale results of Verizon’s common ownership
interest in the Apollo Affiliate are recorded through the equity method of accounting, within
Corporate and other.
In connection with the closing of the transaction, we entered into Transition Services Agreements
with the Apollo Affiliate, under which Verizon will continue to provide and receive specified
technical services to support operations for up to 18months.
Under our ownership, Verizon Media generated revenues from contracts with customers under Topic 606
of approximately $ 5.3billion and $ 7.0billion for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020,
respectively, reflected within our Corporate and Other segment.
Other
During 2022 and 2021, we completed various other acquisitions for cash consideration of an
insignificant amount and approximately $ 51million, respectively.
In connection with a non-strategic divestiture and other activity we recorded a pre-tax net gain of
an insignificant amount in our consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2022.
In December 2021, we completed the sale of an investment. In connection with this transaction, we
recorded a pre-tax gain of $ 131million in Equity in earnings (losses) of unconsolidated businesses
in our consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2021.
 Note 4. Wireless Licenses, Goodwill and Other 
 Intangible Assets 
Wireless Licenses
The carrying amounts of Wireless licenses are as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2022 2021 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Wireless licenses $ 149,796 $ 147,619 
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, approximately $ 41.7billion and $ 54.9billion, respectively, of
wireless licenses were under development for commercial service for which we were capitalizing
interest costs. We recorded approximately $ 1.7billion and $ 1.6billion of capitalized interest on
wireless licenses for the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
During 2022 and 2021, we renewed various wireless licenses in accordance with FCC regulations with an
average renewal period of 15years and 11years, respectively. See Note 1 for additional information.
As discussed in Note 1, we test our wireless licenses for potential impairment annually or more
frequently if impairment indicators are present. In 2022, we performed a qualitative impairment
assessment, which indicated it was more likely than not that the fair value of our wireless licenses
remained above their carrying amount and, therefore, did not result in an impairment. In 2021, we
performed a quantitative impairment test, which compared the estimated fair value of our aggregate
wireless licenses, estimated using the Greenfield approach, to the aggregated carrying amount of the
licenses as of the test date. Our annual assessment in 2021 indicated that the fair value of our
wireless licenses exceeded the carrying value and, therefore, did not result in an impairment.
 72 
Table of Contents
Our strategy requires significant capital investments primarily to acquire wireless spectrum, put the
spectrum into service, provide additional capacity for growth in our networks, invest in the fiber
that supports our businesses, evolve and maintain our networks and develop and maintain significant
advanced information technology systems and data system capabilities.
Goodwill
Changes in the carrying amount of Goodwill are as follows:
 (dollars 
 in 
 millions) 
 Consumer Business Other Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at 
 January 1, $ 17,222 $ 7,535 $ 16 $ 24,773 
 2021(1) 
 Acquisiti… 3,818 — 34 3,852 
 Reclassif… 
 adjustmen… 2 -20 -4 -22 
 and other 
 Balance at 
 December 21,042 7,515 46 28,603 
 31, 2021 
 Acquisiti… 100 — — 100 
 Reclassif… 
 adjustmen… — -13 -19 -32 
 and 
 other(4) 
 Balance at 
 December $ 21,142 $ 7,502 $ 27 $ 28,671 
 31, 2022 
(1) Goodwill is net of accumulated impairment charges of $ 4.8billion, related to our historical
Media reporting unit, which included Verizon Media. On September 1, 2021, we completed the sale of
Verizon Media. See Note 3 for additional information.
(2) Changes in goodwill due to acquisitions is related to TracFone, Bluegrass and other insignificant
transactions. See Note 3 for additional information.
(3) Changes in goodwill due to acquisitions is related to TracFone. See Note 3 for additional
information.
(4) Includes a goodwill impairment charge of $ 16million related to an early stage development
company presented within Other, recorded in Selling, general and administrative expense in our
consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2022.
We performed a qualitative impairment assessment for our Consumer reporting unit during the fourth
quarter of 2022. Our qualitative impairment assessment indicated that it was more likely than not
that the fair value of our Consumer reporting unit exceeded its carrying value and, therefore, did
not result in an impairment.
We performed a quantitative impairment assessment for our Business reporting unit during the fourth
quarter of 2022. We applied a combination of a market approach and a discounted cash flow method, as
a form of the income approach, reflecting current assumptions and inputs, including our revised
projections, discount rate and expected growth rates, which indicated that the fair value of our
Business reporting unit exceeded its carrying value and, therefore, did not result in an impairment.
We do not anticipate reasonable changes in significant estimates to change the outcome of the
quantitative impairment assessment. However, as a result of our 2022 goodwill assessment, management
believes there is an increasing risk that our Business reporting unit may be required to recognize an
impairment charge in the future.
A projected sustained decline in the reporting unit's revenues and earnings could have a significant
negative impact on its fair value and may result in impairment charges. Such a decline could be
driven by, among other things: (1) decreases in sales volumes or long-term growth rate as a result of
competitive pressures or other factors; or (2) the inability to achieve or delays in achieving the
goals in strategic initiatives. Also, adverse changes to macroeconomic factors, such as increases in
long-term interest rates, would also negatively impact the fair value of the reporting unit.
We performed quantitative impairment assessments for both our Consumer and Business reporting units
in 2021. We applied a combination of a market approach and a discounted cash flow method, as a form
of the income approach, which indicated that the fair values for our Consumer and Business reporting
units exceeded their carrying values and, therefore, did not result in an impairment.
 73 
Table of Contents
Other Intangible Assets
The following table displays the composition of Other intangible assets, net as well as the
respective amortization period:
 (d… 
 in 
 mi… 
 At 2022 20… 
 De… Gro… Acc… Net Gro… Ac… Net 
 31, Amo… Amo… Amo… Amo… Am… Am… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cu… 
 li… $ 4,3… $ -1,… $ 2,6… $ 4,2… $ -1,… $ 3,0… 
 (5… 
 No… 
 in… 23,… -16… 7,0… 21,… -14… 6,4… 
 so… 
 (7… 
 Ot… 2,8… -1,… 1,7… 2,9… -785 2,1… 
 (4… 
 To… $ 30,… $ -19… $ 11,… $ 28,… $ -16… $ 11,… 
(1) Other intangible assets are net of assets disposed as a result of the closing of the Verizon
Media sale on September 1, 2021 and includes assets acquired as a result of the acquisition of
TracFone on November 23, 2021. See Note 3 for additional information.
The amortization expense for Other intangible assets was as follows:
 Years (dollars in millions) 
 ────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2022 $ 2,507 
 2021 2,087 
 2020 2,445 
Estimated annual amortization expense for Other intangible assets is as follows:
 Years (dollars in millions) 
 ────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2023 $ 2,497 
 2024 2,256 
 2025 2,059 
 2026 1,813 
 2027 1,260 
 Note 5. Property, Plant and Equipment 
The following table displays the details of Property, plant and equipment, which is stated at cost:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, Lives (years) 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Land - $ 747 $ 673 
 Buildings and equipment 7to45 35,382 33,361 
 Central office and 
 other network 3to15 162,001 153,240 
 equipment 
 Antennas, cable, 
 conduit, poles and 4to50 75,622 69,733 
 towers 
 Leasehold improvements 5to20 10,159 9,587 
 Work in progress - 12,889 13,057 
 Furniture, vehicles and 3to20 10,889 10,246 
 other 
 307,689 289,897 
 Less accumulated 200,255 190,201 
 depreciation 
 Property, plant and $ 107,434 $ 99,696 
 equipment, net 
 Note 6. Leasing Arrangements 
We enter into various lease arrangements for network equipment including towers, distributed antenna
systems, small cells, real estate and connectivity mediums including dark fiber, equipment, and other
various types of assets for use in our operations. Our leases have remaining lease terms ranging from
1year to 30years, some of which include options that we can elect to extend the leases term for up to
25years, and some of which include options to terminate the leases. For the majority of leases
entered into during the current period, we have concluded it is not reasonably certain that we would
exercise the options to extend the lease or not terminate the lease. Therefore, as of the lease
commencement date, our lease terms generally do not include these options. We include options to
extend the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option.
During March 2015, we completed a transaction with American Tower Corporation (American Tower)
pursuant to which American Tower acquired the exclusive rights to lease and operate approximately
11,300of our wireless towers for an upfront payment of
 74 
Table of Contents
$ 5.0billion. We have subleased capacity on the towers from American Tower for a minimum of 10years
at current market rates in 2015, with options to renew. We continue to include the towers in
Property, plant and equipment, net in our consolidated balance sheets and depreciate them
accordingly. In addition to the rights to lease and operate the towers, American Tower assumed the
interest in the underlying ground leases related to these towers. While American Tower can
renegotiate the terms of and is responsible for paying the ground leases, we are still the primary
obligor for these leases and accordingly, the present value of these ground leases are included in
our operating lease right-of-use assets and operating lease liabilities. We do not expect to be
required to make ground lease payments unless American Tower defaults, which we determined to be
remote.
The components of net lease cost were as follows:
 (dollars in 
 Years Ended millions) 
 December 31, Classification 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cost of 
 services 
 Operating Selling, $ 5,345 $ 5,248 $ 5,016 
 lease cost(1) general and 
 administrative 
 expense 
 Finance lease 
 cost: 
 Amortization Depreciation 
 of and 224 259 309 
 right-of-use amortization 
 assets expense 
 Interest on Interest 
 lease expense 36 34 39 
 liabilities 
 Cost of 
 services 
 Short-term Selling, 23 21 22 
 lease cost(1) general and 
 administrative 
 expense 
 Cost of 
 services 
 Variable lease Selling, 294 307 295 
 cost(1) general and 
 administrative 
 expense 
 Sublease Service 
 income revenues and -199 -193 -167 
 other 
 Total net $ 5,723 $ 5,676 $ 5,514 
 lease cost 
(1) All operating lease costs, including short-term and variable lease costs, are split between Cost
of services and Selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of income
based on the use of the facility or equipment that the rent is being paid on. See Note 1 for
additional information. Variable lease costs represent payments that are dependent on a rate or
index, or on usage of the asset.
Supplemental disclosure for the statements of cash flows related to operating and finance leases were
as follows:
 Years Ended December (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash Flows from 
 Operating Activities 
 Cash paid for amounts 
 included in the 
 measurement of lease 
 liabilities 
 Operating cash flows 
 for operating $ -4,490 $ -4,658 $ -4,813 
 leases 
 Operating cash flows -36 -34 -39 
 for finance leases 
 Cash Flows from 
 Financing Activities 
 Financing cash flows -449 -394 -394 
 for finance leases 
 Supplemental lease cash 
 flow disclosures 
 Operating lease 
 right-of-use assets 
 obtained in exchange 2,392 9,778 3,800 
 for new operating 
 lease liabilities 
 Right-of-use assets 
 obtained in exchange 832 461 562 
 for new finance lease 
 liabilities 
Supplemental disclosures for the balance sheet related to finance leases were as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2022 2021 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Assets 
 Property, plant and equipment, net $ 1,138 $ 1,046 
 Liabilities 
 Debt maturing within one year $ 565 $ 400 
 Long-term debt 1,167 925 
 Total Finance lease liabilities $ 1,732 $ 1,325 
 75 
Table of Contents
The weighted-average remaining lease term and the weighted-average discount rate of our leases were
as follows:
 At December 31, 2022 2021 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted-average remaining lease term 
 (years) 
 Operating leases 8 9 
 Finance leases 4 4 
 Weighted-average discount rate 
 Operating leases 3.2 % 3.1 % 
 Finance leases 2.5 % 2.2 % 
The following table presents the maturity analysis of operating and finance lease liabilities as of
December 31, 2022:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Operating Leases Finance Leases 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2023 $ 4,591 $ 586 
 2024 4,318 518 
 2025 3,929 388 
 2026 3,571 196 
 2027 3,253 90 
 Thereafter 10,160 67 
 Total lease payments 29,822 1,845 
 Less interest 4,130 113 
 Present value of lease 25,692 1,732 
 liabilities 
 Less current obligation 4,134 565 
 Long-term obligation at 
 December 31, $ 21,558 $ 1,167 
 2022 
As of December 31, 2022, we have contractually obligated lease payments amounting to $ 2.0billion
primarily for office facility operating leases and small cell colocation and fiber operating leases
that have not yet commenced. We have legally obligated lease payments for various other operating
leases that have not yet commenced for which the total obligation was not significant. We have
certain rights and obligations for these leases, but have not recognized an operating lease right-of-
use asset or an operating lease liability since they have not yet commenced.
 76 
Table of Contents
 Note 7. Debt 
Outstanding long-term debt obligations as of December 31, 2022 and 2021 are as follows:
 (dollars in 
 At December  Interest millions) 
 31, Maturities Rates % 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Verizon < 5 Years 0.75-5.82 $ 23,929 $ 18,406 
 Communications 
 5-10 Years 1.50-7.88 42,637 43,225 
 > 10 Years 1.13-8.95 60,134 73,520 
 < 5 Years Floating -1 2,992 4,086 
 5-10 Years Floating -1 3,029 824 
 Alltel 5-10 Years 6.80-7.88 94 38 
 Corporation 
 > 10 Years N/A N/A 58 
 Operating 
 telephone < 5 Years N/A N/A 141 
 company 
 subsidiaries—… 
 5-10 Years 6.00-8.75 475 375 
 > 10 Years 5.13-7.38 139 250 
 Other 
 subsidiaries—… < 5 Years 0.41-5.72 9,767 9,620 
 debt 
 < 5 Years Floating -2 10,271 4,610 
 Finance lease 
 obligations 
 (average rate 
 of2.5% and2.2% 1,732 1,325 
 in 2022 and 
 2021, 
 respectively) 
 Unamortized 
 discount, net -4,039 -4,922 
 of premium 
 Unamortized 
 debt issuance -671 -688 
 costs 
 Total 
 long-term 
 debt, 150,489 150,868 
 including 
 current 
 maturities 
 Less long-term 
 debt maturing 9,813 7,443 
 within one 
 year 
 Total $ 140,676 $ 143,425 
 long-term debt 
 Long-term debt 
 maturing $ 9,813 $ 7,443 
 within one 
 year 
 Add commercial 150 — 
 paper 
 Debt maturing 
 within one 9,963 7,443 
 year 
 Add long-term 140,676 143,425 
 debt 
 Total debt $ 150,639 $ 150,868 
(1) The debt obligations bore interest at a floating rate based on the Compounded Secured Overnight
Financing Rate (SOFR) for the interest period or the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) plus an
applicable interest margin per annum, as applicable. Compounded SOFR is calculated using the SOFR
Index published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in accordance with the formula set forth in
the terms of the notes. The Compounded SOFR for the interest period ending in December 2022 was
3.450%. The one-month and three-month LIBOR at December 31, 2022 was 4.392% and 4.767%, respectively.
(2) The debt obligations bore interest at floating rates, including floating rates associated with
SOFR for the interest period, or LIBOR plus an applicable interest margin per annum, as applicable.
Floating rates associated with SOFR for the interest period ending in December 2022 ranged from
3.807% to 4.372%.
Maturities of long-term debt (secured and unsecured) outstanding, including current maturities,
excluding unamortized debt issuance costs, at December 31, 2022 are as follows:
 Years (dollars in millions) 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2023 $ 9,279 
 2024 16,252 
 2025 8,706 
 2026 8,304 
 2027 6,962 
 Thereafter 99,925 
During 2022, we received $ 17.8billion of proceeds from long-term borrowings, which included $
10.7billion of proceeds from asset-backed debt transactions. The net proceeds were primarily used for
general corporate purposes including the repayment of debt and the funding of certain renewable
energy projects. We used $ 13.6billion of cash to repay, redeem and repurchase long-term borrowings
and finance lease obligations, including $ 4.9billion to prepay and repay asset-backed, long-term
borrowings. The net proceeds of approximately $ 1.0billion from the green bond issued in 2022 are
expected to be used to fund certain renewable energy projects.
During 2021, we received $ 41.4billion of proceeds from long-term borrowings, which included $
8.4billion of proceeds from asset-backed debt transactions. The net proceeds were primarily used to
finance the purchase of wireless licenses won in connection with the FCC's auction for C-Band
wireless spectrum, Auction 107, and fund certain renewable energy projects. We
 77 
Table of Contents
used $ 18.9billion of cash to repay, redeem and repurchase long-term borrowings and finance lease
obligations, including $ 4.8billion to prepay and repay asset-backed, long-term borrowings. The net
proceeds of approximately $ 1.0billion from the green bond issued in 2021 were used to fund certain
renewable energy projects.
2022 Significant Debt Transactions
Debt or equity financing may be needed to fund additional investments or development activities or to
maintain an appropriate capital structure to ensure our financial flexibility .
The following tables show the significant transactions involving the senior unsecured debt securities
of Verizon and its subsidiaries that occurred during the year ended December 31, 2022.
Tender Offers
 Principal Amount 
 (dollars in millions) Purchased Cash Consideration(1) 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Verizon and subsidiary2.987% -8.950% $ 5,032 $ 5,587 
 notes and debentures, due 2032 - 2056 
(1) The total cash consideration includes the tender offer consideration, plus any accrued and unpaid
interest to the date of purchase.
Repayments, Redemptions and Repurchases
 Principal Repaid/ Redeemed/ 
 (dollars in millions) Repurchased Amount Paid(1) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Verizon floating rate (LIBOR 
 +1.000%) $ 1,094 $ 1,097 
 notes due 2022 
 Subsidiary8.000% debentures due 103 108 
 2022 
 Open market repurchases of various 896 759 
 Verizon notes(2) 
 Total $ 2,093 $ 1,964 
(1) Represents amount paid to repay or repurchase, including any accrued interest .
(2) During 2022, we recorded net gains of $ 119million in connection with the open market
repurchases, which were reflected within Other income (expense), net in our consolidated statements
of income.
Issuances
 Principal Amount 
 (dollars in millions) Issued Net Proceeds(1) 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Verizon3.875% notes due 2052(2) $ 1,000 $ 982 
 Verizon4.100% notes due 2055 655 650 
 Verizon4.250% notes due 2030(3) € 1,250 1,227 
 Verizon4.750% notes due 2034(3) € 1,250 1,231 
 Total $ 4,090 
(1) Net proceeds were net of underwriting discounts and other issuance costs. In addition, for
securities denominated in a currency other than the U.S. dollar, net proceeds are shown on a U.S.
dollar equivalent basis.
(2) An amount equal to the net proceeds from this green bond is expected to be used to fund, in whole
or in part, certain renewable energy projects, including new and existing investments made by us
during the period from December 1, 2021 through the maturity date of the green bond.
(3) See Note 9 for additional information on cross currency swap transactions related to the
issuances.
Short-term Borrowing and Commercial Paper Program
In March 2022, we entered into and fully drew from a $ 1.0billion short-term uncommitted credit
facility. In December 2022, we fully repaid $ 1.0billion under the short-term uncommitted credit
facility. As of December 31, 2022, we had noshort-term borrowing outstanding.
In 2022, we issued $ 27.4billion in commercial paper and we repaid $ 27.3billion of commercial paper.
As of December 31, 2022, we had $ 150million of commercial paper outstanding. These transactions are
reflected within Cash flows from financing activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows.
Asset-Backed Debt
As of December 31, 2022, the carrying value of our asset-backed debt was $ 20.0billion. Our asset-
backed debt includes Asset-Backed Notes (ABS Notes) issued to third-party investors (Investors) and
loans (ABS Financing Facilities) received from banks and their conduit facilities (collectively, the
Banks). Our consolidated asset-backed debt bankruptcy remote legal entities (each, an ABS Entity or
collectively, the ABS Entities) issue the debt or are otherwise party to the transaction
documentation in
 78 
Table of Contents
connection with our asset-backed debt transactions. Under the terms of our asset-backed debt, Cellco
Partnership (Cellco), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, and certain other Company affiliates
(collectively, the Originators) transfer device payment plan agreement receivables and certain other
receivables (collectively referred to as certain receivables) to one of the ABS Entities, which in
turn transfers such receivables to another ABS Entity that issues the debt. Verizon entities retain
the equity interests and residual interests, as applicable, in the ABS Entities, which represent the
rights to all funds not needed to make required payments on the asset-backed debt and other related
payments and expenses.
Our asset-backed debt is secured by the transferred receivables and future collections on such
receivables. These receivables transferred to the ABS Entities and related assets, consisting
primarily of restricted cash, will only be available for payment of asset-backed debt and expenses
related thereto, payments to the Originators in respect of additional transfers of certain
receivables, and other obligations arising from our asset-backed debt transactions, and will not be
available to pay other obligations or claims of Verizon’s creditors until the associated asset-backed
debt and other obligations are satisfied. The Investors or Banks, as applicable, which hold our
asset-backed debt have legal recourse to the assets securing the debt, but do not have any recourse
to Verizon with respect to the payment of principal and interest on the debt. Under a parent support
agreement, the Company has agreed to guarantee certain of the payment obligations of Cellco and the
Originators to the ABS Entities.
Cash collections on the receivables collateralizing our asset-backed debt securities are required at
certain specified times to be placed into segregated accounts. Deposits to the segregated accounts
are considered restricted cash and are included in Prepaid expenses and other and Other assets in our
consolidated balance sheets.
Proceeds from our asset-backed debt transactions are reflected in Cash flows from financing
activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows. The asset-backed debt issued is included in
Debt maturing within one year and Long-term debt in our consolidated balance sheets.
 79 
Table of Contents
ABS Notes
During the year ended December 31, 2022, we completed the following ABS Notes transactions:
 Expected 
 (dollars in Weighted-aver… 
 millions) Life to 
 January 2022 Interest Rates Maturity (in Principal 
 Series 2022-1 % years) Amount Issued 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 A Senior class 1.040 1.49 $ 799 
 notes 
 B Junior class 1.270 1.49 64 
 notes 
 C Junior class 1.390 1.49 37 
 notes 
 Series 2022-2 
 A Senior class 1.530 2.99 710 
 notes 
 B Junior class 1.830 2.99 57 
 notes 
 C Junior class 2.010 2.99 33 
 notes 
 January 2022 1,700 
 total 
 May 2022 
 Series 2022-3 
 A Senior class 3.010 1.49 400 
 notes 
 B Junior class 3.250 1.49 — 
 notes 
 C Junior class 3.500 1.49 16 
 notes 
 Series 2022-4 
 A Senior class 3.400 2.99 488 
 notes 
 B Junior class 3.640 2.99 42 
 notes 
 C Junior class 3.890 2.99 20 
 notes 
 May 2022 total 966 
 August 2022 
 Series 2022-5 
 A-1a Senior 
 fixed rate 3.720 1.44 351 
 class notes 
 A-1b Senior Compounded SOFR 
 floating rate +0.620 1.44 57 
 class notes 
 B Junior class 3.960 1.44 — 
 notes 
 C Junior class 4.210 1.44 — 
 notes 
 Series 2022-6 
 A Senior class 3.670 2.94 479 
 notes 
 B Junior class 3.910 2.94 — 
 notes 
 C Junior class 4.160 2.94 — 
 notes 
 August 2022 887 
 total 
 November 2022 
 Series 2022-7 
 A-1a Senior 
 fixed rate 5.230 1.99 624 
 class notes 
 A-1b Senior Compounded SOFR 
 floating rate +0.850 1.99 267 
 class notes 
 B Junior class 5.480 1.99 — 
 notes 
 C Junior class 5.720 1.99 41 
 notes 
 November 2022 932 
 total 
 Total $ 4,485 
Under the terms of each series of ABS Notes, there is a revolving period of 18months, two yearsor up
to three years, as applicable, during which we may transfer additional receivables to the ABS Entity.
During the year ended December 31, 2022, we made aggregate principal repayments of $ 4.3billion on
ABS Notes that have entered the amortization period, including principal payments made in connection
with clean-up redemptions. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we made aggregate principal
repayments of $ 3.3billion on ABS Notes that had entered the amortization period, including principal
payments made in connection with clean-up redemptions.
 80 
Table of Contents
In January 2023, we issued $ 932million aggregate principal amount of ABS Notes, with a blended
interest rate of approximately 4.511%, through an ABS Entity.
ABS Financing Facilities
Under the twoloan agreements in connection with the ABS Financing Facility entered into in December
2021 (2021 ABS Financing Facility), we prepaid an aggregate of $ 515million in January 2022, borrowed
an additional $ 1.9billion in March 2022, prepaid an aggregate of $ 130million in May 2022 and
borrowed an additional $ 545million in June 2022. In December 2022, we renewed the loan agreements in
connection with the 2021 ABS Financing Facility which reset the revolving period of oneor two years,
as applicable, and we borrowed an additional $ 1.9billion. The aggregate outstanding balance under
the 2021 ABS Financing Facility was $ 7.9billion as of December 31, 2022.
In October 2022, we entered into an ABS financing facility with a financial institution (2022 ABS
Financing Facility). Under the terms of the 2022 ABS Financing Facility, the financial institution
makes advances under asset-backed loans backed by certain wireless service accounts receivables of
both Consumer customers and Business customers. The loan agreement entered into in connection with
the 2022 ABS Financing Facility is outstanding with a final maturity date in June 2024 and the loan
agreement bears interest at a floating rate. There is an 18month revolving period, as set forth in
the loan agreement, which may be extended with the approval of the financial institution. Under the
loan agreement, we have the right to prepay all or a portion of the advances at any time without
penalty, but in certain cases, with breakage costs. Subject to certain conditions, we may also remove
receivables from the applicable ABS Entity. In October 2022, we borrowed $ 2.0billion under the loan
agreement entered into in connection with the 2022 ABS Financing Facility. The aggregate outstanding
balance under the 2022 ABS Financing Facility was $ 2.0billion as of December 31, 2022 .
Variable Interest Entities
The ABS Entities meet the definition of a VIE for which we have determined that we are the primary
beneficiary as we have both the power to direct the activities of the entity that most significantly
impact the entity’s performance and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits
of the entity. Therefore, the assets, liabilities and activities of the ABS Entities are consolidated
in our financial results and are included in amounts presented on the face of our consolidated
balance sheets.
The assets and liabilities related to our asset-backed debt arrangements included in our consolidated
balance sheets were as follows:
 (dollars in millions) At December 31, At December 31, 
 Assets 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Accounts receivable, net $ 13,906 $ 10,705 
 Prepaid expenses and other 1,409 1,094 
 Other assets 9,894 5,455 
 Liabilities 
 Accounts payable and accrued 22 10 
 liabilities 
 Debt maturing within one year 6,809 5,024 
 Long-term debt 13,199 9,178 
See Note 8 for additional information on certain receivables used to secure asset-backed debt.
 81 
Table of Contents
Long-Term Credit Facilities
 At 
 December 
 31, 
 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (dollars Facility Unused Principal 
 in Maturities Capacity Capacity Amount 
 millions) Outstandi… 
 Verizon 
 revolving 2026 $ 9,500 $ 9,436 $ — 
 credit 
 facility… 
 Various 
 export 2024 - 11,000 1,000 6,735 
 credit 2031 
 faciliti… 
 Total $ 20,500 $ 10,436 $ 6,735 
(1) The revolving credit facility does not require us to comply with financial covenants or maintain
specified credit ratings, and it permits us to borrow even if our business has incurred a material
adverse change. The revolving credit facility provides for the issuance of letters of credit . As of
December 31, 2022, there have been nodrawings against the $ 9.5billion revolving credit facility
since its inception.
(2) During 2022 and 2021, we drew down $ 3.0billion and $ 1.0billion, respectively, from these
facilities. Borrowings under certain of these facilities are amortized semi-annually in equal
installments up to the applicable maturity dates. Maturities reflect maturity dates of principal
amounts outstanding. Any amounts borrowed under these facilities and subsequently repaid cannot be
reborrowed.
In January 2023, we submitted an irrevocable request to borrow approximately $ 515million from funds
available under our export credit facilities in March 2023.
Non-Cash Transactions
During the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, we financed, primarily through alternative
financing arrangements, the purchase of approximately $ 832million, $ 461million, and $ 1.7billion,
respectively, of long-lived assets consisting primarily of network equipment. As of December 31, 2022
and 2021, $ 1.7billion and $ 1.3billion, respectively, relating to these financing arrangements,
including those entered into in prior years and liabilities assumed through acquisitions, remained
outstanding. These purchases are non-cash financing activities and therefore are not reflected within
Capital expenditures in our consolidated statements of cash flows.
Net Debt Extinguishment Losses
During the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 , we recorded net debt extinguishment losses
of $ 1.1billion, $ 3.6billion and $ 121million, respectively. The net losses are recorded in Other
income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of income. The total losses are reflected within
Other, net cash flow from operating activities and the portion of the losses representing cash
payments are reflected within Other, net cash flow from financing activities in our consolidated
statements of cash flows.
Guarantees
We guarantee the debentures of our operating telephone company subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2022,
$ 614million aggregate principal amount of these obligations remained outstanding. Each guarantee
will remain in place for the life of the obligation unless terminated pursuant to its terms,
including the operating telephone company no longer being a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
Debt Covenants
We and our consolidated subsidiaries are in compliance with all of our restrictive covenants in our
debt agreements.
 Note 8. Device Payment Plan Agreement and Wireless 
 Service Receivables 
The following table presents information about accounts receivable, net of allowances, recorded in
our consolidated balance sheet:
 At 
 December 
 31, 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (dollars Device 
 in payment Wireless Other Total 
 millions) plan service receivabl… 
 agreement 
 Accounts $ 13,374 $ 5,140 $ 6,818 $ 25,332 
 receivab… 
 Less 
 Allowance 
 for 445 143 238 826 
 credit 
 losses 
 Accounts 
 receivab… $ 12,929 $ 4,997 $ 6,580 $ 24,506 
 net of 
 allowance 
(1) Other receivables primarily include wireline receivables and other receivables, the allowances
for which are individually insignificant.
Included in Other assets and Accounts receivable, net at December 31, 2022 are net device payment
plan agreement receivables and net wireless service receivables of $ 23.6billion, which have been
transferred to ABS Entities and continue to be
 82 
Table of Contents
reported in our consolidated balance sheet. Included in Other assets and Accounts receivable, net at
December 31, 2021, are net device payment plan agreement receivables of $ 16.0billion, which have
been transferred to ABS Entities and continue to be reported in our consolidated balance sheet. See
Note 7 for additional information. We believe the carrying value of these receivables approximate
their fair value using a Level 3 expected cash flow model.
Under the Verizon device payment program, our eligible wireless customers purchase wireless devices
under a device payment plan agreement. Customers that activate service on devices purchased under the
device payment program pay lower service fees as compared to those under our fixed-term service
plans, and their device payment plan charge is included on their wireless monthly bill. We no longer
offer Consumer customers new fixed-term, subsidized service plans for devices; however, we continue
to offer subsidized plans to our Business customers. We also continue to service existing plans for
customers who have not yet purchased and activated devices under the Verizon device payment program.
Wireless Device Payment Plan Agreement Receivables
The following table displays device payment plan agreement receivables, net, recognized in our
consolidated balance sheets:
 At December 31, 2022 2021 (dollars in millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Device payment plan agreement $ 26,188 $ 21,303 
 receivables, gross 
 Unamortized imputed interest -479 -358 
 Device payment plan agreement 25,709 20,945 
 receivables, at amortized cost 
 Allowance(1) -881 -759 
 Device payment plan agreement $ 24,828 $ 20,186 
 receivables, net 
 Classified in our consolidated balance 
 sheets: 
 Accounts receivable, net $ 12,929 $ 12,783 
 Other assets 11,899 7,403 
 Device payment plan agreement $ 24,828 $ 20,186 
 receivables, net 
(1) Includes allowance for both short-term and long-term device payment plan agreement receivables.
For indirect channel wireless contracts with customers, we impute risk adjusted interest on the
device payment plan agreement receivables. We record the imputed interest as a reduction to the
related accounts receivable. Interest income, which is included within Service revenues and other in
our consolidated statements of income, is recognized over the financed device payment term.
Promotions
In connection with certain device payment plan agreements, we may offer a promotion to allow our
customers to upgrade to a new device after paying down a certain specified portion of the required
device payment plan agreement amount as well as trading in their device in good working order. When a
customer enters into a device payment plan agreement with the right to upgrade to a new device, we
account for this trade-in right as a guarantee obligation. We recognize a liability measured at fair
value for the customer’s right to trade in the device which is determined by considering several
factors, including the weighted-average selling prices obtained in recent resales of similar devices
eligible for trade-in. At December 31, 2022 and December 31, 2021, the amount of the guarantee
liability was $ 54million and $ 77million, respectively.
We may offer certain promotions that allow a customer to trade in their owned device in connection
with the purchase of a new device. Under these types of promotions, the customer receives a credit
for the value of the trade-in device. At December 31, 2022 and December 31, 2021, the amount of
trade-in liability was $ 562million and $ 366million, respectively.
In addition, we may provide the customer with additional future billing credits that will be applied
against the customer’s monthly bill as long as service is maintained. These future billing credits
are accounted for as consideration payable to a customer and are included in the determination of
total transaction price, resulting in a contract liability.
Device payment plan agreement receivables, net, does not reflect the trade-in liability, additional
future credits or the guarantee liability.
Origination of Device Payment Plan Agreements
When originating device payment plan agreements, we use internal and external data sources to create
a credit risk score to measure the credit quality of a customer and to determine eligibility for the
device payment program. Verizon’s experience has been that the payment attributes of longer tenured
customers are highly predictive for estimating their reliability to make future payments. Customers
with longer tenures tend to exhibit similar risk characteristics to other customers with longer
tenures, and receivables due from customers with longer tenures tend to perform better than
receivables from customers that have not previously been Verizon customers. As a result of this
experience, we make initial lending decisions based upon whether the customers are "established
customers" or "short-tenured customers." If a Consumer customer has been a customer for 45days
 83 
Table of Contents
or more, or if a Business customer has been a customer for 12months or more, the customer is
considered an "established customer." For established customers, the credit decision and ongoing
credit monitoring processes rely on a combination of internal and external data sources. If a
Consumer customer has been a customer less than 45days, or a Business customer has been a customer
for less than 12months, the customer is considered a "short-tenured customer." For short-tenured
customers, the credit decision and credit monitoring processes rely more heavily on external data
sources.
Available external credit data from credit reporting agencies along with internal data are used to
create custom credit risk scores for Consumer customers. The custom credit risk score is generated
automatically from the applicant’s credit data using proprietary custom credit models. The credit
risk score measures the likelihood that the potential customer will become severely delinquent and be
disconnected for non-payment. For a small portion of short-tenured customer applications, a
traditional credit report is not available from one of the national credit reporting agencies because
the potential customer does not have sufficient credit history. In those instances, alternative
credit data is used for the risk assessment. For Business customers, we also verify the existence of
the business with external data sources.
Based on the custom credit risk score, we assign each customer a credit class, each of which has
specified offers of credit. This includes an account level spending limit and a maximum amount of
credit allowed per device for Consumer customers or a required down payment percentage for Business
customers.
Credit Quality Information
Subsequent to origination, we assess indicators for the quality of our wireless device payment plan
agreement portfolio using two models, one for new customers and one for existing customers. The model
for new customers pools all Consumer and Business wireless customers based on less than 210days as
"new customers." The model for existing customers pools all Consumer and Business wireless customers
based on 210days or more as "existing customers."
The following table presents device payment plan agreement receivables, at amortized cost, as of
December 31, 2022, by credit quality indicator and year of origination:
 (dollars in Year of Prior to 
 millions) Originatio… 2022 2021 2021 Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 New $ 2,761 $ 904 $ 24 $ 3,689 
 customers 
 Existing 16,312 5,544 164 22,020 
 customers 
 Total $ 19,073 $ 6,448 $ 188 $ 25,709 
(1) Includes accounts that have been suspended at a point in time.
The data presented in the table above was last updated on December 31, 2022.
We assess indicators for the quality of our wireless service receivables portfolio as one overall
pool. As of December 31, 2022, wireless service receivables, at amortized cost, originating in 2022
and 2021 were $ 5.1billion and $ 58million, respectively.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The credit quality indicators are used in determining the estimated amount and the timing of expected
credit losses for the device payment plan agreement and wireless service receivables portfolios.
For device payment plan agreement receivables, we record bad debt expense based on a default and loss
calculation using our proprietary loss model. The expected loss rate is determined based on customer
credit scores and other qualitative factors as noted above. The loss rate is assigned individually on
a customer by customer basis and the custom credit scores are then aggregated by vintage and used in
our proprietary loss model to calculate the weighted-average loss rate used for determining the
allowance balance.
We monitor the collectability of our wireless service receivables as one overall pool. Wireline
service receivables are disaggregated and pooled by the following customer groups: consumer, small
and medium business, global enterprise, public sector and wholesale. For wireless service receivables
and wireline consumer and small and medium business receivables, the allowance is calculated based on
a 12 month rolling average write-off balance multiplied by the average life-cycle of an account from
billing to write-off. The risk of loss is assessed over the contractual life of the receivables and
is adjusted based on the historical loss amounts for current and future conditions based on
management’s qualitative considerations. For global enterprise, public sector and wholesale wireline
receivables, the allowance for credit losses is based on historical write-off experience and
individual customer credit risk, if applicable.
 84 
Table of Contents
Activity in the allowance for credit losses by portfolio segment of receivables was as follows:
 Device Payment 
 Plan Agreement Wireless Service Plan 
 (dollars in millions) Receivables(1) Receivables 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1, 2022 $ 759 $ 130 
 Current period provision for 
 expected 958 428 
 credit losses 
 Write-offs charged against -869 -463 
 the allowance 
 Recoveries collected 33 48 
 Balance at December 31, 2022 $ 881 $ 143 
(1) Includes allowance for both short-term and long-term device payment plan agreement receivables.
We monitor delinquency and write-off experience based on the quality of our device payment plan
agreement and wireless service receivables portfolios. The extent of our collection efforts with
respect to a particular customer are based on the results of our proprietary custom internal scoring
models that analyze the customer’s past performance to predict the likelihood of the customer falling
further delinquent. These custom scoring models assess a number of variables, including origination
characteristics, customer account history and payment patterns. Since our customers’ behaviors may be
impacted by general economic conditions, we analyzed whether changes in macroeconomic conditions
impact our credit loss experience and have concluded that our credit loss estimates are generally not
materially impacted by reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions. Based on
the score derived from these models, accounts are grouped by risk category to determine the
collection strategy to be applied to such accounts. For device payment plan agreement receivables and
wireless service receivables, we consider an account to be delinquent and in default status if there
are unpaid charges remaining on the account on the day after the bill’s due date. The risk class
determines the speed and severity of the collections effort including initiatives taken to facilitate
customer payment.
The balance and aging of the device payment plan agreement receivables, at amortized cost, were as
follows:
 (dollars in millions) At December 31, 2022 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Unbilled $ 24,480 
 Billed: 
 Current 998 
 Past due 231 
 Device payment plan agreement receivables, at $ 25,709 
 amortized cost 
 85 
Table of Contents
 Note 9. Fair Value Measurements and Financial 
 Instruments 
Recurring Fair Value Measurements
The following table presents the balances of assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a
recurring basis as of December 31, 2022:
 Assets: (dollars in 
 Prepaid expenses millions) 
 and other: Level 1(1) Level 2(2) Level 3(3) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fixed income $ — $ 37 $ — $ 37 
 securities 
 Cross currency — 42 — 42 
 swaps 
 Foreign exchange — 6 — 6 
 forwards 
 Interest rate — 63 — 63 
 caps 
 Other assets: 
 Fixed income — 349 — 349 
 securities 
 Cross currency — 263 — 263 
 swaps 
 Interest rate — 30 — 30 
 caps 
 Total $ — $ 790 $ — $ 790 
 Liabilities: 
 Other current 
 liabilities: 
 Interest rate $ — $ 731 $ — $ 731 
 swaps 
 Cross currency — 346 — 346 
 swaps 
 Interest rate — 63 — 63 
 caps 
 Foreign exchange — 1 — 1 
 forwards 
 Contingent — — 274 274 
 consideration 
 Other 
 liabilities: 
 Interest rate — 3,902 — 3,902 
 swaps 
 Cross currency — 3,295 — 3,295 
 swaps 
 Interest rate — 30 — 30 
 caps 
 Contingent — — 43 43 
 consideration 
 Total $ — $ 8,368 $ 317 $ 8,685 
(1) Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
(2) Observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and
liabilities.
(3) Unobservable pricing inputs in the market.
 86 
Table of Contents
The following table presents the balances of assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a
recurring basis as of December 31, 2021:
 Assets: (dollars in 
 Prepaid expenses millions) 
 and other: Level 1(1) Level 2(2) Level 3(3) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fixed income $ — $ 18 $ — $ 18 
 securities 
 Interest rate — 188 — 188 
 swaps 
 Cross currency — 9 — 9 
 swaps 
 Foreign exchange — 12 — 12 
 forwards 
 Other assets: 
 Fixed income — 391 — 391 
 securities 
 Interest rate — 285 — 285 
 swaps 
 Cross currency — 580 — 580 
 swaps 
 Interest rate — 44 — 44 
 caps 
 Total $ — $ 1,527 $ — $ 1,527 
 Liabilities: 
 Other current 
 liabilities: 
 Interest rate $ — $ 1 $ — $ 1 
 swaps 
 Forward starting 
 interest rate — 302 — 302 
 swaps 
 Cross currency — 218 — 218 
 swaps 
 Contingent — — 231 231 
 consideration 
 Other 
 liabilities: 
 Interest rate — 665 — 665 
 swaps 
 Cross currency — 1,406 — 1,406 
 swaps 
 Interest rate — 44 — 44 
 caps 
 Contingent — — 313 313 
 consideration 
 Total $ — $ 2,636 $ 544 $ 3,180 
(1) Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
(2) Observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and
liabilities.
(3) Unobservable pricing inputs in the market.
Certain of our equity investments do not have readily determinable fair values and are excluded from
the tables above. Such investments are measured at cost, less any impairment, plus or minus changes
resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for an identical or similar
investment of the same issuer and are included in Investments in unconsolidated businesses in our
consolidated balance sheets. As of December 31, 2022 and December 31, 2021, the carrying amount of
our investments without readily determinable fair values was $ 804million and $ 808million,
respectively. During 2022, there were insignificant adjustments due to observable price changes and
insignificant impairment charges. Cumulative adjustments due to observable price changes and
impairment charges were approximately $ 176million and $ 82million, respectively.
Verizon has a liability for contingent consideration related to its acquisition of TracFone,
completed in November 2021. The fair value is calculated using a probability-weighted discounted cash
flow model and represents a Level 3 measurement. Level 3 instruments include valuation based on
unobservable inputs reflecting our own assumptions, consistent with reasonably available assumptions
made by other market participants. Subsequent to the Acquisition Date, at each reporting date, the
contingent consideration liability is remeasured to fair value. During 2022, we recorded gains of $
57million related to fair value adjustments for the contingent consideration within Selling, general
and administrative expensein our consolidated statement of income. During 2022, we made payments of $
188million related to the contingent consideration. In January 2023, we made an additional payment of
$ 102million related to the contingent consideration. See Note 3 for additional information.
Fixed income securities consist primarily of investments in municipal bonds. The valuation of the
fixed income securities is based on the quoted prices for similar assets in active markets or
identical assets in inactive markets or models that apply inputs from observable market data. The
valuation determines that these securities are classified as Level 2.
Derivative contracts are valued using models based on readily observable market parameters for all
substantial terms of our derivative contracts and thus are classified within Level 2. We use mid-
market pricing for fair value measurements of our derivative instruments. Our derivative instruments
are recorded on a gross basis.
We recognize transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy as of the end of the reporting
period.
 87 
Table of Contents
Fair Value of Short-term and Long-term Debt
The fair value of our debt is determined using various methods, including quoted prices for identical
debt instruments, which is a Level 1 measurement, as well as quoted prices for similar debt
instruments with comparable terms and maturities, which is a Level 2 measurement.
The fair value of our short-term and long-term debt, excluding finance leases, was as follows:
 (do… 
 in Carr… Fair Level Level Level 
 mil… Amou… Value 1 2 3 Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 At 
 Dec… $ 149,… $ 106,… $ 62,606 $ — $ 169,… 
 31, 
 2021 
 At 
 Dec… 148,… 84,3… 54,656 — 139,… 
 31, 
 2022 
Derivative Instruments
We enter into derivative transactions primarily to manage our exposure to fluctuations in foreign
currency exchange rates and interest rates. We employ risk management strategies, which may include
the use of a variety of derivatives including interest rate swaps, cross currency swaps, forward
starting interest rate swaps, treasury rate locks, interest rate caps, swaptions and foreign exchange
forwards. We do not hold derivatives for trading purposes.
The following table sets forth the notional amounts of our outstanding derivative instruments:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2022 2021 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest rate swaps $ 26,071 $ 19,779 
 Cross currency swaps 34,976 32,502 
 Forward starting interest rate swaps — 1,000 
 Foreign exchange forwards 920 932 
The following tables summarize the activities of our designated derivatives:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2022 2021 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest Rate Swaps: 
 Notional value entered into $ 7,155 $ 6,050 
 Notional value settled 863 4,018 
 Pre-tax gain recognized in Interest 2 2 
 expense 
 Cross Currency Swaps: 
 Notional value entered into 2,474 6,214 
 Notional value settled — — 
 Pre-tax loss recognized in Other -430 -2,285 
 comprehensive loss(1) 
 Pre-tax loss on cross currency swaps -1,373 N/A 
 recognized in Interest expense 
 Pre-tax gain on hedged debt recognized 1,373 N/A 
 in Interest expense 
 Excluded components recognized in Other -498 N/A 
 comprehensive loss 
 Initial value of the excluded component 81 N/A 
 amortized into Interest expense 
 Forward Starting Interest Rate Swaps: 
 Notional value entered into — — 
 Notional value settled 1,000 1,000 
 Pre-tax gain recognized in Other 196 258 
 comprehensive loss 
 Treasury Rate Locks: 
 Notional value entered into — 4,650 
 Notional value settled — 4,650 
 Pre-tax gain recognized in Other — 251 
 comprehensive loss 
N/A - not applicable
(1) Represents amounts recorded under the cash flow hedge model. These instruments were re-designated
as fair value hedges on March 31, 2022.
 88 
Table of Contents
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2022 2021 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Other, net Cash Flows from Operating 
 Activities: 
 Cash received for settlement of interest $ 40 $ 107 
 rate swaps 
 Cash paid for settlement of forward -107 -237 
 starting interest rate swaps 
 Cash received for settlement of treasury — 251 
 rate locks 
The following table displays the amounts recorded in Long-term debt in our consolidated balance
sheets related to cumulative basis adjustments for fair value hedges. The cumulative amounts exclude
cumulative basis adjustments related to foreign exchange risk.
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2022 2021 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Carrying amount of hedged liabilities $ 21,741 $ 20,027 
 Cumulative amount of fair value hedging 
 adjustment included in the carrying -4,512 -113 
 amount of the hedged liabilities 
 Cumulative amount of fair value hedging 
 adjustment remaining for which hedge 488 575 
 accounting has been discontinued 
Interest Rate Swaps
We enter into interest rate swaps to achieve a targeted mix of fixed and variable rate debt. We
principally receive fixed rates and pay variable rates, resulting in a net increase or decrease to
Interest expense. These swaps are designated as fair value hedges and hedge against interest rate
risk exposure of designated debt issuances. We record the interest rate swaps at fair value in our
consolidated balance sheets as assets and liabilities. Changes in the fair value of the interest rate
swaps are recorded to Interest expense, which are primarily offset by changes in the fair value of
the hedged debt due to changes in interest rates.
Cross Currency Swaps
We have entered into cross currency swaps previously designated as cash flow hedges through March 31,
2022 to exchange our British Pound Sterling, Euro, Swiss Franc, Canadian Dollar and Australian
Dollar-denominated cash flows into U.S. dollars and to fix our cash payments in U.S. dollars, as well
as to mitigate the impact of foreign currency transaction gains or losses. A portion of the loss
recognized in Other comprehensive income (loss) was reclassified to Interest expense to offset the
related pre-tax foreign currency transaction gain or loss on the underlying hedged item.
On March 31, 2022, we elected to de-designate our cross currency swaps as cash flow hedges and re-
designated these swaps as fair value hedges. For these hedges, we have elected to exclude the change
in fair value of the cross currency swaps related to both time value and cross currency basis spread
from the assessment of hedge effectiveness (the excluded components). The initial value of the
excluded components of $ 1.0billion as of March 31, 2022 will continue to be amortized into Interest
expense over the remaining life of the hedging instruments. We estimate that $ 109million will be
amortized into Interest expense within the next 12 months.
In addition to the previously mentioned cross currency swaps, we have executed additional cross
currency swaps to exchange Euro-denominated cash flows into U.S. dollars to fix our cash payments in
U.S. dollars. These swaps are designated as fair value hedges. We record the cross currency swaps at
fair value in our consolidated balance sheets as assets and liabilities. Changes in the fair value of
the cross currency swaps attributable to changes in the spot rate of the hedged item and changes in
the recorded value of the hedged debt due to changes in spot rates are recorded in the same income
statement line item. We present exchange gains and losses from the conversion of foreign currency
denominated debt as a part of Interest expense. During the year ended December 31, 2022, these
amounts completely offset each other and nonet gain or loss was recorded.
Changes in the fair value of cross currency swaps attributable to time value and cross currency basis
spread are initially recorded to Other comprehensive income (loss). Unrealized gains or losses on
excluded components are recorded in Other comprehensive income (loss) and are recognized into
Interest expense on a systematic and rational basis through the swap accrual over the life of the
hedging instrument. The amount remaining in Accumulated other comprehensive loss related to cash flow
hedges on the date of transition will be reclassified to earnings when the hedged item is recognized
in earnings or when it becomes probable that the forecasted transactions will not occur. During the
year ended December 31, 2022, the amortization of the initial value of the excluded component
completely offset the amortization related to the amount remaining in Other comprehensive income
(loss) related to cash flow hedges. See Note 14 for additional information.
Forward Starting Interest Rate Swaps
We have entered into forward starting interest rate swaps designated as cash flow hedges in order to
manage our exposure to interest rate changes on future forecasted transactions. We hedge our exposure
to the variability in future cash flows based on the expected maturities of the related forecasted
debt issuance. We recognize gains and losses resulting from interest rate movements in Other
comprehensive income (loss).
 89 
Table of Contents
Treasury Rate Locks
We have entered into treasury rate locks designated as cash flow hedges to mitigate our interest rate
risk on future transactions. We recognize gains and losses resulting from interest rate movements in
Other comprehensive income (loss).
Net Investment Hedges
We have designated certain foreign currency debt instruments as net investment hedges to mitigate
foreign exchange exposure related to non-U.S. dollar net investments in certain foreign subsidiaries
against changes in foreign exchange rates. The notional amount of Euro-denominated debt designated as
a net investment hedge was € 750million as of both December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Undesignated Derivatives
We also have the following derivative contracts which we use as economic hedges but for which we have
elected not to apply hedge accounting.
The following table summarizes the activity of our derivatives not designated in hedging
relationships:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2022 2021 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Foreign Exchange Forwards: 
 Notional value entered into $ 10,689 $ 12,604 
 Notional value settled 10,701 13,077 
 Pre-tax loss recognized in Other income -97 -62 
 (expense), net 
 Swaptions: 
 Notional value sold 1,000 2,000 
 Notional value settled 1,000 2,000 
 Pre-tax gain (loss) recognized in -33 11 
 Interest expense 
Foreign Exchange Forwards
We enter into British Pound Sterling and Euro foreign exchange forwards to mitigate our foreign
exchange rate risk related to non-functional currency denominated monetary assets and liabilities of
international subsidiaries.
Swaptions
We enter into swaptions to achieve a targeted mix of fixed and variable rate debt.
Concentrations of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that subject us to concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of temporary
cash investments, short-term and long-term investments, trade receivables, including device payment
plan agreement receivables, certain notes receivable, including lease receivables, and derivative
contracts.
Counterparties to our derivative contracts are major financial institutions with whom we have
negotiated derivatives agreements (ISDA master agreements) and credit support annex (CSA) agreements
which provide rules for collateral exchange. The CSA agreements contain rating based thresholds such
that we or our counterparties may be required to hold or post collateral based upon changes in
outstanding positions as compared to established thresholds and changes in credit ratings. We do not
offset fair value amounts recognized for derivative instruments and fair value amounts recognized for
the right to reclaim cash collateral or the obligation to return cash collateral arising from
derivative instruments recognized at fair value. At December 31, 2022, we did not hold any
collateral. At December 31, 2022, we posted $ 2.3billion of collateral related to derivative
contracts under collateral exchange agreements, which was recorded as Prepaid expenses and other in
our consolidated balance sheet. At December 31, 2021, we held and posted $ 0.1billion and an
insignificant amount, respectively, of collateral related to derivative contracts under collateral
exchange arrangements, which were recorded as Other current liabilities and Prepaid expenses and
other, respectively, in our consolidated balance sheet. While we may be exposed to credit losses due
to the nonperformance of our counterparties, we consider the risk remote and do not expect that any
such nonperformance would result in a significant effect on our results of operations or financial
condition due to our diversified pool of counterparties.
 Note 10. Stock-Based Compensation 
Verizon Long-Term Incentive Plan
In May 2017, our shareholders approved the 2017 Long-Term Incentive Plan (the 2017 Plan) and
terminated the Company's authority to grant new awards under the Verizon 2009 Long-Term Incentive
Plan (the 2009 Plan). The 2017 Plan provides for broad-based equity grants to employees, including
executive officers, and permits the granting of stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted
stock, restricted stock units, performance shares, performance stock units and other awards. Upon
 90 
Table of Contents
approval of the 2017 Plan, we reserved for issuance under the 2017 Plan the number of shares that
were remaining but not issued under the 2009 Plan. Shares subject to outstanding awards under the
2009 Plan that expire, are canceled or otherwise terminated will also be available for awards under
the 2017 Plan. As of December 31, 2022, 69million shares are reserved for future issuance under the
2017 Plan.
Restricted Stock Units
Restricted Stock Units (RSUs) granted under the 2017 Plan generally vest in threeequal installments
on each anniversary of the grant date. The RSUs that are paid in stock upon vesting and are thus
classified as equity awards are measured using the grant date fair value of Verizon common stock and
are not remeasured at the end of each reporting period. The RSUs that are settled in cash are
classified as liability awards and the liability is measured at its fair value at the end of each
reporting period. All RSUs granted under the 2017 Plan have dividend equivalent units (DEUs), which
will be paid to participants if, and only to the extent the applicable RSU award vests, and is paid
at the time the RSU award is paid, and in the same proportion as the RSU award. In 2020, Verizon
announced a broad-based program that provides for the annual award of cash-settled RSUs under the
2017 Plan to all full-time and part-time employees who meet eligibility requirements.
We estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if
actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. We use historical data to estimate forfeitures and
recognize that estimated compensation cost of restricted stock units, net of estimated forfeitures,
on a straight-line basis over the vesting period.
Performance Stock Units
The 2017 Plan also provides for grants of Performance Stock Units (PSUs) that generally vest at the
end of the third year after the grant. As defined by the 2017 Plan, the Human Resources Committee of
the Board of Directors determines the number of PSUs a participant earns based on the extent to which
the corresponding performance goals have been achieved over the three-yearperformance cycle. The PSUs
that are paid in stock upon vesting and are classified as equity awards are measured using the grant
date fair value of Verizon common stock and are not remeasured at the end of each reporting period.
The PSUs that are settled in cash and are classified as liability awards are measured at its fair
value at the end of each reporting period and, therefore, will fluctuate based on the price of
Verizon common stock as well as performance relative to the targets. All PSUs granted under the 2017
Plan have DEUs, which will be paid to participants if, and only to the extent the applicable PSU
award vests, and is paid at the time that PSU award is paid, and in the same proportion as the PSU
award. The granted and cancelled activity for the PSU award includes adjustments for the performance
goals achieved.
The following table summarizes Verizon’s Restricted Stock Unit and Performance Stock Unit activity:
 Restrict… Perform… 
 Stock Stock 
 Units Units 
 (shares Equity Liability Equity Liabili… 
 in Awards Awards Awards Awards 
 thousan… 
 Outstan… 
 January 7,259 14,713 — 15,551 
 1, 2020 
 Granted 3,638 15,161 4,358 1,389 
 Payments -3,814 -9,311 — -7,160 
 Cancell… -182 -1,004 -116 -143 
 Outstan… 
 December 6,901 19,559 4,242 9,637 
 31, 2020 
 Granted 4,079 16,845 5,353 1,692 
 Payments -3,417 -10,797 — -6,718 
 Cancell… -784 -8,317 -955 -146 
 Outstan… 
 December 6,779 17,290 8,640 4,465 
 31, 2021 
 Granted 4,149 11,309 5,752 197 
 Payments -3,313 -6,363 — -2,075 
 Cancell… -362 -1,627 -567 -2,171 
 Outstan… 
 December 7,253 20,609 13,825 416 
 31, 2022 
As of December 31, 2022, unrecognized compensation expense related to the unvested portion of
Verizon’s RSUs and PSUs was approximately $ 604million and is expected to be recognized over
approximately 2years.
The equity awards granted in 2022, 2021 and 2020 have weighted-average grant date fair values of $
53.26, $ 55.39and $ 57.38per unit, respectively. During 2022, 2021 and 2020, we paid $ 433million, $
986million and $ 961million, respectively, to settle RSUs and PSUs classified as liability awards.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
After-tax compensation expense for stock-based compensation related to RSUs and PSUs described above
included in Net income attributable to Verizon was $ 609million, $ 625million and $ 780million for
2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
 91 
Table of Contents
 Note 11. Employee Benefits 
We maintain non-contributory defined benefit pension plans for certain employees. In addition, we
maintain postretirement health care and life insurance plans for certain retirees and their
dependents, which are both contributory and non-contributory, and include a limit on our share of the
cost for certain current and future retirees. In accordance with our accounting policy for pension
and other postretirement benefits, operating expenses include service costs associated with pension
and other postretirement benefits while other credits and/or charges based on actuarial assumptions,
including projected discount rates, an estimated return on plan assets, and impact from health care
trend rates are reported in Other income (expense), net. These estimates are updated in the fourth
quarter or upon a remeasurement event, to reflect actual return on plan assets and updated actuarial
assumptions. The adjustment is recognized in the income statement during the fourth quarter or upon a
remeasurement event pursuant to our accounting policy for the recognition of actuarial gains and
losses.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits
Pension and other postretirement benefits for certain employees are subject to collective bargaining
agreements. Modifications in benefits have been bargained from time to time, and we may also
periodically amend the benefits in the management plans. The following tables summarize benefit
costs, as well as the benefit obligations, plan assets, funded status and rate assumptions associated
with pension and postretirement health care and life insurance benefit plans.
Obligations and Funded Status
 (dollars 
 in 
 millions) 
 Health 
 At Care and 
 December  Pension Life 
 31, 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Change in 
 Benefit 
 Obligatio… 
 Beginning $ 20,167 $ 22,236 $ 14,710 $ 16,168 
 of year 
 Service 246 282 94 112 
 cost 
 Interest 544 394 332 289 
 cost 
 Plan 427 — 4 — 
 amendments 
 Actuarial -3,865 -605 -3,297 -930 
 gain, net 
 Benefits -782 -816 -736 -929 
 paid 
 Curtailme… 
 and 2 6 — — 
 terminati… 
 benefits 
 Settlemen… -1,370 -1,330 — — 
 paid 
 End of 15,369 20,167 11,107 14,710 
 year 
 Change in 
 Plan 
 Assets 
 Beginning 20,087 20,128 581 572 
 of year 
 Actual 
 return on -4,249 2,049 -87 53 
 plan 
 assets 
 Company 53 56 692 885 
 contribut… 
 Benefits -782 -816 -736 -929 
 paid 
 Settlemen… -1,370 -1,330 — — 
 paid 
 End of 13,739 20,087 450 581 
 year 
 Funded 
 Status - $ -1,630 $ -80 $ -10,657 $ -14,129 
 End of 
 year 
 (dollars in 
 millions) 
 At Health Care  
 December  Pension and Life 
 31, 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Amounts 
 recognized 
 in the 
 balance 
 sheets 
 Non-curre… $ 4 $ 376 $ — $ — 
 assets 
 Current -48 -55 -718 -748 
 liabiliti… 
 Non-curre… -1,586 -401 -9,939 -13,381 
 liabiliti… 
 Total $ -1,630 $ -80 $ -10,657 $ -14,129 
 Amounts 
 recognized 
 in 
 Accumulat… 
 other 
 comprehen… 
 loss 
 (pre-tax) 
 Prior 
 service $ 747 $ 402 $ -1,355 $ -1,889 
 cost 
 (benefit) 
 Total $ 747 $ 402 $ -1,355 $ -1,889 
The accumulated benefit obligation for all defined benefit pension plans was $ 15.3billion and $
20.1billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
 92 
Table of Contents
Actuarial Gain, Net
The net actuarial gain in 2022 is primarily the result of a $ 7.0billion gain ($ 4.1billion gain in
the pension plan and $ 2.9billion gain in our postretirement benefit plans) due to an increase in our
discount rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities of our pension plans and
postretirement benefit plans from a weighted-average of 2.9% at December 31, 2021 to a weighted-
average of 5.2% at December 31, 2022.
The net actuarial gain in 2021 is primarily the result of a $ 1.1billion gain due to an increase in
our discount rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities of our pension plans and
postretirement benefit plans from a weighted-average of 2.6% at December 31, 2020 to a weighted-
average of 2.9% at December 31, 2021.
Plan Amendments
In July 2022, union members ratified the extension of our collective bargaining agreements with the
Communications Workers of America and the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers for three
years, from August 5, 2023 until August 1, 2026. Amendments triggered by the collective bargaining
negotiations were made to certain pension plans for certain union-represented employees. The impact
of the plan amendments was an increase in our defined benefit pension plans plan obligations of
approximately $ 427million, which has been recorded as a net decrease to Accumulated other
comprehensive income (loss) of $ 317million (net of taxes of $ 110million). The annual impact of the
amount recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) that will be reclassified to net
periodic benefit cost is minimal.
The reclassifications from the amounts recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) as a
result of collective bargaining agreements and plan amendments made in 2016, 2017 and 2018 resulted
in a net decrease to net periodic benefit cost and net increase to pre-tax income of approximately $
390million during 2022 and $ 708million during 2021 and 2020.
Information for pension plans with an accumulated benefit obligation in excess of plan assets
follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2022 2021 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Accumulated benefit obligation $ 15,286 $ 456 
 Fair value of plan assets 13,694 — 
Information for pension plans with a projected benefit obligation in excess of plan assets follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Projected benefit obligation $ 15,328 $ 456 
 Fair value of plan assets 13,694 — 
Net Periodic Benefit Cost (Income)
The following table summarizes the components of net periodic benefit cost (income) related to our
pension and postretirement health care and life insurance plans:
 (d… 
 in 
 mi… 
 He… 
 Y… Ca… 
 E… and 
 D… Pe… Li… 
 3… 20… 20… 20… 20… 20… 20… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 S… 
 c… 
 - $ 216 $ 247 $ 245 $ 79 $ 94 $ 89 
 C… 
 of 
 s… 
 S… 
 c… 
 - 
 S… 30 35 60 15 18 21 
 g… 
 a… 
 a… 
 e… 
 S… 246 282 305 94 112 110 
 c… 
 A… 
 of 
 p… 82 61 61 -530 -894 -966 
 s… 
 c… 
 (… 
 E… 
 r… 
 on -1… -1,… -1,… -27 -22 -28 
 p… 
 a… 
 I… 544 394 505 332 289 429 
 c… 
 R… 
 l… 1,… -1,… 744 -3,… -960 866 
 (… 
 n… 
 C… 
 a… 2 — — — — — 
 t… 
 b… 
 O… 1,… -2,… 124 -3,… -1,… 301 
 c… 
 T… $ 1,… $ -1,… $ 429 $ -3,… $ -1,… $ 411 
The service cost component of net periodic benefit cost (income) is recorded in Cost of services and
Selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of income while the other
components, including mark-to-market adjustments, if any, are recorded in Other income (expense),
net.
 93 
Table of Contents
Other pre-tax changes in plan assets and benefit obligations recognized in Other comprehensive
(income) loss are as follows:
 (d… 
 in  
 mi… 
 He… 
 Ca… 
 At and 
 De… Pen… Li… 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 20… 2021 20… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Re… 
 of 
 am… 
 it… 
 Pr… 
 se… $ -82 $ -61 $ -61 $ 530 $ 894 $ 966 
 co… 
 (b… 
 To… 
 re… 
 in 
 Ot… $ -82 $ -61 $ -61 $ 530 $ 894 $ 966 
 co… 
 lo… 
 (i… 
 (p… 
Assumptions
The weighted-average assumptions used in determining benefit obligations follow:
 Pension Health Care and Life 
 At December 31, 2022 2021 2022 2021 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Discount Rate 5.20 % 3.00 % 5.20 % 2.90 % 
 Rate of compensation 3.00 % 3.00 % N/A N/A 
 increases 
N/A - not applicable
The weighted-average assumptions used in determining net periodic cost follow:
 Health 
 Care 
 At and 
 Decemb… Pension Life 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Discou… 
 rate in 
 effect 
 for 3.80 % 3.20 % 3.30 % 3.20 % 3.00 % 3.50 % 
 determ… 
 service 
 cost 
 Discou… 
 rate in 
 effect 
 for 3.20 1.90 2.40 2.30 1.80 2.80 
 determ… 
 intere… 
 cost 
 Expect… 
 return 6.70 6.50 6.50 4.90 4.20 4.50 
 on plan 
 assets 
 Rate of 
 compen… 3.00 3.00 3.00 N/A N/A N/A 
 increa… 
N/A - not applicable
In determining our pension and other postretirement benefit obligations, we used a weighted-average
discount rate of 5.2% in 2022. The rates were selected to approximate the composite interest rates
available on a selection of high-quality bonds available in the market at December 31, 2022. The
bonds selected had maturities that coincided with the time periods during which benefits payments are
expected to occur, were non-callable and available in sufficient quantities to ensure marketability
(at least $ 300million par outstanding).
In order to project the long-term target investment return for the total portfolio, estimates are
prepared for the total return of each major asset class over the subsequent 10-year period. Those
estimates are based on a combination of factors including the current market interest rates and
valuation levels, consensus earnings expectations and historical long-term risk premiums. To
determine the aggregate return for the pension trust, the projected return of each individual asset
class is then weighted according to the allocation to that investment area in the trust’s long-term
asset allocation policy.
The assumed health care cost trend rates are as follows:
 Health Care and Life 
 At December 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted-average healthcare cost trend 6.60 % 6.20 % 6.20 % 
 rate assumed for next year 
 Rate to which cost trend rate gradually 4.50 4.50 4.50 
 declines 
 Year the rate reaches the level it is 2031 2029 2029 
 assumed to remain thereafter 
Plan Assets
The Company’s overall investment strategy is to achieve a mix of assets that allows us to meet
projected benefit payments while taking into consideration risk and return. While target allocation
percentages will vary over time, the current target allocation for plan assets is designed so that
41% to 51% of the assets have the objective of achieving a return in excess of the growth in
liabilities (comprised of public equities, private equities, real estate, hedge funds, high yield
bonds and emerging market debt) and 55% to 65% of the assets are invested as liability hedging assets
(where interest rate sensitivity of the liability hedging assets better match the interest rate
sensitivity of the liability) and a maximum of 10% is in cash. This allocation will shift as funded
status improves to a higher allocation of liability hedging assets. Target policies will be revisited
periodically to ensure they are in line with fund objectives. Both active and passive management
approaches are used depending on perceived market efficiencies and various other factors. Due to our
diversification and risk control processes, there are no significant concentrations of risk, in terms
of sector, industry, geography or company names.
Pension and healthcare and life plans assets do not include significant amounts of Verizon bonds or
common stock.
 94 
Table of Contents
Pension Plans
The fair values for the pension plans by asset category at December 31, 2022 are as follows:
 (dollars in 
 Asset millions) 
 Category Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and 
 cash $ 817 $ 779 $ 38 $ — 
 equivalen… 
 Equity 332 318 14 — 
 securities 
 Fixed 
 income 
 securities 
 U.S. 
 Treasuries 1,541 1,312 229 — 
 and 
 agencies 
 Corporate 2,413 13 2,400 — 
 bonds 
 Internati… 528 10 518 — 
 bonds 
 Other 711 4 707 — 
 Real 1,002 — — 1,002 
 estate 
 Other 
 Private 569 — — 569 
 equity 
 Hedge 88 — 36 52 
 funds 
 Total 
 investmen… 8,001 2,436 3,942 1,623 
 at fair 
 value 
 Investmen… 
 measured 5,738 
 at NAV 
 Total $ 13,739 $ 2,436 $ 3,942 $ 1,623 
The fair values for the pension plans by asset category at December 31, 2021 are as follows:
 (dollars in 
 Asset millions) 
 Category Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and 
 cash $ 1,221 $ 1,208 $ 13 $ — 
 equivalen… 
 Equity 2,482 2,463 19 — 
 securities 
 Fixed 
 income 
 securities 
 U.S. 
 Treasuries 1,785 1,652 133 — 
 and 
 agencies 
 Corporate 4,046 123 3,923 — 
 bonds 
 Internati… 1,407 23 1,384 — 
 bonds 
 Other 695 — 695 — 
 Real 972 — — 972 
 estate 
 Other 
 Private 569 — — 569 
 equity 
 Hedge 224 — 114 110 
 funds 
 Total 
 investmen… 13,401 5,469 6,281 1,651 
 at fair 
 value 
 Investmen… 
 measured 6,686 
 at NAV 
 Total $ 20,087 $ 5,469 $ 6,281 $ 1,651 
The following is a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balance of pension plan assets that are
measured at fair value using significant unobservable inputs:
 (… 
 in 
 E… C… I… R… P… H… m… 
 S… B… B… E… E… F… T… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 … 
 … 
 … $ 2 $ 1… $ 20 $ 757 $ 414 $ 138 $ 1,… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … -1 -5 — -21 -19 1 -45 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … -1 1 -4 197 147 81 421 
 … 
 … — -… -16 39 27 -1… -2… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — — 972 569 110 1,… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … — — — 19 30 19 68 
 … 
 … 
 … — — — 14 -11 6 9 
 … 
 … — — — -3 -19 -83 -1… 
 … 
 … 
 … 
 … $ — $ — $ — $ 1,… $ 569 $ 52 $ 1,… 
 … 
 … 
 95 
Table of Contents
Health Care and Life Plans
The fair values for the other postretirement benefit plans by asset category at December 31, 2022 are
as follows:
 (dollars in  
 millions) 
 Asset Category Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and cash $ 30 $ 1 $ 29 $ — 
 equivalents 
 Equity 252 252 — — 
 securities 
 Fixed income 
 securities 
 U.S. Treasuries 101 82 19 — 
 and agencies 
 Corporate bonds 35 25 10 — 
 International 12 9 3 — 
 bonds 
 Other 11 — 11 — 
 Total 
 investments at 441 369 72 — 
 fair value 
 Investments 9 
 measured at NAV 
 Total $ 450 $ 369 $ 72 $ — 
The fair values for the other postretirement benefit plans by asset category at December 31, 2021 are
as follows:
 (dollars in  
 millions) 
 Asset Category Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and cash $ 36 $ — $ 36 $ — 
 equivalents 
 Equity 284 284 — — 
 securities 
 Fixed income 
 securities 
 U.S. Treasuries 160 150 10 — 
 and agencies 
 Corporate bonds 64 50 14 — 
 International 14 10 4 — 
 bonds 
 Other 10 — 10 — 
 Total 
 investments at 568 494 74 — 
 fair value 
 Investments 13 
 measured at NAV 
 Total $ 581 $ 494 $ 74 $ — 
The following are general descriptions of asset categories, as well as the valuation methodologies
and inputs used to determine the fair value of each major category of assets.
Cash and cash equivalents include short-term investment funds (less than 90 days to maturity),
primarily in diversified portfolios of investment grade money market instruments and are valued using
quoted market prices or other valuation methods. The carrying value of cash equivalents approximates
fair value due to the short-term nature of these investments.
Investments in securities traded on national and foreign securities exchanges are valued by the
trustee at the last reported sale prices on the last business day of the year or, if no sales were
reported on that date, at the last reported bid prices. Government obligations, corporate bonds,
international bonds and asset-backed debt are valued using matrix prices with input from independent
third-party valuation sources. Over-the-counter securities are valued at the bid prices or the
average of the bid and ask prices on the last business day of the year from published sources or, if
not available, from other sources considered reliable such as multiple broker quotes.
Commingled funds not traded on national exchanges are priced by the custodian or fund's administrator
at their net asset value (NAV). Commingled funds held by third-party custodians appointed by the fund
managers provide the fund managers with a NAV. The fund managers have the responsibility for
providing this information to the custodian of the respective plan.
The investment manager of the entity values venture capital, corporate finance and natural resource
limited partnership investments. Real estate investments are valued at amounts based upon appraisal
reports prepared by either independent real estate appraisers or the investment manager using
discounted cash flows or market comparable data. Loans secured by mortgages are carried at the lesser
of the unpaid balance or appraised value of the underlying properties. The values assigned to these
investments are based upon available and current market information and do not necessarily represent
amounts that might ultimately be realized. Because of the inherent uncertainty of valuation,
estimated fair values might differ significantly from the values that would have been used had a
ready market for the securities existed. These differences could be material.
Forward currency contracts, futures, and options are valued by the trustee at the exchange rates and
market prices prevailing on the last business day of the year. Both exchange rates and market prices
are readily available from published sources. These securities are classified by the asset class of
the underlying holdings.
Hedge funds are valued by the custodian at NAV based on statements received from the investment
manager. These funds are valued in accordance with the terms of their corresponding offering or
private placement memoranda.
 96 
Table of Contents
Commingled funds, hedge funds, venture capital, corporate finance, natural resource and real estate
limited partnership investments for which fair value is measured using the NAV per share as a
practical expedient are not leveled within the fair value hierarchy but are included in total
investments.
Employer Contributions
In 2022, we made nodiscretionary contribution to our qualified pension plans, $ 53million of
contributions to our nonqualified pension plans and $ 692million of contributions to our other
postretirement benefit plans. No mandatory qualified pension plans contributions are expected or
required to be made in 2023. In 2023, we expect discretionary qualified pension plan contributions to
be approximately $ 200million, nonqualified pension plan contributions are estimated to be
insignificant and contributions to our other postretirement benefit plans are estimated to be
approximately $ 820million.
Estimated Future Benefit Payments
The benefit payments to retirees are expected to be paid as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Year Pension Benefits Health Care and Life 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2023 $ 1,679 $ 867 
 2024 1,583 863 
 2025 1,578 854 
 2026 1,553 845 
 2027 937 837 
 2028 to 2032 4,628 4,082 
Savings Plan and Employee Stock Ownership Plans
We maintain fourleveraged employee stock ownership plans (ESOP). We match a certain percentage of
eligible employee contributions to certain savings plans with shares of our common stock from this
ESOP. At December 31, 2022, the number of allocated shares of common stock in this ESOP was
43million. There were nounallocated shares of common stock in this ESOP at December 31, 2022. All
leveraged ESOP shares are included in earnings per share computations.
Total savings plan costs were $ 620million in 2022, $ 690million in 2021 and $ 730million in 2020.
Severance Benefits
The following table provides an analysis of our severance liability:
 (dolla… 
 in  
 Charged millio… 
 Beginn… to End of  
 Year of Year Expense Payme… Other Year 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2020 $ 565 $ 309 $ -248 $ -24 $ 602 
 2021 602 233 -258 -29 548 
 2022 548 319 -214 — 653 
Severance, Pension and Benefits (Credits) Charges
During 2022, in accordance with our accounting policy to recognize actuarial gains and losses in the
period in which they occur, we recorded net pre-tax pension and benefits credits of $ 1.7billion in
our pension and postretirement benefit plans. The credits were recorded in Other income (expense),
net in our consolidated statement of income and were primarily driven by a credit of $ 7.0billion due
to an increase in our discount rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities of our
pension plans ($ 4.1billion) and postretirement benefit plans ($ 2.9billion) from a weighted-average
of 2.9% at December 31, 2021 to a weighted-average of 5.2% at December 31, 2022, a charge of $
5.5billion due to the difference between our estimated and our actual return on assets and a credit
of $ 206million due to other actuarial assumption adjustments. During 2022, we also recorded net pre-
tax severance charges of $ 319million in Selling, general and administrative expense in our
consolidated statements of income.
During 2021, we recorded net pre-tax pension and benefits credits of $ 2.4billion in our pension and
postretirement benefit plans. The credits were recorded in Other income (expense), net in our
consolidated statement of income and were primarily driven by a credit of $ 1.1billion due to an
increase in our discount rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities of our
pension plans and postretirement benefit plans from a weighted-average of 2.6% at December 31, 2020
to a weighted-average of 2.9% at December 31, 2021, a credit of $ 847million due to the difference
between our estimated and our actual return on assets and a credit of $ 453million due to other
actuarial assumption adjustments. During 2021, we also recorded net pre-tax severance charges of $
233million in Selling, general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of income.
 97 
Table of Contents
During 2020, we recorded net pre-tax pension and benefits charges of $ 1.6billion in our pension and
postretirement benefit plans. The charges were recorded in Other income (expense), net in our
consolidated statement of income and were primarily driven by a charge of $ 3.2billion due to a
decrease in our discount rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities of our
pension plans and postretirement benefit plans from a weighted-average of 3.3% at December 31, 2019
to a weighted-average of 2.6% at December 31, 2020, partially offset by a credit of $ 1.6billion due
to the difference between our estimated and our actual return on assets. During 2020, we also
recorded net pre-tax severance charges of $ 309million in Selling, general and administrative expense
in our consolidated statements of income.
 Note 12. Taxes 
The components of income before provision for income taxes are as follows:
 Years Ended December  (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Domestic $ 26,822 $ 27,607 $ 22,844 
 Foreign 1,449 1,813 1,123 
 Total $ 28,271 $ 29,420 $ 23,967 
The components of the provision for income taxes are as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Current 
 Federal $ 2,411 $ 1,876 $ 2,826 
 Foreign 201 248 159 
 State and Local 938 414 1,081 
 Total 3,550 2,538 4,066 
 Deferred 
 Federal 2,529 3,354 1,432 
 Foreign -22 -97 1 
 State and Local 466 1,007 120 
 Total 2,973 4,264 1,553 
 Total income tax provision $ 6,523 $ 6,802 $ 5,619 
The following table shows the principal reasons for the difference between the effective income tax
rate and the statutory federal income tax rate:
 Years Ended December 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Statutory federal income tax rate 21.0 % 21.0 % 21.0 % 
 State and local income tax rate, net of 3.9 3.8 3.9 
 federal tax benefits 
 Noncontrolling interest -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 
 Divestitures — -0.6 0.1 
 Tax credits -0.5 -0.5 -0.8 
 Other, net -0.9 -0.2 -0.3 
 Effective income tax rate 23.1 % 23.1 % 23.4 % 
The effective income tax rate for 2022 and 2021 was 23.1%. The effective income tax rate for the
twelve months ended December 31, 2022 was comparable to the similar period in 2021. The decrease in
the provision for income taxes was primarily due to the decrease in income before income taxes in the
current period.
The effective income tax rate for 2021 was 23.1% compared to 23.4% for 2020. The decrease in the
effective income tax rate was primarily due to the sale of Verizon Media in 2021, partially offset by
the non-recurring tax benefit recognized in 2020 from a series of legal entity restructurings. The
increase in the provision for income taxes was primarily due to the increase in income before income
taxes in 2021.
The amounts of cash taxes paid by Verizon are as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Income taxes, net of $ 2,736 $ 3,040 $ 2,725 
 amounts refunded 
 Employment taxes 1,245 1,225 618 
 Property and other taxes 1,959 1,756 2,093 
 Total $ 5,940 $ 6,021 $ 5,436 
 98 
Table of Contents
Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities
Deferred taxes arise because of differences in the book and tax bases of certain assets and
liabilities. Significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities are as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2022 2021 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Deferred Tax Assets 
 Employee benefits $ 3,888 $ 4,388 
 Tax loss, credit, and other carry 1,940 2,224 
 forwards 
 Other - assets 6,986 7,314 
 12,814 13,926 
 Valuation allowances -1,347 -1,574 
 Deferred tax assets 11,467 12,352 
 Deferred Tax Liabilities 
 Spectrum and other intangible 25,851 24,935 
 amortization 
 Depreciation 21,388 19,893 
 Other - liabilities 7,496 8,041 
 Deferred tax liabilities 54,735 52,869 
 Net deferred tax liability $ 43,268 $ 40,517 
At December 31, 2022, undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries indefinitely invested
outside the U.S. amounted to approximately $ 2.5billion. The majority of Verizon's cash flow is
generated from domestic operations and we are not dependent on foreign cash or earnings to meet our
funding requirements, nor do we intend to repatriate these undistributed foreign earnings to fund
U.S. operations. Furthermore, a portion of these undistributed earnings represents amounts that
legally must be kept in reserve in accordance with certain foreign jurisdictional requirements and
are unavailable for distribution or repatriation. As a result, we have not provided U.S. deferred
taxes on these undistributed earnings because we intend that they will remain indefinitely reinvested
outside of the U.S. and, therefore unavailable for use in funding U.S. operations. Determination of
the amount of unrecognized deferred taxes related to these undistributed earnings is not practicable.
At December 31, 2022, we had net after-tax loss, credit, and other carry forwards for income tax
purposes of approximately $ 1.9billion that relate to federal, state and foreign taxes. Of these net
after-tax loss, credit, and other carry forwards, approximately $ 1.2billion will expire between 2023
and 2042 and approximately $ 732million may be carried forward indefinitely.
During 2022, the valuation allowance decreased approximately $ 227million. The $ 1.3billion valuation
allowance at December 31, 2022, as well as the 2022 activity is primarily related to state and
foreign taxes.
Unrecognized Tax Benefits
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending balance of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1, $ 3,134 $ 2,944 $ 2,870 
 Additions based on tax 
 positions related 123 150 160 
 to the current year 
 Additions for tax 
 positions of prior 122 621 258 
 years 
 Reductions for tax 
 positions of prior -419 -330 -166 
 years 
 Settlements -92 -163 -46 
 Lapses of statutes of -56 -88 -132 
 limitations 
 Balance at December 31, $ 2,812 $ 3,134 $ 2,944 
Included in the total unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 is $ 2.5billion,
$ 2.8billion and $ 2.5billion, respectively, that if recognized, would favorably affect the effective
income tax rate.
We recognized the following net after-tax expenses (benefit) related to interest and penalties in the
provision for income taxes:
 Years Ended December 31, (dollars in millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2022 $ 35 
 2021 -21 
 2020 5 
 99 
Table of Contents
The after-tax accruals for the payment of interest and penalties in the consolidated balance sheets
are as follows:
 At December 31, (dollars in millions) 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2022 $ 544 
 2021 551 
The decrease in unrecognized tax benefits was primarily related to the resolution of issues with the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) involving tax years 2015-2016 as well as final purchase accounting
adjustments made in connection with the 2021 acquisition of TracFone. The uncertain tax benefits
related to the acquisition of TracFone are the subject of an indemnity from América Móvil for which
there is a corresponding indemnity asset.
Verizon and/or its subsidiaries file income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction, and various
state, local and foreign jurisdictions. As a large taxpayer, we are under audit by the IRS and
multiple state and foreign jurisdictions for various open tax years. The IRS is currently examining
the Company’s U.S. income tax returns for tax years 2017-2018 and Cellco's U.S. income tax return for
tax years 2017-2019. Tax controversies are ongoing for tax years as early as 2009 in certain states
and as early as 2000 outside the U.S. The amount of the liability for unrecognized tax benefits will
change in the next twelve months due to the expiration of the statute of limitations in various
jurisdictions and it is reasonably possible that various current tax examinations will conclude or
require reevaluations of the Company’s tax positions during this period. An estimate of the range of
the possible change cannot be made until these tax matters are further developed or resolved.
 Note 13. Segment Information 
Reportable Segments
We have tworeportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units - Consumer and
Business. We measure and evaluate our reportable segments based on segment operating income,
consistent with the chief operating decision maker’s assessment of segment performance.
Our segments and their principal activities consist of the following:
 Segment Description 
 Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline 
 communications services and products. Our wireless services are 
 provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in the U.S. 
 under the Verizon brand, TracFone brands and through wholesale and 
 Verizon Consumer Group other arrangements. We also provide FWA broadband through our wireless 
 networks. Our wireline services are provided in nine states in the 
 Mid-Atlantic and Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over 
 our 100% fiber-optic network through our Verizon Fios product portfolio 
 and over a traditional copper-based network to customers who are not 
 served by Fios. 
 Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications 
 services and products, including data, video and conferencing services, 
 corporate networking solutions, security and managed network services, 
 Verizon local and long distance voice services and network access to deliver 
 Business Group various IoT services and products. We also provide FWA broadband 
 through our wireless networks. We provide these products and services 
 to businesses, government customers and wireless and wireline carriers 
 across the U.S. and select products and services to customers around 
 the world. 
Our Consumer segment's wireless and wireline products and services are available to our retail
customers, as well as resellers that purchase wireless network access from us on a wholesale basis.
Our Business segment’s wireless and wireline products and services are organized by the primary
customer groups targeted by these offerings: Small and Medium Business, Global Enterprise, Public
Sector and Other, and Wholesale.
Corporate and other primarily includes insurance captives, investments in unconsolidated businesses
and development stage businesses that support our strategic initiatives, as well as unallocated
corporate expenses, certain pension and other employee benefit related costs and interest and
financing expenses. Corporate and other also includes the historical results of divested businesses
including Verizon Media, and other adjustments and gains and losses that are not allocated in
assessing segment performance due to their nature. Although such transactions are excluded from the
business segment results, they are included in reported consolidated earnings. Gains and losses from
these transactions that are not individually significant are included in segment results as these
items are included in the chief operating decision maker’s assessment of segment performance.
We completed the sale of Verizon Media on September 1, 2021. See Note 3 for additional information on
the sale of Verizon Media.
 100 
Table of Contents
The following tables provides operating financial information for our tworeportable segments:
 (dollars in 
 2022 millions) 
 External Total 
 Operating Reportable 
 Revenues Consumer Business Segments 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service $ 73,139 $ — $ 73,139 
 Wireless 23,168 — 23,168 
 equipment 
 Other(1) 6,996 — 6,996 
 Small and Medium — 12,595 12,595 
 Business 
 Global — 9,733 9,733 
 Enterprise 
 Public Sector — 6,117 6,117 
 and Other 
 Wholesale — 2,584 2,584 
 Intersegment 203 43 246 
 revenues 
 Total Operating 103,506 31,072 134,578 
 Revenues(2) 
 Cost of services 17,746 10,483 28,229 
 Cost of wireless 25,134 5,362 30,496 
 equipment 
 Selling, general 
 and 19,064 8,284 27,348 
 administrative 
 expense 
 Depreciation and 
 amortization 12,716 4,312 17,028 
 expense 
 Total Operating 74,660 28,441 103,101 
 Expenses 
 Operating Income $ 28,846 $ 2,631 $ 31,477 
(1) Other revenue includes fees that partially recover the direct and indirect costs of complying
with regulatory and industry obligations and programs, revenues associated with certain products
included in our device protection offerings, leasing and interest when equipment is sold to the
customer by an authorized agent under a device payment plan agreement.
(2) Service and other revenues and Wireless equipment revenues included in our Business segment
amounted to approximately $ 27.0billion and $ 4.0billion, respectively, for the year ended December
31, 2022.
 (dollars in  
 2021 millions) 
 External Total 
 Operating Reportable 
 Revenues Consumer Business Segments 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service $ 67,723 $ — $ 67,723 
 Wireless 19,781 — 19,781 
 equipment 
 Other(1) 7,568 — 7,568 
 Small and Medium — 11,751 11,751 
 Business 
 Global Enterprise — 10,218 10,218 
 Public Sector and — 6,324 6,324 
 Other 
 Wholesale — 2,680 2,680 
 Intersegment 228 69 297 
 revenues 
 Total Operating 95,300 31,042 126,342 
 Revenues(2) 
 Cost of services 16,581 10,653 27,234 
 Cost of wireless 20,523 4,544 25,067 
 equipment 
 Selling, general 
 and 16,562 8,324 24,886 
 administrative 
 expense 
 Depreciation and 
 amortization 11,679 4,084 15,763 
 expense 
 Total Operating 65,345 27,605 92,950 
 Expenses 
 Operating Income $ 29,955 $ 3,437 $ 33,392 
(1) Other revenue includes fees that partially recover the direct and indirect costs of complying
with regulatory and industry obligations and programs, revenues associated with certain products
included in our device protection offerings, leasing and interest when equipment is sold to the
customer by an authorized agent under a device payment plan agreement.
(2) Service and other revenues and Wireless equipment revenues included in our Business segment
amounted to approximately $ 27.7billion and $ 3.4billion, respectively, for the year ended December
31, 2021.
 101 
Table of Contents
 (dollars in 
 2020 millions) 
 External Total 
 Operating Reportable 
 Revenues Consumer Business Segments 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service $ 64,884 $ — $ 64,884 
 Wireless 15,492 — 15,492 
 equipment 
 Other(1) 7,916 — 7,916 
 Small and Medium — 11,112 11,112 
 Business 
 Global Enterprise — 10,405 10,405 
 Public Sector and — 6,362 6,362 
 Other 
 Wholesale — 3,013 3,013 
 Intersegment 241 70 311 
 revenues 
 Total Operating 88,533 30,962 119,495 
 Revenues(2) 
 Cost of services 15,610 10,659 26,269 
 Cost of wireless 15,736 4,064 19,800 
 equipment 
 Selling, general 
 and 16,936 8,380 25,316 
 administrative 
 expense 
 Depreciation and 
 amortization 11,395 4,086 15,481 
 expense 
 Total Operating 59,677 27,189 86,866 
 Expenses 
 Operating Income $ 28,856 $ 3,773 $ 32,629 
(1) Other revenue includes fees that partially recover the direct and indirect costs of complying
with regulatory and industry obligations and programs, revenues associated with certain products
included in our device protection offerings, leasing and interest when equipment is sold to the
customer by an authorized agent under a device payment plan agreement.
(2) Service and other revenues and Wireless equipment revenues included in our Business segment
amounted to approximately $ 28.1billion and $ 2.9billion, respectively, for the year ended December
31, 2020.
The following table provides Fios revenues for our tworeportable segments:
 Years Ended December (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer $ 11,622 $ 11,558 $ 11,082 
 Business 1,201 1,136 1,057 
 Total Fios revenue $ 12,823 $ 12,694 $ 12,139 
The following table provides Wireless service revenue for our reportable segments and includes
intersegment activity:
 Years Ended December (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer $ 61,509 $ 56,103 $ 53,605 
 Business 12,845 12,366 11,805 
 Total Wireless service $ 74,354 $ 68,469 $ 65,410 
 revenue 
Reconciliation to Consolidated Financial Information
The reconciliation of segment operating revenues and expenses to consolidated operating revenues and
operating income below includes the effects of special items that the chief operating decision maker
does not consider in assessing segment performance, primarily because of their nature.
A reconciliation of the reportable segment operating revenues to consolidated operating revenues is
as follows:
 Years Ended December (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating Revenues 
 Total reportable $ 134,578 $ 126,342 $ 119,495 
 segments 
 Corporate and other 2,510 7,722 9,334 
 Reconciling items: 
 Eliminations -253 -451 -537 
 Consolidated $ 136,835 $ 133,613 $ 128,292 
 Operating Revenues 
 102 
Table of Contents
A reconciliation of the total reportable segments’ operating income to consolidated income before
provision for income taxes is as follows:
 Years Ended December  (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating Income 
 Total reportable $ 31,477 $ 33,392 $ 32,629 
 segments 
 Corporate and other -319 -449 -1,472 
 Reconciling items: 
 Severance charges -304 -209 -221 
 Other components of net 
 periodic pension -387 -769 -817 
 and benefit charges 
 (Note 11) 
 Loss on spectrum — -223 -1,195 
 licenses 
 Net gain (loss) from 
 disposition of — 706 -126 
 business 
 Consolidated operating 30,467 32,448 28,798 
 income 
 Equity in earnings 
 (losses) of 44 145 -45 
 unconsolidated 
 businesses 
 Other income (expense), 1,373 312 -539 
 net 
 Interest expense -3,613 -3,485 -4,247 
 Income Before Provision $ 28,271 $ 29,420 $ 23,967 
 For Income Taxes 
No single customer accounted for more than 10% of our total operating revenues during the years ended
December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020. International operating revenues were not significant during the
years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020. As of December 31, 2022 and 2021, international long-
lived assets were not significant.
The chief operating decision maker does not review disaggregated assets on a segment basis;
therefore, such information is not presented. Depreciation and amortization included in the measure
of segment profitability is primarily allocated based on proportional usage, and is included within
Total reportable segment operating income.
 Note 14. Equity and Comprehensive Income (Loss) 
Equity
Common Stock
In February 2020, the Board of Directors of the Company authorized a share buyback program to
repurchase up to 100million shares of our common stock. The program will terminate when the aggregate
number of shares purchased reaches 100million or a new share repurchase plan superseding the current
plan is authorized, whichever is sooner. During the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020, we
did not repurchase any shares of our common stock under our authorized share buyback program. At
December 31, 2022, the maximum number of shares that could be purchased by or on behalf of Verizon
under our share buyback program was 100million.
Common stock has been used from time to time to satisfy some of the funding requirements of employee
and shareholder plans. During the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020, we issued
2.1million, 2.1million and 2.3million shares of common stock from treasury stock, which had aggregate
values of $ 91million, $ 91million and $ 101million, respectively.
In connection with our acquisition of TracFone in November 2021, we issued approximately 57.6million
shares of our common stock from treasury stock valued at approximately $ 3.0billion. See Note 3 for
additional information.
Noncontrolling Interests
During the year ended December 31, 2022, Verizon entered into and completed agreements to acquire
additional interests in certain controlled wireless partnerships for cash consideration of $
508million. Verizon continues to retain controlling financial interest within these partnerships;
therefore, the changes in ownership interest were accounted for as equity transactions. This resulted
in a reduction of additional paid-in capital of $ 450million, reflected in Other, and a reduction of
noncontrolling interest of $ 58million, reflected in Distributions and other, both within our
consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year ended December 31, 2022. These transactions
were recorded within Other, net cash flow from financing activities in our consolidated statement of
cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2022.
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
Comprehensive income consists of net income and other gains and losses affecting equity that, under
U.S. GAAP, are excluded from net income. Significant changes in the components of Other comprehensive
income (loss), net of provision for income taxes are described below.
 103 
Table of Contents
The changes in the balances of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) by component are as
follows:
 Unr… 
 gain Unr… Un… De… 
 (lo… loss ga… be… 
 For… on on (l… pe… 
 (… cur… cash fair on and 
 in tra… flow val… ma… po… 
 m… adj… hed… hed… se… pl… To… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 B… 
 at 
 J… $ -5… $ -8… $ — $ 27 $ 2,3… $ 998 
 1, 
 2… 
 O… 
 c… 180 953 — 7 — 1,1… 
 i… 
 A… 
 r… 
 to — -1… — -9 -676 -2,… 
 n… 
 i… 
 N… 
 o… 
 c… 180 -5… — -2 -676 -1,… 
 i… 
 (… 
 B… 
 at 
 D… -4… -1… — 25 1,6… -71 
 3… 
 2… 
 O… 
 c… -1… -1… — -8 — -1,… 
 l… 
 A… 
 r… 
 to — 1,… — -1 -621 611 
 n… 
 i… 
 N… 
 o… 
 c… -1… -85 — -9 -621 -856 
 i… 
 (… 
 B… 
 at 
 D… -5… -1… — 16 1,0… -927 
 3… 
 2… 
 E… 
 c… 
 r… 
 in — — -3… — — -371 
 o… 
 c… 
 i… 
 O… 
 c… -1… -1… — -25 -317 -669 
 l… 
 A… 
 r… 
 to — 496 -60 — -334 102 
 n… 
 i… 
 N… 
 o… 
 c… -1… 322 -4… -25 -651 -938 
 i… 
 (… 
 B… 
 at 
 D… $ -6… $ -1… $ -4… $ -9 $ 423 $ -1,… 
 3… 
 2… 
The amounts presented above in Net other comprehensive income (loss) are net of taxes. The amounts
reclassified to net income related to unrealized gain (loss) on cash flow hedges and unrealized loss
on fair value hedges in the table above are included in Other income (expense), net and Interest
expense in our consolidated statements of income. See Note 9 for additional information. The amounts
reclassified to net income related to unrealized gain (loss) on marketable securities in the table
above are included in Other income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of income. The
amounts reclassified to net income related to defined benefit pension and postretirement plans in the
table above are included in Other income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of income. See
Note 11 for additional information.
 104 
Table of Contents
 Note 15. Additional Financial Information 
The following tables provide additional financial information related to our consolidated financial
statements:
Income Statement Information
 Years Ended December  (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Depreciation expense $ 14,592 $ 14,119 $ 14,275 
 Interest costs on debt 5,429 5,148 4,632 
 balances 
 Net amortization of 214 178 170 
 debt discount 
 Capitalized interest -2,030 -1,841 -555 
 costs 
 Advertising expense 3,556 3,394 3,107 
 -dollars in millions 
 Years Ended December  2022 2021 2020 
 31, 
 Other income (expense), 
 net 
 Interest income $ 146 $ 48 $ 65 
 Other components of net 
 periodic benefit 2,386 3,785 -425 
 (cost) income 
 Net debt extinguishment -1,077 -3,541 -129 
 losses 
 Other, net -82 20 -50 
 $ 1,373 $ 312 $ -539 
Balance Sheet Information
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2022 2021 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Prepaid expenses and other 
 Prepaid taxes $ 167 $ 1,093 
 Deferred contract costs 2,629 2,432 
 Collateral payments related to 2,286 21 
 derivative contracts 
 Restricted cash 1,343 1,094 
 Other prepaid expense and other 1,933 2,266 
 $ 8,358 $ 6,906 
 Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
 Accounts payable $ 8,750 $ 8,040 
 Accrued expenses 7,824 9,123 
 Accrued vacation, salaries and wages 3,950 4,485 
 Interest payable 1,577 1,561 
 Taxes payable 1,876 1,624 
 $ 23,977 $ 24,833 
 Other current liabilities 
 Dividends payable $ 2,764 $ 2,709 
 Contract liability 6,583 6,053 
 Other 2,750 2,263 
 $ 12,097 $ 11,025 
As of December 31, 2022 and 2021, Property, plant and equipment includes approximately $ 6.0billion
and $ 5.9billion of additions that have not yet been paid.
 105 
Table of Contents
Cash Flow Information
 Years Ended December  (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2022 2021 2020 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash Paid 
 Interest, net of $ 3,316 $ 3,435 $ 4,420 
 amounts capitalized 
 Income taxes, net of 2,736 3,040 2,725 
 amounts refunded 
 Other, net Cash Flows 
 from Operating 
 Activities 
 Changes in device 
 payment plan agreement $ -4,919 $ -2,438 $ 558 
 non-current receivables 
 Net debt extinguishment 1,077 3,541 129 
 losses 
 Loss on spectrum — 223 1,195 
 licenses 
 Gain on disposition of — -1,051 — 
 Media business 
 Other, net 64 -368 898 
 $ -3,778 $ -93 $ 2,780 
 Other, net Cash Flows 
 from Financing 
 Activities 
 Net debt related $ -366 $ -2,309 $ -1,055 
 costs(1) 
 Other, net -1,706 -1,523 -1,648 
 $ -2,072 $ -3,832 $ -2,703 
 (1)These costs include 
 the premiums paid 
 for the early 
 extinguishment of debt, 
 fees paid in connection 
 with exchange 
 and tender offers, and 
 settlements of 
 associated instruments. 
 Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies 
In the ordinary course of business, Verizon is involved in various commercial litigation and
regulatory proceedings at the state and federal level. Where it is determined, in consultation with
counsel based on litigation and settlement risks, that a loss is probable and estimable in a given
matter, Verizon establishes an accrual. In none of the currently pending matters is the amount of
accrual material. An estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of loss in excess of the
amounts already accrued cannot be made at this time due to various factors typical in contested
proceedings, including: (1) uncertain damage theories and demands; (2) a less than complete factual
record; (3) uncertainty concerning legal theories and their resolution by courts or regulators; and
(4) the unpredictable nature of the opposing party and its demands. We continuously monitor these
proceedings as they develop and adjust any accrual or disclosure as needed. We do not expect that the
ultimate resolution of any pending regulatory or legal matter in future periods will have a material
effect on our financial condition, but it could have a material effect on our results of operations
for a given reporting period.
Verizon is currently involved in approximately 25federal district court actions alleging that Verizon
is infringing various patents. Most of these cases are brought by non-practicing entities and
effectively seek only monetary damages; a small number are brought by companies that have sold
products and could seek injunctive relief as well. These cases have progressed to various stages and
a small number may go to trial in the coming 12 months if they are not otherwise resolved.
In connection with the execution of agreements for the sales of businesses and investments, Verizon
ordinarily provides representations and warranties to the purchasers pertaining to a variety of
nonfinancial matters, such as ownership of the securities being sold, as well as indemnity from
certain financial losses. From time to time, counterparties may make claims under these provisions,
and Verizon will seek to defend against those claims and resolve them in the ordinary course of
business.
As of December 31, 2022, letters of credit totaling approximately $ 834million, which were executed
in the normal course of business and support several financing arrangements and payment obligations
to third parties, were outstanding.
During 2022, Verizon entered into fourrenewable energy purchase agreements (REPAs) with third parties
, in addition to 20signed in previous years . Each of the REPAs is based on the expected operation of
a renewable energy-generating facility and has a fixed price term of 12to 18years from the
commencement of the facility's entry into commercial operation. Sevenof the facilities have entered
into commercial operation, and the remainder are under development. The REPAs generally are expected
to be financially settled based on the prevailing market price as energy is generated by the
facilities.
We have various unconditional purchase obligations, which represent agreements to purchase goods or
services that are enforceable and legally binding. We estimate that these unconditional purchase
obligations, for contracts with terms in excess of one year, total $ 24.5billion, and primarily
represent commitments to purchase network equipment, software and services, content, marketing
services and other items which will be used or sold in the ordinary course of business from a variety
of suppliers. Of this total amount, $ 9.4billion is attributable to 2023, $ 6.9billion is
attributable to 2024, $ 5.5billion is attributable to 2025, $ 1.4billion is attributable to 2026, $
772million is attributable to 2027 and $ 524million is attributable to years thereafter. These
amounts do not represent our entire anticipated purchases in the future, but represent only those
items that are the
 106 
Table of Contents
subject of contractual obligations. Our commitments are generally determined based on the
noncancelable quantities to which we are contractually obliged. Since the commitments to purchase
programming services from television networks and broadcast stations have no minimum volume
requirement, we estimated our obligation based on number of subscribers at December 31, 2022, and
applicable rates stipulated in the contracts in effect at that time. We also purchase products and
services as needed with no firm commitment.
 Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with 
 Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure 
None.
 Item 9A.    Controls and Procedures 
 Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures 
Our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have evaluated the effectiveness of the
registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934), as of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report, that
ensure that information relating to the registrant which is required to be disclosed in this report
is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within required time periods using the criteria for
effective internal control established in Internal Control–Integrated Framework issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission in 2013. Based on this evaluation,
our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have concluded that the registrant’s
disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of December 31, 2022.
 Changes in Internal Control over Financial 
 Reporting 
In the ordinary course of business, we routinely review our system of internal control over financial
reporting and make changes to our systems and processes that are intended to ensure an effective
internal control environment. In the third quarter of 2020, we began a multi-year implementation of a
new global enterprise resource planning (ERP) system, which will replace many of our existing core
financial systems. The new ERP system is designed to enhance the flow of financial information,
facilitate data analysis and accelerate information reporting. The implementation is expected to
occur in phases over the next several years.
As the phased implementation of the new ERP system continues, we could have changes to our processes
and procedures which, in turn, could result in changes to our internal controls over financial
reporting. As such changes occur, we will evaluate quarterly whether such changes materially affect
our internal control over financial reporting.
There were no changes in Verizon's internal control over financial reporting during the fourth
quarter 2022 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our
internal control over financial reporting.
 Management's Annual Report on Internal Control 
 over Financial Reporting 
The management of Verizon Communications Inc. is responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial reporting of Verizon. Management has evaluated internal
control over financial reporting of Verizon using the criteria for effective internal control
established in Internal Control–Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission in 2013.
Management has assessed the effectiveness of Verizon’s internal control over financial reporting as
of December 31, 2022. Based on this assessment, management believes that the internal control over
financial reporting of Verizon is effective as of December 31, 2022. In connection with this
assessment, there were no material weaknesses in Verizon’s internal control over financial reporting
identified by management. The Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, Ernst & Young
LLP, has provided an attestation report on Verizon’s internal control over financial reporting and is
included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
 Item 9B.    Other Information 
None.
 Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign 
 Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections 
Not applicable.
 107 
Table of Contents
 PART III 
 Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and 
 Corporate Governance 
Set forth below is information with respect to our current executive officers.
 Name Age Office Held Since 
 Hans Vestberg 57 Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 2019 
 Matthew D. Ellis 51 Executive Vice President and Chief Financial 2016 
 Officer 
 Samantha Hammock 44 Executive Vice President and Chief Human 2021 
 Resources Officer 
 Kyle Malady 55 Executive Vice President and President - Global 2022 
 Networks & Technology 
 Rima Qureshi 58 Executive Vice President and Chief Strategy 2017 
 Officer 
 Sowmyanarayan Sampath 46 Executive Vice President and Group CEO - 2022 
 Verizon Business 
 Craig L. Silliman 55 Executive Vice President and President - 2023 
 Verizon Global Services 
 Anthony T. Skiadas 54 Senior Vice President and Controller 2013 
 Vandana Venkatesh 51 Executive Vice President and General Counsel 2022 
Each of the above officers has held the indicated office or other high-level managerial positions
with the Company or one of its subsidiaries for at least five years, with the exception of Samantha
Hammock, who has been with the Company since 2020. Officers are not elected for a fixed term of
office and may be removed from office at any time at the discretion of the Board of Directors.
Samantha Hammock is the Executive Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer of the Company.
Ms. Hammock joined the Company in December 2020 as Senior Vice President of Global Talent and began
serving in her current role in December 2021. Prior to joining Verizon, Ms. Hammock spent 14 years at
the American Express Company, a globally integrated payments company and provider of credit and
charge cards to consumers and businesses around the world, where she served as Head of Talent and
Learning from April 2020 to December 2020, Chief Learning Officer from 2017 to April 2020, and Vice
President, Leadership Strategy, from 2016 to April 2020.
For other information required by this item, see the sections entitled "Governance — Item 1: Election
of Directors — Nominees for election and — Election process, — Our governance framework — Where to
find more information, — Board committees — Audit Committee and — Other risk-related matters —
Business conduct and ethics" in our definitive Proxy Statement to be filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission and delivered to shareholders in connection with our 2023 Annual Meeting of
Shareholders, which are incorporated herein by reference.
 Item 11.    Executive Compensation 
For information with respect to executive compensation, see the sections entitled "Governance — Non-
employee Director compensation" and "Executive Compensation — Compensation discussion and analysis, —
Compensation Committee Report and — Compensation tables" in our definitive Proxy Statement to be
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and delivered to shareholders in connection with
our 2023 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, which are incorporated by reference herein. There were no
relationships to be disclosed under paragraph (e)(4) of Item 407 of Regulation S-K.
 Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial 
 Owners and Management and Related Stockholder 
 Matters 
For information with respect to the security ownership of certain beneficial owners, the directors
and executive officers, see the section entitled "Stock ownership — Security ownership of certain
beneficial owners and management" in our definitive Proxy Statement to be filed with the Securities
and Exchange Commission and delivered to shareholders in connection with our 2023 Annual Meeting of
Shareholders, which is incorporated herein by reference.
The following table provides information as of December 31, 2022 for (i) all equity compensation
plans previously approved by the Company’s shareholders, and (ii) all equity compensation plans not
previously approved by the Company’s shareholders. Since May 4, 2017, the Company has only issued
awards under the 2017 Verizon Communications. Inc. Long-Term Incentive Plan (2017 LTIP), which
provides for awards of stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units, performance stock
units and other equity-based hypothetical stock units to employees of Verizon. No new awards are
permitted to be issued under any other equity compensation plan. In accordance with SEC rules, the
table does not include outstanding awards that are payable solely in cash by the terms of the award,
and such awards do not reduce the number of shares remaining for issuance under the 2017 LTIP.
 108 
Table of Contents
 Number of 
 securities 
 remaining 
 Number of available for 
 securities to be future issuance 
 issued upon under equity 
 exercise of Weighted-average compensation 
 outstanding exercise price of plans (excluding 
 options, outstanding securities 
 warrants and options, warrants reflected in 
 Plan category rights (a) and rights (b) column (a)) (c) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Equity 
 compensation 
 plans approved 21,078,199 -1 $ — -2 68,502,052 -3 
 by 
 security 
 holders 
 Equity 
 compensation 
 plans not 92,978 -4 — — 
 approved 
 by security 
 holders 
 Total 21,171,177 $ — 68,502,052 
(1) This amount includes: 21,078,199 shares of common stock subject to outstanding restricted stock
units and performance stock units, including dividend equivalents accrued on such awards through
December 31, 2022. This does not include performance stock units, deferred stock units and deferred
share equivalents payable solely in cash.
(2) The Company's outstanding restricted stock units, performance stock units and deferred stock
units do not have exercise prices associated with the settlement of these awards.
(3) This number reflects the number of shares of common stock that remained available for future
issuance under the 2017 LTIP.
(4) This number reflects shares subject to deferred stock units credited to the Verizon Income
Deferral Plan, which were awarded in 2002 under the Verizon Communications Broad-Based Incentive
Plan. No new awards are permitted to be issued under this plan.
 Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related 
 Transactions, and Director Independence 
For information with respect to certain relationships and related transactions and director
independence, see the sections entitled "Governance — Our governance framework — Other risk-related
matters — Related person transactions and — Item 1: Election of Directors — Our Board's independence"
in our definitive Proxy Statement to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and
delivered to shareholders in connection with our 2023 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, which are
incorporated herein by reference.
 Item 14.    Principal Accounting Fees and Services 
Our independent registered public accounting firm is Ernst & Young LLP, New York, NY, Auditor Firm
ID: 42.
For information with respect to principal accounting fees and services, see the section entitled
"Audit matters — Item 4: Ratification of appointment of independent registered public accounting
firm" in our definitive Proxy Statement to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and
delivered to shareholders in connection with our 2023 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, which is
incorporated herein by reference.
 109 
Table of Contents
 PART IV 
 Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement 
 Schedules 
(a) Documents filed as part of this report:
 Page 
 (1) Financial Statements 
 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Internal Control Over 51 
 Financial Reporting 
 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Financial Statements 52 
 Financial Statements covered by Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting 
 Firm: 
 Consolidated Statements of Income 54 
 Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income 55 
 Consolidated Balance Sheets 56 
 Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 57 
 Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity 58 
 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 59 
 (2) Financial Statement Schedule 
 II – Valuation and Qualifying Accounts 113 
 (3) Exhibits 
 Exhibits identified in parentheses below, on file with the SEC, are incorporated 
 herein by reference as exhibits hereto. Unless otherwise indicated, all exhibits 
 so incorporated are from File No. 1-8606. 
 Pursuant to Regulation S-K, Item 601(b)(4)(iii)(A), certain instruments which 
 define the rights of holders of long-term debt of Verizon and its consolidated 
 subsidiaries are not filed herewith, and Verizon hereby agrees to furnish a copy 
 of any such instrument to the SEC upon request. 
 110 
Table of Contents
 Description 
 Restated Certificate of Incorporation of 
 Verizon Communications Inc. (filed as 
 Exhibit 3a to Form 10-Q for the period 
 ended June 30, 2014 and incorporated 
 herein by reference). 
 Bylaws of Verizon Communications Inc., as 
 Exhibit amended and restated, effective as of 
 Number September 30, 2022 (filed as Exhibit 3b 
 3a to Form 8-K filed on September 30, 2022 
 3b and incorporated herein by reference). 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Indenture between Verizon Communications 
 Inc., both individually and as successor 
 in interest to Verizon Global Funding 
 Corp., and U.S. Bank National 
 Association, as successor trustee to 
 Wachovia Bank, National Association, 
 4a formerly known as First Union National 
 Bank, as Trustee, dated as of December 1, 
 2000 (filed as Exhibit 4.1 to Verizon 
 Global Funding Corp.’s Registration 
 Statement on Form S-4, Registration No.  
 333-64792, and incorporated herein by 
 reference). 
 First Supplemental Indenture between 
 Verizon Communications Inc., both 
 individually and as successor in interest 
 to Verizon Global Funding Corp., and U.S. 
 Bank National Association, as successor 
 trustee to Wachovia Bank, National 
 4b Association, formerly known as First 
 Union National Bank, as Trustee, dated as 
 of May 15, 2001 (filed as Exhibit 4.2 to 
 Verizon Global Funding Corp.’s 
 Registration Statement on Form S-3, 
 Registration No. 333-67412, and 
 incorporated herein by reference). 
 Second Supplemental Indenture between 
 Verizon Communications Inc., both 
 individually and as successor in interest 
 to Verizon Global Funding Corp., and U.S. 
 Bank National Association, as successor 
 4c trustee to Wachovia Bank, National 
 Association, formerly known as First 
 Union National Bank, as Trustee, dated as 
 of September 29, 2004 (filed as Exhibit 
 4.1 to Form 8-K filed on February 9, 
 2006, and incorporated herein by 
 reference). 
 Third Supplemental Indenture between 
 Verizon Communications Inc., both 
 individually and as successor in interest 
 to Verizon Global Funding Corp., and U.S. 
 Bank National Association, as successor 
 4d trustee to Wachovia Bank, National 
 Association, formerly known as First 
 Union National Bank, as Trustee, dated as 
 of February 1, 2006 (filed as Exhibit 4.2 
 to Form 8-K filed on February 9, 2006, 
 and incorporated herein by reference). 
 Fourth Supplemental Indenture between 
 Verizon Communications Inc., both 
 individually and as successor in interest 
 to Verizon Global Funding Corp., and U.S. 
 Bank National Association, as successor 
 trustee to Wachovia Bank, National 
 4e Association, formerly known as First 
 Union National Bank, as Trustee, dated as 
 of April 4, 2016 (filed as Exhibit 4.5 to 
 Verizon Communications Inc.’s 
 Registration Statement on Form S-4, 
 Registration No. 333-212307, and 
 incorporated herein by reference). 
 Fifth Supplemental Indenture between 
 Verizon Communications Inc., both 
 individually and as successor in interest 
 to Verizon Global Funding Corp., and U.S. 
 Bank National Association, as successor 
 4f trustee to Wachovia Bank, National 
 Association, formerly known as First 
 Union National Bank, as Trustee, dated as 
 of May 15, 2020 (filed as Exhibit 4.1 to 
 Form 8-K filed on May 15, 2020, and 
 incorporated herein by reference). 
 Pursuant to Regulation S-K, Item 
 601(b)(4)(iii)(A), certain instruments 
 which define the rights of holders of 
 long-term debt of Verizon Communications 
 Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries 
 are not filed herewith, and the Company 
 hereby agrees to furnish a copy of any 
 such instrument to the SEC upon request. 
 Description of Verizon's Securities 
 4g Registered Pursuant to Section 12 of the 
 Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, 
 filed herewith. 
 2017 Verizon Communications Inc. 
 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by 
 10a reference to Appendix B of the 
 Registrant’s Proxy Statement included in 
 Schedule 14A filed on March 20, 2017).** 
 2018 Special Performance Stock Unit 
 Agreement pursuant to the 2017 Verizon 
 Communications Inc. Long-Term Incentive 
 10a(i) Plan for H. Vestberg (filed as Exhibit 10 
 to Form 10-Q for the period ended 
 September 30, 2018 and incorporated 
 herein by reference).** 
 Form of 2020 Performance Stock Unit 
 Agreement pursuant to the 2017 Verizon 
 10a(ii) Communications Inc. Long-Term Incentive 
 Plan (filed as Exhibit 10a to Form 10-Q 
 for the period ended March 31, 2020 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Form of 2020 Restricted Stock Unit 
 Agreement pursuant to the 2017 Verizon 
 10a(iii) Communications Inc. Long-Term Incentive 
 Plan (filed as Exhibit 10b to Form 10-Q 
 for the period ended March 31, 2020 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Form of 2021 Performance Stock Unit 
 Agreement pursuant to the 2017 Verizon 
 10a(iv) Communications Inc. Long-Term Incentive 
 Plan (filed as Exhibit 10a to Form 10-Q 
 for the period ended March 31, 2021 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Form of 2021 Restricted Stock Unit 
 Agreement pursuant to the 2017 Verizon 
 10a(v) Communications Inc. Long-Term Incentive 
 Plan (filed as Exhibit 10b to Form 10-Q 
 for the period ended March 31, 2021 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Form of 2022 Performance Stock Unit 
 Agreement pursuant to the 2017 Verizon 
 10a(vi) Communications Inc. Long-Term Incentive 
 Plan (filed as Exhibit 10a to Form 10-Q 
 for the period ended March 31, 2022 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 111 
Table of Contents
 Form of 2022 Restricted Stock Unit 
 10a(vii) Agreement pursuant to the 2017 Verizon 
 Verizon Communications Inc. Short-Term Communications Inc. Long-Term Incentive 
 Incentive Plan (filed as Exhibit 10a to Plan 
 Form 10-Q for the period ended March 31, (filed as Exhibit 10b to Form 10-Q for 
 2019 and incorporated herein by the period ended March 31, 2022 and 
 10b reference).** incorporated herein by reference).** 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Verizon Executive Deferral Plan (filed as 
 10c Exhibit 10e to Form 10-K for the period 
 ended December 31, 2017 and incorporated 
 herein by reference).** 
 Verizon Communications Inc. Income 
 Deferral Plan (filed as Exhibit 10f to 
 10d Form 10-Q for the period ended June 30, 
 2002 and incorporated herein by 
 reference).** 
 Description of Amendment to Verizon 
 Communications Inc. Income Deferral Plan 
 10d(i) (filed as Exhibit 10o(i) to Form 10-K for 
 the year ended December 31, 2004 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Verizon Excess Pension Plan (filed as 
 10e Exhibit 10p to Form 10-K for the year 
 ended December 31, 2004 and incorporated 
 herein by reference).** 
 First Amendment to Verizon Excess Pension 
 10e(i) Plan (filed as Exhibit 10p(i) to Form 
 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004 
 and incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Bell Atlantic Senior Management Long-Term 
 Disability and Survivor Protection Plan, 
 as amended (filed as Exhibit 10h to Form 
 10f SE filed on March 27, 1986 and Exhibit 
 10b(ii) to Form 10-K for the year ended 
 December 31, 1997 and incorporated herein 
 by reference).** 
 Verizon Executive Life Insurance Plan, As 
 Amended and Restated September 2009 
 10g (filed as Exhibit 10s to Form 10-K for 
 the year ended December 31, 2010 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Form of Aircraft Time Sharing Agreement 
 10h (filed as Exhibit 10i to Form 10-K for 
 the year ended December 31, 2020 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Verizon Senior Manager Severance Plan 
 10i (filed as Exhibit 10d to Form 10-Q for 
 the period ended March 31, 2010 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 21 List of principal subsidiaries of Verizon 
 Communications Inc., filed herewith. 
 23 Consent of Ernst & Young LLP, filed 
 herewith. 
 24 Powers of Attorney, filed herewith. 
 Certification of Chief Executive Officer 
 31.1 pursuant to Section 302 of the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, filed 
 herewith. 
 Certification of Chief Financial Officer 
 31.2 pursuant to Section 302 of the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, filed 
 herewith. 
 Certification of Chief Executive Officer 
 32.1 pursuant to Section 906 of the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, filed 
 herewith. 
 Certification of Chief Financial Officer 
 32.2 pursuant to Section 906 of the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, filed 
 herewith. 
 XBRL Instance Document - the instance 
 document does not appear in the 
 101.INS interactive data file because its XBRL 
 tags are embedded within the inline XBRL 
 document. 
 101.SCH XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document. 
 101.PRE XBRL Taxonomy Presentation Linkbase 
 Document. 
 101.CAL XBRL Taxonomy Calculation Linkbase 
 Document. 
 101.LAB XBRL Taxonomy Label Linkbase Document. 
 101.DEF XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition 
 Linkbase Document. 
 Cover Page Interactive Data File 
 104 (formatted as inline XBRL with applicable 
 taxonomy extension information contained 
 in Exhibits 101). 
 ** Indicates management contract or 
 compensatory plan or arrangement. 
 112 
Table of Contents
 Schedule II - Valuation and Qualifying Accounts 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
For the Years Ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020
 Desc… 
 Allo… 
 for 
 cred… 
 loss… Balan… Bala… 
 dedu… at Char… at 
 from Begin… Charg… to End (doll… 
 acco… of to Other of in 
 rece… Period Addit… Expen… Acco… Deduc… Peri… milli… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Year $ 1,151 $ 1,531 $ 69 $ 1,490 $ 1,261 
 2022 
 Year 1,507 743 139 1,238 1,151 
 2021 
 Year 1,125 -d 1,390 165 1,173 1,507 
 2020 
 Addit… 
 Balan… Char… Balan… 
 at Charg… to at End 
 Desc… Begin… to Other Deduc… of 
 of Expen… Acco… Period 
 Period 
 Valu… 
 allo… 
 for 
 defe… 
 tax 
 asse… 
 Year $ 1,574 $ 41 $ — $ 268 $ 1,347 
 2022 
 Year 2,183 339 — 948 1,574 
 2021 
 Year 2,260 202 84 363 2,183 
 2020 
(a) Charged to Other Accounts primarily includes amounts previously written off which were credited
directly to this account when recovered.
(b) Deductions primarily include amounts written off as uncollectible or transferred to other
accounts or utilized.
(c) Allowance for credit losses includes approximately $ 436million, $ 255million, and $ 254million
at December 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020, respectively, related to long-term device payment receivables.
(d) Includes opening balance sheet adjustment related to the adoption of Topic 326.
(e) Charged to Other Accounts includes current year increase to valuation allowance charged to equity
and reclassifications from other balance sheet accounts.
(f) Reductions to valuation allowances related to deferred tax assets.
 113 
Table of Contents
 Item 16.    Form 10-K Summary 
None.
 Signatures 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the
registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized.
 VERIZON COMMUNICATIONS INC. Date: 
 By: /s/ Anthony T. Skiadas February 10, 2023 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Anthony T. Skiadas 
 Senior Vice President and Controller 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates
indicated.
 Principal Executive Officer: 
 /s/ Hans E. Vestberg February 10, 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Hans E. Vestberg 
 Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
 Principal Financial Officer: 
 /s/ Matthew D. Ellis February 10, 2023 
 Matthew D. Ellis 
 Executive Vice President and Chief 
 Financial Officer 
 Principal Accounting Officer: 
 /s/ Anthony T. Skiadas February 10, 2023 
 Anthony T. Skiadas 
 Senior Vice President and Controller 
 114 
Table of Contents
 * Director February 10, 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Hans E. Vestberg 
 * Director February 10, 2023 
 Shellye L. Archambeau 
 * Director February 10, 2023 
 Roxanne S. Austin 
 * Director February 10, 2023 
 Mark T. Bertolini 
 * Director February 10, 2023 
 Vittorio Colao 
 * Director February 10, 2023 
 Melanie L. Healey 
 * Director February 10, 2023 
 Laxman Narasimhan 
 * Director February 10, 2023 
 Clarence Otis, Jr. 
 * Director February 10, 2023 
 Daniel H. Schulman 
 * Director February 10, 2023 
 Rodney E. Slater 
 * Director February 10, 2023 
 Carol B. Tomé 
 * Director February 10, 2023 
 Gregory G. Weaver 
 * By: /s/ Anthony T. Skiadas 
 Anthony T. Skiadas 
 (as attorney-in-fact) 
 115