UNITED STATES 
 SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
 Washington, D.C. 20549 
 FORM 10-K 
 (Mark one) 
 ☒ ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) 
 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2024 
 OR 
 ☐ TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) 
 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 For the transition period from         to 
 Commission file number: 1-8606 
 Verizon Communications Inc. 
 (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) 
 Delaware 23-2259884 
 (State or other jurisdiction -I.R.S. Employer Identification No. 
 of incorporation or organization) 
 1095 Avenue of the Americas 
 New York, New York 10036 
 (Address of principal executive -Zip Code 
 offices) 
 Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: ( 212) 395-1000 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
 Title of Each Class Trading Symbol(s) Name of Each Exchange on Which 
 Registered 
 Common Stock, par value $0.10 VZ New York Stock Exchange 
 Common Stock, par value $0.10 VZ The Nasdaq Global Select Market 
 0.875% Notes due 2025 VZ 25 New York Stock Exchange 
 3.25% Notes due 2026 VZ 26 New York Stock Exchange 
 1.375% Notes due 2026 VZ 26B New York Stock Exchange 
 0.875% Notes due 2027 VZ 27E New York Stock Exchange 
 1.375% Notes due 2028 VZ 28 New York Stock Exchange 
 1.125% Notes due 2028 VZ 28A New York Stock Exchange 
 2.350% Fixed Rate Notes due 2028 VZ 28C New York Stock Exchange 
 1.875% Notes due 2029 VZ 29B New York Stock Exchange 
 0.375% Notes due 2029 VZ 29D New York Stock Exchange 
 1.250% Notes due 2030 VZ 30 New York Stock Exchange 
 1.875% Notes due 2030 VZ 30A New York Stock Exchange 
 4.250% Notes due 2030 VZ 30D New York Stock Exchange 
 2.625% Notes due 2031 VZ 31 New York Stock Exchange 
 2.500% Notes due 2031 VZ 31A New York Stock Exchange 
 3.000% Fixed Rate Notes due 2031 VZ 31D New York Stock Exchange 
 0.875% Notes due 2032 VZ 32 New York Stock Exchange 
 0.750% Notes due 2032 VZ 32A New York Stock Exchange 
 3.500% Notes due 2032 VZ 32B New York Stock Exchange 
 1.300% Notes due 2033 VZ 33B New York Stock Exchange 
 4.75% Notes due 2034 VZ 34 New York Stock Exchange 
 4.750% Notes due 2034 VZ 34C New York Stock Exchange 
 3.125% Notes due 2035 VZ 35 New York Stock Exchange 
 1.125% Notes due 2035 VZ 35A New York Stock Exchange 
 Securities registered pursuant to 
 Section 12(b) of the Act 
 (continued): 
 Title of Each Class Trading Symbol(s) Name of Each Exchange on Which 
 Registered 
 3.375% Notes due 2036 VZ 36A New York Stock Exchange 
 3.750% Notes due 2036 VZ 36B New York Stock Exchange 
 2.875% Notes due 2038 VZ 38B New York Stock Exchange 
 1.875% Notes due 2038 VZ 38C New York Stock Exchange 
 1.500% Notes due 2039 VZ 39C New York Stock Exchange 
 3.50% Fixed Rate Notes due 2039 VZ 39D New York Stock Exchange 
 1.850% Notes due 2040 VZ 40 New York Stock Exchange 
 3.850% Fixed Rate Notes due 2041 VZ 41C New York Stock Exchange 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of
the Securities Act. ☒ Yes ☐ No
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or
Section 15(d) of the Act. ☐ Yes ☒ No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for
such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject
to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. ☒ Yes ☐ No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data
File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter)
during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit
such files). ☒ Yes ☐ No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the
definitions of "large accelerated filer," "accelerated filer," "smaller reporting company," and
"emerging growth company" in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
 Large accelerated filer ☒ Accelerated filer ☐ 
 Non-accelerated filer ☐ Smaller reporting company ☐ 
 Emerging growth company ☐ 
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the
extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards
provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its
management’s assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting under
Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm
that prepared or issued its audit report. ☒
If securities are registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act, indicate by check mark whether the
financial statements of the registrant included in the filing reflect the correction of an error to
previously issued financial statements. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether any of those error corrections are restatements that required a
recovery analysis of incentive-based compensation received by any of the registrant’s executive
officers during the relevant recovery period pursuant to §240.10D-1(b). ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Act). ☐Yes ☒ No
At June 30, 2024, the aggregate market value of the registrant’s voting stock held by non-affiliates
was approximately $ 173.6billion.
At January 31, 2025, 4,209,703,958shares of the registrant’s common stock were outstanding, after
deducting 81,729,688 shares held in treasury.
 Documents Incorporated By Reference: 
Portions of the registrant's definitive Proxy Statement to be delivered to shareholders in connection
with the registrant's 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders (Part III).
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Item No. Page 
 PART I 
 Item 1. Business 4 
 Item 1A. Risk Factors 13 
 Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments 19 
 Item 1C. Cybersecurity 19 
 Item 2. Properties 21 
 Item 3. Legal Proceedings 21 
 Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures 21 
 PART II 
 Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters 22 
 and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities 
 Item 6. [Reserved] 22 
 Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and 23 
 Results of Operations 
 Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk 49 
 Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 51 
 Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and 107 
 Financial Disclosure 
 Item 9A. Controls and Procedures 107 
 Item 9B. Other Information 108 
 Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent 108 
 Inspections 
 PART III 
 Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance 108 
 Item 11. Executive Compensation 109 
 Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and 109 
 Related Stockholder Matters 
 Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director 109 
 Independence 
 Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services 109 
 PART IV 
 Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules 110 
 Item 16. Form 10-K Summary 114 
 Signatures 114 
 Certifications 
Table of Contents
 PART I 
 Item 1.    Business 
 General 
Verizon Communications Inc. (the Company) is a holding company that, acting through its subsidiaries
(together with the Company, collectively, Verizon), is one of the world’s leading providers of
communications, technology, information and streaming products and services to consumers, businesses
and government entities. With a presence around the world, we offer data, video and voice services
and solutions on our networks and platforms that are designed to meet customers’ demand for mobility,
reliable network connectivity and security.
We have two reportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units - Verizon
Consumer Group (Consumer) and Verizon Business Group (Business).
 Verizon Consumer Group 
Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline communications services and
products. Our wireless services are provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in
the United States (U.S.) under the Verizon family of brands and through wholesale and other
arrangements. We also provide fixed wireless access (FWA) broadband through our fifth-generation (5G)
or fourth-generation (4G) Long-Term Evolution (LTE) networks as an alternative to traditional
landline internet access. Our wireline services are provided in nine states in the Mid-Atlantic and
Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over our 100% fiber-optic network through our Verizon
Fios product portfolio and over a traditional copper-based network to customers who are not served by
Fios.
In 2024, the Consumer segment’s revenues were $102.9 billion, representing approximately 76% of
Verizon’s consolidated revenues. As of December 31, 2024, Consumer had approximately 115 million
wireless retail connections (including FWA), of which 83% are postpaid connections. In addition, at
December 31, 2024, Consumer had approximately 10 million total broadband connections (which includes
Fios internet, FWA and Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) connections), and approximately 3 million Fios
video connections.
 Verizon Business Group 
Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications services and products, including
FWA broadband, data, video and advanced communication services, corporate networking solutions,
security and managed network services, local and long distance voice services and network access to
deliver various Internet of Things (IoT) services and products. We provide these products and
services to businesses, public sector customers and wireless and wireline carriers across the U.S.
and a subset of these products and services to customers around the world.
In 2024, the Business segment's revenues were $29.5 billion, representing approximately 22% of
Verizon’s consolidated revenues. As of December 31, 2024, Business had approximately 31 million
wireless retail postpaid connections (including FWA) and approximately 2 million total broadband
connections (which includes Fios internet, FWA and DSL connections).
Additional discussion of our reportable segments is included in Item 7 under the headings
"Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Overview"
and "— Segment Results of Operations" and in Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements
included in this Annual Report.
 Service and Product Offerings 
 Wireless Services and Equipment 
We provide a wide variety of wireless services to Consumer and Business customers on different
service plan options.
Our Consumer Group offers customizable, personalized phone plans for retail customers, allowing them
to design the plan that fits their needs, including access to their preferred content and services
(which we call “perks”). We also offer plans for customers who want access to Verizon’s network at a
lower price point, as well as discounts and special rate plans for qualifying customers.
Customers can obtain our wireless services on a postpaid or prepaid basis. Retail (non-wholesale)
postpaid accounts primarily represent retail customers that are directly served and managed by
Verizon and use Verizon branded services. A single account may include monthly wireless services for
a variety of connected devices. Our postpaid service is generally billed one month in advance for a
monthly access charge in return for access to and usage of network services. Our prepaid service is
offered only to Consumer customers and enables individuals to obtain wireless services without credit
verification by paying for all services in advance. As of December 31, 2024, we had 95 million
postpaid connections and 20 million prepaid connections, representing approximately 83% and 17% of
our Consumer wireless retail connections, respectively.
 4 
Table of Contents
Our Business customers can choose from a variety of plans with different features to meet their
specific needs.
We also provide FWA broadband through our 5G or 4G LTE wireless networks to our Consumer and Business
customers. FWA enables fixed broadband access using radio frequencies instead of cables and can be
used to connect homes and businesses to the internet. As of December 31, 2024, we had nearly 4.6
million FWA broadband connections.
Consumer and Business offer several categories of wireless equipment to customers, including a
variety of smartphones and other handsets, wireless-enabled internet devices, such as tablets, and
other wireless-enabled connected devices, such as smart watches. Oftentimes, we offer promotional
trade in offers to incentivize new customers or existing customer upgrades. Consumer wireless
customers can acquire wireless equipment from us using device payment plans, which permit the
customer to pay for the device in installments over time. Customers that activate service on devices
purchased under the device payment program generally pay lower service fees as compared to those
under our fixed-term service plans, and their device payment plan charge is included on their
wireless monthly bill. While we no longer offer Consumer customers fixed-term subsidized service
plans for devices, we continue to offer subsidized plans to our Business customers. We also continue
to service existing plans for customers who have not yet purchased and activated devices under the
Verizon device payment program.
 Verizon Consumer Group 
In addition to wireless services and equipment for retail customers, the Consumer segment sells
residential fixed connectivity solutions, including internet, video and voice services, and wireless
network access to resellers on a wholesale basis. Consumer also provides non-connectivity services
including device protection, content offerings, cloud storage, and other products.
Residential fixed services – We provide residential fixed connectivity solutions to customers over
our 100% fiber-optic network through our Verizon Fios product portfolio and over a traditional
copper-based network to customers who are not served by Fios. We also provide FWA broadband through
both 5G and 4G LTE home internet offerings, which are available in most states across the U.S.
We offer residential fixed services tailored to the needs of our customers with a variety of perk
options and the flexibility to change them. Depending on customer needs at a particular time, our
services may include features related to, among other things: internet access at different speed
tiers using fiber-optic, copper or wireless technology; video services that may feature a variety of
content and streaming options, video on demand products, cloud-based services and digital video
recording capabilities; over-the-top (OTT) video services; voice services; and other home solutions.
Network access services – We sell network access to mobile virtual network operators (MVNOs) on a
wholesale basis, who in turn resell wireless service under their own brand(s) to consumers.
 Verizon Business Group 
In addition to the wireless services and equipment discussed above, our Business segment provides a
variety of wireless and wireline services and products, which are organized by the primary customer
groups for these offerings: Enterprise and Public Sector, Business Markets and Other, and Wholesale.
 Enterprise and Public Sector 
Enterprise and Public Sector offers wireless products and services as well as wireline connectivity
such as broadband and managed services to our large business and public sector customers. Large
businesses are identified based on their size and volume of business with Verizon. Public sector
customers include U.S. federal, state and local governments and educational institutions. Our
offerings to this customer group include plans with features and pricing designed to address their
specific needs. In 2024, Enterprise and Public Sector revenues were $14.2 billion, representing
approximately 48% of Business’s total revenues.
Enterprise and Public Sector offers a broad portfolio of connectivity, security and professional
services designed to enable our customers to optimize their business operations, mitigate business
risks and capitalize on data. These services include the following:
• Network services – We offer a portfolio of network connectivity products to help our customers
connect with their employees, partners, vendors and customers. These products include internet access
services, private networking services, private cloud connectivity services and virtual and software
defined networking services.
• Advanced communications services – We offer a suite of services to our customers to help them
communicate with their employees, partners, vendors, constituents and customers. These products
include Internet Protocol (IP)-based voice and video services, unified communications and
collaboration tools and customer contact center solutions.
• Core services – We provide a portfolio of domestic and global voice and data solutions utilizing
traditional telecommunications technology, including voice calling, messaging services, conferencing,
contact center solutions and private line and data access networks. Core services also include the
provision of customer premises equipment, and installation, maintenance and site services.
 5 
Table of Contents
• Security services – We offer a suite of management and data security services that help our
customers protect, detect and respond to security threats to their networks, data, applications and
infrastructure.
• IoT services – We provide the network access required to deliver various IoT products and services.
We work with companies that purchase network access from us to connect their devices, bundled
together with their own solutions, which they sell to end users.
 Business Markets and Other 
Business Markets and Other offers wireless services (including FWA broadband), wireless equipment,
advanced communication services, tailored voice and networking products, Fios services, advanced
voice solutions and security services to businesses that ordinarily do not meet the requirements to
be categorized as Enterprise and Public Sector, as described above. Business Markets and Other also
includes solutions that support mobile resource management. In 2024, Business Markets and Other
revenues were $13.1 billion, representing approximately 44% of Business’s total revenues.
Business Markets and Other also provides fixed connectivity solutions comparable to the residential
fixed services provided by Consumer, as well as business services and connectivity similar to the
products and services offered to Global Enterprise customers, in each case with features and pricing
designed to address the needs of small and medium businesses.
 Wholesale 
Wholesale offers wireline communications services including data, voice, local dial tone and
broadband services primarily to local, long distance, and wireless carriers that use our facilities
to provide services to their customers. In 2024, Wholesale revenues were $2.2 billion, representing
approximately 8% of Business’s total revenues. A portion of Wholesale revenues are generated by a few
large telecommunications companies, most of which compete directly with us. Wholesale's services
include:
• Data services – We offer a portfolio of data services to enhance our Wholesale customers’ networks
and provide connections to their end users and subscribers.
• Voice services – We provide switched access services that allow carriers to complete their end-user
calls that originate or terminate within our territory. In addition, we provide originating and
terminating voice services throughout the U.S. and globally utilizing our time-division multiplexing
and Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) networks.
• Local services – We offer an array of local dial tone and broadband services to competitive local
exchange carriers, some of which are offered to comply with telecommunications regulations. In
addition, we offer services such as colocation, resale and unbundled network elements in compliance
with applicable regulations.
 Distribution 
We use a combination of direct, indirect and alternative distribution channels to market and
distribute our products and services to Consumer and Business customers.
Our direct channel, including our company-operated stores, is a core component of our distribution
strategy. Our sales and service centers and business direct sales teams also represent significant
distribution channels for our services. In addition, we have a robust digital channel and omni-
channel as a part of the customer experience in order to offer choice and convenience.
Our indirect channel includes agents that sell our wireless and wireline products and services at
retail locations throughout the U.S., as well as through the internet. The majority of these sales
are made under exclusive selling arrangements with us. We also have relationships with high-profile
national retailers that sell our wireless and wireline products and services, as well as convenience
store chains that sell our wireless prepaid products and services.
In addition to our direct channel, our Business segment has additional distribution channels that
include business solution fulfillment provided by resellers, non-stocked device fulfillment performed
by distributors and integrated mobility services provided by system integrators and resellers.
 Global Networks and Technology 
 Our Networks 
We design, build and operate networks to provide connectivity and related services meeting the needs
of our diverse customers: consumers, businesses, government organizations and educational
institutions.
• Technologies – Our networks leverage advanced technologies, including 5G wireless, fiber-based
transport, cloud infrastructures, private networks and IP routing solutions.
 6 
Table of Contents
• Scale and geography – We operate a national network covering over 146 million wireless retail
connections as of December 31, 2024. In addition to our significant U.S. infrastructure, we have a
presence globally and relationships with many operators and partners allowing us to service
multinational network needs.
• Services and capabilities – We provide connectivity, access to the internet, voice calling, text
messaging and both linear and streaming video capabilities. Beyond these basic services, our network
solutions include advanced services and capabilities such as E911, first responder solutions and
private networking solutions.
• Reliability – We strive to design and deploy reliable networks. We test our networks for
reliability and use various methods and procedures to maintain network availability, capability and
capacity. To mitigate the impact of power disruptions on our operations, we have battery backup at
every switch and every macro cell. We also utilize backup generators at a majority of our macro cells
and at every switch location. In addition, we have a fleet of portable backup generators that can be
deployed if needed.
 Network Evolution 
We consider the reliability, speed, capacity, coverage and security of our wireless network to be key
factors in our continued success. We are evolving and transforming our networks to ensure our
customers receive access to the best network possible. Areas of evolution and transformation include:
• 5G Wireless – Verizon has driven the conversion from 4G to 5G through a sequence of network changes
involving the radio access network, the core network infrastructure and change to the devices
connecting to the network. Over the past several years, we have been leading the development of 5G
wireless technology industry standards and the ecosystems for fixed and mobile 5G wireless services.
5G technology enables higher throughput and lower latency than 4G LTE technology and allows our
networks to handle more traffic as the number of internet-connected devices and customer usage needs
grow. Our evolution to 5G with its new architecture allows us to simplify operations by eliminating
legacy network elements.
• Coverage and densification – We continue to improve 5G wireless service coverage by leveraging our
breadth of wireless spectrum, including millimeter wave and C-Band spectrum, which we are continuing
to deploy across the continental U.S. We are densifying our networks by utilizing macro and small
cell technology, in-building solutions and distributed antenna systems. Network densification enables
us to increase coverage, improve quality of service and add capacity to accommodate an increasing
number of users. It also supports our growing FWA business and growing bandwidth needs for uses such
as streaming and video content creation.
• Virtualization – We are leveraging the benefits of cloud computing and storage as we evolve our
network infrastructure. Our private cloud infrastructure allows us to use shared compute, storage and
networking resources rather than building unique physical instances for our network infrastructure.
• Fiber transport and IP networking – We own and operate one of the largest global fiber-optic
networks in the world, providing connectivity to Business customers in more than 180 countries. Our
global IP network includes long-haul, metro and submarine assets that enable and support
international operations. In response to growing bandwidth demand, we have upgraded and increased our
long-haul core fiber-based transport capacity as well as our IP network capacity and efficiency. We
continue to build local fiber networks by adding fiber connectivity to premises, venues, cell tower
locations and data centers.
• Energy efficiency – We strive to improve the energy efficiency of our networks, facilities and
fleet. We are balancing increased energy needs from ongoing expansion and densification of our
networks with initiatives to effectively manage energy consumption, including using more energy-
efficient equipment, discontinuing or migrating legacy services and pursuing opportunities to use
renewable energy sources.
 Fios 
Residential broadband service has seen significant growth in bandwidth demand over the past several
years, and we believe that demand will continue to grow. We expect that the continued emergence of
new video services, new data applications and the proliferation of IP devices in the home will
continue to drive new network requirements for increased data speeds and throughput. We believe that
the Passive Optical Network (PON) technology underpinning Fios positions us well to meet these
demands in a cost-effective and efficient manner. We also continue to evolve the in-home broadband
router element to bring new capability and improved performance, such as improved Wi-Fi, to our
retail customers.
While deployed initially as a consumer broadband network, our Fios infrastructure is also
experiencing more widespread application in the Business segment, especially as businesses
increasingly migrate to ethernet-based access services.
In September 2024, we entered into an agreement to acquire Frontier Communications Parent, Inc.
(Frontier), a U.S. provider of broadband internet and other communication services. Upon closing,
this transaction is expected to enhance our fiber broadband footprint and provide opportunities for
future Fios growth.
 7 
Table of Contents
 Spectrum 
The spectrum licenses we hold can be used for mobile and fixed wireless voice, video and data
communications services. We are licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to provide
these wireless services on the following low and mid-band spectrum in areas that collectively cover
nearly all of the population of the U.S.: (i) the 700 MHz Upper C block, (ii) Cellular spectrum (850
MHz), (iii) Personal Communication Services (PCS) spectrum (1900 MHz), (iv) AWS 1 and AWS 3 bands
(1700 MHz uplink and 2100 MHz downlink), and (v) the 3.7 GHz band (C-Band). We also hold spectrum
licenses in the 28, Upper 37 and 39 GHz bands, known as millimeter wave spectrum, and utilize both
Priority Access Licenses (PALs) and General Authorized Access (GAA) in the 3.5 GHz band (Citizens
Broadband Radio Service).
We anticipate that demand for spectrum will continue to increase over time, driven by growth in
customer connections and the increased usage of wireless broadband services that use more bandwidth
and require faster rates of speed, as well as the wider deployment of 5G mobile and fixed services.
We expect to meet the demand for 5G and 4G spectrum needs with our existing spectrum assets. If
demand continues to increase or if new spectrum is required for a future generation of technology, we
can meet that demand by acquiring licenses or leasing spectrum from other licensees, or by acquiring
new spectrum licenses from the FCC, if and when future FCC spectrum auctions occur.
From time to time we have exchanged spectrum licenses with other wireless service providers through
secondary market swap transactions. We expect to continue to pursue similar opportunities to trade
spectrum licenses in order to meet capacity and expansion needs in the future. We also gain access to
spectrum through cross-lease transactions. In certain cases, we have entered into intra-market
spectrum swaps designed to increase the amount of contiguous spectrum within frequency bands in a
specific market. Contiguous spectrum improves network performance and efficiency. These swaps, as
well as any spectrum purchases, require us to obtain governmental approvals.
Information regarding spectrum license transactions, including our pending acquisition of select
spectrum licenses of United States Cellular Corporation and certain of its subsidiaries, is presented
in Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
 Competition and Related Trends 
The telecommunications industry is highly competitive. The rapid development of new technologies,
services and products has eliminated many of the distinctions among wireless, cable, internet and
traditional telephone services and brought new competitors to our markets. We expect competition to
remain intense as traditional and non-traditional participants seek increased market share.
Competitive factors within the telecommunications industry include, among others, network
reliability, speed, capacity and coverage; pricing and promotional strategies; the quality of
customer service; marketing, sales and distribution capabilities; development of new and enhanced
products and services; the ability to anticipate and respond to various factors and trends affecting
our industry; the availability of capital resources; and regulatory changes.
Competition remains intense as a result of various factors, including aggressive pricing, increased
levels of promotions and service plan discounts, and offerings that include additional bundled
premium content or other perks, in some cases specifically targeting Verizon customers. Competition
may increase as smaller, stand-alone wireless service providers merge or transfer licenses to larger,
better capitalized wireless service providers and as MVNOs resell wireless communication services. In
addition, aggressive network deployment as well as increasing government incentives related to it may
enhance the ability of certain of our competitors to compete with us.
With respect to our wireless connectivity products and services, we compete against other national
wireless service providers, including AT&T Inc. and T-Mobile US, Inc., as well as various regional
wireless service providers. We also compete for retail activations with resellers that buy bulk
wholesale service from wireless service providers, including Verizon, and resell it to their
customers. Resellers include cable companies, such as Comcast Corporation and Charter Communications,
Inc., and others. Several major cable operators also offer bundles with wireless services through
strategic relationships.
We also face competition from other communications and technology companies seeking to increase their
brand recognition and capture market share with respect to the provision of wireless products and
services, in addition to non-traditional offerings in mobile data. For example, Microsoft
Corporation, Alphabet Inc., Apple Inc., Meta Platforms, Inc. and others are offering alternative
means for messaging and making wireless voice calls that, in certain cases, can be used in lieu of
the wireless providers' voice service, as well as alternative means of accessing video content. In
addition, we are seeing increasing competition in the provisioning of internet access by low Earth
orbit satellite companies as well in the area of fixed wireless offerings that provide an alternative
to traditional landline internet service providers.
With respect to Fios and our other broadband services, we compete against cable companies, wireless
service providers, domestic and foreign telecommunications providers, satellite television companies,
low Earth orbit satellite companies, internet service providers, OTT providers and other companies
that offer network services and managed enterprise solutions. We also
 8 
Table of Contents
face increasing competition from other internet portal providers. We expect the market will continue
to shift from traditional linear video to OTT offerings. We also expect customer migration from
traditional voice services to wireless services to continue.
Companies with a global presence are increasingly competing with us in our Business segment. A
relatively small number of telecommunications and integrated service providers with global operations
serve customers in the global enterprise market and, to a lesser extent, the global wholesale market.
We compete with these providers for large contracts to provide integrated solutions to global
enterprises and government customers. Many of these companies have strong market presence, brand
recognition and existing customer relationships, all of which contribute to intense competition.
In the Enterprise and Public Sector markets, competition levels remain high, primarily as a result of
increased industry focus on technology convergence. We compete in this area with system integrators,
carriers, and hardware and software providers. In addition, some of the largest information
technology services companies are making strategic acquisitions, divesting non-strategic assets and
forging new alliances to improve their cost structure. Many new alliances and acquisitions have
focused on developing fields, such as cloud computing, software defined networking, communication
applications and other computing tasks via networks, rather than by the use of in-house machines.
In the Business Markets and Other category, customer purchasing behaviors and preferences continue to
evolve. Solution speed and simplicity are becoming key differentiators for customers who are seeking
full life-cycle offers that simplify the process of starting, running and growing their businesses.
Mobile network operators and other carriers are aggressively targeting this customer group with a
variety of bundles and discounts as it is among the largest and fastest growing categories in the
Business segment.
Our Wholesale business competes with traditional carriers for metro/mid/long-haul fiber, voice and IP
services. In addition, mobile video and data needs are driving a greater need for wireless backhaul.
Network providers, cable companies and specialty firms are competitors for this business opportunity.
 Regulatory Trends 
 Regulatory Landscape 
Verizon operates in a regulated and highly competitive market, as described above. Some of our
competitors are subject to fewer regulatory constraints than Verizon. For many services offered by
Verizon, the FCC is our primary regulator. The FCC has jurisdiction over interstate
telecommunications services and other matters under the Communications Act of 1934, as amended
(Communications Act). Other Verizon services are subject to various state and local regulations.
 Federal, State and Local Regulation 
 Wireless Services 
The FCC regulates several aspects of our wireless operations. Generally, the FCC has jurisdiction
over the construction, operation, acquisition and transfer of wireless communications systems. All
wireless services require use of radio frequency spectrum, the assignment and distribution of which
is subject to FCC oversight. If demand continues to increase or if new spectrum is required for a
future generation of technology, we can meet our needs for licensed spectrum by purchasing licenses
or leasing spectrum from others, or by participating in a competitive bidding process to acquire new
spectrum from the FCC. Those processes are subject to certain reviews, approvals and potential
conditions.
Today, Verizon holds FCC spectrum licenses that allow it to provide a wide range of mobile and fixed
communications services, including both voice and data services. FCC spectrum licenses typically have
a term of 10 years, at which time they are subject to renewal. While the FCC has routinely renewed
all of Verizon’s wireless licenses, challenges could be raised in the future. If a wireless license
was revoked or not renewed, Verizon would not be permitted to provide services on the spectrum
covered by that license. Some of our licenses require us to comply with so-called "open access" FCC
regulations, which generally require licensees of particular spectrum to allow customers to use
devices and applications of their choice, subject to certain technical limitations. The FCC has also
imposed certain specific mandates on wireless carriers, including construction and geographic
coverage requirements, technical operating standards, provision of enhanced 911 services, roaming
obligations and requirements for wireless tower and antenna facilities.
The Communications Act generally preempts regulation by state and local governments of the entry of,
or the rates charged by, wireless carriers. It does not prohibit states from regulating the other
"terms and conditions" of wireless service. For example, some states impose reporting and consumer
protection requirements. Several states also have laws or regulations that address safety issues (for
example, use of wireless handsets while driving), universal service funding, and taxation matters.
Some states are also considering new network reliability or service quality requirements that may
affect how and where we provide services if not preempted by federal law. In addition, wireless tower
and antenna facilities are often subject to state and local zoning and land use regulation, and
securing approvals for new or modified facilities is often a lengthy and expensive process.
 9 
Table of Contents
 Broadband 
Verizon offers many different broadband services. In early January 2025, based on litigation filed by
the broadband industry, a federal appeals court overturned the FCC's April 2024 final decision to
regulate broadband services via utility-style common carriage regulation under Title II of the
Communications Act. Absent further action in the courts, this decision will remain in effect and
limit the risk of burdensome FCC broadband regulation. In addition to federal activity, several
states have adopted or are considering adopting laws or executive orders that would impose net
neutrality and other requirements on some of our broadband services, including a law in New York that
requires discounted broadband pricing for low income customers. Some states may also impose pricing
or other rules related to broadband built with the assistance of federal or state funding. The FCC
also adopted broad rules related to "digital discrimination" that could further increase regulatory
oversight of broadband services; industry groups have appealed those rules in court. Our broadband
commitment can be found on our website at https://www.verizon.com/about/our-company/verizon-
broadband-commitment.
 Wireline Voice 
Verizon offers many different wireline voice services, including traditional telephone service and
other services that rely on technologies such as VoIP. For regulatory purposes, legacy telephone
services are generally considered to be "common carrier" services. Common carrier services are
subject to heightened regulatory oversight with respect to rates, terms and conditions and other
aspects of the services. The FCC has not decided the regulatory classification of VoIP but has said
VoIP service providers must comply with certain rules, such as 911 capabilities and law enforcement
assistance requirements.
State public utility commissions regulate Verizon’s telephone operations with respect to certain
telecommunications intrastate matters. Verizon operates as an "incumbent local exchange carrier" in
nine states and the District of Columbia. These incumbent operations are subject to various levels of
pricing flexibility and other state oversight and requirements. Verizon also has other wireline
operations that are more lightly regulated. Some states, including California, impose reporting
requirements and are considering new network reliability or service quality requirements for wireline
voice services, including for VoIP.
 Video 
Verizon offers a multichannel video service that is regulated like traditional cable service. The FCC
has a body of rules that apply to cable operators, and these rules also generally apply to Verizon.
In areas where Verizon offers its facilities-based multichannel video services, Verizon has been
required to obtain a cable franchise from local government entities, or in some cases a state-wide
franchise, and comply with certain one-time and ongoing obligations as a result.
Privacy, Data Protection, and Artificial Intelligence
We are subject to local, state, federal, and international laws and regulations relating to privacy
and data protection that impact all parts of our business, including wireline, wireless, broadband
and the development and roll out of new products. At the federal level, our business is governed by
the FCC or the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), depending on the product or service. The California
Consumer Privacy Act, Europe's General Data Protection Regulation and a number of other privacy laws
more recently adopted by other states and countries include significant penalties for non-compliance.
Generally, attention to privacy and data security requirements is increasing at all levels of
government globally, and privacy-related legislation has been introduced or is under consideration in
many locations. These regulations could have a significant impact on our businesses. Policymakers at
the local, state, federal and international levels are also considering imposing laws and regulations
on the use of artificial intelligence (AI). This is a nascent area of regulatory focus; therefore, it
is unclear how such regulation could impact our business.
 Public Safety and Cybersecurity 
The FCC plays a role in addressing public safety concerns by regulating emergency communications
services and mandating widespread availability of both media (broadcast/cable) and wireless emergency
alerting services. In addition, federal and state agencies have mandated and may impose additional
regulations to ensure continuity of service during disasters. For example, the FCC adopted rules
requiring wireless providers to support roaming on each other’s networks during disasters, and the
California Public Utilities Commission has imposed regulations relating to back-up power for
communications facilities. In response to prior cyberattacks and increasing risks from cybersecurity
threats, the FCC and other regulators are attempting to increase regulation of the cybersecurity
practices of providers. The FCC is also addressing the use by American companies of equipment
produced by certain companies deemed to cause potential national security risks. Verizon does not
currently use equipment in its networks from vendors under such restrictions.
 Intercarrier Compensation and Network Access 
The FCC regulates some of the rates that carriers pay each other for the exchange of voice traffic
(particularly traditional wireline traffic) over different networks and other aspects of
interconnection for some voice services. The FCC also regulates some of the rates and terms and
conditions for certain wireline "business data services" and other services and network facilities.
Verizon is both a seller and a buyer of these services, and both makes and receives interconnection
payments.
 10 
Table of Contents
 Human Capital Resources 
With approximately 99,600 employees on a full-time equivalent basis as of December 31, 2024, 88% of
whom are based in the U.S., we know that our people are one of our most valuable investments. In
order to realize our core business strategy, we have developed human capital programs and practices
that support, develop and care for our employees throughout their careers with Verizon. Our strategy
to build a workforce with talent, skills and motivation to give the company a competitive edge now
and into the future rests on three pillars:
• Attract and maintain a diverse workforce with the necessary skills and talent to execute on our
business priorities.
• Develop our employees' potential by offering educational opportunities that keep pace with changes
occurring across our industry.
• Inspire individuals to build a career at Verizon by providing meaningful work and opportunities for
career advancement in a collaborative and inclusive environment.
Verizon strives to be an employer of choice by offering our employees competitive compensation and
benefits packages. We seek to recruit and retain employees with diverse backgrounds, experiences and
perspectives to best meet the needs of the diverse customers and communities we serve. We provide
extensive on-the-job training opportunities, tuition reimbursement programs and career development
support to enable our employees to maximize their potential and thrive professionally. As of December
31, 2024, Verizon's global workforce was approximately 68.6% male, 31.1% female and 0.3% unknown or
undeclared, and the race/ethnicity of our U.S. workforce was 52.5% White, 18.4% Black, 14.0%
Hispanic, 8.8% Asian, 0.4% American Indian / Alaskan Native, 0.3% Native Hawaiian / Pacific Islander,
2.6% two or more races, and 3.0% unknown or undeclared. Women represented 36.2% of U.S. senior
leadership (vice president level and above). People of color represented 34.0% of U.S. senior
leadership.
Verizon respects our employees' rights to freedom of association and collective bargaining in
compliance with applicable laws, including the right to join or not join labor unions. We have a long
history of working with the Communications Workers of America and the International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers — the two unions that in total represent approximately 25% of our employees as of
December 31, 2024. The current collective bargaining agreements covering our union-represented
employees who serve customers in our Mid-Atlantic and Northeast service areas extend through August
1, 2026. Other collective bargaining agreements covering smaller groups of employees extend through
various dates between 2025 and 2028. In addition, where applicable outside of the U.S., we engage
with employee representative bodies such as works council. Verizon meets with U.S. national and local
union leaders, as well as works council leaders outside the U.S., to talk about key business topics,
including safety, customer service, plans to improve operational processes, our business performance
and the impacts that changing technology and competition are having on our customers, employees and
business strategy.
For a discussion of Verizon's Board oversight of risks related to our human capital resources, see
the section entitled "Governance — Our governance framework — Oversight of business risks" in our
definitive Proxy Statement to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and delivered to
shareholders in connection with our 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders.
 Patents, Trademarks and Licenses 
We own or have licenses to various patents, copyrights, trademarks, domain names and other
intellectual property rights necessary to conduct our business. We actively pursue the filing and
registration of patents, copyrights, trademarks and domain names to protect our intellectual property
rights within the United States and abroad. We also actively grant licenses, in exchange for
appropriate fees or other consideration and subject to appropriate safeguards and restrictions, to
other companies that enable them to utilize certain of our intellectual property rights and
proprietary technology as part of their products and services. Such licenses enable the licensees to
take advantage of Verizon's brands and the results of Verizon’s research and development efforts.
While these licenses result in valuable consideration for Verizon, we do not believe that the loss of
such consideration, or the expiration of any of our intellectual property rights, would have a
material effect on our results of operations.
We periodically receive offers from third parties to purchase or obtain licenses for patents and
other intellectual property rights in exchange for royalties or other payments. We also periodically
receive notices alleging that our products or services infringe on third-party patents or other
intellectual property rights. These claims, whether against us directly or against third-party
suppliers of products or services that we sell to our customers, if successful, could require us to
pay damages or royalties, rebrand, or cease offering the relevant products or services.
 Information About Our Executive Officers 
See Part III, Item 10. "Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance" of this Annual Report
on Form 10-K for information about our executive officers.
 11 
Table of Contents
 Information on Our Internet Website 
We make available, free of charge on our website, our annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly reports
on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments to those reports, at
https://www.verizon.com/about/investors as soon as reasonably practicable after such reports are
electronically filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). These reports
and other information are also available on the SEC's website at https://www.sec.gov. We periodically
provide other information for investors on our website, including news and announcements regarding
our financial performance, information on environmental, social and corporate governance matters, and
details related to our annual meeting of shareholders. We encourage investors, the media, our
customers, business partners and other stakeholders to review the information we post on this
channel. Website references in this report are provided as a convenience and do not constitute, and
should not be viewed as, incorporation by reference of the information contained on, or available
through, the websites. Therefore, such information should not be considered part of this report.
 Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking 
 Statements 
In this report we have made forward-looking statements. These statements are based on our estimates
and assumptions and are subject to risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements include the
information concerning our possible or assumed future results of operations. Forward-looking
statements also include those preceded or followed by the words "anticipates," "assumes," "believes,"
"estimates," "expects," "forecasts," "hopes," "intends," "plans," "targets" or similar expressions.
For those statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements
contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. We undertake no obligation to
revise or publicly release the results of any revision to these forward-looking statements, except as
required by law. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue
reliance on such forward-looking statements.
The following important factors, along with those discussed elsewhere in this report and in other
filings with the SEC, could affect future results and could cause those results to differ materially
from those expressed in the forward-looking statements:
• the effects of competition in the markets in which we operate, including the inability to
successfully respond to competitive factors such as prices, promotional incentives and evolving
consumer preferences;
• failure to take advantage of, or respond to competitors' use of, developments in technology,
including artificial intelligence, and address changes in consumer demand;
• performance issues or delays in the deployment of our 5G network resulting in significant costs or
a reduction in the anticipated benefits of the enhancement to our networks;
• the inability to implement our business strategy;
• adverse conditions in the U.S. and international economies, including inflation and changing
interest rates in the markets in which we operate;
• cyberattacks impacting our networks or systems and any resulting financial or reputational impact;
• damage to our infrastructure or disruption of our operations from natural disasters, extreme
weather conditions, acts of war, terrorist attacks or other hostile acts and any resulting financial
or reputational impact;
• disruption of our key suppliers’ or vendors' provisioning of products or services, including as a
result of geopolitical factors or the potential impacts of global climate change;
• material adverse changes in labor matters and any resulting financial or operational impact;
• damage to our reputation or brands;
• the impact of public health crises on our business, operations, employees and customers;
• changes in the regulatory environment in which we operate, including any increase in restrictions
on our ability to operate our networks or businesses;
• allegations regarding the release of hazardous materials or pollutants into the environment from
our, or our predecessors', network assets and any related government investigations, regulatory
developments, litigation, penalties and other liability, remediation and compliance costs,
operational impacts or reputational damage;
• our high level of indebtedness;
 12 
Table of Contents
• significant litigation and any resulting material expenses incurred in defending against lawsuits
or paying awards or settlements;
• an adverse change in the ratings afforded our debt securities by nationally accredited ratings
organizations or adverse conditions in the credit markets affecting the cost, including interest
rates, and/or availability of further financing;
• significant increases in benefit plan costs or lower investment returns on plan assets;
• changes in tax laws or regulations, or in their interpretation, or challenges to our tax positions,
resulting in additional tax expense or liabilities;
• changes in accounting assumptions that regulatory agencies, including the SEC, may require or that
result from changes in the accounting rules or their application, which could result in an impact on
earnings; and
• risks associated with mergers, acquisitions, divestitures and other strategic transactions,
including our ability to consummate the proposed acquisition of Frontier and obtain cost savings,
synergies and other anticipated benefits within the expected time period or at all.
 Item 1A.    Risk Factors 
The following discussion of "Risk Factors" identifies factors that may adversely affect our business,
operations, financial condition or future performance. This information should be read in conjunction
with "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Result of Operations" and the
consolidated financial statements and related notes. The following discussion of risks is not all-
inclusive but is designed to highlight what we believe are the material factors to consider when
evaluating our business and expectations. These factors could cause our future results to differ
materially from our historical results and from expectations reflected in forward-looking statements.
 Economic and Strategic Risks 
We face significant competition that may negatively affect our operating results.
We face significant competition in our industries. The rapid development of new technologies,
services and products has eliminated many of the traditional distinctions among wireless, cable,
internet and other communication services and brought new competitors to our markets, including other
telecommunications companies, cable companies, wireless service providers, satellite providers,
technology companies and application and device providers. While these changes have enabled us to
offer new types of products and services, they have also allowed other providers to broaden the scope
of their own competitive offerings. If we are unable to successfully differentiate our services and
products from our competitors, it could adversely affect our competitive position and market share.
Our competitors commonly offer aggressive pricing, promotions, premium content options and other
incentives – in some cases specifically targeting our customers and putting pressure on our pricing
and margins. In addition, we expect the wireless industry’s customer growth rate to moderate over
time in comparison to historical growth rates, leading to increased competition for customers. Our
ability to compete effectively will depend on, among other things, our network reliability, speed,
capacity and coverage, the pricing of our products and services, our and our competitors' promotional
strategies, the quality of our customer service, our development of new and enhanced products and
services, the reach and quality of our sales and distribution channels, our ability to market our
products and services effectively and our capital resources. It will also depend on how successfully
we anticipate and respond to various factors affecting our industries, including regulatory changes,
new technologies and business models, such as the increasing use of AI and machine learning
technologies, changes in consumer preferences and demand for existing services, demographic trends
and evolving geopolitical and economic conditions, including inflation. If we are not able to respond
successfully to these competitive challenges, our results of operations and financial condition could
be adversely impacted. In addition, a sustained decline in a reporting unit's revenues and earnings
has resulted in the past, and may again result in the future, in a significant negative impact on its
fair value requiring us to record an impairment charge, which could have an adverse impact on our
results of operations.
If we are not able to take advantage of developments in technology and address changing consumer
demand on a timely basis, or if the ongoing deployment of our 5G network is delayed or hindered for
any reason, we may experience a decline in the demand for our services, be unable to implement our
business strategy and experience reduced profits.
Our industries are rapidly changing as new technologies are developed that offer consumers an array
of choices for their communications needs and allow new entrants into the markets we serve. In order
to grow and remain competitive, we will need to adapt to future changes in technology, enhance our
existing offerings and introduce new offerings to address our customers’ changing demands. If we are
unable to meet future challenges from competing technologies on a timely basis or at an acceptable
cost, we could lose customers to our competitors. We may not be able to accurately predict
technological trends or the success of new services in the market. If our new services fail to gain
acceptance in the marketplace, or if costs associated
 13 
Table of Contents
with the implementation and introduction of these services materially increase, our ability to retain
and attract customers could be adversely affected.
The deployment of our 5G network is subject to a variety of risks, including those related to
equipment availability, unexpected costs, and regulatory matters that could cause deployment delays
or network performance issues. In addition, certain advanced use cases for 5G technologies and
related ecosystems are still in the early phases of adoption and their ultimate adoption or success
is uncertain. These issues could result in significant costs, put us at a competitive disadvantage,
or reduce the anticipated benefits of the enhancements to our networks.
As we introduce new offerings and technologies, we expect to phase out outdated and unprofitable
technologies and services. If we are unable to do so on a cost-effective basis, we could experience
reduced profits. In addition, there could be legal or regulatory restraints on our ability to phase
out current services.
Finally, we are using AI in our network deployment and maintenance as well as our customer and
employee support services. There are technological, regulatory, ethical and other risks involved in
deploying and using AI, particularly generative AI models. There can be no assurance that the usage
of AI will meaningfully enhance our products or services or be beneficial to our business, including
our efficiency or profitability. Our investments in AI and related technologies may not result in the
benefits we anticipate or enable us to obtain or maintain a competitive advantage.
Adverse conditions in the U.S. and international economies could impact our results of operations and
financial condition.
Unfavorable economic conditions, such as a recession or economic slowdown in the U.S. or elsewhere,
or inflation in the markets in which we operate, could negatively affect the affordability of and
demand for some of our products and services and our cost of doing business. In difficult economic
conditions, consumers may seek to reduce discretionary spending by forgoing purchases of our
products, electing to use fewer higher margin services, dropping down in price plans or obtaining
lower-cost products and services offered by other companies. Similarly, under these conditions,
business customers may delay purchasing decisions, or full implementation of our service offerings,
reduce their use of our services or choose lower-cost offerings from our competitors. In addition,
adverse economic conditions may lead to an increased number of our consumer and business customers
that are unable to pay for services. Unfavorable economic conditions could also amplify other risks
discussed in this report, including, but not limited to, those related to our competitive position
and margins. Furthermore, our initiatives designed to reduce costs and improve operating efficiencies
may be ineffective or insufficient.
Over the last several years, as a result of the inflationary environment in the U.S., we experienced
increases in our direct costs, including electricity and other energy-related costs for our network
operations, and transportation and labor costs, as well as increased interest expense related to
changing interest rates. In 2022, these factors, along with impacts of the intense competition in our
industries, resulted in lower earnings per share and caused us to lower our growth expectations and
related financial guidance for that year. Similarly, unfavorable economic conditions in the future
could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
 Operational Risks 
Cyberattacks impacting our networks or systems could have an adverse effect on our business.
Cyberattacks, including through the use of ransomware and other forms of malware, distributed denial
of services attacks, credential harvesting, social engineering and other means for obtaining
unauthorized access to or disrupting the operation of our networks and systems and those of our
suppliers, vendors and other service providers, could have an adverse effect on our business.
Cyberattacks against companies, including Verizon, have increased in frequency, scope and potential
harm in recent years. Cyberattacks may be perpetrated by a variety of groups or persons, including
nation-state and state-sponsored actors, malicious actors, employees, contractors, or other unrelated
third parties. Nation-state and state-sponsored actors can sustain malicious activities for extended
periods and deploy significant resources to plan and carry out attacks. For example, in September
2024, we became aware that we were one of several telecommunications companies that were the subject
of a cyberattack by a highly sophisticated nation-state actor known as Salt Typhoon. In that case,
the threat actor was able to access portions of our network as part of what we determined to be a
narrowly focused effort to obtain information about a limited number of individuals primarily
involved in government or political activity. While we were able to contain the Salt Typhoon attack,
we may be unable to contain or mitigate the impacts of a significant cyberattack in the future.
Cyberattacks may cause equipment failures, loss of information, including sensitive personal
information of customers or employees or valuable technical, financial and marketing information.
Such attacks may also result in disruptions to our customers’ operations or our own business
operations, including our ability to operate our networks and systems, activate customers or take
payments. Cyberattacks may occur alone or in conjunction with physical attacks, especially where
disruption of service is an objective of the attacker. Further, the use of AI and machine learning by
threat actors may increase the frequency and severity of cyberattacks against us or other companies.
The inability to operate or use our networks and systems or those of our suppliers, vendors and other
service providers as a result of cyberattacks, even for a limited period of time, may result in
significant expenses to Verizon, a loss of current or future customers and/or a loss of market share
to our competitors. The costs associated with a cyberattack on Verizon could include expensive
incentives offered to existing customers and business partners
 14 
Table of Contents
to retain their business, increased expenditures on cybersecurity measures and the use of alternate
resources, lost revenues from business interruption and the costs of investigations and litigation,
including potential damages. Further, certain of Verizon’s businesses, such as those offering
security solutions and infrastructure and cloud services to business customers, could be negatively
affected if our ability to protect our own networks and systems is called into question as a result
of a cyberattack. Our presence in the IoT industry, which includes offerings of telematics products
and services, could also increase our exposure to potential costs and expenses and reputational harm
in the event of cyberattacks impacting these products or services. Any of these occurrences could
damage our reputation, adversely impact customer and investor confidence and result in a material
adverse effect on Verizon’s results of operation or financial condition.
The development and maintenance of systems to prevent and detect cyberattacks is costly and requires
ongoing monitoring and updating to address the increasing prevalence and sophistication of
cyberattacks. In addition, due to the sophistication of threat actors, an attack may persist for an
extended period of time before it is detected, and it may be difficult and time consuming to
ascertain the extent of an attack once detected.
While none of the cyberattacks to which we have been subject to date have been material to Verizon's
operations or financial condition, there can be no guarantee that we will not experience a material
cyberattack in the future. The actions we take to reduce the risks associated with cyberattacks,
including protecting our systems and networks, may be insufficient to repel or mitigate the effects
of a cyberattack in the future.
Natural disasters, extreme weather conditions, acts of war, terrorist or other hostile acts could
cause damage to our infrastructure and result in significant disruptions to our operations.
Our business operations are subject to interruption by power outages, acts of war, terrorist or other
hostile acts, natural disasters or the potential impacts of climate change, including the increasing
prevalence and intensity of hurricanes, wildfires, flooding, hail and storms. Such events could cause
significant damage to our infrastructure upon which our business operations rely, resulting in
degradation or disruption of service to our customers, as well as significant recovery time and
expenditures to resume operations. Our system redundancy may be ineffective or inadequate to sustain
our operations through all such events. We are implementing, and will continue to implement, measures
to protect our infrastructure and operations from the impacts of these events in the future, but
these measures and our overall disaster recovery planning may not be sufficient for all
eventualities. These events could also damage the infrastructure of the suppliers that provide us
with the equipment and services that we need to operate our business and provide products to our
customers. These occurrences could result in lost revenues from business interruption, damage to our
reputation and reduced profits.
We depend on key suppliers and vendors to provide services and equipment that we need to operate our
business.
We depend on various key suppliers and vendors to provide us, directly or through other suppliers,
with equipment and services, such as fiber, switch and network equipment, smartphones and other
wireless devices, customer service support and other services that we need in order to operate our
business. For example, our smartphone and other device suppliers often rely on one vendor for the
manufacture and supply of critical components, such as chipsets, used in their devices, and there are
a limited number of companies capable of supplying the network infrastructure equipment on which we
depend.
Our suppliers or vendors could fail to provide equipment or service on a timely basis, or fail to
meet our performance expectations, for a number of reasons, including, for example, disruption to the
global supply chain as a result of geopolitical factors, public health crises, natural disasters or
the potential impacts of global climate change. If such failures occur, we may be unable to provide
products and services as and when requested by our customers, or we may be unable to continue to
maintain or upgrade our networks. Due to the cost and time lag that can be associated with
transitioning from one supplier to another, our business could be substantially disrupted if we were
required to, or chose to, replace the products or services of one or more major suppliers with
products or services from another source, especially if the replacement became necessary on short
notice. Any such disruption could increase our costs, decrease our operating efficiencies and have a
material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
A significant number of our suppliers and vendors are located or rely on operations outside of the
U.S., which carries additional risks and regulatory obligations, including those related to
cybersecurity, data privacy and compliance. Certain business practices in foreign countries may not
align with U.S. laws and regulations. In addition, international operations increase our exposure to
other risks, such as economic and geopolitical instability, fluctuations in exchange rates, and
labor-related risks.
The suppliers and vendors on which we rely are and may in the future be subject to litigation with
respect to technology on which we depend, including litigation involving claims of patent
infringement. Such claims are frequently made in the communications industry. We are unable to
predict whether our business will be affected by any such litigation. We expect our dependence on key
suppliers to continue as we develop and introduce more advanced generations of technology.
 15 
Table of Contents
A significant portion of our workforce is represented by labor unions, and we could incur additional
costs or experience work stoppages as a result of the renegotiation of our labor contracts.
As of December 31, 2024, approximately 25% of our workforce is represented by the Communications
Workers of America or the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. While we have labor
contracts in place with these unions, with subsequent negotiations we could incur additional costs
and/or experience work stoppages, which could adversely affect our business operations. In addition,
while a small percentage of the workforce outside of our traditional wireline operations is
represented by unions for bargaining, we cannot predict what impact increased union density in this
workforce could have on our operations.
Damage to our reputation or brands could adversely affect our business.
We believe that our reputation and brands significantly contribute to the success of our business and
our relationships with our customers, employees and other stakeholders.
Our reputation and brands could be negatively affected by a number of factors, including actual or
alleged quality or reliability issues related to our services and products; cybersecurity incidents
and data breaches; allegations of legal noncompliance; litigation or regulatory activity; incidents
involving unethical behavior or misconduct; material weaknesses in our internal controls over
financial reporting; safety, human rights, workplace or labor issues; environmental incidents or
impacts; allegations related to the safety of our products, services and equipment; governance
issues; our sustainability goals and practices; our actual or perceived position or lack of position
on social and other sensitive matters; the conduct of our employees, representatives or partners;
activists’ campaigns; negative sentiment about us shared over social media or the press; and other
issues, incidents, or statements that, whether based on actual or perceived circumstances, result in
adverse publicity. In addition, changes to the content standards of social media platforms could
impact our marketing and advertising initiatives on such platforms and increase risks related to our
brand.
Damage to our reputation and brands could undermine our customers’ confidence in us and reduce demand
for our products and services, which could result in decreased revenue and adversely affect our
business and financial results. If our reputation or brands are damaged, it could also attract
regulatory scrutiny, increase litigation risks, affect our ability to attract and retain top talent,
and reduce investor confidence in us.
Public health crises could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition and results
of operations.
We are subject to risks related to public health crises, which have in the past, and may in the
future, have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and operating results. For
example, in 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting policies, initiatives and impacts, along with
the related global slowdown in economic activity, resulted in our decreased revenues, increased costs
and lower earnings per share. Negative effects of a public health crisis may include, but are not
limited to, closure of our retail stores, impacts on customers' use of our networks, products and
services and their ability to pay for them, employees' health and safety concerns, limitation of
customer-focused field operations, and vendor and supply chain disruptions. In addition, such a
crisis could significantly increase the probability or consequences of the risks our business faces
in ordinary circumstances, such as risks associated with our supplier and vendor relationships, risks
of an economic slowdown, regulatory risks, and the costs and availability of financing.
 Regulatory and Legal Risks 
Changes in the regulatory framework under which we operate could adversely affect our business
prospects or results of operations.
Our domestic operations are subject to regulation by the FCC and other federal, state, and local
agencies, and our international operations are regulated by various foreign governments and
international bodies. These regulatory regimes frequently restrict or impose conditions on our
ability to operate in designated areas and provide specified products or services. We are frequently
required to maintain licenses for our operations and conduct our operations in accordance with
prescribed standards. We are often involved in regulatory and other governmental proceedings or
inquiries related to the application of these requirements. It is impossible to predict with any
certainty the outcome of pending federal and state regulatory proceedings relating to our operations,
or the reviews by federal or state courts of regulatory rulings. Without relief, existing laws and
regulations may inhibit our ability to expand our business and introduce new products and services.
Similarly, we cannot guarantee that we will be successful in obtaining the licenses needed to carry
out our business plan or in maintaining our existing licenses. For example, the FCC grants wireless
licenses for terms generally lasting 10 years, subject to renewal. The loss of, or a material
limitation on, certain of our licenses could have a material adverse effect on our business, results
of operations and financial condition.
New laws or regulations or changes to the existing regulatory framework at the federal, state, and
local, or international level, such as those described below, those that incentivize business models
or technologies different from ours or requirements limiting our ability to continue or discontinue
service to customers could restrict the ways in which we manage our wireline and wireless networks
and operate our businesses, impose additional costs, diminish revenue opportunities, and potentially
impede our ability to provide services in a manner that would be attractive to us and our customers.
 16 
Table of Contents
• Privacy and data protection – We are subject to local, state, federal and international laws and
regulations related to privacy and data protection. In particular, the California Consumer Privacy
Act, Europe's General Data Protection Regulation and a number of other privacy laws more recently
adopted by other states and countries include significant penalties for non-compliance. Generally,
attention to privacy and data security requirements is increasing at all levels of government
globally, and privacy-related legislation has been introduced or is under consideration in many
locations. These regulations could have a significant impact on our businesses.
• Regulation of broadband internet access services – Verizon offers many different broadband
services. In early January 2025, based on litigation filed by the broadband industry, a federal
appeals court overturned the FCC's April 2024 final decision to regulate broadband services via
utility-style common carriage regulation under Title II of the Communications Act. Absent further
action in the courts, this decision will remain in effect and limit the risk of burdensome FCC
broadband regulation. In addition to federal activity, several states have adopted or are considering
adopting laws or executive orders that would impose net neutrality and other requirements on some of
our broadband services, including a law in New York that requires discounted broadband pricing for
low income customers. Some states may also impose pricing or other rules related to broadband built
with the assistance of federal or state funding. The FCC also adopted broad rules related to "digital
discrimination" that could further increase regulatory oversight of broadband services; industry
groups have appealed those rules in court.
• "Open access" – We hold certain wireless licenses that require us to comply with so-called "open
access" FCC regulations, which generally require licensees of particular spectrum to allow customers
to use devices and applications of their choice. Moreover, certain services could be subject to
conflicting regulation by the FCC and/or various state and local authorities, which could
significantly increase the cost of implementing and introducing new services.
• Climate-related regulation and policy – Due to the nature of our operations, we have been, and
expect to continue to be impacted by regulatory developments related to climate change, including,
for example, the direct regulation of greenhouse gas emissions or carbon policies that could result
in a tax on such emissions. In addition, policy-driven changes in the prices of fuel or energy in
geographies in which we operate could make it more expensive for us to purchase energy to power our
networks and data centers, and any increase in taxes on fuel could increase our costs associated with
operating those vehicles in our fleet that are dependent on traditional fuels.
These developments and the further regulation of broadband, wireless, and our other activities and
any related court decisions could result in significant increases in costs for us or restrict our
ability to compete in the marketplace and limit the return we can expect to achieve on past and
future investments in our networks.
Our business may be impacted by changes in tax laws and regulations, or their interpretations, and
challenges to our tax positions.
Tax laws and regulations are complex, dynamic, and subject to change and varying interpretations,
especially when evaluated against new technologies and telecommunications services. In addition, tax
legislation has been introduced or is being considered in various jurisdictions that could
significantly impact our tax rate, tax liabilities, and the carrying value of deferred tax assets or
deferred tax liabilities. Any of these changes could materially impact our financial performance and
our tax provision, net income and cash flows.
We are also subject to ongoing audits, examinations and other tax controversies in various
jurisdictions. Although we regularly assess the likelihood of an adverse outcome resulting from these
controversies to determine the adequacy of provisions for taxes, the final outcome of any such
controversy may be materially different from our expectations. In the event that we have not
accurately or fully described, disclosed or determined, calculated or remitted amounts that were due
to taxing authorities or if the ultimate determination of our taxes owed is for an amount in excess
of amounts previously accrued, we could be subject to additional taxes, penalties and interest, which
could materially impact our business, financial condition and operating results.
We are subject to a substantial amount of litigation, which could require us to pay significant
damages or settlements.
We are subject to a substantial amount of litigation and claims in arbitration, including, but not
limited to, shareholder lawsuits, patent and copyright infringement lawsuits, wage and hour class
actions, contract and commercial claims, personal injury claims, property claims, environmental
claims, and lawsuits relating to our advertising, sales, billing and collection practices. We may
incur significant expenses in defending these lawsuits. In addition, we may be required to pay
significant awards of damages or settlements. We also could be subject to court-ordered injunctions
and other remedies that could negatively impact our business operations. Our wireless business is
also subject to lawsuits relating to alleged adverse health effects of wireless phones and radio
frequency transmitters. Any of these allegations or changes in government agencies’ assessment of the
risks associated with using wireless devices could result in significant legal and regulatory
liability and other remedies, and could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial
condition and operating results.
 17 
Table of Contents
Allegations related to lead sheathed copper cables in our copper network infrastructure could expose
us to regulatory scrutiny, litigation, penalties, removal and compliance costs, operational impact or
reputational damage.
There have been media reports alleging that certain lead sheathed copper cables that are part of our
copper-based network infrastructure may present health or environmental risks in areas where those
facilities are deployed. These allegations have resulted in government investigations, regulatory
inquiries and litigation, and could further result in legislative or regulatory actions, penalties
and other liability, remediation and compliance costs or negative operational impacts. Additional
legal proceedings and other contingencies may arise in the future. Our insurance policies may not
cover or may not be sufficient to fully cover the costs of these claims. Accordingly, we may incur
substantial expenses as a result of these allegations, which cannot be reasonably estimated at this
time but could be material.
In addition, negative assertions about the health or environmental impact of our lead sheathed cables
may harm our reputation, which could adversely affect our business and our relationship with various
stakeholders, even if such allegations ultimately prove to be inaccurate.
 Financial Risks 
Verizon has significant debt, which could increase further if we incur additional debt in the future
and do not retire existing debt.
As of December 31, 2024, Verizon had approximately $117.9 billion of outstanding unsecured
indebtedness, $12.0 billion of unused borrowing capacity under our existing revolving credit facility
and $26.1 billion of outstanding secured indebtedness. Our debt level and related debt service
obligations could have negative consequences, including:
• requiring us to dedicate significant cash flow from operations to the payment of principal,
interest and other amounts payable on our debt, which would reduce the funds we have available for
other purposes, such as working capital, capital expenditures, dividend payments and acquisitions;
• making it more difficult or expensive for us to obtain any necessary future financing for working
capital, capital expenditures, debt service requirements, debt refinancing, acquisitions or other
purposes and limiting our ability to repurchase common stock;
• reducing our flexibility in planning for or reacting to changes in our industries and market
conditions;
• making us more vulnerable in the event of a downturn in our business; and
• exposing us to increased interest rate risk to the extent that (i) our debt obligations are subject
to variable interest rates or (ii) we need to refinance existing debt that bears interest at a rate
lower than current market rates.
Our initiatives aimed at reducing our indebtedness and achieving any target leverage ratio may be
unsuccessful due to macroeconomic, business and other factors.
Adverse changes in the financial markets and other factors could increase our borrowing costs and
reduce the availability of financing.
We require a significant amount of capital to operate and grow our business. We fund our capital
needs in part through borrowings in the public and private credit markets. Adverse changes in the
financial markets, including increases in interest rates or changes in exchange rates, could increase
our cost of borrowing, require us to post a significant amount of collateral, and/or make it more
difficult for us to obtain financing for our operations or refinance existing indebtedness. In
addition, our ability to obtain funding under asset-backed debt transactions is subject to our
ability to continue to originate a sufficient amount of assets eligible to be securitized. Our
borrowing costs also can be affected by short- and long-term debt ratings assigned by independent
rating agencies, which are based, in significant part, on our performance as measured by customary
credit metrics. A decrease in these ratings would likely increase our cost of borrowing and/or make
it more difficult for us to obtain financing. A severe disruption in the global financial markets
could impact some of the financial institutions with which we do business, and such instability could
also affect our access to financing.
Increases in costs for pension benefits and active and retiree healthcare benefits may reduce our
profitability and increase our funding commitments.
With approximately 99,600 employees and approximately 179,700 retirees as of December 31, 2024
eligible to participate in Verizon’s benefit plans, the costs of pension benefits and active and
retiree healthcare benefits have a significant impact on our profitability. Our costs of maintaining
these plans, and the future funding requirements for these plans, are affected by several factors,
including increases in healthcare costs, decreases in investment returns on funds held by our pension
and other benefit plan trusts and changes in the discount rate and mortality assumptions used to
calculate pension and other postretirement
 18 
Table of Contents
expenses. If we are unable to limit future increases in the costs of our benefit plans, those costs
could reduce our profitability and increase our funding commitments.
We are subject to risks associated with mergers, acquisitions, divestitures and other strategic
transactions.
From time to time, we pursue mergers, acquisitions, joint ventures, assets transfers and other
strategic transactions that we believe may expand our business or are consistent with our strategy.
We may also occasionally divest assets and businesses. Any such transaction entails certain risks and
could present financial, managerial and operational challenges. If we are unable to consummate
planned strategic transactions and successfully integrate acquired businesses into our existing
operations, or if we are not able to achieve cost savings, synergies and other anticipated benefits
of any such transaction, our business could be negatively affected. Divestitures may result in asset
impairment and disposition charges, and loss of income from divested assets and businesses, or
require continued financial involvement in the divested business for a period following the
transaction, including through indemnification arrangements. In addition, strategic transactions may
involve significant expenses, require additional financing or expose us to liabilities not discovered
in the due diligence process or as a result of transaction-related litigation. These and other risks
related to our mergers, acquisitions, divestitures and other strategic transactions, including our
pending acquisition of Frontier, may have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and
operating results.
 Item 1B.    Unresolved Staff Comments 
None.
 Item 1C.    Cybersecurity 
 Cybersecurity Program 
Verizon’s comprehensive cybersecurity program is designed to identify and protect against
cybersecurity risks and to position Verizon to rapidly detect, respond to, and recover from
cybersecurity incidents that impact our company. The program is built on the following pillars:
• NIST Cybersecurity Framework - Our program is aligned to the National Institute of Standards and
Technology’s (NIST) Cybersecurity Framework, which outlines the core components and responsibilities
necessary to sustain a healthy and well-balanced cybersecurity program.
• Risk identification - We continually assess the cybersecurity threat and vulnerability landscape
using various commercial, government and publicly available information sources.
• Risk detection - We use both manual and automated detection methods on a scheduled and ad-hoc basis
to identify vulnerabilities within, and threats to, our operations and network infrastructure.
• Risk evaluation - Once a cybersecurity vulnerability is detected, we assign a threat severity
classification based on the risk profile associated with the vulnerability.
• Remediation - Verizon’s information security team reports all cybersecurity vulnerabilities and
their associated threat classification to the appropriate business team for remediation. Deadlines
for remediation are set based on the severity of the threat and closely tracked in a central system
of record. In the instances when a remediation deadline cannot be met, the information security team
and the business team work together to deploy appropriate mitigating or compensating controls until
the remediation work is complete.
• Metrics and analysis - We track the performance of our cybersecurity program by collecting,
retaining and analyzing a broad range of data related to our threat identification, detection and
response activity. We use this data to assess threat trends, for strategic planning purposes and to
enhance management accountability for cybersecurity.
Our processes for assessing, identifying, and managing cybersecurity risks include tabletop exercises
to test and reinforce our incident response controls, control gap analyses, penetration tests, data
recovery testing, internal and external security assessments, and threat intelligence monitoring. We
also conduct annual cybersecurity and data privacy training, which is mandatory for all our full- and
part-time employees.
In addition to our in-house cybersecurity capabilities, we also engage assessors, consultants and
other third parties to assist with various cybersecurity matters. For example, Verizon validates
enterprise cybersecurity maturity every two years through a third-party maturity assessment.This
assessment measures Verizon’s ability to identify, prevent, detect, respond to, and recover from
threats to systems, assets and data. The results of the assessment serve as the baseline for
enterprise cybersecurity across the company. In addition to this baseline, certain subsets of our
technology environment are subject to incremental cybersecurity certification and periodic third
party validation under applicable regulatory or contractual requirements.
 19 
Table of Contents
Verizon has a comprehensive enterprise cybersecurity incident response plan, which is activated in
the event of a cybersecurity incident. The plan is a detailed playbook that specifies how Verizon
classifies, responds to, and recovers from cybersecurity incidents and includes notification
procedures that vary depending on the significance of the incident. When warranted by the severity of
the incident, our Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and other senior executives are part of the
notification chain.
Integrated Cybersecurity Risk Management
Verizon’s Senior Vice President and Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) has responsibility for
the management of cybersecurity risks at Verizon. The CISO and her team are responsible for Verizon’s
information security strategy, policy, standards, architecture and processes.
The CISO brings nearly two decades of cybersecurity experience to her work at Verizon. Prior to
joining Verizon, she held executive-level cybersecurity roles at other large public companies, where
she was responsible for cybersecurity strategy and operations, including incident response, threat
intelligence, security services, architecture, commercial operational technology security, and
regulatory and compliance matters.
Verizon effectuates cybersecurity management by providing for close cooperation among the CISO’s team
and other teams within the company, as well as by integrating cybersecurity risk into Verizon’s
overall enterprise risk management structures and processes. Each of our business units and certain
functional groups have a Business Information Security Officer, who is an integral member of that
unit or group, but reports to the CISO. This structure provides the CISO with line of sight across
the enterprise. The CISO and members of her leadership team also meet regularly with business unit
senior leaders, including the CEO, the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) and the Chief Human Resources
Officer, to discuss business priorities, emerging threats and trends, and the performance of the
cybersecurity program.
The Verizon Executive Security Council (VESC) oversees and evaluates the work of the CISO and their
team. The VESC is jointly chaired by the head of Verizon Global Services and the President of Global
Networks and Technology and includes Verizon’s Chief Compliance Officer, Chief Legal Officer, Senior
Vice President of Internal Audit and senior executives in business and technology functions. The VESC
provides oversight of all aspects of Verizon’s cybersecurity program and, at regular intervals
throughout the year, evaluates key cybersecurity metrics as well as planned and ongoing initiatives
to reduce cybersecurity risks.
Verizon’s Management Audit Committee (VMAC), which includes our CFO, Senior Vice President of
Internal Audit and other senior executives, is responsible for overseeing components of our overall
risk management strategy. The VMAC receives quarterly updates from the CISO on Verizon’s
cybersecurity program.
Verizon also operates a robust internal audit program. Each year, Verizon’s internal audit team
conducts an overall business risk assessment, which includes an evaluation of cybersecurity risks.
The results of the assessment are presented to the leaders of the relevant business teams, who are
responsible for prioritizing and addressing the risks identified.
 Board Oversight of Cybersecurity Risk 
The Audit Committeeof the Board of Directors (Board) has primary responsibility for overseeing
Verizon’s risk management and compliance programs relating to cybersecurity and data protection and
privacy.
As part of the Board’s oversightof risks from cybersecurity threats, the CISO leads an annual review
and discussion with the full Board dedicated to Verizon’s cybersecurity risks, threats and
protections. The CISO provides a mid-year update to this annual review to the Audit Committee and, as
warranted, additional updates throughout the year. The Audit Committee also receives a report from
senior management on Verizon’s cybersecurity posture and related matters at each of its other
meetings during the year at which the CISO is not present.
 Third Party Risk Management 
We have implemented processes to identify and manage risks from cybersecurity threats associated with
our use of third-party service providers.The Verizon Third Party Risk Management Program establishes
governance, processes and tools for managing various supplier-related risks, including information
security. As a condition of working with Verizon, suppliers who access sensitive business or customer
information are expected to meet certain information security requirements.
 Risks from Cybersecurity Threats 
We are subject to increasing and evolving cybersecurity threats as cyberattacks against companies,
including Verizon, have increased in frequency, scope and potential harm in recent years. While none
of the cyberattacks to which we have been subject to date have been material to Verizon's operations
or financial condition, there can be no guarantee that we will not experience a material cyberattack
in the future.For more information on the risks from cybersecurity threats that we face, refer to
“Risk Factors — Operational Risks — Cyberattacks impacting our networks or systems could have an
adverse effect on our business” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 20 
Table of Contents
 Item 2.    Properties 
Our principal properties do not lend themselves to simple description by character and location. Our
total gross investment in property, plant and equipment was approximately $331 billion at December
31, 2024 and $320 billion at December 31, 2023, including the effect of retirements, but before
deducting accumulated depreciation. Our gross investment in property, plant and equipment consisted
of the following:
 At December 31, 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Network equipment 78.3 % 77.6 % 
 Land, buildings and building equipment 12.0 % 11.8 % 
 Furniture and other 9.7 % 10.6 % 
 100.0 % 100.0 % 
Network equipment consists primarily of cable (aerial, buried, underground or undersea) and the
related support structures of conduit, poles and towers, wireless plant, switching equipment, network
software, transmission equipment and related facilities. Land, buildings and building equipment
consists of land and land improvements, central office buildings or any other buildings that house
network equipment, and buildings that are used for administrative and other purposes. Substantially
all the switching centers are located on land and in buildings we own due to their critical role in
the networks and high set-up and relocation costs. We also maintain facilities throughout the U.S.
comprised of administrative and sales offices, customer care centers, retail sales locations, garage
work centers, switching centers, cell sites and data centers. Furniture and other consists of
telephone equipment, furniture, data processing equipment, office equipment, motor vehicles,
construction in process, and leasehold improvements.
 Item 3.    Legal Proceedings 
In the ordinary course of business, Verizon is involved in various litigation and regulatory
proceedings at the state and federal level. As of the date of this report, we do not believe that any
pending legal proceedings to which we or our subsidiaries are subject are required to be disclosed as
material legal proceedings pursuant to this item. Verizon is not subject to any administrative or
judicial proceeding arising under any federal, state or local provisions that have been enacted or
adopted regulating the discharge of materials into the environment or primarily for the purpose of
protecting the environment that is likely to result in monetary sanctions of $1 million or more. For
a discussion of our litigation risks, refer to Item 1A Risk Factors.
 Item 4.    Mine Safety Disclosures 
Not applicable.
 21 
Table of Contents
 PART II 
 Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, 
 Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases 
 of Equity Securities 
The principal market for trading in the common stock of the Company is the New York Stock Exchange
under the symbol "VZ."
As of December 31, 2024, there were 397,636 shareholders of record. In addition, a significant number
of holders of the Company's common stock are "street name" or beneficial holders, whose shares are
held of record by banks, brokers, and other financial institutions.
 Stock Repurchases 
In February 2020, the Board of Directors of the Company authorized a share buyback program to
repurchase up to 100 million shares of our common stock. The program will terminate when the
aggregate number of shares purchased reaches 100 million, or a new share repurchase plan superseding
the current plan is authorized, whichever is sooner. Under the program, shares may be repurchased in
privately negotiated transactions, on the open market, or otherwise, including through plans
complying with Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act. The timing and number of shares purchased under
the program, if any, will depend on market conditions and our capital allocation priorities.
During the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023, Verizon did not repurchase any shares of the
Company's common stock under our authorized share buyback program. At December 31, 2024, the maximum
number of shares that could be purchased by or on behalf of Verizon under our share buyback program
was 100 million.
 Stock Performance Graph 
 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Ve… $ 100… $ 99.9 $ 92.4 $ 73.9 $ 75.9 $ 85.9 
 S&P 100… 118… 152.3 124… 157.5 196… 
 500 
 S&P 
 500 100… 123… 150.3 90.3 140.8 197… 
 Co… 
 Se… 
The graph compares the cumulative total returns of Verizon, the S&P 500 Stock Index and the S&P 500
Communication Services Index over a five-year period. It assumes $100 was invested on December 31,
2019 with dividends being reinvested.
 Item 6. [Reserved] 
 22 
Table of Contents
 Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of 
 Financial Condition and Results of Operations 
 Overview 
Verizon Communications Inc. is a holding company that, acting through its subsidiaries, is one of the
world’s leading providers of communications, technology, information and streaming products and
services to consumers, businesses and government entities. With a presence around the world, we offer
data, video and voice services and solutions on our networks and platforms that are designed to meet
customers’ demand for mobility, reliable network connectivity and security.
To compete effectively in today’s dynamic marketplace, we are focused on the capabilities of our
high-performing networks to drive growth based on delivering what customers want and need in the
digital world. We are consistently deploying new network architecture and technologies to secure our
leadership in both 5G and 4G wireless networks. Our network quality is the hallmark of our brand and
the foundation for the connectivity, platforms and solutions upon which we build our competitive
advantage. In 2024, we focused on enhancing and driving the monetization of our networks, platforms
and solutions, retaining and growing our high-quality customer base and further improving our
financial and operating performance.
Our strategy requires significant capital investments primarily to acquire wireless spectrum, put the
spectrum into service, provide additional capacity for growth in our networks, invest in the fiber
that supports our businesses, evolve and maintain our networks and develop and maintain significant
advanced information technology systems and data system capabilities. We believe that our C-Band
spectrum, together with our industry leading millimeter wave spectrum holdings and our 4G LTE network
and fiber infrastructure, will drive innovative products and services and fuel our growth.
 Highlights of Our 2024 Financial Results 
(dollars in millions)
 Business Overview 
We have two reportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units - Consumer and
Business.
 23 
Table of Contents
 Revenue by Segment 
———
Note: Excludes eliminations.
 Verizon Consumer Group 
Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline communications services and
products. Our wireless services are provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in
the U.S. under the Verizon family of brands and through wholesale and other arrangements. We also
provide FWA broadband through our 5G or 4G LTE networks as an alternative to traditional landline
internet access. Our wireline services are provided in nine states in the Mid-Atlantic and
Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over our 100% fiber-optic network through our Verizon
Fios product portfolio and over a traditional copper-based network to customers who are not served by
Fios.
Customers can obtain our wireless services on a postpaid or prepaid basis. Our postpaid service is
generally billed one month in advance for a monthly access charge in return for access to and usage
of network services. Our prepaid service is offered only to Consumer customers and enables
individuals to obtain wireless services without credit verification by paying for all services in
advance. The Consumer segment also offers several categories of wireless equipment to customers,
including a variety of smartphones and other handsets, wireless-enabled internet devices, such as
tablets, and other wireless-enabled connected devices, such as smart watches.
In addition to wireless services and equipment for retail customers, the Consumer segment sells
residential fixed connectivity solutions, including internet, video and voice services, and wireless
network access to resellers on a wholesale basis.
The Consumer segment's operating revenues for the year ended December 31, 2024 totaled $102.9
billion, an increase of $1.3 billion, or 1.3%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2023. See
"Segment Results of Operations" for additional information regarding our Consumer segment’s operating
performance and selected operating statistics.
 Verizon Business Group 
Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications services and products, including
FWA broadband, data, video and advanced communication services, corporate networking solutions,
security and managed network services, local and long distance voice services and network access to
deliver various IoT services and products. We provide these products and services to businesses,
public sector customers and wireless and wireline carriers across the U.S. and a subset of these
products and services to customers around the world.
The Business segment's operating revenues for the year ended December 31, 2024 totaled $29.5 billion,
a decrease of $591 million, or 2.0%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2023. See "Segment
Results of Operations" for additional information regarding our Business segment's operating
performance and selected operating statistics.
 Corporate and Other 
Corporate and other primarily includes device insurance programs, investments in unconsolidated
businesses and development stage businesses that support our strategic initiatives, as well as
unallocated corporate expenses, certain pension and other employee benefit related costs and interest
and financing expenses. Corporate and other also includes the historical results of divested
businesses and other adjustments and gains and losses that are not allocated or used in assessing
segment performance due to their nature. Although such transactions are excluded from the business
segment results, they are included in reported consolidated earnings. Gains and losses from these
transactions that are not individually significant are included in segment results and therefore are
included in the chief operating decision maker's assessment of segment performance. See "Consolidated
Results of Operations" for additional information regarding Corporate and other results.
 24 
Table of Contents
 Capital Expenditures and Investments 
We continue to invest in our wireless networks, high-speed fiber and other advanced technologies to
position ourselves at the center of growth trends for the future. During the year ended December 31,
2024, these investments included $17.1 billion for capital expenditures . See "Cash Flows Used in
Investing Activities" and "Liquidity and Capital Resources" for additional information.
 Global Networks and Technology 
We consider the reliability, speed, capacity, coverage and security of our wireless network to be key
factors in our continued success. We are evolving and transforming our networks to ensure our
customers receive access to the best network possible. Over the past several years, we have been
leading the development of 5G wireless technology industry standards and the ecosystems for fixed and
mobile 5G wireless services. Our evolution to 5G with its new architecture allows us to simplify
operations by eliminating legacy network elements.
While we continue to improve our 5G wireless service coverage, we are also adding capacity and
density to our networks. Network densification enables us to increase coverage, improve quality of
service and add capacity to accommodate an increasing number of users.
In addition to enhancing our wireless service, our wireless mobility investments provide the
foundation for our growing FWA broadband business. We are also continuing to expand our fiber-based
networks, as customers increasingly value the ability to obtain wireless and wireline broadband
services from the same provider. In September 2024, we entered into an agreement to acquire Frontier
as part of our fiber expansion strategy, and we expect to increase the capital expenditures we devote
to our fiber networks in 2025.
 Consolidated Results of Operations 
In this section, we discuss our overall results of operations and highlight special items that are
not included in our segment results. In "Segment Results of Operations," we review the performance of
our two reportable segments in more detail. A detailed discussion of our 2022 results and year-over-
year comparisons between 2023 and 2022 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in the
"Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2023.
 Consolidated Operating Revenues 
 Years Ended (dollars in 
 December 31, 2024 2023 Increase/(De… millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer $ 102,904 $ 101,626 $ 1,278 1.3 % 
 Business 29,531 30,122 -591 -2.0 
 Corporate and 2,609 2,479 130 5.2 
 other 
 Eliminations -256 -253 -3 1.2 
 Consolidated 
 Operating $ 134,788 $ 133,974 $ 814 0.6 
 Revenues 
Consolidated operating revenues increased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily due to revenue
increases in our Consumer segment, partially offset by revenue decreases in our Business segment.
Revenues for our segments are discussed separately below under the heading "Segment Results of
Operations."
 Consolidated Operating Expenses 
 Years Ended (dollars in 
 December 31, 2024 2023 Increase/(De… millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cost of $ 27,997 $ 28,100 $ -103 -0.4 % 
 services 
 Cost of 
 wireless 26,100 26,787 -687 -2.6 
 equipment 
 Selling, 
 general and 34,113 32,745 1,368 4.2 
 administrati… 
 expense 
 Depreciation 
 and 17,892 17,624 268 1.5 
 amortization 
 expense 
 Verizon 
 Business 
 Group — 5,841 -5,841 nm 
 goodwill 
 impairment 
 Consolidated 
 Operating $ 106,102 $ 111,097 $ -4,995 -4.5 
 Expenses 
nm - not meaningful
Operating expenses for our segments are discussed separately below under the heading "Segment Results
of Operations."
 25 
Table of Contents
 Cost of Services 
Cost of services includes the following costs directly attributable to a service: salaries and wages,
benefits, materials and supplies, content costs, contracted services, network access and transport
costs, customer provisioning costs, computer systems support and costs to support our outsourcing
contracts and technical facilities. Aggregate customer service costs, which include billing and
service provisioning, are allocated between Cost of services and Selling, general and administrative
expense.
Cost of services decreased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily as a result of:
• a decrease of $259 million in access costs primarily as a result of decreases in prepaid
subscribers, changes in usage and net circuit access prices;
• a decrease of $147 million in personnel costs primarily related to the impact of workforce changes;
• an increase of $167 million related to an asset and business rationalization charge taken in 2024
compared to an asset rationalization charge taken in 2023; and
• an increase of $152 million in digital content costs primarily associated with an increase in
subscriptions through MyPlan offerings, partially offset by a decrease in traditional linear content
costs due to a decline in Fios video subscribers.
 Cost of Wireless Equipment 
Cost of wireless equipment decreased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily as a result of:
• a decrease of $2.1 billion driven by a lower volume of wireless devices sold primarily related to a
decrease of 10% in upgrades; and
• an increase of $1.4 billion due to a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of wireless
devices sold.
 Selling, General and Administrative Expense 
Selling, general and administrative expense includes salaries and wages and benefits not directly
attributable to a service or product, the provision for credit losses, taxes other than income taxes,
advertising and sales commission costs, call center and information technology costs, regulatory
fees, professional service fees and rent and utilities for administrative space. Also included is a
portion of the aggregate customer care costs as discussed above in "Cost of Services."
Selling, general and administrative expense increased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily as a
result of:
• an increase of $1.2 billion due to severance charges in 2024 primarily related to our voluntary
separation program compared to 2023;
• an increase of $240 million in personnel costs related to an increase in costs associated with the
transition to third-party contracted resources along with the impacts of a prior year compensation
plan assumption change that did not reoccur and increased sales commission expense;
• an increase of $124 million in the provision for credit losses resulting from an increase in
postpaid phone gross additions and additional bad debt reserves;
• an increase of $124 million in advertising costs related to Value Brand marketing campaigns and the
refresh of the Verizon brand in 2024 compared to 2023;
• a decrease of $273 million related to an asset and business rationalization charge taken in 2024
compared to an asset rationalization charge taken in 2023; and
• a decrease of $161 million related to business transformation costs in 2023 that did not reoccur.
See "Special Items" for additional information on the severance charges, the asset and business
rationalization charges and the business transformation costs.
 Depreciation and Amortization Expense 
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during 2024 compared to 2023, primarily due to the
change in the mix of net depreciable and amortizable assets, including the amortization period of
certain acquisition-related intangible assets, and the continued deployment of C-Band network assets.
 Verizon Business Group Goodwill Impairment 
During 2023, we recorded a pre-tax charge of $5.8 billion as a result of the annual goodwill
impairment test performed in the fourth quarter. See "Critical Accounting Estimates" for additional
information.
 26 
Table of Contents
 Other Consolidated Results 
 Other Income (Expense), Net 
Additional information relating to Other income (expense), net is as follows:
 Years Ended (dollars in 
 December 31, 2024 2023 Increase/(Decr… millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest income $ 336 $ 354 $ -18 -5.1 % 
 Other 
 components of 
 net periodic 300 -938 1,238 nm 
 benefit 
 income (cost) 
 Net debt 
 extinguishment 385 308 77 25.0 
 gains 
 Other, net -26 -37 11 -29.7 
 Other Income $ 995 $ -313 $ 1,308 nm 
 (Expense), Net 
nm - not meaningful
Other income (expense), net reflects certain items not directly related to our core operations,
including interest income, debt extinguishment gains and losses, components of net periodic pension
and postretirement benefit income and cost and certain foreign exchange gains and losses.
Other income (expense), net increased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily due to a net pension and
postretirement benefits remeasurement gain of $657 million recorded during 2024, compared with a loss
of $992 million recorded during 2023. The increase was partially offset by a decrease of $396 million
due to lower plan assets on which to earn expected returns in our pension and postretirement plans
compared to 2023.
See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for more information on the other components of
net periodic benefit income (cost).
 Interest Expense 
 Years Ended (dollars in 
 December 31, 2024 2023 Increase/(De… millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Total 
 interest 
 costs on $ 7,612 $ 7,342 $ 270 3.7 % 
 debt 
 balances 
 Less 
 capitalized 963 1,818 -855 -47.0 
 interest 
 costs 
 Interest $ 6,649 $ 5,524 $ 1,125 20.4 
 Expense 
 Average debt $ 150,361 $ 151,062 
 outstanding… 
 Effective 
 interest 5.1 % 4.9 % 
 rate(2)(3) 
(1) The average debt outstanding is a financial measure and is calculated by applying a simple
average of prior thirteen-month end balances of total short-term and long-term debt, net of
discounts, premiums and unamortized debt issuance costs.
(2) The effective interest rate is the rate of actual interest incurred on debt. It is calculated by
dividing the total interest costs on debt balances by the average debt outstanding.
(3) We believe that this measure is useful to management, investors and other users of our financial
information in evaluating our debt financing cost and trends in our debt leverage management.
Total interest expense increased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily as a result of a decrease in
capitalized interest due to additional C-Band spectrum licenses being placed into service and an
increase in interest costs due to a higher average interest rate partially offset by lower average
debt balances.
 Provision for Income Taxes 
 Years Ended (dollars in 
 December 31, 2024 2023 Increase millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Provision for $ 5,030 $ 4,892 $ 138 2.8 % 
 income taxes 
 Effective income 21.9 % 28.8 % 
 tax rate 
The effective income tax rate is calculated by dividing the provision for income taxes by income
before the provision for income taxes. The decrease in the effective income tax rate was primarily
due to the Verizon Business Group goodwill impairment charge of $5.8 billion in 2023 that
substantially decreased income before income taxes and was not deductible. The increase in the
provision for income taxes was primarily due to the increase in 2024 in income before income taxes.
A reconciliation of the statutory federal income tax rate to the effective income tax rate for each
period is included in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements.
 27 
Table of Contents
Consolidated Net Income, Consolidated EBITDA and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA
Consolidated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization expense (Consolidated
EBITDA) and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, which are presented below, are non-GAAP financial measures
that we believe are useful to management, investors and other users of our financial information in
evaluating operating profitability on a more variable cost basis as they exclude the depreciation and
amortization expense related primarily to capital expenditures and acquisitions that occurred in
prior years, as well as in evaluating operating performance in relation to Verizon’s competitors.
Consolidated EBITDA is calculated by adding back interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization
expense to net income.
Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is calculated by excluding from Consolidated EBITDA the effect of the
following non-operational items: equity in earnings and losses of unconsolidated businesses and other
income and expense, net, as well as the effect of certain special items. We believe that this measure
is useful to management, investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating the
effectiveness of our operations and underlying business trends. We believe that Consolidated Adjusted
EBITDA is widely used by investors to compare a company’s operating performance to its competitors by
minimizing impacts caused by differences in capital structure, taxes, and depreciation and
amortization policies. Further, the exclusion of non-operational items and special items enables
comparability to prior period performance and trend analysis. See "Special Items" for additional
information.
It is management’s intent to provide non-GAAP financial information to enhance the understanding of
Verizon’s GAAP financial information, and it should be considered by the reader in addition to, but
not instead of, the financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. Each non-GAAP financial
measure is presented along with the corresponding GAAP measure so as not to imply that more emphasis
should be placed on the non-GAAP measure. We believe that providing these non-GAAP measures in
addition to the GAAP measures allows management, investors and other users of our financial
information to more fully and accurately assess both consolidated and segment performance. The non-
GAAP financial information presented may be determined or calculated differently by other companies
and may not be directly comparable to that of other companies.
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2024 2023 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consolidated Net Income $ 17,949 $ 12,095 
 Add: 
 Provision for income taxes 5,030 4,892 
 Interest expense 6,649 5,524 
 Depreciation and amortization expense(1) 17,892 17,624 
 Consolidated EBITDA $ 47,520 $ 40,135 
 Add (Less): 
 Other (income) expense, net(2) $ -995 $ 313 
 Equity in losses of unconsolidated 53 53 
 businesses 
 Severance charges 1,733 533 
 Asset and business rationalization 374 480 
 Legacy legal matter 106 — 
 Verizon Business Group goodwill — 5,841 
 impairment 
 Legal settlement — 100 
 Business transformation costs — 176 
 Non-strategic business shutdown — 158 
 Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA $ 48,791 $ 47,789 
(1) Includes Amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets, which were $817 million and $865
million during the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. The results for the year
ended December 31, 2023 also include a portion of the charges associated with the Non-strategic
business shutdown. See "Special Items" for additional information.
(2) Includes Pension and benefits mark-to-market credits of $532 million during the year ended
December 31, 2024 and charges of $992 million during the year ended December 31, 2023. See "Special
Items" for additional information.
The changes in Consolidated Net Income, Consolidated EBITDA and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA in the
table above during 2024 compared to 2023 were primarily a result of the factors described above in
connection with consolidated operating revenues and consolidated operating expenses.
 Segment Results of Operations 
We have two reportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units - Consumer and
Business. We measure and evaluate our segments based on segment operating income. The use of segment
operating income is consistent with the chief operating decision maker’s assessment of segment
performance.
 28 
Table of Contents
To aid in the understanding of segment performance as it relates to segment operating income,
management uses the following operating statistics to evaluate the overall effectiveness of our
segments. We believe these operating statistics are useful to investors and other users of our
financial information because they provide additional insight into drivers of our segments’ operating
results, key trends and performance relative to our peers. These operating statistics may be
determined or calculated differently by other companies and may not be directly comparable to those
statistics of other companies.
Wireless retail connections are retail customer device postpaid and prepaid connections as of the end
of the period. Retail connections under an account may include those from smartphones and basic
phones (collectively, phones), postpaid and prepaid FWA, as well as tablets and other internet
devices, wearables and retail IoT devices. Wireless retail connections are calculated by adding total
retail postpaid and prepaid new connections in the period to prior period retail connections, and
subtracting total retail postpaid and prepaid disconnects in the period.
Wireless retail postpaid connections are retail postpaid customer device connections as of the end of
the period. Retail postpaid connections under an account may include those from phones, postpaid FWA,
as well as tablets and other internet devices, wearables and retail IoT devices. Wireless retail
postpaid connections are calculated by adding retail postpaid new connections in the period to prior
period retail postpaid connections, and subtracting retail postpaid disconnects in the period.
Wireless retail prepaid connections are retail prepaid customer device connections as of the end of
the period. Retail prepaid connections may include those from phones, prepaid FWA, as well as tablets
and other internet devices, and wearables. Wireless retail prepaid connections are calculated by
adding retail prepaid new connections in the period to prior period retail prepaid connections, and
subtracting retail prepaid disconnects in the period.
Fios internet connections are the total number of connections to the internet using Fios internet
services as of the end of the period. Fios internet connections are calculated by adding Fios
internet new connections in the period to prior period Fios internet connections, and subtracting
Fios internet disconnects in the period.
Fios video connections are the total number of connections to traditional linear video programming
using Fios video services as of the end of the period. Fios video connections are calculated by
adding Fios video net additions in the period to prior period Fios video connections. Fios video net
additions are calculated by subtracting the Fios video disconnects from the Fios video new
connections.
Total broadband connections are the total number of connections to the internet using Fios internet
services, Digital Subscriber Line (DSL), and postpaid, prepaid and IoT FWA as of the end of the
period. Total broadband connections are calculated by adding total broadband connections, net
additions in the period to prior period total broadband connections.
FWA broadband connections are the total number of postpaid and prepaid connections to the internet
through our 5G or 4G LTE wireless networks as of the end of the period. FWA broadband connections are
calculated by adding FWA broadband connections, net additions in the period to prior period FWA
broadband connections.
Wireline broadband connections are the total number of connections to the internet using DSL and Fios
internet services as of the end of the period. Wireline broadband connections are calculated by
adding wireline broadband connections, net additions in the period to prior period wireline broadband
connections.
Wireless retail connections, net addition s are the total number of additional retail customer device
postpaid and prepaid connections, less the number of device disconnects in the period. Wireless
retail connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the total
retail postpaid and prepaid disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the total retail postpaid
and prepaid new connections in the period.
Wireless retail postpaid connections, net additions are the total number of additional retail
customer device postpaid connections, less the number of device disconnects in the period. Wireless
retail postpaid connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the
retail postpaid disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the retail postpaid new connections in
the period.
Wireless retail prepaid connections, net additions are the total number of additional retail customer
device prepaid connections, less the number of device disconnects in the period. Wireless retail
prepaid connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the retail
prepaid disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the retail prepaid new connections in the
period.
Wireless retail postpaid phone connections, net additions are the total number of additional retail
customer postpaid phone connections, less the number of phone disconnects in the period. Wireless
retail postpaid phone connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by
subtracting the retail postpaid phone disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the retail
postpaid phone new connections in the period.
Total broadband connections, net additions are the total number of additional total broadband
connections, less the number of total broadband disconnects in the period. Total broadband
connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the total broadband
disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the total broadband new connections in the period.
 29 
Table of Contents
FWA broadband connections, net additions are the total number of additional FWA broadband
connections, less the number of FWA broadband disconnects in the period. FWA broadband connections,
net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the FWA broadband disconnects,
net of certain adjustments, from the FWA broadband new connections in the period.
Wireline broadband connections, net additions are the total number of additional wireline broadband
connections, less the number of wireline broadband disconnects in the period. Wireline broadband
connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the wireline
broadband disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the wireline broadband new connections in the
period.
Wireless churn is the rate at which service to retail, retail postpaid, or retail postpaid phone
connections is terminated on average in the period. The churn rate in each period presented is
calculated by dividing retail disconnects, retail postpaid disconnects, or retail postpaid phone
disconnects by the average retail connections, average retail postpaid connections, or average retail
postpaid phone connections, respectively, in the period.
Wireless retail postpaid ARPA is the calculated average retail postpaid service revenue per account
(ARPA) from retail postpaid accounts in the period. Wireless retail postpaid service revenue does not
include recurring device payment plan billings related to the Verizon device payment program, plan
billings related to device warranty and insurance or regulatory fees. Wireless retail postpaid ARPA
in each period presented is calculated by dividing retail postpaid service revenue by the average
retail postpaid accounts in the period.
Wireless retail postpaid accounts are wireless retail customers that are directly served and managed
under the Verizon brand and use its services as of the end of the period. Accounts include unlimited
plans, shared data plans and corporate accounts, as well as legacy single connection plans and multi-
connection family plans. A single account may include monthly wireless services for a variety of
connected devices. Wireless retail postpaid accounts are calculated by adding retail postpaid new
accounts to the prior period retail postpaid accounts.
Wireless retail postpaid connections per account is the calculated average number of retail postpaid
connections per retail postpaid account as of the end of the period. Wireless retail postpaid
connections per account is calculated by dividing the total number of retail postpaid connections by
the number of retail postpaid accounts as of the end of the period.
Segment operating income margin reflects the profitability of the segment as a percentage of revenue.
Segment operating income margin is calculated by dividing total segment operating income by total
segment operating revenues.
Segment earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (Segment EBITDA) , which is
presented below, is a non-GAAP measure and does not purport to be an alternative to operating income
(loss) as a measure of operating performance. We believe this measure is useful to management,
investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating operating profitability on a
more variable cost basis as it excludes the depreciation and amortization expense related primarily
to capital expenditures and acquisitions that occurred in prior years, as well as in evaluating
operating performance in relation to our competitors. Segment EBITDA is calculated by adding back
depreciation and amortization expense to segment operating income (loss). Segment EBITDA margin is
calculated by dividing Segment EBITDA by total segment operating revenues. See Note 13 to the
consolidated financial statements for additional information.
 Verizon Consumer Group 
Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline communications services and
products. Our wireless services are provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in
the U.S. under the Verizon family of brands and through wholesale and other arrangements. We also
provide FWA broadband through our 5G or 4G LTE networks as an alternative to traditional landline
internet access. Our wireline services are provided in nine states in the Mid-Atlantic and
Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over our 100% fiber-optic network through our Verizon
Fios product portfolio and over a traditional copper-based network to customers who are not served by
Fios.
 30 
Table of Contents
Operating Revenues and Selected Operating Statistics
 (dollars in 
 Years Ended millions, 
 December 31, 2024 2023 Increase/(De… except ARPA) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service $ 76,880 $ 74,874 $ 2,006 2.7 % 
 Wireless 19,598 20,645 -1,047 -5.1 
 equipment 
 Other 6,426 6,107 319 5.2 
 Total 
 Operating $ 102,904 $ 101,626 $ 1,278 1.3 
 Revenues 
 Revenue 
 Statistics: 
 Wireless 
 service $ 65,374 $ 63,358 $ 2,016 3.2 
 revenue 
 Fios revenue $ 11,647 $ 11,614 $ 33 0.3 
 Connections 
 (‘000):(1) 
 Wireless 
 retail 95,118 93,850 1,268 1.4 
 postpaid 
 Wireless 
 retail 20,138 21,122 -984 -4.7 
 prepaid 
 Total 
 wireless 115,256 114,972 284 0.2 
 retail 
 Fios 7,135 6,976 159 2.3 
 internet 
 Fios video 2,684 2,951 -267 -9.0 
 FWA 2,714 1,866 848 45.4 
 broadband 
 Wireline 7,300 7,190 110 1.5 
 broadband 
 Total 10,014 9,056 958 10.6 
 broadband 
 Net 
 Additions in 
 Period 
 (‘000): 
 Wireless 
 retail 1,345 2,044 -699 -34.2 
 postpaid 
 Wireless 
 retail -975 -1,151 176 15.3 
 prepaid 
 Total 
 wireless 370 893 -523 -58.6 
 retail 
 Wireless 
 retail 341 -132 473 nm 
 postpaid 
 phones 
 FWA 846 989 -143 -14.5 
 broadband 
 Wireline 110 174 -64 -36.8 
 broadband 
 Total 956 1,163 -207 -17.8 
 broadband 
 Churn Rate: 
 Wireless 1.62 % 1.67 % 
 retail 
 Wireless 
 retail 1.06 % 1.03 % 
 postpaid 
 Wireless 
 retail 0.84 % 0.83 % 
 postpaid 
 phones 
 Account 
 Statistics: 
 Wireless 
 retail $ 138.25 $ 132.36 $ 5.89 4.4 
 postpaid 
 ARPA 
 Wireless 
 retail 
 postpaid 32,794 32,990 -196 -0.6 
 accounts 
 (‘000)(1) 
 Wireless 
 retail 
 postpaid 2.90 2.84 0.06 2.1 
 connections 
 per 
 account(1) 
(1) As of end of period
Where applicable, the operating results reflect certain adjustments, including those related to the
3G network shutdowns, migration activity among different types of devices and plans, customer profile
changes, and adjustments in connection with mergers, acquisitions and divestitures.
nm - not meaningful
Consumer's total operating revenues increased during 2024 compared to 2023 as a result of increases
in Service and Other revenues, partially offset by a decrease in Wireless equipment revenue.
 Service Revenue 
Service revenue increased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily driven by an increase in Wireless
service revenue.
 31 
Table of Contents
Wireless service revenue increased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily as a result of:
• an increase of $1.5 billion in access revenues related to our postpaid plans primarily due to
pricing actions, an increase in subscriptions through MyPlan offerings and a 45% increase in our FWA
subscriber base. These increases were partially offset by the amortization of wireless equipment
sales promotions;
• an increase of $638 million related to growth in non-retail service revenue;
• an increase of $318 million in TravelPass revenue due to increased customer international travel;
and
• a decrease of $625 million in prepaid revenue primarily due to a decrease in the prepaid subscriber
base partially driven by the termination of the Affordable Connectivity Program in the second quarter
of 2024.
 Wireless Equipment Revenue 
Wireless equipment revenue decreased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily as a result of:
• a decrease of $1.5 billion driven by a lower volume of wireless devices sold primarily related to a
decrease of 10% in upgrades; and
• an increase of $474 million due to a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of wireless
devices sold, partially offset by the impact of related promotions.
 Other Revenue 
Other revenue includes fees that partially recover the direct and indirect costs of complying with
regulatory and industry obligations and programs, revenues associated with certain products included
in our device protection offerings, leasing and interest recognized when equipment is sold to the
customer by an authorized agent under a device payment plan agreement.
Other revenue increased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily due to:
• an increase of $193 million driven by regulatory surcharges primarily related to a higher net
Federal Universal Service Fund rate, along with an increase in other regulatory surcharges; and
• an increase of $116 million related to device protection offerings primarily due to changes in the
products offered and pricing actions.
 Operating Expenses 
 Years Ended (dollars in 
 December 31, 2024 2023 Increase/(Decr… millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cost of $ 18,072 $ 17,580 $ 492 2.8 % 
 services 
 Cost of 
 wireless 21,259 21,827 -568 -2.6 
 equipment 
 Selling, 
 general and 20,537 20,131 406 2.0 
 administrati… 
 expense 
 Depreciation 
 and 13,552 13,077 475 3.6 
 amortization 
 expense 
 Total 
 Operating $ 73,420 $ 72,615 $ 805 1.1 
 Expenses 
 Cost of Services 
Cost of services increased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily as a result of:
• an increase of $270 million in rent and lease expense primarily driven by new leases and lease
modifications related to the continued deployment of the C-Band spectrum and Consumer's proportionate
usage of shared leased assets;
• an increase of $195 million in personnel costs mainly driven by certain other post-employment
benefit credits in 2023 that did not reoccur in 2024;
• an increase of $154 million in digital content costs primarily associated with an increase in
subscriptions through MyPlan offerings, partially offset by a decrease in traditional linear content
costs due to a decline in Fios video subscribers; and
• a decrease of $169 million in access costs primarily as a result of decreases in prepaid
subscribers, changes in usage and net circuit access prices.
 Cost of Wireless Equipment 
Cost of wireless equipment decreased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily as a result of:
• a decrease of $1.7 billion driven by a lower volume of wireless devices sold primarily related to a
decrease of 10% in upgrades; and
• an increase of $1.2 billion due to a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of wireless
devices sold.
 Selling, General and Administrative Expense 
Selling, general and administrative expense increased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily due to:
• an increase of $176 million in the provision for credit losses resulting from an increase in
postpaid phone gross additions and additional bad debt reserves; and
• an increase of $105 million in advertising costs related to Value Brand marketing campaigns in 2024
compared to 2023.
 32 
Table of Contents
 Depreciation and Amortization Expense 
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during 2024 compared to 2023 driven by the change in
the mix of total Verizon depreciable and amortizable assets and Consumer's usage of those assets.
 Segment Operating Income and EBITDA 
 Years Ended (dollars in 
 December 31, 2024 2023 Increase millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Segment Operating $ 29,484 $ 29,011 $ 473 1.6 % 
 Income 
 Add Depreciation 
 and amortization 13,552 13,077 475 3.6 
 expense 
 Segment EBITDA $ 43,036 $ 42,088 $ 948 2.3 
 Segment operating 28.7 % 28.5 % 
 income margin 
 Segment EBITDA 41.8 % 41.4 % 
 margin 
The changes in the table above during the periods presented were primarily a result of the factors
described above in connection with Consumer operating revenues and operating expenses.
 Verizon Business Group 
Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications services and products, including
FWA broadband, data, video and advanced communication services, corporate networking solutions,
security and managed network services, local and long distance voice services and network access to
deliver various IoT services and products. We provide these products and services to businesses,
public sector customers and wireless and wireline carriers across the U.S. and a subset of these
products and services to customers around the world. The Business segment is organized in three
customer groups: Enterprise and Public Sector, Business Markets and Other, and Wholesale.
 33 
Table of Contents
Operating Revenues and Selected Operating Statistics
 Years Ended (dollars in 
 December 31, 2024 2023 Increase/(Dec… millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Enterprise 
 and Public $ 14,218 $ 15,076 $ -858 -5.7 % 
 Sector 
 Business 
 Markets and 13,099 12,715 384 3.0 
 Other 
 Wholesale 2,214 2,331 -117 -5.0 
 Total 
 Operating $ 29,531 $ 30,122 $ -591 -2.0 
 Revenues(1) 
 Revenue 
 Statistics: 
 Wireless 
 service $ 13,753 $ 13,372 $ 381 2.8 
 revenue 
 Fios revenue $ 1,252 $ 1,235 $ 17 1.4 
 Connections 
 (‘000):(2) 
 Wireless 
 retail 30,819 29,779 1,040 3.5 
 postpaid 
 Fios internet 401 385 16 4.2 
 Fios video 54 61 -7 -11.5 
 FWA broadband 1,854 1,201 653 54.4 
 Wireline 459 460 -1 -0.2 
 broadband 
 Total 2,313 1,661 652 39.3 
 broadband 
 Net Additions 
 in Period 
 ('000): 
 Wireless 
 retail 1,010 1,242 -232 -18.7 
 postpaid 
 Wireless 
 retail 546 562 -16 -2.8 
 postpaid 
 phones 
 FWA broadband 622 547 75 13.7 
 Wireline -1 -8 7 87.5 
 broadband 
 Total 621 539 82 15.2 
 broadband 
 Churn Rate: 
 Wireless 
 retail 1.47 % 1.48 % 
 postpaid 
 Wireless 
 retail 1.11 % 1.13 % 
 postpaid 
 phones 
(1) Service and other revenues included in our Business segment were approximately $25.9 billion and
$26.4 billion for the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. Wireless equipment
revenues included in our Business segment were approximately $3.6 billion and $3.7 billion for the
years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively.
(2) As of end of period
Where applicable, the operating results reflect certain adjustments, including those related to the
3G network shutdowns, migration activity among different types of devices and plans, customer profile
changes, and adjustments in connection with mergers, acquisitions and divestitures.
Business's total operating revenues decreased during 2024 compared to 2023 as a result of decreases
in Enterprise and Public Sector and Wholesale revenues, partially offset by an increase in Business
Markets and Other revenue.
 Enterprise and Public Sector 
Enterprise and Public Sector offers wireless products and services as well as wireline connectivity
such as broadband and managed services to our large business and public sector customers. Large
businesses are identified based on their size and volume of business with Verizon. Public sector
customers include U.S. federal, state and local governments and educational institutions. Our
offerings to this customer group include plans with features and pricing designed to address their
specific needs.
Enterprise and Public Sector revenues decreased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily due to a
decrease of $702 million in wireline revenue primarily driven by declines in networking, traditional
data and voice communication services along with related professional services. These declines were
due to secular market pressure and technology shifts, coupled with lower customer premise equipment
sales volumes.
 Business Markets and Other 
Business Markets and Other offers wireless services (including FWA broadband), wireless equipment,
advanced communication services, tailored voice and networking products, Fios services, advanced
voice solutions and security services to businesses
 34 
Table of Contents
that ordinarily do not meet the requirements to be categorized as Enterprise and Public Sector, as
described above. Business Markets and Other also includes solutions that support mobile resource
management.
Business Markets and Other revenue increased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily as a result of:
• an increase of $486 million in Wireless service revenue primarily due to pricing actions and an
increase in our FWA subscriber base; and
• a decrease of $89 million in connection with the shutdown of our BlueJeans business offering in
2023 and a decline in traditional voice communication revenues.
 Wholesale 
Wholesale offers wireline communications services including data, voice, local dial tone and
broadband services primarily to local, long distance, and wireless carriers that use our facilities
to provide services to their customers.
Wholesale revenues decreased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily due to a decrease of $117 million
related to declines in traditional voice communication and network connectivity as a result of
technology substitution, as well as a decrease in core data.
Operating Expenses
 Years Ended (dollars in 
 December 31, 2024 2023 Increase/(Decr… millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cost of $ 9,742 $ 10,180 $ -438 -4.3 % 
 services 
 Cost of 
 wireless 4,841 4,959 -118 -2.4 
 equipment 
 Selling, 
 general and 8,583 8,429 154 1.8 
 administrati… 
 expense 
 Depreciation 
 and 4,307 4,488 -181 -4.0 
 amortization 
 expense 
 Total 
 Operating $ 27,473 $ 28,056 $ -583 -2.1 
 Expenses 
 Cost of Services 
Cost of services decreased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily due to:
• a decrease of $99 million in rent and lease expense primarily driven by a change in Business's
proportionate usage of shared leased assets;
• a decrease of $87 million in access costs primarily related to changes in usage and net circuit
access prices;
• a decrease of $82 million in customer premise equipment costs due to lower volumes sold; and
• a decrease of $63 million in personnel costs related to the impact of workforce changes, partially
offset by certain other post-employment benefit credits in 2023 that did not reoccur in 2024.
 Cost of Wireless Equipment 
Cost of wireless equipment decreased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily as a result of:
• a decrease of $385 million driven by a lower volume of wireless devices sold; and
• an increase of $267 million due to a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of wireless
devices sold.
 Selling, General and Administrative Expense 
Selling, general and administrative expense increased during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily as a
result of:
• an increase of $221 million in personnel costs primarily related to an increase in costs associated
with the transition to third-party contracted resources along with the impacts of a prior year
compensation plan assumption change that did not reoccur; and
• a decrease of $63 million in the provision for credit losses resulting from a reduction in bad debt
reserves.
 Depreciation and Amortization Expense 
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased during 2024 compared to 2023 driven by the change in
the mix of total Verizon depreciable and amortizable assets and Business's usage of those assets.
 35 
Table of Contents
 Segment Operating Income and EBITDA 
 Years Ended (dollars in 
 December 31, 2024 2023 Decrease millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Segment Operating $ 2,058 $ 2,066 $ -8 -0.4 % 
 Income 
 Add Depreciation 
 and amortization 4,307 4,488 -181 -4.0 
 expense 
 Segment EBITDA $ 6,365 $ 6,554 $ -189 -2.9 
 Segment operating 7.0 % 6.9 % 
 income margin 
 Segment EBITDA 21.6 % 21.8 % 
 margin 
The changes in the table above during the periods presented were primarily a result of the factors
described above in connection with Business operating revenues and operating expenses.
 Special Items 
Special items included in Income Before Provision For Income Taxes were as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Amortization of acquisition-related 
 intangible assets(1) 
 Depreciation and amortization expense $ 817 $ 865 
 Severance, pension and benefits charges 
 (credits) 
 Selling, general and administrative 1,733 533 
 expense 
 Other (income) expense, net -532 992 
 Asset and business rationalization 
 Cost of services 189 22 
 Selling, general and administrative 185 458 
 expense 
 Legacy legal matter 
 Selling, general and administrative 106 — 
 expense 
 Verizon Business Group goodwill 
 impairment 
 Verizon Business Group goodwill — 5,841 
 impairment 
 Legal settlement 
 Selling, general and administrative — 100 
 expense 
 Business transformation costs 
 Cost of services — 15 
 Selling, general and administrative — 161 
 expense 
 Non-strategic business shutdown 
 Depreciation and amortization expense — 21 
 Cost of services — 45 
 Selling, general and administrative — 113 
 expense 
 Total $ 2,498 $ 9,166 
(1) Amounts are included in segment results of operations.
Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP measure discussed in the section titled "Consolidated Net
Income, Consolidated EBITDA and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA" as part of Consolidated Results of
Operations, excludes all of the amounts included above.
The income and expenses related to special items included in our consolidated results of operations
were as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2024 2023 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Within Total Operating Expenses $ 3,030 $ 8,174 
 Within Other (income) expense, net -532 992 
 Total $ 2,498 $ 9,166 
Amortization of Acquisition-Related Intangible Assets
During 2024 and 2023, we recorded pre-tax amortization expense of $817 million and $865 million,
respectively, related to acquired intangible assets.
 36 
Table of Contents
 Severance, Pension and Benefits Charges (Credits) 
During 2024, we recorded pre-tax severance charges of $1.7 billion, related to separations under our
voluntary separation program for select U.S.-based management employees as well as other headcount
reduction initiatives. The severance charges were recorded in Selling, general and administrative
expense in our consolidated statement of income.
During 2024, in accordance with our accounting policy to recognize actuarial gains and losses in the
period in which they occur, we recorded a net pre-tax pension and benefits credit of $532 million in
our pension and postretirement benefit plans. The net gain was recorded in Other income (expense),
net in our consolidated statement of income and was primarily driven by:
• a credit of $1.3 billion ($635 million for pension plans and $656 million for postretirement
benefit plans) due to an increase in our discount rate assumption used to determine the current year
liabilities of our plans from a weighted-average of 5.0% for both our pension and post retirement
plans at December 31, 2023 to a weighted-average of 5.8% for our pension plans and 5.6% for our
postretirement benefit plans at December 31, 2024;
• a charge of $711 million due to the difference between our estimated and actual return on assets;
and
• a net charge of $48 million primarily due to other actuarial assumption adjustments.
During 2023, we recorded net pre-tax severance charges of $533 million, primarily related to
involuntary separations under our existing plans, in Selling, general and administrative expense in
our consolidated statement of income.
During 2023, in accordance with our accounting policy to recognize actuarial gains and losses in the
period in which they occur, we recorded net pre-tax pension and benefits charges of $992 million in
our pension and postretirement benefit plans. The charges were recorded in Other income (expense),
net in our consolidated statement of income and were primarily driven by:
• a charge of $534 million due to an increase in our healthcare cost trend rate assumption used to
determine the current year liabilities of our postretirement benefit plans from a weighted-average of
6.6% at December 31, 2022 to a weighted-average of 7.3% at December 31, 2023;
• a charge of $503 million ($288 million for pension plans and $215 million for postretirement
benefit plans) due to a decrease in our discount rate assumption used to determine the current year
liabilities of our plans from a weighted-average of 5.2% at December 31, 2022 to a weighted-average
of 5.0% at December 31, 2023; and
• a net credit of $45 million primarily due to other actuarial assumption adjustments, which includes
the difference between our estimated and our actual return on plan assets.
Due to the presentation of the other components of net periodic benefit cost, we recognize a portion
of the pension and benefits charges (credits) in Other income (expense), net in our consolidated
statements of income.
See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to severance,
pension and benefits charges (credits).
 Asset and Business Rationalization 
During 2024, we recorded a pre-tax asset and business rationalization charge of $374 million
predominately related to the decision to cease use of certain real estate assets and exit non-
strategic portions of certain businesses as part of our continued transformation initiatives.
During 2023, we recorded pre-tax asset rationalization charges of $480 million. Asset rationalization
charges of $155 million recorded during the second quarter of 2023 related to certain real estate and
non-strategic assets that we made a decision to cease use of as part of our transformation
initiatives. Asset rationalization charges of $325 million recorded during the fourth quarter of 2023
primarily related to Business network assets that we made a decision to cease use of as part of our
continued transformation initiatives.
 Legacy Legal Matter 
During 2024, we recorded a pre-tax charge of $106 million associated with a litigation matter related
to a legacy contract for the production of telephone directories in Costa Rica by a subsidiary of the
Company.
 Verizon Business Group Goodwill Impairment 
During 2023, we recorded a pre-tax charge of $5.8 billion as a result of the annual goodwill
impairment test performed in the fourth quarter. See "Critical Accounting Estimates" for additional
information.
 Legal Settlement 
During 2023, we recorded a pre-tax charge of $100 million related to the settlement of a litigation
matter regarding certain administrative fees.
 Business Transformation Costs 
During 2023, we recorded pre-tax charges of $176 million primarily related to costs incurred in
connection with strategic partnership initiatives in our managed network support services for certain
Business customers.
 37 
Table of Contents
 Non-Strategic Business Shutdown 
During 2023, we recorded pre-tax charges of $179 million related to the shutdown of our BlueJeans
business offering.
 Operating Environment and Trends 
The telecommunications industry is highly competitive, and we expect competition to remain intense as
traditional and non-traditional participants seek increased market share. We believe that our high-
quality networks and customer base in addition to our attractive offerings and value proposition
differentiate us from our competitors and give us the ability to plan and manage through changing
market conditions. We remain focused on executing on the fundamentals of the business: enhancing our
networks, offering innovative services and products, growing and maintaining a high-quality customer
base, and delivering strong financial and operating results. We also continue to focus on cost
efficiencies in order to have flexibility to adjust to changes in the competitive and economic
environments and increase shareholder value.
The U.S. wireless market has achieved a high penetration of smartphones, which reduces the
opportunity for new phone connection growth for the industry. We expect the wireless industry's
customer growth rate to moderate over time in comparison to historical growth rates, furthering
competition for customers. Future revenue growth in the industry is expected to be driven by
expanding existing customer relationships, increasing the number of ways customers can connect with
wireless networks and services and increasing the penetration of FWA and connected devices including
wearables, tablets and IoT devices. Although certain advanced use cases for 5G technologies and
related ecosystems are in the early phases of adoption, we believe that they will provide an
opportunity for growth in the coming years.
We expect future service revenue growth opportunities to arise from increased access revenue as
customer demand for mobile and FWA 5G connectivity continues to expand and customers shift to higher
access plans. Additionally, we expect service revenue to benefit from targeted pricing actions and
increased connections per account. Future service revenue growth opportunities will be dependent on
expanding the penetration of our services, increasing the number of ways that our customers can
connect with our networks and services and the development of new 5G use cases and ecosystems.
Pricing plays an increasingly important role in the wireless competitive landscape. As the demand for
wireless services continues to grow, wireless service providers are offering a range of service plans
and bundled services at competitive prices. In addition, aggressive device promotions have become
more common in recent years in an effort to encourage customers to switch carriers, as well as retain
existing customers. We compete in this area by offering our customers services and devices, with a
variety of content options and other perks, that we believe provide significant value for the price.
We and other wireless service providers, as well as equipment manufacturers, offer device payment
options, which provide customers with the ability to pay for their device over a period of time, and
some providers offer device leasing arrangements.
For further details on competitive environment and trends, refer to "Business — Competition and
Related Trends" in Part I, Item 1 and "Risk Factors — Economic and Strategic Risks — We face
significant competition that may negatively affect our operating results" in Part I, Item 1A of this
Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 Connection Trends 
In our Consumer segment, we are focused on attracting new customers and maintaining our high-quality
retail postpaid customer base by capitalizing on demand for reliable high-speed connectivity and
customizable, personalized offerings and solutions. We believe the combination of our wireless
network quality and service and product offerings represents an attractive value proposition and
provides a compelling customer experience, supporting increased penetration of data services. While
our Consumer segment experienced diminished wireless connection growth in recent years, we expect
that future connection growth opportunities will be driven by the comparative value we provide to our
customers, as well as our FWA broadband service. In our prepaid business, while we expect to continue
to operate in a highly competitive environment, we are making improvements to achieve long-term
growth.
We expect to continue to grow our Fios internet connections as we seek to expand availability of
Fios, increase our penetration rates within our Fios service areas, and experience continued strong
demand for higher speed internet connections. Our pending acquisition of Frontier is expected to
enhance our fiber broadband footprint and provide opportunities for future growth. At the same time,
we expect continued growth of FWA connections to complement strong Fios results as demand for
broadband services continues to grow.
In Fios video, the business continues to face ongoing pressure as observed throughout the linear
television market. We have experienced continuing access line and DSL losses as customers have
switched to alternative technologies such as wireless, VoIP, and cable for voice and data services,
and we expect this trend to continue.
In our Business segment, we offer wireless products and services to business and public sector
customers across the U.S. We continue to grow our connections while operating in a highly competitive
environment. We expect that this connection growth, combined with our industry-leading network
assets, will provide additional opportunities to sell solutions, such as those around security,
private networking and other network connectivity services, advanced communications and professional
services.
 38 
Table of Contents
In addition, in both our Consumer and our Business segments, we expect to support connection growth
in part by adding capacity and further expanding our wireless coverage, and by continuing the build-
out and densification of our 5G network.
 Service Revenue Trends 
In our Consumer segment, we expect continued growth in our wireless service revenue, driven by
targeted pricing actions, migrations to higher priced plans, increased offering of perks, and
increases in FWA connections and revenue, offset in part by higher promotion amortization impacts in
2025. Our efforts to maintain and grow our customer base and make improvements to our prepaid
business, if successful, are also expected to benefit our wireless service revenue. We expect Fios
revenue to benefit from growth in our Fios customer base and an ongoing demand for higher speed
internet connections, which offsets the impact of the shift from bundled wireline services to
standalone internet service.
In our Business segment, we expect wireless service revenue to expand, driven by growth from an
increase in wireless volumes and strong FWA revenue. We expect that Fios, through increased
penetration, will also contribute to revenue growth and that legacy traditional wireline services
will continue to face secular pressures.
 Other Trends 
We are focused on achieving profitable growth as we continue to deliver strong revenues and undertake
initiatives to reduce costs and improve efficiencies, including through AI-driven technologies.
We expect that our ability to generate cash flows will benefit from our expected service revenue
growth, despite the moderate expected increase in our 2025 capital program compared to 2024. See
"Liquidity and Capital Resources" for additional information on our capital program.
In the course of business, we make promotional equipment offers to attract and retain customers. In
2024, the growth of our wireless service revenue was unfavorably impacted by the amortization of
wireless equipment sales and promotions. We expect these pressures to continue and increase in 2025.
In addition, in 2023 and 2024, we had fewer phone upgrades compared to prior years. To the extent
upgrade volumes increase in 2025, the expenses associated with those device sales are expected to
contribute to higher costs.
 Liquidity and Capital Resources 
We use the net cash generated from our operations to invest in new businesses and spectrum, fund
expansion and modernization of our networks, pay dividends, service and repay external financing and,
when appropriate, buy back shares of our outstanding common stock. Our sources of funds, primarily
from operations and, to the extent necessary, from external financing arrangements, are sufficient to
meet ongoing operating and investing requirements over the next 12 months and beyond.
Our cash and cash equivalents balance is $4.2 billion as of December 31, 2024. Our cash and cash
equivalents are held both domestically and internationally, and are invested to maintain principal
and provide liquidity. See "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk" for
additional information regarding our foreign currency risk management strategies.
We expect that our capital spending requirements will continue to be financed primarily through
internally generated funds. Debt or equity financing may be needed to fund additional investments or
development activities, including, for example, to complete our acquisition of Frontier, or to
maintain an appropriate capital structure to ensure our financial flexibility. Our external financing
arrangements include credit facilities and other bank lines of credit, an active commercial paper
program, vendor financing arrangements, issuances of registered debt or equity securities, U.S.
retail medium-term notes and other securities that are privately-placed or offered overseas. In
addition, we monetize certain receivables through asset-backed debt transactions.
 Capital Expenditures 
Our 2025 capital program includes capital to fund advanced networks and services, including expanding
and adding capacity and density to our core networks, the ongoing deployment of C-Band spectrum, and
advancing our network architecture. It will also support our broadband expansion plans including the
launch of our fixed wireless access solution for multi-dwelling units. We anticipate cash
requirements for our 2025 capital program to be between $17.5 billion and $18.5 billion.
 Contractual Obligations and Commitments 
We have various contractual obligations and commitments. The following represent our anticipated
material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations as of December 31, 2024:
• Long-term debt, including current maturities, commitments of $142.2 billion, of which $21.7 billion
(including $3.3 billion of unsecured debt) are expected to be due within the next twelve months.
Related interest payments are $66.3 billion, of which $5.8 billion, are expected to be due within the
next twelve months. Items included in long-term debt with variable coupon rates exclude unamortized
debt issuance costs, and are described in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements.
 39 
Table of Contents
• Operating lease obligations of $29.1 billion and Finance lease obligations of $2.5 billion, of
which $5.0 billion and $954 million, respectively, are expected to be due within the next twelve
months. In addition, Verizon has an obligation of $3.7 billion representing future minimum payments
under the leaseback and sublease arrangements for our cell towers, of which $447 million is expected
to be due within the next twelve months. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional information.
• Unconditional purchase obligations, with terms in excess of one year, amount to $16.7 billion, of
which $6.2 billion is expected to be due within the next twelve months. Items included in
unconditional purchase obligations are primarily commitments to purchase content, network equipment,
software and services, marketing services and other items which will be used or sold in the ordinary
course of business. These amounts do not represent our entire anticipated purchases in the future,
but represent only those items that are the subject of contractual obligations. We also purchase
products and services as needed with no firm commitment. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial
statements for additional information.
• Other long-term liabilities, including current maturities, of $3.9 billion, of which approximately
$726 million is expected to be due within the next twelve months. Other long-term liabilities
represent estimated postretirement benefit and qualified pension plan contributions. Qualified
pension plan contributions include estimated minimum funding contributions. We expect that there will
be no required pension funding through the end of 2025, subject to changes in market conditions.
Postretirement benefit payments include future postretirement benefit payments. These estimated
amounts: (1) are subject to change based on changes to assumptions and future plan performance, which
could impact the timing and/or amounts of these payments; and (2) exclude expectations beyond 5 years
due to uncertainty of the timing and amounts.
• We are not able to make a reasonable estimate of when the unrecognized tax benefits balance of $2.6
billion and related interest and penalties will be settled with the respective taxing authorities
until the related tax audits are further developed or resolved.
 Consolidated Financial Condition 
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2024 2023 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash Flows Provided By (Used In) 
 Operating activities $ 36,912 $ 37,475 
 Investing activities -18,674 -23,432 
 Financing activities -17,100 -14,657 
 Increase (decrease) in cash, cash $ 1,138 $ -614 
 equivalents and restricted cash 
 Cash Flows Provided By Operating Activities 
Our primary source of funds continues to be cash generated from operations. Net cash provided by
operating activities decreased $563 million during 2024 compared to 2023 primarily due to changes in
working capital, partially offset by an increase in earnings and an increase in Other, net cash flow
from operating activities.
Changes in current assets and liabilities, net of effects from acquisition/disposition of businesses
The change in working capital was primarily driven by higher cash income taxes paid in the current
period as well as higher interest expense and severance payments primarily related to separations
under our voluntary separation program.
 Other, Net 
Other, net cash flow from operating activities during 2024 includes $2.0 billion of proceeds related
to the transaction with Vertical Bridge REIT, LLC (Vertical Bridge). These proceeds were partially
offset by discretionary contributions made in March 2024 in the aggregate amount of $365 million to
our qualified pension plans. We expect that there will be no required pension funding through the end
of 2025, subject to changes in market conditions.
 Cash Flows Used In Investing Activities 
 Capital Expenditures 
Capital expenditures continue to relate primarily to the use of capital resources to enhance the
operating efficiency and productivity of our networks, maintain our existing infrastructure,
facilitate the introduction of new products and services and enhance responsiveness to competitive
challenges.
Capital expenditures, including capitalized software, were $17.1 billion and $18.8 billion for 2024
and 2023, respectively. Capital expenditures decreased approximately $1.7 billion during 2024,
compared to 2023, primarily due to the completion of our accelerated $10 billion C-Band deployment
program in 2023.
 Acquisitions of Wireless Licenses 
During 2024 and 2023, we made payments of $269 million and $4.3 billion, respectively, for
obligations related to clearing costs and accelerated clearing incentives associated with Auction 107
.
 40 
Table of Contents
During 2024 and 2023, we recorded capitalized interest related to wireless licenses of $616 million
and $1.4 billion, respectively.
Collateral Receipts (Payments) Related to Derivative Contracts, Net
During 2024, we made collateral payments of $712 million related to derivative contracts, net of
receipts. During 2023, we received return of collateral posted of $880 million related to derivative
contracts, net of payments. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for additional
information.
 Cash Flows Used In Financing Activities 
We seek to maintain a mix of fixed and variable rate debt to lower borrowing costs within reasonable
risk parameters and to protect against earnings and cash flow volatility resulting from changes in
market conditions. During 2024 and 2023, net cash used in financing activities was $17.1 billion and
$14.7 billion, respectively.
 2024 
During 2024, our net cash used in financing activities of $17.1 billion was primarily driven by $20.3
billion used for repayments and repurchases of long-term borrowings (secured and unsecured) as well
as finance lease obligations, $11.2 billion used for dividend payments, and $1.1 billion used for
other financing activities. These cash flows used in financing activities were partially offset by
$15.6 billion provided by proceeds from long-term borrowings, which included $12.4 billion of
proceeds from our asset-backed debt transactions.
Proceeds from and Repayments and Repurchases of Long-Term Borrowings
At December 31, 2024, our total debt decreased to $144.0 billion compared to $150.7 billion at
December 31, 2023. Our effective interest rate was 5.1% and 4.9% during the years ended December 31,
2024 and 2023, respectively. We have entered into interest rate swaps to achieve a targeted mix of
fixed and variable rate debt, managing our exposure to changes in interest rates. See "Quantitative
and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk" and Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements
for additional information.
At December 31, 2024, approximately $30.5 billion, or 20.6%, of the aggregate principal amount of our
total debt portfolio consisted of foreign denominated debt, primarily Euro and British Pound
Sterling. We have entered into cross currency swaps on our foreign denominated debt in order to fix
our future interest and principal payments in U.S. dollars and mitigate the impact of foreign
currency transaction gains or losses. See "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market
Risk" for additional information.
Verizon may acquire debt securities issued by Verizon and its affiliates through open market
purchases, redemptions, privately negotiated transactions, tender offers, exchange offers, or
otherwise, upon such terms and at such prices as Verizon may from time to time determine, for cash or
other consideration.
 Other, Net 
Other, net cash flow from financing activities during 2024 includes $830 million in proceeds related
to financing obligations for the cell towers transaction with Vertical Bridge. These proceeds were
partially offset by $431 million in payments related to vendor financing arrangements, $425 million
in equity distribution payments made for controlled entities, $313 million in payments made under the
sublease arrangement for our cell towers, $280 million in cash consideration payments to acquire
additional interest in certain controlled entities and $243 million in payments for settlement of
cross currency swaps. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information
on the Vertical Bridge transaction. See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional information on noncontrolling interests.
 Dividends 
The Board of Directors of the Company assesses the level of our dividend payments on a periodic basis
taking into account such factors as long-term growth opportunities, internal cash requirements and
the expectations of our shareholders. During the third quarter of 2024, our Board of Directors
increased our quarterly dividend payment by 1.9% to $0.6775 from $0.6650 per share in the preceding
quarter. This is the eighteenth consecutive year that Company’s Board of Directors has approved a
quarterly dividend increase.
As in prior periods, dividend payments were a significant use of capital resources. During 2024, we
paid $11.2 billion in dividends.
 2023 
During 2023, our net cash used in financing activities of $14.7 billion was primarily driven by $11.0
billion used for dividend payments, $10.6 billion used for repayments and repurchases of long-term
borrowings (secured and unsecured) as well as finance lease obligations and $1.5 billion used for
other financing activities. These cash flows used in financing activities were
 41 
Table of Contents
partially offset by $8.6 billion provided by proceeds from long-term borrowings, which included $6.6
billion of proceeds from our asset-backed debt transactions.
Proceeds from and Repayments and Repurchases of Long-Term Borrowings
At December 31, 2023, our total debt was $150.7 billion. During the year ended December 31, 2023, our
effective interest rate was 4.9%. We have entered into interest rate swaps to achieve a targeted mix
of fixed and variable rate debt, managing our exposure to changes in interest rates. See
"Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk" and Note 7 to the consolidated financial
statements for additional information.
At December 31, 2023, approximately $33.7 billion, or 21.7%, of the aggregate principal amount of our
total debt portfolio consisted of foreign denominated debt, primarily Euro and British Pound
Sterling. We have entered into cross currency swaps on our foreign denominated debt in order to fix
our future interest and principal payments in U.S. dollars and mitigate the impact of foreign
currency transaction gains or losses. See "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market
Risk" for additional information.
 Other, Net 
Other, net cash flow from financing activities during 2023 includes $302 million in payments made
under the sublease arrangement for our cell towers, $257 million in payments for contingent
consideration related to the acquisition of TracFone Wireless, Inc. (TracFone) and $252 million in
payments related to vendor financing arrangements. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial
statements for additional information on the TracFone contingent considerations.
 Dividends 
During the third quarter of 2023, our Board of Directors increased our quarterly dividend payment by
1.9% to $0.6650 per share.
During 2023, we paid $11.0 billion in dividends.
 Asset-Backed Debt 
Cash collections on the receivables and on the underlying receivables related to the participation
interest collateralizing our asset-backed debt securities are required at certain specified times to
be placed into segregated accounts. Deposits to the segregated accounts are considered restricted
cash and are included in Prepaid expenses and other and Other assets in our consolidated balance
sheets.
Proceeds from our asset-backed debt transactions are reflected in Cash flows from financing
activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows. The asset-backed debt issued is included in
Debt maturing within one year and Long-term debt in our consolidated balance sheets.
See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
 Long-Term Credit Facilities 
 At 
 December 
 31, 2024 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (dollars Facility Unused Principal 
 in Maturiti… Capacity Capacity Amount 
 million… Outstandi… 
 Verizon 
 revolvi… 2028 $ 12,000 $ 11,963 $ — 
 credit 
 facilit… 
 Various 
 export 2025 - 10,000 — 5,441 
 credit 2031 
 facilit… 
 Total $ 22,000 $ 11,963 $ 5,441 
(1) The revolving credit facility does not require us to comply with financial covenants or maintain
specified credit ratings, and it permits us to borrow even if our business has incurred a material
adverse change. The revolving credit facility provides for the issuance of letters of credit. As of
December 31, 2024, there have been no drawings against the revolving credit facility since its
inception.
(2) During 2024, there were no drawings from these facilities. During 2023, we drew down $1.0 billion
from these facilities. Borrowings under certain of these facilities are amortized semi-annually in
equal installments up to the applicable maturity dates. Maturities reflect maturity dates of
principal amounts outstanding. Any amounts borrowed under these facilities and subsequently repaid
cannot be reborrowed.
In March 2024, we amended our $9.5 billion revolving credit facility to increase the capacity to
$12.0 billion and extended its maturity to 2028.
 42 
Table of Contents
 Common Stock 
Common stock has been used from time to time to satisfy some of the funding requirements of employee
and shareholder plans. During the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023, we issued 5.4 million and
4.4 million shares of common stock from treasury stock, which had aggregate values of $238 million
and $192 million, respectively.
In February 2020, the Board of Directors of the Company authorized a share buyback program to
repurchase up to 100 million shares of our common stock. The program will terminate when the
aggregate number of shares purchased reaches 100 million, or a new share repurchase plan superseding
the current plan is authorized, whichever is sooner. The program permits Verizon to repurchase shares
over time, with the amount and timing of repurchases depending on market conditions and corporate
needs. There were no repurchases of common stock during 2024 and 2023 under our authorized share
buyback program.
 Credit Ratings 
Verizon’s credit ratings did not change in 2024 or 2023.
Securities ratings assigned by rating organizations are expressions of opinion and are not
recommendations to buy, sell or hold securities. A securities rating is subject to revision or
withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization. Each rating should be evaluated
independently of any other rating.
 Covenants 
Our credit agreements contain covenants that are typical for large, investment grade companies. These
covenants include requirements to pay interest and principal in a timely fashion, pay taxes, maintain
insurance with responsible and reputable insurance companies, preserve our corporate existence, keep
appropriate books and records of financial transactions, maintain our properties, provide financial
and other reports to our lenders, limit pledging and disposition of assets and mergers and
consolidations, and other similar covenants.
We and our consolidated subsidiaries are in compliance with all of our restrictive covenants in our
debt agreements.
Change In Cash, Cash Equivalents and Restricted Cash
Our Cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2024 totaled $4.2 billion, a $2.1 billion increase
compared to December 31, 2023, primarily as a result of the factors discussed above.
Restricted cash at December 31, 2024 totaled $441 million, a $991 million decrease compared to
restricted cash at December 31, 2023, primarily related to cash collections on certain receivables
and on the underlying receivables related to the participation interest that are required at certain
specified times to be placed into segregated accounts. The decrease of $991 million in restricted
cash was primarily due to a change in the timing on when cash collections on certain receivables
collateralizing our asset-backed debt securities are required to be placed into segregated accounts.
 Free Cash Flow 
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that reflects an additional way of viewing our
liquidity that, we believe, when viewed with our GAAP results, provides management, investors and
other users of our financial information with a more complete understanding of factors and trends
affecting our cash flows. Free cash flow is calculated by subtracting capital expenditures (including
capitalized software) from net cash provided by operating activities. We believe it is a more
conservative measure of cash flow since capital expenditures are necessary for ongoing operations.
Free cash flow has limitations due to the fact that it does not represent the residual cash flow
available for discretionary expenditures. For example, free cash flow does not incorporate payments
made on finance lease obligations or cash payments for business acquisitions or wireless licenses.
Therefore, we believe it is important to view free cash flow as a complement to our entire
consolidated statements of cash flows.
The following table reconciles net cash provided by operating activities to free cash flow:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2024 2023 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net cash provided by operating $ 36,912 $ 37,475 
 activities 
 Less Capital expenditures (including 17,090 18,767 
 capitalized software) 
 Free cash flow $ 19,822 $ 18,708 
The increase in free cash flow during 2024 is a reflection of the decrease in capital expenditures,
partially offset by the decrease in operating cash flows, both of which are discussed above.
 43 
Table of Contents
Employee Benefit Plans Funded Status and Contributions
 Employer Contributions 
We operate numerous qualified and nonqualified pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans.
These plans primarily relate to our domestic business units. During 2024, we made discretionary
contributions in the aggregate amount of $365 million to our qualified pension plans. During 2023, we
made a discretionary contribution of $200 million to one of our qualified pension plans. During 2024
and 2023, we made contributions of $56 million and $52 million to our nonqualified pension plans,
respectively.
Our overall investment strategy is to achieve a mix of assets that allows us to meet projected
benefit payments while taking into consideration risk and return. In an effort to reduce the risk of
our portfolio strategy and better align assets with liabilities, we have adopted a liability driven
pension strategy that seeks to better match the interest rate sensitivity of the liability hedging
assets with the interest rate sensitivity of the liability. We expect that the strategy will reduce
the likelihood that assets will decline at a time when liabilities increase (referred to as liability
hedging), with the goal to reduce the risk of underfunding to the plan and its participants and
beneficiaries. Over time, as the asset allocation shifts to more liability hedging assets, this
strategy will generally result in lower expected asset returns. For 2025, we expect no required
qualified pension plan contributions and insignificant nonqualified pension plan contributions.
Contributions to our other postretirement benefit plans generally relate to payments for benefits on
an as-incurred basis since these other postretirement benefit plans do not have funding requirements
similar to the pension plans. We contributed $935 million and $936 million to our other
postretirement benefit plans in 2024 and 2023, respectively. Contributions to our other
postretirement benefit plans are estimated to be approximately $726 million in 2025.
 Leasing Arrangements 
See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to leasing
arrangements.
 Guarantees 
We guarantee the debentures of our operating telephone company subsidiaries. See Note 7 to the
consolidated financial statements for additional information.
In connection with the execution of agreements for the sale of businesses and investments, Verizon
ordinarily provides representations and warranties to the purchasers pertaining to a variety of
nonfinancial matters, such as ownership of the securities being sold, as well as financial losses.
See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
As of December 31, 2024, letters of credit totaling approximately $816 million, which were executed
in the normal course of business and support several financing arrangements and payment obligations
to third parties, were outstanding. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional information.
 Other Future Obligations 
As of December 31, 2024, Verizon had 28 renewable energy purchase agreements with third parties for a
total of approximately 3.7 gigawatts of anticipated renewable energy capacity across multiple states.
See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
 Critical Accounting Estimates 
 Critical Accounting Estimates 
A summary of the critical accounting estimates used in preparing our financial statements are as
follows:
 Wireless Licenses and Goodwill 
Wireless licenses and goodwill are a significant component of our consolidated assets. Both our
wireless licenses and goodwill are treated as indefinite-lived intangible assets and, therefore are
not amortized, but rather are tested for impairment annually in the fourth fiscal quarter, unless
there are events requiring an earlier assessment or changes in circumstances during an interim period
suggesting impairment indicators are present. We believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable
and represent appropriate marketplace considerations as of the valuation date. Although we use
consistent methodologies in developing the assumptions and estimates underlying the fair value
calculations used in our impairment tests, these estimates and assumptions are uncertain by nature,
may change over time and can vary from actual results. It is possible that in the future there may be
changes in our estimates and assumptions, including the timing and amount of future cash flows,
margins, growth rates, market participant assumptions, comparable benchmark companies and related
multiples and discount rates, which could result in different fair value estimates. Significant and
adverse changes to any one or more of the above-noted estimates and assumptions could result in an
impairment to our wireless licenses and goodwill impairment for one or more of our reporting units.
 44 
Table of Contents
 Wireless Licenses 
The carrying value of our wireless licenses was approximately $156.6 billion as of December 31, 2024.
We aggregate our wireless licenses into one single unit of accounting, as we utilize our wireless
licenses on an integrated basis as part of our nationwide wireless network. Our wireless licenses
provide us with the exclusive right to utilize certain radio frequency spectrum to provide wireless
communication services. There are currently no legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic
or other factors that limit the useful life of our wireless licenses.
We test our wireless licenses for potential impairment annually or more frequently if impairment
indicators are present. We have the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine
whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. However, we may elect to bypass
the qualitative assessment in any period and proceed directly to performing the quantitative
impairment test. It is our policy to perform quantitative impairment assessment at least every three
years.
Our quantitative impairment assessment consisted of comparing the estimated fair value of our
aggregate wireless licenses to the aggregated carrying amount as of the test date. Under our
quantitative assessment, we estimated the fair value of our wireless licenses using the Greenfield
approach. The Greenfield approach is an income based valuation approach that values the wireless
licenses by calculating the cash flow generating potential of a hypothetical start-up company that
goes into business with no assets except the wireless licenses to be valued. A discounted cash flow
analysis is used to estimate what a marketplace participant would be willing to pay to purchase the
aggregated wireless licenses as of the valuation date. As a result, we were required to make
significant estimates about future cash flows and profitability specifically associated with our
wireless licenses, an appropriate discount rate based on the risk associated with those estimated
cash flows and assumed terminal value and growth rates. We considered current and expected future
economic conditions, current and expected availability of wireless network technology and
infrastructure and related equipment and the costs thereof as well as other relevant factors in
estimating future cash flows and profitability. The discount rate represented our estimate of the
weighted-average cost of capital (WACC), or expected return, that a marketplace participant would
have required as of the valuation date and includes a risk premium associated with the current and
expected economic conditions as of the valuation date. We developed the discount rate based on our
consideration of the cost of debt and equity of a group of guideline companies as of the valuation
date. The terminal value growth rate represented our estimate of the marketplace's long-term growth
rate.
During the fourth quarter of 2023, we performed a qualitative impairment assessment as our annual
impairment test to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our wireless
licenses was less than the carrying amount. As part of our qualitative assessment we considered
several factors including the enterprise value of our combined wireless business, macroeconomic
conditions (including changes in interest rates and discount rates), industry and market
considerations (including industry revenue and EBITDA margin results, projections and recent merger
and acquisition activity), the recent and projected financial performance of our combined wireless
business as a whole, as well as other factors including the result of our last quantitative
assessment performed in 2021. Our annual impairment test in 2023 indicated that it is more likely
than not that the fair value of our wireless licenses remained above their carrying value and,
therefore, did not result in an impairment.
During the fourth quarter of 2024, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment in accordance
with our policy. The quantitative impairment assessment we performed during the fourth quarter of
2024 indicated that the fair value of our wireless licenses is substantially in excess of their
carrying value and, therefore, did not result in an impairment. In the event of a 10% decline in the
fair value of our wireless licenses, the fair value would have still exceeded their carrying value.
We do not believe reasonable changes in significant estimates would change the outcome to this
quantitative assessment. For instance, if either the terminal value growth rate declined by 50 basis
points (bps) or if the WACC increased by 50 bps, the fair value of wireless licenses would still
exceed their carrying value.
 Goodwill 
At both December 31, 2024 and 2023, the balance of our goodwill was approximately $22.8 billion, of
which $21.2 billion was in our Consumer reporting unit and $1.7 billion was in our Business reporting
unit.
To determine if goodwill is potentially impaired, we have the option to perform a qualitative
assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is
less than its carrying value. If we elect not to conduct the qualitative assessment or if indications
of a potential impairment exist, the determination of whether an impairment has occurred requires the
fair value of each reporting unit to be assessed. It is our policy to perform quantitative impairment
assessments at least every three years.
Under the qualitative assessment, we consider several factors, including the enterprise value of the
reporting unit from the last quantitative test and the excess of fair value over carrying value from
this test, macroeconomic conditions (including changes in interest rates and discount rates),
industry and market considerations (including industry revenue and EBITDA margin results, projections
and recent merger and acquisition activity), the recent and projected financial performance of the
reporting unit, as well as other factors.
Under the quantitative assessment, the fair value of the reporting unit is calculated using an
average of the market approach and a discounted cash flow method, as a form of the income approach.
The market approach includes the use of comparative multiples to complement discounted cash flow
results. The discounted cash flow method is based on the present value of two
 45 
Table of Contents
components-projected cash flows and a terminal value. The terminal value represents the expected
normalized future cash flows of the reporting unit beyond the cash flows from the discrete projection
period. The fair value of the reporting unit using the income approach is calculated based on the sum
of the present value of the cash flows from the discrete period and the present value of the terminal
value. The discount rate represents our estimate of the WACC, or expected return, that a marketplace
participant would have required as of the valuation date. The application of our goodwill impairment
test requires key assumptions underlying our valuation model. The discounted cash flow analysis
factors in assumptions on discount rates and terminal growth rates to reflect risk profiles of key
strategic revenue and cost initiatives, as well as revenue and EBITDA growth relative to history and
market trends and expectations. The market multiples approach reflects significant judgment involved
in the selection of comparable public company multiples and benchmarks. The selection of companies
and multiples is influenced by differences in growth and profitability, and volatility in market
prices of peer companies. These valuation inputs are inherently judgmental, and an adverse change in
one or a combination of these inputs could result in a goodwill impairment.
During the fourth quarter of 2023, we performed a qualitative impairment assessment for our Consumer
reporting unit. Our qualitative assessment indicated that it was more likely than not that the fair
value of our Consumer reporting unit exceeded its carrying value and, therefore, did not result in an
impairment.
During the fourth quarter of 2024, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment for our Consumer
reporting unit in accordance with our policy. We applied a combination of a market approach and a
discounted cash flow method reflecting current assumptions and inputs, including our revised
projections, discount rate and expected growth rates. Our assessment indicated that the fair value of
our Consumer reporting unit substantially exceeded its carrying value and, therefore, did not result
in an impairment. In the event of a 10% decline in the fair value of our Consumer reporting unit, the
fair value of the Consumer reporting unit would have still exceeded its book value. We do not believe
reasonable changes in significant assumptions would change the outcome to this quantitative
assessment. For instance, if either the terminal value growth rate declined by 50 bps or if the
discount rate increased by 50 bps, the fair value of our Consumer reporting unit would still exceed
its carrying value.
During the fourth quarter of 2023, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment for our Business
reporting unit given the low excess of fair value over carrying value identified in our 2022 annual
impairment assessment and increased competitive and market pressures experienced throughout 2023.
These pressures resulted in lower projected cash flows primarily driven by secular declines in
wireline services and products across our Business customer groups. In connection with Verizon’s
annual budget process in the fourth quarter of 2023, leadership completed a comprehensive five-year
strategic planning review of our Business reporting unit resulting in declines in financial
projections driven by market dynamics as compared to the prior year five-year strategic planning
cycle. The revised projections were used as a key input into the Business reporting unit’s annual
goodwill impairment test performed in the fourth quarter of 2023. In addition, changes in the
macroeconomic environment, including interest rate and inflationary pressures also impacted the fair
value of the reporting unit. We applied a combination of a market approach and a discounted cash flow
method reflecting current assumptions and inputs, including our revised projections, discount rate
and expected growth rates, which resulted in the determination that the fair value of our Business
reporting unit was less than its carrying amount. As a result, in the fourth quarter of 2023, we
recorded a noncash goodwill impairment charge of approximately $5.8 billion ($5.8 billion after-tax)
in our consolidated statement of income. The goodwill balance of the Business reporting unit was
approximately $7.5 billion prior to the occurrence of this impairment charge.
During the fourth quarter of 2024, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment for our Business
reporting unit given the impairment of the Business reporting unit's goodwill in the prior year. In
addition, the Business reporting unit has continued to experience competitive and market pressures
throughout 2024, that may persist over the near term. We applied a combination of a market approach
and a discounted cash flow method reflecting current assumptions and inputs, including our revised
projections, discount rate and expected growth rates, which indicated that the fair value of our
Business reporting unit exceeded its carrying value and, therefore, did not result in an impairment.
At the goodwill impairment measurement date of October 31, 2024, our Business reporting unit had a
fair value that exceeded its carrying amount by approximately 8% and remains susceptible to future
impairment risk. We do not anticipate reasonable changes in significant assumptions to change the
outcome of the quantitative impairment assessment. For instance, if either the terminal value growth
rate declined by 50 bps, or if the discount rate increased by 50 bps, or if the EBITDA margin
decreased by 100 basis points, the fair value of our Business reporting unit would still exceed its
carrying value. However, management believes there is a continued risk that our Business reporting
unit may be required to recognize an impairment charge in the future. As of December 31, 2024, $1.7
billion of goodwill was allocated to our Business reporting unit. See Note 4 to the consolidated
financial statements for additional information.
A projected sustained decline in the reporting unit's revenues and earnings could have a significant
negative impact on its fair value and could result in future impairment charges. Such a decline could
be driven by, among other things: (1) decreases in sales volumes or long-term growth rate as a result
of competitive pressures or other factors; or (2) the reporting unit's inability to achieve or delays
in achieving its goals or strategic initiatives. Adverse changes to macroeconomic factors, such as
increases in long-term interest rates, would also negatively impact the fair value of the reporting
unit.
 Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans 
We maintain benefit plans for most of our employees, including, for certain employees, pension and
other postretirement benefit plans. Benefit plan assumptions, including the discount rate used, the
long-term rate of return on plan assets, the determination of the substantive plan and health care
trend rates are periodically updated and impact the amount of benefit plan income,
 46 
Table of Contents
expense, assets and obligations. Changes to one or more of these assumptions could significantly
impact our accounting for pension and other postretirement benefits.
In determining pension and other postretirement obligations, the weighted-average discount rate was
selected to approximate the composite interest rates available on a selection of high-quality bonds
available in the market at December 31, 2024. The bonds selected had maturities that coincided with
the time periods during which benefit payments are expected to occur, were non-callable (or callable
with certain selection criteria met) and available in sufficient quantities to ensure marketability
(at least $300 million par outstanding). Bond yields are subject to uncertainty for a number of
reasons including corporate performance, credit rating downgrades and upgrades, government fiscal
policy decisions, and general market volatility. The expected long-term rates of return on plan
assets used in determining Verizon’s pension and other postretirement obligations are based on
expectations for future investment returns for the plans’ asset allocation. The rates are subject to
uncertainty for a number of reasons including corporate performance, credit ratings, monetary policy,
inflation, exchange rates, investor behavior and general market volatility.
A sensitivity analysis of the impact of changes in the discount rate and the long-term rate of return
on plan assets on the benefit obligations and expense (income) recorded, as well as an increase or a
decrease in the actual versus expected return on plan assets as of December 31, 2024 and for the year
then ended pertaining to Verizon’s pension and postretirement benefit plans, is provided in the table
below. The amounts in the table below related to discount rate changes are gross impacts on benefit
obligations and expense, and do not reflect changes in asset values as a result of interest rate
changes, for which our pension plan is highly hedged.
 Percentage point Increase/(Decrease) at December 
 (dollars in millions) change 31, 2024 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Pension plans discount rate +0.50 $ -410 
 -0.50 451 
 Rate of return on pension plan +1.00 -78 
 assets 
 -1.00 78 
 Postretirement plans discount rate +0.50 -450 
 -0.50 486 
 Rate of return on postretirement 
 plan +1.00 -4 
 assets 
 -1.00 4 
In addition to our liability hedging assets, we also employ an interest rate hedging strategy to
further minimize the impact of discount rate changes on the funded ratio of the pension plan. While
the target hedge ratio varies depending on the funded status of the plan and the level of interest
rates, the target hedge ratio was 60% at December 31, 2024, limiting volatility.
The annual measurement date for both our pension and other postretirement benefits is December 31. We
use the full yield curve approach to estimate the interest cost component of net periodic benefit
cost for pension and other postretirement benefits. The full yield curve approach refines our
estimate of interest cost by applying the individual spot rates from a yield curve composed of the
rates of return on several hundred high-quality fixed income corporate bonds available at the
measurement date. These individual spot rates align with the timing of each future cash outflow for
benefit payments and therefore provide a more precise estimate of interest cost.
See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
 Income Taxes 
Our current and deferred income taxes and associated valuation allowances are impacted by events and
transactions arising in the normal course of business as well as in connection with the adoption of
new accounting standards, changes in tax laws and rates, acquisitions and dispositions of businesses
and non-recurring items. As a global commercial enterprise, our income tax rate and the
classification of income taxes can be affected by many factors, including estimates of the timing and
realization of deferred income tax assets and the timing and amount of income tax payments. We
account for tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in our tax returns in accordance with the
accounting standard relating to the uncertainty in income taxes, which requires the use of a two-step
approach for recognizing and measuring tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We
review and adjust our liability for unrecognized tax benefits based on our best judgment given the
facts, circumstances and information available at each reporting date. To the extent that the final
outcome of these tax positions is different than the amounts recorded, such differences may impact
income tax expense and actual tax payments. We recognize any interest and penalties accrued related
to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. Actual tax payments may materially differ from
estimated liabilities as a result of changes in tax laws as well as unanticipated transactions
impacting related income tax balances. See Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional information.
 Property, Plant and Equipment 
Our Property, plant and equipment balance represents a significant component of our consolidated
assets. We record property, plant and equipment at cost. We depreciate property, plant and equipment
on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the assets. The estimated useful life is
subject to change due to a variety of factors such as change in asset capacity or
 47 
Table of Contents
performance, technical obsolescence, market expectations and competitive impacts. In connection with
our ongoing review of the estimated useful lives of property, plant and equipment during 2024, we
determined that the estimated useful life of our property, plant and equipment would remain
unchanged. We expect that a one year increase in estimated useful lives of our property, plant and
equipment would result in a decrease to our 2024 depreciation expense of $2.4 billion and that a one
year decrease would result in an increase of approximately $3.6 billion in our 2024 depreciation
expense.
 Accounts Receivable 
Accounts receivable are recorded at amortized cost less an allowance for credit losses that are not
expected to be recovered. The gross amount of accounts receivable and corresponding allowance for
credit losses are presented separately in the consolidated balance sheets. We maintain allowances for
credit losses resulting from the expected failure or inability of our customers to make required
payments. We recognize the allowance for credit losses at inception and reassess quarterly based on
management’s expectation of the asset’s collectability. The allowance is based on multiple factors
including historical experience with bad debts, the credit quality of the customer base, the aging of
such receivables and current macroeconomic conditions, as well as management’s expectations of
conditions in the future, as applicable. The impact of these factors on the allowance involves
significant level of estimation and is subject to uncertainty. Our allowance for credit losses is
based on management’s assessment of the collectability of assets pooled together with similar risk
characteristics.
We record an allowance to reduce the receivables to the amount that is expected to be collectible.
For device payment plan agreement receivables, we record bad debt expense based on a default and loss
calculation using our proprietary loss model. The expected loss rate is determined based on customer
credit scores and other qualitative factors as noted above. The loss rate is assigned individually on
a customer by customer basis and the custom credit scores are then aggregated by vintage and used in
our proprietary loss model to calculate the weighted-average loss rate used for determining the
allowance balance. The weighted-average expected loss r ate increased 0.75% at December 31, 2024 as
compared to the rate at December 31, 2023. We expect that an increase or decrease of 0.25% in the
weighted-average loss rate would result in a chan ge of $160 million in bad debt expense.
We monitor the collectability of our wireless service receivables as one overall pool. Wireline
service receivables are disaggregated and pooled by the following types of customers and related
contracts: consumer, small and medium business, enterprise, public sector and wholesale. For wireless
service receivables and wireline consumer and small and medium business receivables, the allowance is
calculated based on a 12 month rolling average write-off balance multiplied by the average life-cycle
of an account from billing to write-off. The risk of loss is assessed over the contractual life of
the receivables and is adjusted based on the historical loss amounts for current and future
conditions based on management’s qualitative considerations. For enterprise, public sector and
wholesale wireline receivables, the allowance for credit losses is based on historical write-off
experience and individual customer credit risk, if applicable. We consider multiple factors in
determining the allowance as discussed above.
If there is a deterioration of our customers’ financial condition or if future actual default rates
on receivables in general differ from those currently anticipated, we may have to adjust our
allowance for credit losses, which would affect earnings in the period the adjustments are made. See
Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
 Acquisitions and Divestitures 
 Spectrum License Transactions 
From time to time we enter into agreements to buy, sell or exchange spectrum licenses. We believe
these spectrum license transactions have allowed us to continue to enhance the reliability of our
wireless network while also resulting in a more efficient use of spectrum.
In February 2021, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) concluded Auction 107 for C-Band
wireless spectrum. In accordance with the rules applicable to the auction, Verizon is required to
make payments for our allocable share of clearing costs incurred by, and incentive payments due to,
the incumbent license holders associated with the auction, which are estimated to be $7.5 billion.
During 2024, 2023 and 2022, we made payments of $269 million, $4.3 billion and $1.6 billion,
respectively, for obligations related to clearing costs and accelerated clearing incentives. The
carrying value of the wireless spectrum won in Auction 107 consists of all payments required to
participate and purchase licenses in the auction, including Verizon’s allocable share of clearing
costs incurred by, and incentive payments due to, the incumbent license holders associated with the
auction that we are obligated to pay in order to acquire the licenses, as well as capitalized
interest to the extent qualifying activities have occurred.
In March 2022, Verizon signed agreements with satellite operators in which operators agreed to clear
C-Band spectrum in certain markets and frequencies ahead of the previously expected timeframe. During
2022, Verizon incurred costs associated with these agreements of approximately $340 million, of which
$310 million was paid as of December 31, 2022 and the remainder was paid in 2023. This early
clearance accelerated Verizon's access to more spectrum in a number of key markets to support its 5G
network initiatives.
 48 
Table of Contents
On October 17, 2024, Verizon entered into a license purchase agreement to acquire select spectrum
licenses of United States Cellular Corporation and certain of its subsidiaries (UScellular) for total
consideration of $1.0 billion, subject to certain potential adjustments. The closing of this
transaction is subject to the receipt of regulatory approvals and other closing conditions, including
the consummation of UScellular's proposed sale of its wireless operations and select spectrum assets
to T-Mobile US, Inc., and the termination of certain post-closing arrangements with respect to that
sale.
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our spectrum
license transactions.
 TracFone Wireless, Inc. 
On November 23, 2021 (the Acquisition Date), we completed the acquisition of TracFone. Verizon
acquired all of TracFone's outstanding stock in exchange for approximately $3.5 billion in cash, net
of cash acquired and working capital and other adjustments, 57,596,544 shares of common stock of the
Company valued at approximately $3.0 billion, and up to an additional $650 million in future cash
contingent consideration related to the achievement of certain performance measures and other
commercial arrangements. The fair value of the common stock was determined on the basis of its
closing market price on the Acquisition Date. The estimated fair value of the contingent
consideration as of the Acquisition Date was approximately $560 million and represented a Level 3
measurement. The contingent consideration payable was based on the achievement of certain revenue and
operational targets, measured over a two year earn out period. Contingent consideration payments were
completed in January of 2024.
During 2024 and 2023, Verizon made payments of $52 million and $257 million, respectively, related to
the contingent consideration, which are reflected in Cash flows from financing activities in our
consolidated statements of cash flows. See Note 3 and Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements
for additional information.
 Frontier Communications Parent, Inc. 
On September 4, 2024, Verizon entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the Merger Agreement) to
acquire Frontier, a U.S. provider of broadband internet and other communication services. The
transaction is structured as a merger of the Company's subsidiary with and into Frontier, as a result
of which Frontier will become a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company and shares of Frontier common
stock outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of merger (subject to certain limited
exceptions) will be cancelled and converted into the right to receive a per share merger
consideration of $38.50, in cash. In November 2024, Frontier shareholders approved the transaction.
Consummation of the transaction is subject to the receipt of certain regulatory approvals and other
customary closing conditions. Under certain circumstances, if the Merger Agreement is terminated,
Frontier may be required to pay Verizon a termination fee of $320 million. Under certain other
specified circumstances, Verizon may be required to pay Frontier a termination fee of $590 million.
 Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures 
 About Market Risk 
We are exposed to various types of market risk in the normal course of business, including the impact
of interest rate changes, foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, changes in investment, equity
and commodity prices and changes in corporate tax rates. We employ risk management strategies, which
may include the use of a variety of derivatives including cross currency swaps, forward starting
interest rate swaps, interest rate swaps, interest rate caps, treasury rate locks and foreign
exchange forwards. We do not hold derivatives for trading purposes.
It is our general policy to enter into interest rate, foreign currency and other derivative
transactions only to the extent necessary to achieve our desired objectives in optimizing exposure to
various market risks. Our objectives include maintaining a mix of fixed and variable rate debt to
lower borrowing costs within reasonable risk parameters and to protect against earnings and cash flow
volatility resulting from changes in market conditions. We do not hedge our market risk exposure in a
manner that would completely eliminate the effect of changes in interest rates and foreign exchange
rates on our earnings.
Counterparties to our derivative contracts are major financial institutions with whom we have
negotiated derivatives agreements (ISDA master agreements) and credit support annex (CSA) agreements
which provide rules for collateral exchange. The CSA agreements contain fixed cap amounts or rating
based thresholds such that we or our counterparties may be required to hold or post collateral based
upon changes in outstanding positions as compared to established thresholds or caps and changes in
credit ratings. We do not offset fair value amounts recognized for derivative instruments and fair
value amounts recognized for the right to reclaim cash collateral or the obligation to return cash
collateral arising from derivative instruments recognized at fair value. At both December 31, 2024
and 2023, we did not hold any collateral. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, we posted $2.1 billion and
$1.4 billion, respectively, of collateral related to derivative contracts under collateral exchange
agreements, which were recorded as Prepaid expenses and other in our consolidated balance sheets.
While we may be exposed to credit losses due to the nonperformance of our counterparties, we consider
the risk remote and do not expect that any such nonperformance would result in a significant effect
on our results of operations or financial condition due to our diversified pool of counterparties.
See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the
derivative portfolio.
 49 
Table of Contents
 Interest Rate Risk 
We are exposed to changes in interest rates, primarily on our short-term debt and the portion of
long-term debt that carries floating interest rates. As of December 31, 2024, approximately 76% of
the aggregate principal amount of our total debt portfolio consisted of fixed-rate indebtedness,
including the effect of interest rate swap agreements designated as hedges. The impact of a
100-basis-point change in interest rates affecting our floating rate debt would result in a change in
annual interest expense, including our interest rate swap agreements that are designated as hedges,
of approximately $362 million. The interest rates on our existing long-term debt obligations are
unaffected by changes to our credit ratings.
The table that follows summarizes the fair values of our long-term debt, including current
maturities, and interest rate swap derivatives as of December 31, 2024 and 2023. The table also
provides a sensitivity analysis of the estimated fair values of these financial instruments assuming
100-basis-point upward and downward shifts in the yield curve. Our sensitivity analysis does not
include the fair values of our commercial paper and bank loans, if any, because they are not
significantly affected by changes in market interest rates.
 (dollars in 
 millions) 
 Long-term Fair Value  Fair Value  
 debt and assuming assuming 
 related + 100 basis  - 100 basis  
 derivatives Fair Value point shift point shift 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 At December $ 142,201 $ 135,521 $ 149,956 
 31, 2024 
 At December 150,058 142,551 158,912 
 31, 2023 
 Interest Rate Swaps 
We enter into interest rate swaps to achieve a targeted mix of fixed and variable rate debt. We
principally receive fixed rates and pay variable rates, resulting in a net increase or decrease to
Interest expense. These swaps are designated as fair value hedges and hedge against interest rate
risk exposure of designated debt issuances. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, the fair value of the
liability of these contracts was $5.3 billion and $4.5 billion, respectively. At December 31, 2024
and 2023, the total notional amount of the interest rate swaps was $24.0 billion and $26.1 billion,
respectively.
 Foreign Currency Risk 
The functional currency for our foreign operations is primarily the local currency. The translation
of income statement and balance sheet amounts of our foreign operations into U.S. dollars is recorded
as cumulative translation adjustments, which are included in Accumulated other comprehensive loss in
our consolidated balance sheets. Gains and losses on foreign currency transactions are recorded in
the consolidated statements of income. At December 31, 2024, our primary translation exposure was to
the British Pound Sterling, Euro, Australian Dollar and Swedish Krona.
 Cross Currency Swaps 
We have entered into cross currency swaps to exchange our British Pound Sterling, Euro, Swiss Franc,
Canadian Dollar and Australian Dollar-denominated cash flows into U.S. dollars and to fix our cash
payments in U.S. dollars, as well as to mitigate the impact of foreign currency transaction gains or
losses. The fair value of the asset of these contracts was $500 million and $762 million at December
31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, the fair value of the liability of
these contracts was $2.7 billion and $2.1 billion, respectively. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, the
total notional amount of the cross currency swaps was $32.1 billion and $33.5 billion, respectively.
 Foreign Exchange Forwards 
We also have foreign exchange forwards which we use as an economic hedge but for which we have
elected not to apply hedge accounting. We entered into British Pound Sterling and Euro foreign
exchange forwards to mitigate our foreign exchange rate risk related to non-functional currency
denominated monetary assets and liabilities of international subsidiaries.
At both December 31, 2024 and 2023, the fair value of the asset and liability of these contracts was
insignificant. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, the total notional amount of the foreign exchange
forwards was $620 million and $1.1 billion, respectively.
 50 
Table of Contents
 Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary 
 Data 
 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting 
 Firm 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of Verizon Communications Inc.
Opinion on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
We have audited Verizon Communications Inc. and subsidiaries’ (Verizon) internal control over
financial reporting as of December 31, 2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control –
Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
(2013 framework) (the COSO criteria). In our opinion, Verizon maintained, in all material respects,
effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2024, based on the COSO
criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated balance sheets of Verizon as of December 31, 2024 and
2023, the related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income, cash flows, and changes in
equity for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2024, and the related notes and
financial statement schedule listed in the Index at Item 15(a) and our report dated February 12, 2025
expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
Verizon’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial
reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
included in the accompanying Management's Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on Verizon’s internal control over financial reporting
based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be
independent with respect to Verizon in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the
applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing
the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as
we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis
for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1)
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3)
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition,
use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial
statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
 /s/ Ernst & Young LLP 
 Ernst & Young LLP 
 New York, New York 
 February 12, 2025 
 51 
Table of Contents
 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting 
 Firm 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of Verizon Communications Inc.
 Opinion on the Financial Statements 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Verizon Communications Inc. and
subsidiaries (Verizon or the Company) as of December 31, 2024 and 2023, the related consolidated
statements of income, comprehensive income, cash flows, and changes in equity for each of the three
years in the period ended December 31, 2024, and the related notes and financial statement schedule
listed in the Index at Item 15(a) (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial
statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of Verizon at December 31, 2024 and 2023, and the results of its
operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2024, in
conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States) (PCAOB), Verizon’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31,
2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report dated February
12, 2025 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 Basis for Opinion 
These financial statements are the responsibility of Verizon’s management. Our responsibility is to
express an opinion on Verizon’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting
firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to Verizon in
accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements
are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing
procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included
examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial
statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 Critical Audit Matter 
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the
financial statements that was communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and
that: (1) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2)
involved our especially challenging, subjective or complex judgments. The communication of the
critical audit matter does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements,
taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a
separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
 Valuation of Employee Benefit Obligations 
 The Company sponsors several pension plans and other post-employment 
 benefit plans. At December 31, 2024, the Company’s aggregate defined 
 benefit pension obligation was $7.9 billion and exceeded the fair 
 value of pension plan assets of $6.8 billion, resulting in an 
 unfunded defined benefit pension obligation of $1.1 billion. Also, 
 at December 31, 2024, the other postretirement benefits obligation 
 was approximately $10.5 billion. As explained in Note 11 of the 
 Description of the Matter consolidated financial statements, the Company updates the estimates 
 used to measure employee benefit obligations and plan assets in the 
 fourth quarter and upon a remeasurement event to reflect the actual 
 return on plan assets and updated actuarial assumptions. 
 Auditing the employee benefit obligations was complex due to the 
 highly judgmental nature of the actuarial assumption relating to the 
 discount rates used in the measurement process. This assumption had 
 a significant effect on the projected benefit obligations. 
 52 
Table of Contents
 We obtained an understanding, evaluated the design 
 and tested the operating effectiveness of controls 
 over the employee benefits obligation valuation 
 process. For example, we tested controls over 
 management’s review of the employee benefit 
 obligation calculations, the actuarial assumption 
 relating to the discount rates and the data inputs 
 provided to the actuary. 
 To test the employee benefit obligations, our audit 
 procedures included, among others, evaluating the 
 methodologies used, the actuarial assumption relating 
 to the discount rates and the underlying data used by 
 the Company. We compared the actuarial assumption 
 used by management to historical trends, current 
 How We Addressed the Matter in Our Audit economic factors and evaluated the change in the 
 employee benefit obligations from prior year due to 
 the change in service cost, interest cost, actuarial 
 gains and losses, benefit payments, contributions and 
 other activities. In addition, we involved an 
 actuarial specialist to assist in evaluating 
 management’s methodology for determining the discount 
 rates that reflect the maturity and duration of the 
 benefit payments and are used to measure the employee 
 benefit obligations. As part of this assessment, we 
 compared the projected cash flows to prior year 
 projections and compared the current year benefits 
 paid to the prior year projected cash flows. We also 
 tested the completeness and accuracy of the 
 underlying data. 
 /s/ Ernst & Young LLP 
 Ernst & Young LLP 
 We have served as Verizon's auditor since 2000. 
 New York, New York 
 February 12, 2025 
 53 
Table of Contents
 Consolidated Statements of Income 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
 (dollars in millions, 
 except per share  
 Years Ended December amounts) 
 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating Revenues 
 Service revenues and $ 111,571 $ 109,652 $ 109,625 
 other 
 Wireless equipment 23,217 24,322 27,210 
 revenues 
 Total Operating 134,788 133,974 136,835 
 Revenues 
 Operating Expenses 
 Cost of services 
 (exclusive of items 27,997 28,100 28,637 
 shown below) 
 Cost of wireless 26,100 26,787 30,496 
 equipment 
 Selling, general and 
 administrative 34,113 32,745 30,136 
 expense 
 Depreciation and 17,892 17,624 17,099 
 amortization expense 
 Verizon Business 
 Group goodwill — 5,841 — 
 impairment 
 Total Operating 106,102 111,097 106,368 
 Expenses 
 Operating Income 28,686 22,877 30,467 
 Equity in earnings 
 (losses) of -53 -53 44 
 unconsolidated 
 businesses 
 Other income 995 -313 1,373 
 (expense), net 
 Interest expense -6,649 -5,524 -3,613 
 Income Before 
 Provision For Income 22,979 16,987 28,271 
 Taxes 
 Provision for income -5,030 -4,892 -6,523 
 taxes 
 Net Income $ 17,949 $ 12,095 $ 21,748 
 Net income 
 attributable to $ 443 $ 481 $ 492 
 noncontrolling 
 interests 
 Net income 
 attributable to 17,506 11,614 21,256 
 Verizon 
 Net Income $ 17,949 $ 12,095 $ 21,748 
 Basic Earnings Per 
 Common Share 
 Net income 
 attributable to $ 4.15 $ 2.76 $ 5.06 
 Verizon 
 Weighted-average 
 shares outstanding 4,218 4,211 4,202 
 (in 
 millions) 
 Diluted Earnings Per 
 Common Share 
 Net income 
 attributable to $ 4.14 $ 2.75 $ 5.06 
 Verizon 
 Weighted-average 
 shares outstanding 4,223 4,215 4,204 
 (in 
 millions) 
 See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 54 
Table of Contents
 Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
 Years Ended December  (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Net Income $ 17,949 $ 12,095 $ 21,748 
 Other Comprehensive 
 Income (Loss), Net 
 of Tax (Expense) 
 Benefit 
 Foreign currency 
 translation 
 adjustments, net of tax -97 62 -153 
 of $(13), $6and 
 $(13) 
 Unrealized gain on cash 
 flow hedges, net 81 88 322 
 of tax of $(27), $(30) 
 and $(111) 
 Unrealized gain (loss) 
 on fair value 
 hedges, net of tax of 484 536 -431 
 $(162), $(181) and 
 $148 
 Unrealized gain (loss) 
 on marketable 
 securities, net of tax -3 7 -25 
 of $1, $(2) and 
 $8 
 Defined benefit pension 
 and 
 postretirement plans, -8 -208 -651 
 net of tax of $4, 
 $68and $221 
 Other comprehensive 
 income (loss) 457 485 -938 
 attributable to Verizon 
 Total Comprehensive $ 18,406 $ 12,580 $ 20,810 
 Income 
 Comprehensive income 
 attributable to $ 443 $ 481 $ 492 
 noncontrolling 
 interests 
 Comprehensive income 
 attributable to 17,963 12,099 20,318 
 Verizon 
 Total Comprehensive $ 18,406 $ 12,580 $ 20,810 
 Income 
 See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 55 
Table of Contents
 Consolidated Balance Sheets 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
 (dollars in millions, except 
 per share amounts) 
 At December 31, 2024 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Assets 
 Current assets 
 Cash and cash equivalents $ 4,194 $ 2,065 
 Accounts receivable 27,261 26,102 
 Less Allowance for credit 1,152 1,017 
 losses 
 Accounts receivable, net 26,109 25,085 
 Inventories 2,247 2,057 
 Prepaid expenses and other 7,973 7,607 
 Total current assets 40,523 36,814 
 Property, plant and equipment 331,406 320,108 
 Less Accumulated depreciation 222,884 211,798 
 Property, plant and equipment, 108,522 108,310 
 net 
 Investments in unconsolidated 842 953 
 businesses 
 Wireless licenses 156,613 155,667 
 Goodwill 22,841 22,843 
 Other intangible assets, net 11,129 11,057 
 Operating lease right-of-use 24,472 24,726 
 assets 
 Other assets 19,769 19,885 
 Total assets $ 384,711 $ 380,255 
 Liabilities and Equity 
 Current liabilities 
 Debt maturing within one year $ 22,633 $ 12,973 
 Accounts payable and accrued 23,374 23,453 
 liabilities 
 Current operating lease 4,415 4,266 
 liabilities 
 Other current liabilities 14,349 12,531 
 Total current liabilities 64,771 53,223 
 Long-term debt 121,381 137,701 
 Employee benefit obligations 11,997 13,189 
 Deferred income taxes 46,732 45,781 
 Non-current operating lease 19,928 20,002 
 liabilities 
 Other liabilities 19,327 16,560 
 Total long-term liabilities 219,365 233,233 
 Commitments and Contingencies 
 (Note 16) 
 Equity 
 Series preferred stock 
 ($0.10par — — 
 value;250,000,000shares 
 authorized;noneissued) 
 Common stock ($0.10par 
 value;6,250,000,000shares 
 authorized in 
 each 429 429 
 period;4,291,433,646shares 
 issued 
 in each period) 
 Additional paid in capital 13,466 13,631 
 Retained earnings 89,110 82,915 
 Accumulated other -923 -1,380 
 comprehensive loss 
 Common stock in treasury, at 
 cost -3,583 -3,821 
 (81,753,488and87,172,997shares 
 outstanding) 
 Deferred compensation – 
 employee stock 738 656 
 ownership plans (ESOPs) and 
 other 
 Noncontrolling interests 1,338 1,369 
 Total equity 100,575 93,799 
 Total liabilities and equity $ 384,711 $ 380,255 
 See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 56 
Table of Contents
 Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
 Years Ended December (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash Flows from 
 Operating Activities 
 Net Income $ 17,949 $ 12,095 $ 21,748 
 Adjustments to 
 reconcile net income 
 to 
 net cash provided by 
 operating 
 activities: 
 Depreciation and 17,892 17,624 17,099 
 amortization expense 
 Employee retirement -52 1,206 -2,046 
 benefits 
 Deferred income 815 2,388 2,973 
 taxes 
 Provision for 
 expected credit 2,338 2,214 1,611 
 losses 
 Equity in losses 
 (earnings) of 
 unconsolidated 75 84 -10 
 businesses, net of 
 dividends received 
 Verizon Business 
 Group goodwill — 5,841 — 
 impairment 
 Changes in current 
 assets and 
 liabilities, net of 
 effects from 
 acquisition/disposi… 
 of businesses: 
 Accounts receivable -2,565 -2,198 -1,978 
 Inventories -196 287 627 
 Prepaid expenses and -626 -435 928 
 other 
 Accounts payable and 
 accrued liabilities 1,109 2,079 -33 
 and Other current 
 liabilities 
 Other, net 173 -3,710 -3,778 
 Net cash provided by 
 operating 36,912 37,475 37,141 
 activities 
 Cash Flows from 
 Investing Activities 
 Capital expenditures 
 (including -17,090 -18,767 -23,087 
 capitalized 
 software) 
 Cash received (paid) 
 related to 
 acquisitions of — -30 248 
 businesses, net of 
 cash 
 acquired 
 Acquisitions of -900 -5,796 -3,653 
 wireless licenses 
 Collateral receipts 
 (payments) related -712 880 -2,265 
 to derivative 
 contracts, net 
 Proceeds from 
 disposition of — — 33 
 business 
 Other, net 28 281 62 
 Net cash used in -18,674 -23,432 -28,662 
 investing activities 
 Cash Flows from 
 Financing Activities 
 Proceeds from 3,146 2,018 7,074 
 long-term borrowings 
 Proceeds from 
 asset-backed 12,422 6,594 10,732 
 long-term 
 borrowings 
 Net proceeds from 
 (repayments of) — -150 106 
 short-term 
 commercial paper 
 Repayments of 
 long-term borrowings 
 and -11,854 -6,181 -8,616 
 finance lease 
 obligations 
 Repayments of 
 asset-backed -8,490 -4,443 -4,948 
 long-term 
 borrowings 
 Dividends paid -11,249 -11,025 -10,805 
 Other, net -1,075 -1,470 -2,072 
 Net cash used in -17,100 -14,657 -8,529 
 financing activities 
 Increase (decrease) 
 in cash, cash 1,138 -614 -50 
 equivalents and 
 restricted cash 
 Cash, cash 
 equivalents and 
 restricted 3,497 4,111 4,161 
 cash, beginning of 
 period 
 Cash, cash 
 equivalents and 
 restricted $ 4,635 $ 3,497 $ 4,111 
 cash, end of period 
 (Note 1) 
 See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 57 
Table of Contents
 Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
 (dol… 
 in  
 mill… 
 exce… 
 per  
 share 
 amou… 
 and  
 Ye… shar… 
 En… in  
 De… thou… 
 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Sha… Amo… Sha… Amo… Sha… Amou… 
 Co… 
 St… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… 4,2… $ 429 4,2… $ 429 4,2… $ 429 
 of 
 ye… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end 4,2… 429 4,2… 429 4,2… 429 
 of 
 ye… 
 Ad… 
 Pa… 
 In 
 Ca… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… 13,… 13,… 13,… 
 of 
 ye… 
 Ot… 
 (N… -165 211 -441 
 14) 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end 13,… 13,… 13,… 
 of 
 ye… 
 Re… 
 Ea… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… 82,… 82,… 71,… 
 of 
 ye… 
 Net 
 in… 
 at… 17,… 11,… 21,… 
 to 
 Ve… 
 Di… 
 de… 
 ($… -11… -11… -10… 
 $2… 
 $2… 
 sh… 
 Ot… -5 3 -9 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end 89,… 82,… 82,… 
 of 
 ye… 
 Ac… 
 Ot… 
 Co… 
 In… 
 (L… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… 
 of -1,… -1,… -927 
 ye… 
 at… 
 to 
 Ve… 
 Fo… 
 cu… -97 62 -153 
 tr… 
 ad… 
 Un… 
 ga… 
 on 81 88 322 
 ca… 
 fl… 
 he… 
 Un… 
 ga… 
 (l… 
 on 484 536 -431 
 fa… 
 va… 
 he… 
 Un… 
 ga… 
 (l… -3 7 -25 
 on 
 ma… 
 se… 
 De… 
 be… 
 pe… -8 -208 -651 
 and 
 po… 
 pl… 
 Ot… 
 co… 457 485 -938 
 in… 
 (l… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end 
 of -923 -1,… -1,… 
 ye… 
 at… 
 to 
 Ve… 
 Tr… 
 St… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… -87… -3,… -91… -4,… -93… -4,… 
 of 
 ye… 
 Em… 
 pl… 5,4… 237 4,3… 191 2,0… 90 
 (N… 
 14) 
 Sh… 
 pl… 13 1 19 1 15 1 
 (N… 
 14) 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end -81… -3,… -87… -3,… -91… -4,… 
 of 
 ye… 
 De… 
 Co… 
 and 
 Ot… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… 656 793 538 
 of 
 ye… 
 Re… 
 st… 447 296 423 
 eq… 
 gr… 
 Am… -365 -433 -168 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end 738 656 793 
 of 
 ye… 
 No… 
 In… 
 Ba… 
 at 
 be… 1,3… 1,3… 1,4… 
 of 
 ye… 
 To… 
 co… 443 481 492 
 in… 
 Di… 
 and 
 ot… -474 -431 -583 
 (N… 
 14) 
 Ba… 
 at 
 end 1,3… 1,3… 1,3… 
 of 
 ye… 
 To… $ 100… $ 93,… $ 92,… 
 Eq… 
 See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 58 
Table of Contents
 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
 Note 1. Description of Business and Summary of 
 Significant Accounting Policies 
Description of Business
Verizon Communications Inc. (the Company) is a holding company that, acting through its subsidiaries
(together with the Company, collectively, Verizon), is one of the world’s leading providers of
communications, technology, information and streaming products and services to consumers, businesses
and government entities. With a presence around the world, we offer data, video and voice services
and solutions on our networks and platforms that are designed to meet customers’ demand for mobility,
reliable network connectivity and security.
We have tworeportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units - Verizon
Consumer Group (Consumer) and Verizon Business Group (Business).
Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline communications services and
products. Our wireless services are provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in
the United States (U.S.) under the Verizon family of brands and through wholesale and other
arrangements. We also provide fixed wireless access (FWA) broadband through our fifth-generation (5G)
or fourth-generation (4G) Long-Term Evolution (LTE) networks as an alternative to traditional
landline internet access. Our wireline services are provided in ninestates in the Mid-Atlantic and
Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over our 100% fiber-optic network through our Verizon
Fios product portfolio and over a traditional copper-based network to customers who are not served by
Fios.
Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications services and products, including
FWA broadband, data, video and advanced communication services, corporate networking solutions,
security and managed network services, local and long distance voice services and network access to
deliver various Internet of Things (IoT) services and products. We provide these products and
services to businesses, public sector customers and wireless and wireline carriers across the U.S.
and a subset of these products and services to customers around the world.
Consolidation
The method of accounting applied to investments, whether consolidated or equity, involves an
evaluation of all significant terms of the investments that explicitly grant or suggest evidence of
control or influence over the operations of the investee. The consolidated financial statements
include our controlled subsidiaries, as well as variable interest entities (VIE) where we are deemed
to be the primary beneficiary. For controlled subsidiaries that are not wholly-owned, the
noncontrolling interests are included in Net income and Total equity. Investments in businesses that
we do not control, but have the ability to exercise significant influence over operating and
financial policies, are accounted for using the equity method. Equity method investments are included
in Investments in unconsolidated businesses in our consolidated balance sheets. All significant
intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated.
Basis of Presentation
We have reclassified certain prior year amounts to conform to the current year presentation.
Use of Estimates
We prepare our financial statements using U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), which
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts and disclosures.
These estimates and assumptions take into account historical and forward-looking factors that the
Company believes are reasonable. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
Examples of significant estimates include the allowance for credit losses, the recoverability of
property, plant and equipment and other long-lived assets, the incremental borrowing rate for the
lease liability, fair value measurements, including those related to financial instruments, goodwill,
spectrum licenses and intangible assets, unrecognized tax benefits, valuation allowances on tax
assets, pension and postretirement benefit obligations, contingencies and the identification and
valuation of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in connection with business combinations.
Revenue Recognition
We earn revenue from contracts with customers, primarily through the provision of telecommunications
and other services and through the sale of wireless equipment. These services include a variety of
communication and connectivity services for our Consumer and Business customers including other
carriers that use our facilities to provide services to their customers, as well as professional and
integrated managed services for our large enterprise and government customers. We account for these
revenues under Topic 606.
 59 
Table of Contents
We also earn revenues that are not accounted for under Topic 606 from leasing arrangements (such as
those for towers and equipment), captive reinsurance arrangements primarily related to wireless
device insurance and the interest recognized when equipment is sold to the customer by an authorized
agent under a device payment plan agreement.
Nature of Products and Services
Telecommunications
Service
We offer wireless services through a variety of plans on a postpaid or prepaid basis. For wireless
service, we recognize revenue using an output method, either as the service allowance units are used
or as time elapses, because it reflects the pattern by which we satisfy our performance obligation
through the transfer of service to the customer. Monthly service is generally billed in advance,
which results in a contract liability. See Note 2 for additional information. For postpaid plans,
where monthly usage exceeds the allowance, the overage usage represents options held by the customer
for incremental services and the usage-based fee is recognized when the customer exercises the option
(typically on a month-to-month basis).
For our contracts related to wireline communication and connectivity services, in general, fixed
monthly fees for service are billed one month in advance, which results in a contract liability, and
service revenue is recognized over the enforceable contract term as the service is rendered, as the
customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the services through network access and
usage. While substantially all of our wireline service revenue contracts are the result of providing
access to our networks, revenue from services that are not fixed in amount and, instead, are based on
usage are generally billed in arrears and recognized as the usage occurs.
Equipment
We sell wireless devices and accessories under the Verizon brand and other brands. Equipment revenue
is generally recognized when the products are delivered to and accepted by the customer, as this is
when control passes to the customer. In addition to offering the sale of equipment on a standalone
basis, we have twoprimary offerings through which customers pay for a wireless device, in connection
with a service contract: fixed-term plans (for our Business customers) and device payment plans.
Under a fixed-term plan, the customer is sold the wireless device without any upfront charge or at a
discounted price in exchange for entering into a fixed-term service contract (typically for a term of
36months or less).
Under a device payment plan, the customer is sold the wireless device in exchange for a non-interest-
bearing installment note, which is repaid by the customer, typically over a 36-monthterm, and
concurrently enters into a month-to-month contract for wireless service. We may offer certain
promotions that provide billing credits applied over a specified term, contingent upon the customer
maintaining service. The credits are included in the transaction price, which are allocated to the
performance obligations based on their relative selling price and are recognized when earned.
A financing component exists in both our fixed-term plans and device payment plans because the timing
of the payment for the device, which occurs over the contract term, differs from the satisfaction of
the performance obligation, which occurs at contract inception upon transfer of the device to the
customer. We periodically assess, at the contract level, the significance of the financing component
inherent in our fixed-term and device payment plan receivable based on qualitative and quantitative
considerations related to our customer classes. These considerations include assessing the commercial
objective of our plans, the term and duration of financing provided, interest rates prevailing in the
marketplace, and credit risks of our customer classes, all of which impact our selection of
appropriate discount rates. Based on current facts and circumstances, we determined that the
financing component in our existing wireless device payments and fixed-term contracts sold through
the direct channel is not significant and therefore is not accounted for separately. See Note 8 for
additional information on the interest on equipment financed on a device payment plan agreement when
sold to the customer by an authorized agent in our indirect channel.
Wireless Contracts
For our wireless contracts, total contract revenue, which represents the transaction price for
wireless service and wireless equipment, is allocated between service and equipment revenue based on
their estimated standalone selling prices. We estimate the standalone selling price of the device or
accessory to be its retail price excluding subsidies or conditional purchase discounts. We estimate
the standalone selling price of wireless service to be the price that we offer to customers on month-
to-month contracts that can be cancelled at any time without penalty (i.e., when there is no fixed-
term for service) or when service is procured without the concurrent purchase of a wireless device.
In addition, we also assess whether the service term is impacted by certain legally enforceable
rights and obligations in our contract with customers, such as penalties that a customer would have
to pay to early terminate a fixed-term contract or billing credits that would cease if the month-to-
month wireless service is canceled. The assessment of these legally enforceable rights and
obligations involves judgment and impacts our determination of the transaction price and related
disclosures.
From time to time, we may offer certain promotions that provide our customers on device payment plans
with the right to upgrade to a new device after paying a specified portion of their device payment
plan agreement amount and trading in their device in good working order. We account for this trade-in
right as a guarantee obligation. The full amount of the trade-in right's fair value is recognized as
a guarantee liability and results in a reduction to the revenue recognized upon the sale of the
device. The total
 60 
Table of Contents
transaction price is reduced by the guarantee, which is accounted for outside the scope of Topic 606,
and the remaining transaction price is allocated between the performance obligations within the
contract.
Our fixed-term plans generally include the sale of a wireless device at subsidized prices. This
results in the creation of a contract asset at the time of sale, which represents the recognition of
equipment revenue in excess of amounts billed.
For our device payment plans, billing credits are accounted for as consideration payable to a
customer and are included in the determination of total transaction price, resulting in a contract
liability.
We may provide a right of return on our products and services for a short time period after a sale.
These rights are accounted for as variable consideration when determining the transaction price, and
accordingly we recognize revenue based on the estimated amount to which we expect to be entitled
after considering expected returns. Returns and credits are estimated at contract inception and
updated at the end of each reporting period as additional information becomes available. We also may
provide credits or incentives on our products and services for contracts with resellers, which are
accounted for as variable consideration when estimating the amount of revenue to recognize.
Wireline Contracts
Total consideration for wireline services that are bundled in a single contract is allocated to each
performance obligation based on our standalone selling price for each service. While many contracts
include one or more service performance obligations, the revenue recognition pattern is generally not
impacted by the allocation since the services are generally satisfied over the same period of time.
We estimate the standalone selling price to be the price of the services when sold on a standalone
basis without any promotional discount. In addition, we also assess whether the service term is
impacted by certain legally enforceable rights and obligations in our contract with customers such as
penalties that a customer would have to pay to early terminate a fixed-term contract. The assessment
of these legally enforceable rights and obligations involves judgment and impacts our determination
of transaction price and related disclosures.
We may provide performance-based credits or incentives on our products and services for contracts
with our Business customers, which are accounted for as variable consideration when estimating the
transaction price. Credits are estimated at contract inception and are updated at the end of each
reporting period as additional information becomes available.
Wireless and Wireline Contracts
For offers that include third-party providers, we evaluate whether we are acting as the principal or
as the agent with respect to the goods or services provided to the customer. This principal-versus-
agent assessment involves judgment and focuses on whether the facts and circumstances of the
arrangement indicate that the goods or services were controlled by us prior to transferring them to
the customer. To evaluate if we have control, we consider various factors including whether we are
primarily responsible for fulfillment, bear risk of loss and have discretion over pricing.
Other
We offer telematics services including smart fleet management and optimization software. Telematics
service revenue is generated primarily through subscription contracts. We recognize revenue over time
for our subscription contracts.
We report taxes collected from customers on behalf of governmental authorities on revenue-producing
transactions on a net basis.
Maintenance and Repairs
We charge the cost of maintenance and repairs, including the cost of replacing minor items not
constituting substantial betterments, principally to Cost of services as these costs are incurred.
Advertising Costs
Costs for advertising products and services, as well as other promotional and sponsorship costs, are
charged to Selling, general and administrative expense in the periods in which they are incurred.See
Note 15 for additional information.
Earnings Per Common Share
Basic earnings per common share are based on the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during
the period. Where appropriate, diluted earnings per common share include the dilutive effect of
shares issuable under our stock-based compensation plans.
There were a total of approximately 4.7million and 4.2million outstanding dilutive securities,
primarily consisting of performance stock units and restricted stock units, included in the
computation of diluted earnings per common share for the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023,
respectively. There was a total of approximately 1.9million outstanding dilutive securities,
primarily consisting of restricted stock units, included in the computation of diluted earnings per
common share for the year ended December 31, 2022 .
 61 
Table of Contents
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Restricted Cash
We consider all highly liquid investments with an original maturity of 90 days or less when purchased
to be cash equivalents. Cash equivalents are stated at cost, which approximates quoted market value
and includes amounts held in money market funds.
Cash collections on the receivables and on the underlying receivables related to the participation
interest collateralizing our asset-backed debt securities are required at certain specified times to
be placed into segregated accounts. Deposits to the segregated accounts are considered restricted
cash.
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash are included in the following line items in the
consolidated balance sheets:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2024 2023 Increase / (Decrease) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and cash equivalents $ 4,194 $ 2,065 $ 2,129 
 Restricted cash: 
 Prepaid expenses and other 319 1,244 -925 
 Other assets 122 188 -66 
 Cash, cash equivalents and 
 restricted $ 4,635 $ 3,497 $ 1,138 
 cash 
Investments in Debt and Equity Securities
Investments in equity securities that are not accounted for under equity method accounting or result
in consolidation are to be measured at fair value. For investments in equity securities without
readily determinable fair values, Verizon elects the measurement alternative permitted under GAAP to
measure these investments at cost, less any impairment, plus or minus changes resulting from
observable price changes in orderly transactions for an identical or similar investment of the same
issuer. For investments in debt securities without quoted prices, Verizon uses an alternative matrix
pricing method. Investments in equity securities that do not result in consolidation of the investee
are included in Investments in unconsolidated businesses and debt securities are included in Other
assets in our consolidated balance sheets.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Accounts receivable are recorded at amortized cost less an allowance for credit losses that are not
expected to be recovered. The gross amount of accounts receivable and corresponding allowance for
credit losses are presented separately in the consolidated balance sheets. We maintain allowances for
credit losses resulting from the expected failure or inability of our customers to make required
payments. We recognize the allowance for credit losses at inception and reassess quarterly based on
management’s expectation of the asset’s collectability. The allowance is based on multiple factors
including historical experience with bad debts, the credit quality of the customer base, the aging of
such receivables and current macroeconomic conditions, as well as management’s expectations of
conditions in the future, as applicable. Our allowance for credit losses is based on management’s
assessment of the collectability of assets pooled together with similar risk characteristics.
We pool our device payment plan agreement receivables based on the credit quality indicators and
shared risk characteristics of "new customers" and "existing customers." New customers are defined as
customers who have been with Verizon for less than 210days. Existing customers are defined as
customers who have been with Verizon for 210days or more. We record an allowance to reduce the
receivables to the amount that is expected to be collectible. For device payment plan agreement
receivables, we record bad debt expense based on a default and loss calculation using our proprietary
loss model. The expected loss rate is determined based on customer credit scores and other
qualitative factors as noted above. The loss rate is assigned individually on a customer by customer
basis and the custom credit scores are then aggregated by vintage and used in our proprietary loss
model to calculate the weighted-average loss rate used for determining the allowance balance.
We monitor the collectability of our wireless service receivables as one overall pool. Wireline
service receivables are disaggregated and pooled by the following types of customers and related
contracts: consumer, small and medium business, enterprise, public sector and wholesale. For wireless
service receivables and wireline consumer and small and medium business receivables, the allowance is
calculated based on a 12 month rolling average write-off balance multiplied by the average life-cycle
of an account from billing to write-off. The risk of loss is assessed over the contractual life of
the receivables and is adjusted based on the historical loss amounts for current and future
conditions based on management’s qualitative considerations. For enterprise, public sector and
wholesale wireline receivables, the allowance for credit losses is based on historical write-off
experience and individual customer credit risk, if applicable. We consider multiple factors in
determining the allowance as discussed above.
Inventories
Inventory consists of wireless and wireline equipment held for sale, which is carried at the lower of
cost (determined principally on either an average cost or first-in, first-out basis) or net
realizable value.
 62 
Table of Contents
Property, Plant and Equipment and Depreciation
We record property, plant and equipment at cost. Property, plant and equipment are generally
depreciated on a straight-line basis.
Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of the estimated life of the improvement or the
remaining term of the related lease, calculated from the time the asset was placed in service.
When depreciable assets are retired or otherwise disposed of, the related cost and accumulated
depreciation are deducted from the property, plant and equipment accounts and any gains or losses on
disposition are recognized in Selling, general and administrative expense.
We capitalize and depreciate network software purchased or developed within property, plant and
equipment assets. We also capitalize interest associated with the acquisition or construction of
network-related assets. Capitalized interest is reported as a reduction in interest expense and
depreciated as part of the cost of the network-related assets.
Computer Software and Cloud Computing Costs
We capitalize the cost of internal-use network and non-network software and defer the costs
associated with cloud computing service arrangements that have a useful life and term in excess of
one year. Subsequent additions, modifications or upgrades to internal-use network and non-network
software are capitalized only to the extent that they add significant new functionality. Planning,
software maintenance and training costs for internal-use software and cloud computing arrangements
are expensed in the period in which they are incurred. We capitalize interest associated with the
development of internal-use network and non-network software. Capitalized non-network internal-use
software costs are amortized using the straight-line method over a period of 3to 7years and are
included in Other intangible assets, net in our consolidated balance sheets. Costs incurred in
implementing a cloud computing service arrangement are deferred during the application-development
stage and recorded as Prepaid expense and other in our consolidated balance sheets. Once a project is
substantially complete and ready for its intended use, we stop deferring the related cloud computing
arrangement costs.
For a discussion of our impairment policy for capitalized non-network software costs, see "Goodwill
and Other Intangible Assets" below. See Note 4 for additional information of internal-use non-network
software reflected in our consolidated balance sheets. Similar to capitalized software costs,
deferred costs associated with cloud computing arrangements are subject to impairment testing.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill
Goodwill is the excess of the acquisition cost of businesses over the fair value of the identifiable
net assets acquired. Impairment testing for goodwill is performed annually in the fourth quarter or
more frequently if impairment indicators are present.
To determine if goodwill is potentially impaired, we have the option to perform a qualitative
assessment. However, we may elect to bypass the qualitative assessment and perform a quantitative
impairment test even if no indications of a potential impairment exist. It is our policy to perform
quantitative impairment assessment at least every three years.
Under the qualitative assessment, we consider several factors, including the enterprise value of the
reporting unit from the last quantitative test and the excess of fair value over carrying value from
this test, macroeconomic conditions (including changes in interest rates and discount rates),
industry and market considerations (including industry revenue and earnings before interest, taxes,
depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) margin results, projections and recent merger and acquisition
activity), the recent and projected financial performance of the reporting unit, as well as other
factors.
The quantitative impairment test for goodwill is performed at the reporting unit level and compares
the fair value of the reporting unit (calculated using a combination of a market approach and a
discounted cash flow method, as a form of the income approach) to its carrying value. Estimated fair
values of reporting units are Level 3 measures in the fair value hierarchy, see "Fair Value
Measurements" discussion below for additional information. The market approach includes the use of
comparative multiples of guideline companies to complement discounted cash flow results. The
discounted cash flow method is based on the present value of two components, projected cash flows and
a terminal value. The terminal value represents the expected normalized future cash flows of the
reporting unit beyond the cash flows from the discrete projection period. The fair value of the
reporting unit is calculated based on the sum of the present value of the cash flows from the
discrete period and the present value of the terminal value. The discount rate represents our
estimate of the weighted-average cost of capital, or expected return, that a marketplace participant
would have required as of the valuation date. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, an
impairment charge is booked for the excess carrying value over fair value, limited to the total
amount of goodwill of that reporting unit. During the fourth quarter each year, we update our three-
year strategic planning review for each of our reporting units. Those plans consider current economic
conditions and trends, estimated future operating results, our view of growth-rates and anticipated
future economic and regulatory conditions.
See Note 4 for additional information regarding our goodwill impairment testing.
 63 
Table of Contents
Intangible Assets Not Subject to Amortization
A significant portion of our intangible assets are wireless licenses that provide our wireless
operations with the exclusive right to utilize designated radio frequency spectrum to provide
wireless communication services. While licenses are issued for only a fixed time, generally tento
fifteen years, such licenses are subject to renewal by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
License renewals have occurred routinely and at nominal cost. Moreover, we have determined that there
are currently no legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic or other factors that limit
the useful life of our wireless licenses. As a result, we treat the wireless licenses as an
indefinite-lived intangible asset. We re-evaluate the useful life determination for wireless licenses
each year to determine whether events and circumstances continue to support an indefinite useful
life. We aggregate our wireless licenses into one single unit of accounting, as we utilize our
wireless licenses on an integrated basis as part of our nationwide wireless network.
We test our wireless licenses for potential impairment annually or more frequently if impairment
indicators are present. We have the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine
whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. However, we may elect to bypass
the qualitative assessment in any period and proceed directly to performing the quantitative
impairment test. It is our policy to perform quantitative impairment assessment at least every three
years.
As part of our qualitative assessment we consider several factors including the enterprise value of
our combined wireless business, macroeconomic conditions (including changes in interest rates and
discount rates), industry and market considerations (including industry revenue and EBITDA margin
results, projections and recent merger and acquisition activity), the recent and projected financial
performance of our combined wireless business as a whole, as well as other factors including the
result of our last quantitative assessment. See Note 4 for additional information regarding our
impairment tests.
Our quantitative impairment assessment consists of comparing the estimated fair value of our
aggregate wireless licenses to the aggregated carrying amount as of the test date. Under our
quantitative assessment, we estimate the fair value of our wireless licenses using the Greenfield
approach. The Greenfield approach is an income based valuation approach that values the wireless
licenses by calculating the cash flow generating potential of a hypothetical start-up company that
goes into business with no assets except the wireless licenses to be valued. A discounted cash flow
analysis is used to estimate what a marketplace participant would be willing to pay to purchase the
aggregated wireless licenses as of the valuation date. If the estimated fair value of the aggregated
wireless licenses is less than the aggregated carrying amount of the wireless licenses, then an
impairment charge is recognized.
Interest expense incurred while qualifying activities are performed to ready wireless licenses for
their intended use is capitalized as part of wireless licenses. The capitalization period ends when
the development is discontinued or substantially completed and the license is ready for its intended
use.
Wireless licenses can be purchased through public auctions conducted by the FCC. Deposits required to
participate in these auctions and purchase licenses are recorded within Other assets in our
consolidated balance sheets until the corresponding licenses are received and within Net cash used in
investing activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows.
Intangible Assets Subject to Amortization and Long-Lived Assets
Our intangible assets that do not have indefinite lives (primarily customer lists and non-network
internal-use software) are amortized over their estimated useful lives. All of our intangible assets
subject to amortization and other long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or
changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. If
any indications of impairment are present, we would test for recoverability by comparing the carrying
amount of the asset group to the net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated from the asset
group. If those net undiscounted cash flows do not exceed the carrying amount, we would perform the
next step, which is to determine the fair value of the asset group and record an impairment, if any.
We re-evaluate the useful life determinations for these intangible assets each year to determine
whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to their remaining useful lives.
See Note 4 for information related to the carrying amount of goodwill, wireless licenses and other
intangible assets, as well as the major components and average useful lives of our other acquired
intangible assets.
Leases
We lease network equipment including towers, distributed antenna systems, small cells, real estate,
connectivity mediums which include dark fiber, equipment, and other various types of assets for use
in our operations under both operating and finance leases. We assess whether an arrangement is a
lease or contains a lease at inception. For arrangements considered leases or that contain a lease
that is accounted for separately, we determine the classification and initial measurement of the
right-of-use asset and lease liability at the lease commencement date, which is the date that the
underlying asset becomes available for use.
For both operating and finance leases, we recognize a right-of-use asset, which represents our right
to use the underlying asset for the lease term, and a lease liability, which represents the present
value of our obligation to make payments arising over the lease term. The present value of the lease
payments is calculated using the incremental borrowing rate for operating and finance leases. The
incremental borrowing rate is determined using a portfolio approach based on the rate of interest
that the Company
 64 
Table of Contents
would have to pay to borrow an amount equal to the lease payments on a collateralized basis over a
similar term. Management uses the unsecured borrowing rate and risk-adjusts that rate to approximate
a collateralized rate, which is updated on a quarterly basis.
In those circumstances where Verizon is the lessee, we account for non-lease components associated
with our leases (e.g., common area maintenance costs) and lease components as a single lease
component for substantially all of our asset classes. Additionally, in arrangements where we are the
lessor, we have customer premise equipment for which we account for non-lease components (e.g.,
service revenue) and lease components as combined components under the revenue recognition guidance
in Topic 606 as the service revenues are the predominant components in the arrangements.
Rent expense for operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease
and is included in either Cost of services or Selling, general and administrative expense in our
consolidated statements of income, based on the use of the facility or equipment on which rent is
being paid. Variable rent payments related to both operating and finance leases are expensed in the
period incurred. Our variable lease payments consist of payments dependent on various external
indicators, including real estate taxes, common area maintenance charges and utility usage.
Operating leases with a term of 12 months or less are not recorded in our consolidated balance
sheets; we recognize rent expense for these leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
We recognize the amortization of the right-of-use asset for our finance leases on a straight-line
basis over the shorter of the lease term or the useful life of the right-of-use asset in Depreciation
and amortization expense in our consolidated statements of income. The interest expense related to
finance leases is recognized using the effective interest method based on the discount rate
determined at lease commencement and is included within Interest expense in our consolidated
statements of income.
See Note 6 for additional information related to leases, including disclosure required under Topic
842.
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value of financial and non-financial assets and liabilities is defined as an exit price,
representing the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction between market participants. The three-tier hierarchy for inputs used in
measuring fair value, which prioritizes the inputs used in the methodologies of measuring fair value
for assets and liabilities, is as follows:
Level 1 — Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
Level 2 — Observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and
liabilities
Level 3 — Unobservable pricing inputs in the market
Financial assets and financial liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level
of input that is significant to the fair value measurements. Our assessment of the significance of a
particular input to the fair value measurements requires judgment and may affect the valuation of the
assets and liabilities being measured and their categorization within the fair value hierarchy.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate is based on pre-tax income, statutory tax rates, tax laws and regulations and
tax planning strategies available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate.
Deferred income taxes are provided for temporary differences in the basis between financial statement
and income tax assets and liabilities. Deferred income taxes are recalculated annually at tax rates
in effect for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or
settled. We record valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more
likely than not to be realized.
We use a two-step approach for recognizing and measuring tax benefits taken or expected to be taken
in a tax return. The first step is recognition: we determine whether it is more likely than not that
a tax position will be sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related appeals or
litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. In evaluating whether a tax
position has met the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, we presume that the position will be
examined by the appropriate taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. The
second step is measurement: a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold
is measured to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The tax
position is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being
realized upon ultimate settlement. Differences between tax positions taken in a tax return and
amounts recognized in the financial statements will generally result in one or more of the following:
an increase in a liability for income taxes payable, a reduction of an income tax refund receivable,
a reduction in a deferred tax asset or an increase in a deferred tax liability.
Significant management judgment is required in evaluating our tax positions and in determining our
effective tax rate.
 65 
Table of Contents
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based compensation awards made to
employees and directors based on estimated fair values. See Note 10 for additional information.
Foreign Currency Translation and Transactions
The functional currency of our foreign operations is generally the local currency. For these foreign
entities, we translate their financial statements into U.S. dollars using average exchange rates for
the period for income statement amounts and using end-of-period exchange rates for assets and
liabilities. We record these translation adjustments in Accumulated other comprehensive loss, a
separate component of Equity, in our consolidated balance sheets. We record exchange gains and losses
resulting from the conversion of transaction currency to functional currency as a component of Other
income (expense), net.
Employee Benefit Plans
Pension and postretirement health care and life insurance benefits earned during the year, as well as
interest on projected benefit obligations, are accrued. Prior service costs and credits resulting
from changes in plan benefits are generally amortized over the average remaining service period of
the employees expected to receive benefits. Expected return on plan assets is determined by applying
the return on assets assumption to the actual fair value of plan assets. Actuarial gains and losses
are recognized in Other income (expense), net in the year in which they occur. These gains and losses
are measured annually as of December 31 and upon a remeasurement event. Verizon management employees
no longer earn pension benefits or earn service towards the Company retiree medical subsidy. See Note
11 for additional information.
We recognize a pension or a postretirement plan’s funded status as either an asset or liability in
the consolidated balance sheets. Also, we measure any unrecognized prior service costs and credits
that arise during the period as a component of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of
applicable income tax.
Derivative Instruments
We enter into derivative transactions primarily to manage our exposure to fluctuations in foreign
currency exchange rates and interest rates. We employ risk management strategies, which may include
the use of a variety of derivatives including cross currency swaps, forward starting interest rate
swaps, interest rate swaps, treasury rate locks, interest rate caps, swaptions and foreign exchange
forwards. We do not hold derivatives for trading purposes.
We measure all derivatives at fair value and recognize them as either assets or liabilities in our
consolidated balance sheets. Our derivative instruments are valued primarily using models based on
readily observable market parameters for all substantial terms of our derivative contracts and thus
are classified as Level 2. Changes in the fair values of derivative instruments applied as economic
hedges are recognized in earnings in the current period. For fair value hedges, the change in the
fair value of the derivative instruments is recognized in earnings, along with the change in the fair
value of the hedged item. Unrealized gains or losses on excluded components of fair value hedges are
recorded in Other comprehensive income (loss) and are recognized into earnings on a systematic and
rational basis through the swap accrual over the life of the hedged item. For cash flow hedges, the
change in the fair value of the derivative instruments is reported in Other comprehensive income
(loss) and recognized in earnings when the hedged item is recognized in earnings. For net investment
hedges of certain of our foreign operations, the change in the fair value of the hedging instruments
is reported in Other comprehensive income (loss) as part of the cumulative translation adjustment and
partially offsets the impact of foreign currency changes on the value of our net investment.
Cash flows from derivatives, which are designated as accounting hedges or applied as economic hedges,
are presented consistently with the cash flow classification of the related hedged items.See Note 9
for additional information.
Variable Interest Entities
VIEs are entities that lack sufficient equity to permit the entity to finance its activities without
additional subordinated financial support from other parties, have equity investors that do not have
the ability to make significant decisions relating to the entity’s operations through voting rights,
do not have the obligation to absorb the expected losses, or do not have the right to receive the
residual returns of the entity. We consolidate the assets and liabilities of VIEs when we are deemed
to be the primary beneficiary. The primary beneficiary is the party that has the power to make the
decisions that most significantly affect the economic performance of the VIE and has the obligation
to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits that could potentially be significant to the VIE.
 66 
Table of Contents
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
The following Accounting Standards Update (ASU) was issued by the Financial Accounting Standards
Board (FASB), and has been early adopted by Verizon.
 Description 
 ASU 2023-09, Income Taxes (Topic 740) 
 In December 2023, the FASB issued this 
 standard update which requires enhanced 
 disclosures primarily related to rate Effect on Financial Statements 
 reconciliation and income taxes paid Verizon has elected to early adopt this Topic 
 information. The standard is effective for effective December 31, 2024 using a 
 annual periods beginning after December 15, retrospective approach and included the 
 2024. A prospective transition approach should required disclosures in our notes to the 
 be applied; however, a retrospective financial statements for our income taxes. This 
 application is permitted. Early adoption of standard update did not affect our operating 
 this standard is permitted. results. 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Note 2. Revenue and Contract Costs 
We earn revenue from contracts with customers, primarily through the provision of telecommunications
and other services and through the sale of wireless equipment.
Revenue by Category
We have tworeportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units, Consumer and
Business. Revenue is disaggregated by products and services within Consumer, and customer groups
(Enterprise and Public Sector, Business Markets and Other, and Wholesale) within Business. See Note
13 for additional information on revenue by segment, including Corporate and other.
We also earn revenues that are not accounted for under Topic 606 from leasing arrangements (such as
those for towers and equipment), captive reinsurance arrangements primarily related to wireless
device insurance and the interest recognized when equipment is sold to the customer by an authorized
agent under a device payment plan agreement. We have elected the practical expedient within Topic
842, to combine the lease and non-lease components for those customer arrangements under Topic 606
that involve customer premise equipment where we are the lessor. Revenues from arrangements that were
not accounted for under Topic 606 were approximately $ 3.1billion, $ 2.9billion and $ 3.2billion for
the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Remaining Performance Obligations
When allocating the total contract transaction price to identified performance obligations, a portion
of the total transaction price may relate to service performance obligations which were not satisfied
or are partially satisfied as of the end of the reporting period. Below we disclose information
relating to these unsatisfied performance obligations. We apply the practical expedient available
under Topic 606 that provides the option to exclude the expected revenues arising from unsatisfied
performance obligations related to contracts that have an original expected duration of one year or
less. This situation primarily arises with respect to certain month-to-month service contracts. At
December 31, 2024, month-to-month service contracts represented approximately 95% of both our
wireless postpaid contracts and our wireline Consumer and our Business Markets and Other contracts,
compared to December 31, 2023, for which month-to-month service contracts represented approximately
95% of our wireless postpaid contracts and 94% of our wireline Consumer and our Business Markets and
Other contracts .
Additionally, certain contracts provide customers the option to purchase additional services. The
fees related to these additional services are recognized when the customer exercises the option
(typically on a month-to-month basis).
Contracts for wireless services, with or without promotional credits that require maintenance of
service, are generally either month-to-month and cancellable at any time, or considered to contain
terms ranging from greater than one monthto up to thirty-six months(typically under a device payment
plan or a fixed-term plan). Additionally, customers may incur charges based on usage or additional
optional services purchased in conjunction with entering into a contract that can be cancelled at any
time and therefore are not included in the transaction price. The transaction price allocated to
service performance obligations, which are not satisfied or are partially satisfied as of the end of
the reporting period, are generally related to contracts that are not accounted for as month-to-month
contracts.
Our Consumer group customers also include traditional wholesale resellers that purchase and resell
wireless service under their own brands to their respective customers. Reseller arrangements
generally include a stated contract term, which typically extends longer than two yearsand, in some
cases, include a periodic minimum revenue commitment over the contract term for which revenues will
be recognized in future periods.
Consumer customer contracts for wireline services are generally month-to-month; however, they may
have a service term of two yearsor shorter than twelve months. Certain contracts with Business
customers for wireline services extend into future periods, contain fixed monthly fees and usage-
based fees, and can include annual commitments in each year of the contract or
 67 
Table of Contents
commitments over the entire specified contract term; however, a significant number of contracts for
wireline services with our Business customers have a contract term that is twelve monthsor less.
Additionally, there are certain contracts with Business customers for wireline services that have a
contractual minimum fee over the total contract term. We cannot predict the time period when revenue
will be recognized related to those contracts; thus, they are excluded from the time bands below.
These contracts have varying terms spanning over approximately twenty-nine yearsending in September
2053 and have aggregate contract minimum payments totaling $ 1.8billion.
At December 31, 2024, the transaction price related to unsatisfied performance obligations that are
expected to be recognized for 2025, 2026 and thereafter was $ 28.5billion, $ 17.5billion and $
7.2billion, respectively. Remaining performance obligation estimates are subject to change and are
affected by several factors, including terminations and changes in the timing and scope of contracts,
arising from contract modifications.
Accounts Receivable and Contract Balances
The timing of revenue recognition may differ from the time of billing to our customers. Receivables
presented in our consolidated balance sheets represent an unconditional right to consideration.
Contract balances represent amounts from an arrangement when either Verizon has performed, by
transferring goods or services to the customer in advance of receiving all or partial consideration
for such goods and services from the customer, or the customer has made payment to Verizon in advance
of obtaining control of the goods and/or services promised to the customer in the contract.
The following table presents information about receivables from contracts with customers:
 At December 31, At December 31, 
 (dollars in millions) 2024 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Accounts Receivable(1) $ 9,225 $ 9,760 
 Device payment plan agreement 19,766 18,528 
 receivables(2) 
(1) Balances do not include receivables related to the following: activity associated with certain
vendor agreements, leasing arrangements (such as those for towers and equipment), captive reinsurance
arrangements primarily related to wireless device insurance and device payment plan agreement
receivables presented separately.
(2) Included in device payment plan agreement receivables presented in Note 8. Receivables derived
from the sale of equipment on a device payment plan through an authorized agent are excluded.
Contract assets primarily relate to our rights to consideration for goods or services provided to
customers but for which we do not have an unconditional right at the reporting date. Under a fixed-
term plan, total contract revenue is allocated between wireless service and equipment revenues. In
conjunction with these arrangements, a contract asset is created, which represents the difference
between the amount of equipment revenue recognized upon sale and the amount of consideration received
from the customer when the performance obligation related to the transfer of control of the equipment
is satisfied. The contract asset is reclassified to accounts receivable as wireless services are
provided and billed. We have the right to bill the customer as service is provided over time, which
results in our right to the payment being unconditional. The contract asset balances are presented in
our consolidated balance sheets as Prepaid expenses and other and Other assets. We recognize the
allowance for credit losses at inception and reassess quarterly based on management's expectation of
the asset's collectability.
Contract assets increased $ 128million during the year ended December 31, 2024. The change in
contract assets was primarily due to new contracts and increases in sales promotions recognized
upfront, driven by customer activity related to wireless and Fios services. These items were
partially offset by reclassifications to accounts receivable due to billings on existing contracts
and impairment charges of $ 53million.
Contract liabilities arise when we bill our customers and receive consideration in advance of
providing the goods or services promised in the contract. We typically bill service one month in
advance, which is the primary component of the contract liability balance. Contract liabilities are
recognized as revenue when services are provided to the customer. The contract liability balances are
presented in our consolidated balance sheets as Other current liabilities and Other liabilities.
Contract liabilities increased $ 776million during the year ended December 31, 2024. The change in
contract liabilities was primarily due to increases in sales promotions recognized over time, upfront
fees and wireless pricing actions.
Revenue recognized during the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023 related to contract liabilities
existing at January 1, 2024 and 2023 were $ 5.0billion and $ 4.9billion, respectively, as performance
obligations related to services were satisfied.
 68 
Table of Contents
The balance of contract assets and contract liabilities recorded in our consolidated balance sheets
were as follows:
 (dollars in millions) At December 31, At December 31, 
 Assets 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Prepaid expenses and other $ 621 $ 546 
 Other assets 321 268 
 Total Contract Assets $ 942 $ 814 
 Liabilities 
 Other current liabilities $ 7,492 $ 6,955 
 Other liabilities 2,186 1,947 
 Total Contract Liabilities $ 9,678 $ 8,902 
Contract Costs
As discussed in Note 1, Topic 606 requires the recognition of an asset for incremental costs to
obtain a customer contract, which are then amortized to expense over the respective periods of
expected benefit. We recognize an asset for incremental commission expenses paid to internal and
external sales personnel and agents in conjunction with obtaining customer contracts. We only defer
these costs when we have determined the commissions are incremental costs that would not have been
incurred absent the customer contract and are expected to be recoverable. Costs to obtain a contract
are amortized and recorded ratably as commission expense over the period representing the transfer of
goods or services to which the assets relate. Costs to obtain wireless contracts are amortized over
both of our Consumer and Business customers' estimated upgrade cycles, as such costs are typically
incurred each time a customer upgrades. Costs to obtain wireline contracts are amortized as expense
over the estimated customer relationship period for our Consumer customers. Incremental costs to
obtain wireline contracts for our Business customers are insignificant. Costs to obtain contracts are
recorded in Selling, general and administrative expense.
We also defer costs incurred to fulfill contracts that: (1) relate directly to the contract; (2) are
expected to generate resources that will be used to satisfy our performance obligation under the
contract; and (3) are expected to be recovered through revenue generated under the contract. Contract
fulfillment costs are expensed as we satisfy our performance obligations and recorded in Cost of
services. These costs principally relate to direct costs that enhance our wireline business
resources, such as costs incurred to install circuits.
We determine the amortization periods for our costs incurred to obtain or fulfill a customer contract
at a portfolio level due to the similarities within these customer contract portfolios.
Other costs, such as general costs or costs related to past performance obligations, are expensed as
incurred.
Collectively, costs to obtain a contract and costs to fulfill a contract are referred to as deferred
contract costs, and amortized over a two-to- seven yearperiod. Deferred contract costs are classified
as current or non-current within Prepaid expenses and other and Other assets, respectively.
The balances of deferred contract costs included in our consolidated balance sheets were as follows:
 (dollars in millions) At December 31, At December 31, 
 Assets 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Prepaid expenses and other $ 2,932 $ 2,756 
 Other assets 2,808 2,639 
 Total $ 5,740 $ 5,395 
For the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023, we recognized expense of $ 3.4billion and $
3.2billion, respectively, associated with the amortization of deferred contract costs, primarily
within Selling, general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of income.
We assess our deferred contract costs for impairment on a quarterly basis. We recognize an impairment
charge to the extent the carrying amount of a deferred cost exceeds the remaining amount of
consideration we expect to receive in exchange for the goods and services related to the cost, less
the expected costs related directly to providing those goods and services that have not yet been
recognized as expenses. There were noimpairment charges recognized for the year ended December 31,
2024. There were insignificant impairment charges recognized for the year ended December 31, 2023.
 69 
Table of Contents
 Note 3. Acquisitions and Divestitures 
Spectrum License Transactions
In February 2021, the FCC concluded Auction 107 for C-Band wireless spectrum. In accordance with the
rules applicable to the auction, Verizon is required to make payments for our allocable share of
clearing costs incurred by, and incentive payments due to, the incumbent license holders associated
with the auction, which are estimated to be $ 7.5billion. During 2024, 2023 and 2022, we made
payments of $ 269million, $ 4.3billion and $ 1.6billion respectively, for obligations related to
clearing costs and accelerated clearing incentives. The carrying value of the wireless spectrum won
in Auction 107 consists of all payments required to participate and purchase licenses in the auction,
including Verizon’s allocable share of clearing costs incurred by, and incentive payments due to, the
incumbent license holders associated with the auction that we are obligated to pay in order to
acquire the licenses, as well as capitalized interest to the extent qualifying activities have
occurred.
In March 2022, Verizon signed agreements with satellite operators in which operators agreed to clear
C-Band spectrum in certain markets and frequencies ahead of the previously expected timeframe. During
2022, Verizon incurred costs associated with these agreements of approximately $ 340million, of which
$ 310million was paid as of December 31, 2022 and the remainder was paid in 2023. This early
clearance accelerated Verizon's access to more spectrum in a number of key markets to support its 5G
network initiatives.
On October 17, 2024, Verizon entered into a license purchase agreement to acquire select spectrum
licenses of United States Cellular Corporation and certain of its subsidiaries (UScellular) for total
consideration of $ 1.0billion, subject to certain potential adjustments. The closing of this
transaction is subject to the receipt of regulatory approvals and other closing conditions, including
the consummation of UScellular's proposed sale of its wireless operations and select spectrum assets
to T-Mobile US, Inc., and the termination of certain post-closing arrangements with respect to that
sale.
Business Acquisitions and Divestitures
TracFone Wireless, Inc.
On November 23, 2021 (the Acquisition Date), we completed the acquisition of TracFone Wireless, Inc.
(TracFone). Verizon acquired all of TracFone's outstanding stock in exchange for approximately $
3.5billion in cash, net of cash acquired and working capital and other adjustments, 57,596,544shares
of common stock of the Company valued at approximately $ 3.0billion, and up to an additional $
650million in future cash contingent consideration related to the achievement of certain performance
measures and other commercial arrangements. The fair value of the common stock was determined on the
basis of its closing market price on the Acquisition Date. The estimated fair value of the contingent
consideration as of the Acquisition Date was approximately $ 560million and represented a Level 3
measurement as defined in ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures. See Note 9 for additional
information. The contingent consideration payable was based on the achievement of certain revenue and
operational targets, measured over a two-yearearn out period. Contingent consideration payments were
completed in January of 2024.
During 2024, 2023 and 2022, Verizon made payments of $ 52million, $ 257million and $ 188million,
respectively, related to the contingent consideration, which are reflected in Cash flows from
financing activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows.
During 2022, Verizon received net cash proceeds of $ 248million for the final settlement of working
capital, which was included in our consideration as of the Acquisition Date.
Frontier Communications Parent, Inc.
On September 4, 2024, Verizon entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the Merger Agreement) to
acquire Frontier Communications Parent, Inc. (Frontier), a U.S. provider of broadband internet and
other communication services. The transaction is structured as a merger of the Company's subsidiary
with and into Frontier, as a result of which Frontier will become a wholly owned subsidiary of the
Company and shares of Frontier common stock outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of
merger (subject to certain limited exceptions) will be cancelled and converted into the right to
receive a per share merger consideration of $ 38.50, in cash. In November 2024, Frontier shareholders
approved the transaction. Consummation of the transaction is subject to the receipt of certain
regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions. Under certain circumstances, if the
Merger Agreement is terminated, Frontier may be required to pay Verizon a termination fee of $
320million. Under certain other specified circumstances, Verizon may be required to pay Frontier a
termination fee of $ 590million.
 Note 4. Wireless Licenses, Goodwill and Other 
 Intangible Assets 
Wireless Licenses
The carrying amounts of Wireless licenses are as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2024 2023 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Wireless licenses $ 156,613 $ 155,667 
 70 
Table of Contents
During 2024 and 2023, we made payments of $ 269million and $ 4.3billion, respectively, for
obligations related to clearing costs and accelerated clearing incentives for wireless licenses in
connection with Auction 107. See Note 3 for additional information.
At December 31, 2024 and 2023, approximately $ 10.1billion and $ 15.0billion, respectively, of
wireless licenses were under development for commercial service for which we were capitalizing
interest costs. We recorded $ 616million and $ 1.4billion of capitalized interest on wireless
licenses for the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively.
During 2024 and 2023, we renewed various wireless licenses in accordance with FCC regulations with an
average renewal period of 10years. See Note 1 for additional information.
As discussed in Note 1, we test our wireless licenses for potential impairment annually or more
frequently if impairment indicators are present. In 2023, we performed a qualitative impairment
assessment, which indicated it was more likely than not that the fair value of our wireless licenses
remained above their carrying amount and, therefore, did not result in an impairment. In 2024, we
performed a quantitative impairment assessment, in accordance with our policy, which compared the
estimated fair value of our aggregate wireless licenses, estimated using the Greenfield approach, to
the aggregate carrying amount of the licenses as of the test date. Our annual assessment in 2024
indicated that the fair value of our wireless licenses exceeded the carrying value and, therefore,
did not result in an impairment.
Our strategy requires significant capital investments primarily to acquire wireless spectrum, put the
spectrum into service, provide additional capacity for growth in our networks, invest in the fiber
that supports our businesses, evolve and maintain our networks and develop and maintain significant
advanced information technology systems and data system capabilities.
Goodwill
Changes in the carrying amount of Goodwill are as follows:
 (dollars in millions) Consumer Business Other Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1, $ 21,142 $ 7,502 $ 27 $ 28,671 
 2023(1) 
 Acquisitions 35 — — 35 
 Verizon Business Group 
 goodwill — -5,841 — -5,841 
 impairment 
 Reclassifications, 
 adjustments and — 5 -27 -22 
 other(2) 
 Balance at December 21,177 1,666 — 22,843 
 31, 2023(3) 
 Reclassifications, — -2 — -2 
 adjustments and other 
 Balance at December $ 21,177 $ 1,664 $ — $ 22,841 
 31, 2024(3) 
(1) Goodwill balances are net of an accumulated impairment charge of $ 16million presented within
both Other and Total.
(2) Includes a goodwill impairment charge of $ 27million related to non-strategic businesses
presented within Other, recorded in Selling, general and administrative expense in our consolidated
statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2023.
(3) Goodwill balances are net of accumulated impairment charges of $ 5.8billion, $ 43million and $
5.9billion presented within Business, Other and Total, respectively.
During the fourth quarter of 2023, we performed a qualitative impairment assessment for our Consumer
reporting unit. Our qualitative assessment indicated that it was more likely than not that the fair
value of our Consumer reporting unit exceeded its carrying value and, therefore, did not result in an
impairment.
During the fourth quarter of 2024, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment for our Consumer
reporting unit in accordance with our policy. We applied a combination of a market approach and a
discounted cash flow method reflecting current assumptions and inputs, including our revised
projections, discount rate and expected growth rates. Our assessment indicated that the fair value of
our Consumer reporting unit exceeded its carrying value and, therefore, did not result in an
impairment.
During the fourth quarter of 2023, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment for our Business
reporting unit given the low excess of fair value over carrying value identified in our 2022 annual
impairment assessment and increased competitive and market pressures experienced throughout 2023.
These pressures resulted in lower projected cash flows primarily driven by secular declines in
wireline services and products across our Business customer groups. In connection with Verizon’s
annual budget process in the fourth quarter of 2023, leadership completed a comprehensive five-year
strategic planning review of our Business reporting unit resulting in declines in financial
projections driven by market dynamics as compared to the prior year five-year strategic planning
cycle. The revised projections were used as a key input into the Business reporting unit’s annual
goodwill impairment test performed in the fourth quarter of 2023. In addition, changes in the
macroeconomic environment, including interest rate and inflationary pressures also impacted the fair
value of the reporting unit. We applied a combination of a market approach and a discounted cash flow
method reflecting current assumptions and inputs, including our revised projections, discount rate
and expected growth rates, which resulted in the determination that the fair value of our Business
reporting unit was less than its carrying amount. As a result, in the fourth quarter of 2023, we
recorded a noncash goodwill impairment charge of approximately $ 5.8billion ($ 5.8billion after-tax)
in our consolidated statement of income.
 71 
Table of Contents
During the fourth quarter of 2024, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment for our Business
reporting unit given the impairment of the Business reporting unit's goodwill in the prior year. In
addition, the Business reporting unit has continued to experience competitive and market pressures
throughout 2024, that may persist over the near term. We applied a combination of a market approach
and a discounted cash flow method reflecting current assumptions and inputs, including our revised
projections, discount rate and expected growth rates, which indicated that the fair value of our
Business reporting unit exceeded its carrying value and, therefore, did not result in an impairment.
We do not anticipate reasonable changes in significant assumptions to change the outcome of the
quantitative impairment assessment. However, management believes there is a continued risk that our
Business reporting unit may be required to recognize an impairment charge in the future.
A projected sustained decline in the reporting unit's revenues and earnings could have a significant
negative impact on its fair value and could result in impairment charges. Such a decline could be
driven by, among other things: (1) decreases in sales volumes or long-term growth rate as a result of
competitive pressures or other factors; or (2) the inability to achieve or delays in achieving the
goals in strategic initiatives. Adverse changes to macroeconomic factors, such as increases in long-
term interest rates, would also negatively impact the fair value of the reporting unit.
Other Intangible Assets
The following table displays the composition of Other intangible assets, net as well as the
respective amortization period:
 (d… 
 in 
 mi… 
 At 2024 20… 
 De… Gro… Acc… Net Gro… Ac… Net 
 31, Amo… Amo… Amo… Amo… Am… Am… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cu… 
 li… $ 4,2… $ -2,… $ 1,6… $ 4,3… $ -2,… $ 2,1… 
 (5… 
 No… 
 in… 28,… -19… 8,3… 25,… -17… 7,5… 
 so… 
 (3… 
 Ot… 2,6… -1,… 1,1… 2,6… -1,… 1,3… 
 (4… 
 To… $ 35,… $ -23… $ 11,… $ 32,… $ -21… $ 11,… 
The amortization expense for Other intangible assets was as follows:
 Years (dollars in millions) 
 ────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2024 $ 2,781 
 2023 2,687 
 2022 2,507 
Estimated annual amortization expense for Other intangible assets is as follows:
 Years (dollars in millions) 
 ────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2025 $ 2,825 
 2026 2,571 
 2027 2,025 
 2028 1,549 
 2029 887 
 Note 5. Property, Plant and Equipment 
The following table displays the details of Property, plant and equipment, which is stated at cost:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, Lives (years) 2024 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Land - $ 740 $ 751 
 Buildings and equipment 7to45 39,130 36,940 
 Central office and 
 other network 3to15 176,680 170,161 
 equipment 
 Antennas, cable, 
 conduit, poles and 4to50 82,810 78,355 
 towers 
 Leasehold improvements 5to20 10,562 10,355 
 Work in progress - 9,424 12,092 
 Furniture, vehicles and 3to20 12,060 11,454 
 other 
 331,406 320,108 
 Less accumulated 222,884 211,798 
 depreciation 
 Property, plant and $ 108,522 $ 108,310 
 equipment, net 
 72 
Table of Contents
 Note 6. Leasing Arrangements 
We enter into various lease arrangements for network equipment including towers, distributed antenna
systems, small cells, real estate and connectivity mediums including dark fiber, equipment, and other
various types of assets for use in our operations. Our leases have remaining lease terms ranging from
1year to 30years, some of which include options that we can elect to extend the leases term for up to
25years, and some of which include options to terminate the leases. For the majority of leases
entered into during the current period, we have concluded it is not reasonably certain that we would
exercise the options to extend the lease or not terminate the lease. Therefore, as of the lease
commencement date, our lease terms generally do not include these options. We include options to
extend the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option.
During December 2024, we completed a transaction with Vertical Bridge REIT, LLC (Vertical Bridge)
pursuant to which Vertical Bridge obtained the exclusive rights to lease, operate and manage over
6,000wireless towers from Verizon in exchange for an upfront payment of $ 2.8billion. Under the terms
of the agreement, Vertical Bridge has exclusive rights to lease, operate and manage the towers over
an average term of approximately 30years, with the option to acquire the towers at the end of the
lease terms. We have leased back a portion of the capacity on the towers from Vertical Bridge for an
initial term of 10years, with eightoptional renewal terms of five yearseach, subject to certain early
termination rights. We continue to include the towers in Property, plant and equipment, net in our
consolidated balance sheets and depreciate them accordingly. The upfront payment, which is primarily
included within Other liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet, is accounted for as prepaid rent
and as a financing obligation. We recorded prepaid rent of $ 2.0billion related to the portion of the
towers for which the right-of-use has passed to Vertical Bridge, which is reflected in Cash flows
from operating activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows. In addition, we recorded a
financing obligation of $ 830million related to the portion of the towers that we continue to occupy
and use for network operations, which is reflected in Cash flows from financing activities in our
consolidated statements of cash flows.
During March 2015, we completed a transaction with American Tower Corporation (American Tower)
pursuant to which American Tower acquired the exclusive rights to lease and operate approximately
11,300of our wireless towers for an upfront payment of $ 5.0billion. We have subleased capacity on
the towers from American Tower for a minimum of 10years at current market rates in 2015, with options
to renew. We continue to include the towers in Property, plant and equipment, net in our consolidated
balance sheets and depreciate them accordingly.
In addition to the rights to lease and operate the towers, Vertical Bridge and American Tower assumed
the interest in the underlying ground leases related to these towers. While Vertical Bridge and
American Tower can renegotiate the terms of and are responsible for paying the ground leases, we are
still the primary obligor for these leases and accordingly, the present value of these ground leases
are included in our operating lease right-of-use assets and operating lease liabilities. We do not
expect to be required to make ground lease payments unless Vertical Bridge or American Tower
defaults, which we determined to be remote.
The components of net lease cost were as follows:
 (dollars in 
 Years Ended millions) 
 December 31, Classification 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cost of 
 services 
 Operating Selling, $ 5,607 $ 5,432 $ 5,345 
 lease cost(1) general and 
 administrative 
 expense 
 Finance lease 
 cost: 
 Amortization Depreciation 
 of and 329 259 224 
 right-of-use amortization 
 assets expense 
 Interest on Interest 
 lease expense 98 69 36 
 liabilities 
 Cost of 
 services 
 Short-term Selling, 21 29 23 
 lease cost(1) general and 
 administrative 
 expense 
 Cost of 
 services 
 Variable lease Selling, 310 313 294 
 cost(1) general and 
 administrative 
 expense 
 Sublease Service 
 income revenues and -216 -210 -199 
 other 
 Total net $ 6,149 $ 5,892 $ 5,723 
 lease cost 
(1) All operating lease costs, including short-term and variable lease costs, are split between Cost
of services and Selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of income
based on the use of the facility or equipment that the rent is being paid on. See Note 1 for
additional information. Variable lease costs represent payments that are dependent on a rate or
index, or on usage of the asset.
 73 
Table of Contents
Supplemental disclosure for the statements of cash flows related to operating and finance leases were
as follows:
 Years Ended December (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash Flows from 
 Operating Activities 
 Cash paid for amounts 
 included in the 
 measurement of lease 
 liabilities 
 Operating cash flows 
 for operating $ -5,067 $ -4,929 $ -4,490 
 leases 
 Operating cash flows -98 -69 -36 
 for finance leases 
 Cash Flows from 
 Financing Activities 
 Financing cash flows -794 -612 -449 
 for finance leases 
 Supplemental lease cash 
 flow disclosures 
 Operating lease 
 right-of-use assets 
 obtained in exchange 4,385 2,634 2,392 
 for new operating 
 lease liabilities 
 Right-of-use assets 
 obtained in exchange 1,051 968 832 
 for new finance lease 
 liabilities 
Supplemental disclosures for the balance sheet related to finance leases were as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2024 2023 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Assets 
 Property, plant and equipment, net $ 1,692 $ 1,459 
 Liabilities 
 Debt maturing within one year $ 894 $ 753 
 Long-term debt 1,455 1,338 
 Total Finance lease liabilities $ 2,349 $ 2,091 
The weighted-average remaining lease term and the weighted-average discount rate of our leases were
as follows:
 At December 31, 2024 2023 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted-average remaining lease term 
 (years) 
 Operating leases 8 8 
 Finance leases 3 3 
 Weighted-average discount rate 
 Operating leases 4.1 % 3.6 % 
 Finance leases 4.8 % 2.9 % 
The following table presents the maturity analysis of operating and finance lease liabilities as of
December 31, 2024:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Operating Leases Finance Leases 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2025 $ 5,013 $ 954 
 2026 4,685 714 
 2027 4,392 457 
 2028 3,004 248 
 2029 2,505 116 
 Thereafter 9,451 53 
 Total lease payments 29,050 2,542 
 Less interest 4,707 193 
 Present value of lease 24,343 2,349 
 liabilities 
 Less current obligation 4,415 894 
 Long-term obligation at 
 December 31, $ 19,928 $ 1,455 
 2024 
As of December 31, 2024, we have contractually obligated lease payments amounting to $ 1.4billion
primarily for office facility operating leases and small cell colocation and fiber operating leases
that have not yet commenced. We have legally obligated lease payments for various other operating
leases that have not yet commenced for which the total obligation was not significant. We have
certain rights and obligations for these leases, but have not recognized an operating lease right-of-
use asset or an operating lease liability since they have not yet commenced.
 74 
Table of Contents
 Note 7. Debt 
Outstanding long-term debt obligations as of December 31, 2024 and 2023 are as follows:
 (dollars in 
 Interest millions) 
 At December 31, Maturities Rates % 2024 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Verizon < 5 Years 0.75-6.94 $ 29,325 $ 33,316 
 Communications 
 5-10 Years 1.50-7.88 33,851 37,229 
 > 10 Years 1.13-8.95 52,719 55,355 
 < 5 Years Floating(1) 1,171 2,099 
 5-10 Years Floating(1) 1,735 2,029 
 Alltel < 5 Years 6.80 38 N/A 
 Corporation 
 5-10 Years 6.80-7.88 56 94 
 Operating 
 telephone 
 company < 5 Years 6.00-8.38 286 79 
 subsidiaries 
 – debentures 
 5-10 Years 5.13-8.75 328 535 
 Other 
 subsidiaries – < 5 Years 0.50-6.09 16,363 14,048 
 asset-backed 
 debt 
 < 5 Years Floating(1) 9,805 8,163 
 Finance lease 
 obligations 
 (average rate 
 of4.8% and2.9% 2,349 2,091 
 in 2024 and 
 2023, 
 respectively)(2) 
 Vendor financing 85 64 
 arrangements(2) 
 Unamortized 
 discount, net of -3,604 -3,812 
 premium 
 Unamortized debt -558 -616 
 issuance costs 
 Total long-term 
 debt, including 143,949 150,674 
 current 
 maturities 
 Less long-term 
 debt maturing 22,568 12,973 
 within one 
 year 
 Total long-term $ 121,381 $ 137,701 
 debt 
 Long-term debt 
 maturing within $ 22,568 $ 12,973 
 one year 
 Add short-term 
 vendor financing 65 — 
 arrangements(2) 
 Debt maturing $ 22,633 $ 12,973 
 within one year 
 Add long-term 121,381 137,701 
 debt 
 Total debt $ 144,014 $ 150,674 
N/A - not applicable
(1) For the period ending December 2024, the debt obligations bore interest at floating rates,
including floating rates associated with the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) for the interest
period plus an applicable interest margin per annum. Floating rates associated with SOFR for the
interest payments made in December 2024 ranged from 4.598% to 5.556%.
(2) Finance lease and vendor financing obligations are part of alternative financing arrangements.
Maturities of long-term debt (secured and unsecured) outstanding, including current maturities,
excluding finance lease obligations and unamortized debt issuance costs, at December 31, 2024 are as
follows:
 Years (dollars in millions) 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2025 $ 21,709 
 2026 7,823 
 2027 9,158 
 2028 11,592 
 2029 8,673 
 Thereafter 83,203 
During 2024, we received $ 15.6billion of proceeds from long-term borrowings, which included $
12.4billion of proceeds from asset-backed debt transactions. The net proceeds were primarily used for
general corporate purposes including the repayment of debt and the funding of certain renewable
energy projects. We used $ 20.3billion of cash to repay and repurchase long-term borrowings and
finance lease obligations, including $ 8.5billion to prepay and repay asset-backed, long-term
borrowings. The net proceeds of approximately $ 1.0billion from the notes issued in 2024 are expected
to be used to fund certain renewable energy projects.
During 2023, we received $ 8.6billion of proceeds from long-term borrowings, which included $
6.6billion of proceeds from asset-backed debt transactions. The net proceeds were primarily used for
general corporate purposes including the repayment of debt and the funding of certain renewable
energy projects. We used $ 10.6billion of cash to repay and repurchase long-term borrowings and
finance lease obligations, including $ 4.4billion to prepay and repay asset-backed, long-term
borrowings. The net proceeds of approximately $ 1.0billion from the notes issued in 2023 were used to
fund certain renewable energy projects.
 75 
Table of Contents
2024 Significant Debt Transactions
Debt or equity financing may be needed to fund additional investments or development activities or to
maintain an appropriate capital structure to ensure our financial flexibility .
The following tables show the significant transactions involving the senior unsecured debt securities
of the Company and its subsidiaries that occurred during the year ended December 31, 2024.
Exchange Offers
 Principal Amount Principal 
 (dollars in millions) Exchanged Amount Issued 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Verizon0.850% -4.329% notes and floating $ 2,256 $ — 
 rate notes, due 2025 - 2028 
 Verizon4.780% notes due 2035(1) — 2,191 
 Total(2) $ 2,256 $ 2,191 
(1) The principal amount issued in exchange does not include either an insignificant amount of cash
paid in lieu of the issuance of fractional new notes or accrued and unpaid interest paid on the old
notes accepted for exchange to the date of exchange.
(2) The debt exchange offers above meet the criteria to be accounted for as a modification of debt.
As a result, the excess of the principal amount of notes exchanged over the principal amount of new
notes issued of $ 65million was recorded as a premium to Long-term debt in the consolidated balance
sheets.
Tender Offers
 Principal Amount 
 (dollars in millions) Purchased Cash Consideration(1) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Verizon0.875% -3.250% notes due 2025 - € 1,981 $ 2,237 
 2028 
 Verizon0.850% -3.376% notes and 
 floating $ 3,314 3,267 
 rate notes, due 2025 - 2026 
 Total $ 5,504 
(1) The total cash consideration includes the tender offer consideration, plus any accrued and unpaid
interest to the date of purchase. In addition, for securities denominated in a currency other than
the U.S. dollar, cash consideration is shown on a U.S. dollar equivalent basis and includes the
amount payable per the derivatives entered into in connection with the transaction. See Note 9 for
additional information on cross currency swap transactions related to the transaction.
Repayments and Repurchases
 Principal Repaid/ 
 (dollars in millions) Repurchased Amount Paid(1) 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Verizon1.625% notes due 2024 € 685 $ 840 
 Verizon4.073% notes due 2024 £ 413 582 
 Verizon0.750% notes due 2024 $ 999 1,003 
 Verizon floating rate notes due 2024 95 96 
 Verizon3.500% notes due 2024 1,161 1,182 
 Open market repurchases of various 1,255 985 
 Verizon notes(2) 
 Total $ 4,688 
(1) Represents amount paid to repay or repurchase, including any accrued interest. In addition, for
securities denominated in a currency other than the U.S. dollar, amount paid is shown on a U.S.
dollar equivalent basis and includes the amount payable per the derivatives entered into in
connection with the transaction. See Note 9 for additional information on cross currency swap
transactions related to the transaction.
(2) During 2024, we recorded gains of $ 267million in connection with the open market repurchases,
which were reflected within Other income (expense), net in our consolidated statement of income.
 76 
Table of Contents
Issuances
 Principal Amount 
 (dollars in millions) Issued Net Proceeds(1) 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Verizon3.500% notes due 2032 € 1,000 $ 1,062 
 Verizon3.750% notes due 2036 € 1,000 1,061 
 Verizon5.500% notes due 2054(2) $ 1,000 980 
 Total $ 3,103 
(1) Net proceeds were net of underwriting discounts and other issuance costs. In addition, for
securities denominated in a currency other than the U.S. dollar, net proceeds are shown on a U.S.
dollar equivalent basis. See Note 9 for additional information on cross currency swap transactions
related to the issuances.
(2) An amount equal to the net proceeds from these notes is expected to be used to fund, in whole or
in part, certain renewable energy projects, including new and existing investments made by us during
the period from May 1, 2023 through the maturity date of the notes.
Commercial Paper Program
In 2024, we issued $ 27.5billion in net proceeds and made $ 27.5billion in principal repayments of
commercial paper. These transactions are reflected within Cash flows from financing activities in our
consolidated statements of cash flows on a net basis. As of December 31, 2024, we had nocommercial
paper outstanding.
Asset-Backed Debt
As of December 31, 2024, the carrying value of our asset-backed debt was $ 26.1billion. Our asset-
backed debt includes Asset-Backed Notes (ABS Notes) issued to third-party investors (Investors) and
loans (ABS Financing Facilities) received from banks and their conduit facilities (collectively, the
Banks). Our consolidated asset-backed debt bankruptcy remote legal entities (each, an ABS Entity, or
collectively, the ABS Entities) issue the debt or are otherwise party to the transaction
documentation in connection with our asset-backed debt transactions. Under the terms of our asset-
backed debt, Cellco Partnership (Cellco), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, and certain other
Company affiliates (collectively, the Originators) transfer device payment plan agreement receivables
and certain other receivables (collectively referred to as certain receivables) or a participation
interest in certain other receivables to one of the ABS Entities, which in turn transfers such
receivables and participation interest to another ABS Entity that issues the debt. Verizon entities
retain the equity interests and residual interests, as applicable, in the ABS Entities, which
represent the rights to all funds not needed to make required payments on the asset-backed debt and
other related payments and expenses.
Our asset-backed debt is secured by the transferred receivables and participation interest, and
future collections on such receivables and underlying receivables related to such participation
interest. These receivables and participation interest transferred to the ABS Entities and related
assets, consisting primarily of restricted cash, will only be available for payment of asset-backed
debt and expenses related thereto, payments to the Originators in respect of additional transfers of
certain receivables and participation interest, and other obligations arising from our asset-backed
debt transactions, and will not be available to pay other obligations or claims of Verizon’s
creditors until the associated asset-backed debt and other obligations are satisfied. The Investors
or Banks, as applicable, which hold our asset-backed debt have legal recourse to the assets securing
the debt, but do not have any recourse to Verizon with respect to the payment of principal and
interest on the debt. Under a parent support agreement, the Company has agreed to guarantee certain
of the payment obligations of Cellco and the Originators to the ABS Entities.
Cash collections on the receivables and on the underlying receivables related to the participation
interest collateralizing our asset-backed debt securities are required at certain specified times to
be placed into segregated accounts. Deposits to the segregated accounts are considered restricted
cash and are included in Prepaid expenses and other and Other assets in our consolidated balance
sheets.
Proceeds from our asset-backed debt transactions are reflected in Cash flows from financing
activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows. The asset-backed debt issued is included in
Debt maturing within one year and Long-term debt in our consolidated balance sheets.
 77 
Table of Contents
ABS Notes
During the year ended December 31, 2024, we completed the following ABS Notes transactions:
 (dollars in Expected 
 millions) Weighted-average 
 January 2024 Life to Principal Amount 
 Series 2024-1 Interest Rates % Maturity (in years) Issued 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 A-1a Senior class 5.000 1.92 $ 835 
 notes 
 A-1b Senior class Compounded SOFR 1.92 279 
 notes +0.650 
 B Junior class 5.240 1.92 — 
 notes 
 C Junior class 5.490 1.92 51 
 notes 
 Series 2024-2 
 A Senior class 4.830 4.92 668 
 notes 
 B Junior class 5.080 4.92 51 
 notes 
 C Junior class 5.320 4.92 31 
 notes 
 January 2024 total 1,915 
 April 2024 
 Series 2024-3 
 A-1a Senior class 5.340 2.99 605 
 notes 
 A-1b Senior class Compounded SOFR 2.99 175 
 notes +0.580 
 B Junior class 5.540 2.99 59 
 notes 
 C Junior class 5.730 2.99 36 
 notes 
 April 2024 total 875 
 June 2024 
 Series 2024-4 
 A-1a Senior class 5.210 1.98 289 
 notes 
 A-1b Senior class Compounded SOFR 1.98 246 
 notes +0.550 
 B Junior class 5.400 1.98 41 
 notes 
 C Junior class 5.600 1.98 25 
 notes 
 Series 2024-5 
 A Senior class 5.000 4.98 512 
 notes 
 B Junior class 5.250 4.98 39 
 notes 
 C Junior class 5.490 4.98 24 
 notes 
 June 2024 total 1,176 
 September 2024 
 Series 2024-6 
 A-1a Senior class 4.170 2.92 1,069 
 notes 
 A-1b Senior class Compounded SOFR 2.92 267 
 notes +0.670 
 B Junior class 4.420 2.92 — 
 notes 
 C Junior class 4.670 2.92 61 
 notes 
 Series 2024-7 
 A Senior class 4.350 4.92 535 
 notes 
 B Junior class 4.600 4.92 — 
 notes 
 C Junior class 4.840 4.92 25 
 notes 
 September 2024 1,957 
 total 
 78 
Table of Contents
 (dollars in Expected 
 millions) Weighted-average 
 November 2024 Life to Principal Amount 
 Series 2024-8 Interest Rates % Maturity (in years) Issued 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 A-1a Senior class 4.620 2.98 $ 816 
 notes 
 A-1b Senior class Compounded SOFR 2.98 75 
 notes +0.420 
 B Junior class 4.820 2.98 68 
 notes 
 C Junior class 4.990 2.98 41 
 notes 
 November 2024 1,000 
 total 
 Total $ 6,923 
Under the terms of each series of ABS Notes outstanding as of December 31, 2024, there is a revolving
period of up to two years, three years, or five years, as applicable, during which we may transfer
additional receivables to the ABS Entity. During the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023 , we made
aggregate principal repayments of $ 4.5billion and $ 3.7billion, respectively, in connection with
anticipated redemptions of ABS Notes and notes that have entered the amortization period, including
payments in connection with any note redemptions.
In January 2025, we issued $ 1.1billion aggregate principal amount of twoseries of senior and junior
ABS Notes, with a blended interest rate of approximately 4.740% and 4.970%, through an ABS Entity. In
addition, in connection with an anticipated redemption of ABS Notes, we made a principal repayment,
in whole, for $ 800million.
ABS Financing Facilities
Under the twoloan agreements outstanding in connection with the ABS Financing Facility originally
entered into in 2021 and most recently renewed in 2023 (2021 ABS Financing Facility) we prepaid an
aggregate of $ 900million in January 2024, borrowed an additional $ 600million in March 2024, prepaid
an aggregate of $ 900million in April 2024, borrowed an additional $ 225million in June 2024, prepaid
an aggregate of $ 1.2billion in August 2024, prepaid an aggregate of $ 950million in September 2024,
borrowed an additional $ 450million in September 2024, borrowed an additional $ 1.6billion in October
2024 and borrowed an additional $ 650million in December 2024. The aggregate outstanding balance
under the 2021 ABS Financing Facility was $ 8.0billion as of December 31, 2024.
Under the loan agreement outstanding in connection with the ABS Financing Facility originally entered
into in 2022 and initially renewed in 2023 (2022 ABS Financing Facility), we borrowed an additional $
1.1billion in June 2024. In December 2024, we renewed the loan agreement in connection with the 2022
ABS Financing Facility which reset the revolving period by one yearand we borrowed an additional $
1.0billion. T he aggregate outstanding balance under the 2022 ABS Financing Facility was $ 5.0billion
as of December 31, 2024 .
Variable Interest Entities
The ABS Entities meet the definition of a VIE for which we have determined that we are the primary
beneficiary as we have both the power to direct the activities of the entity that most significantly
impact the entity’s performance and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits
of the entity. Therefore, the assets, liabilities and activities of the ABS Entities are consolidated
in our financial results and are included in amounts presented on the face of our consolidated
balance sheets.
The assets and liabilities related to our asset-backed debt arrangements included in our consolidated
balance sheets were as follows:
 (dollars in millions) At December 31, At December 31, 
 Assets 2024 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Accounts receivable, net $ 18,339 $ 14,550 
 Prepaid expenses and other 322 1,288 
 Other assets 11,647 11,682 
 Liabilities 
 Accounts payable and accrued 37 29 
 liabilities 
 Debt maturing within one year 17,312 7,483 
 Long-term debt 8,827 14,700 
The Accounts receivable, net amounts above do not include underlying receivables for which a
participation interest has been transferred to the ABS Entities. See Note 8 for additional
information on certain receivables and participation interest used to secure asset-backed debt.
 79 
Table of Contents
Long-Term Credit Facilities
 At 
 December 
 31, 2024 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (dollars Facility Unused Principal 
 in Maturiti… Capacity Capacity Amount 
 million… Outstandi… 
 Verizon 
 revolvi… 2028 $ 12,000 $ 11,963 $ — 
 credit 
 facilit… 
 Various 
 export 2025 - 10,000 — 5,441 
 credit 2031 
 facilit… 
 Total $ 22,000 $ 11,963 $ 5,441 
(1) The revolving credit facility does not require us to comply with financial covenants or maintain
specified credit ratings, and it permits us to borrow even if our business has incurred a material
adverse change. The revolving credit facility provides for the issuance of letters of credit. As of
December 31, 2024, there have been nodrawings against the revolving credit facility since its
inception.
(2) During 2024, there were nodrawings from these facilities. During 2023, we drew down $ 1.0billion
from these facilities. Borrowings under certain of these facilities are amortized semi-annually in
equal installments up to the applicable maturity dates. Maturities reflect maturity dates of
principal amounts outstanding. Any amounts borrowed under these facilities and subsequently repaid
cannot be reborrowed.
In March 2024, we amended our $ 9.5billion revolving credit facility to increase the capacity to $
12.0billion and extended its maturity to 2028.
Non-Cash Transactions
During the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, we financed, primarily through alternative
financing arrangements, the purchase of approximately $ 1.6billion, $ 1.3billion and $ 832million,
respectively, of long-lived assets consisting primarily of network equipment. As of December 31, 2024
and 2023, $ 2.5billion and $ 2.2billion, respectively, relating to these financing arrangements,
including those entered into in prior years and liabilities assumed through acquisitions, remained
outstanding. These purchases are non-cash financing activities and therefore are not reflected within
Capital expenditures in our consolidated statements of cash flows.
Net Debt Extinguishment Gains (Losses)
During the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023, we recorded net debt extinguishment gains of $
385million and $ 308million, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2022, we recorded net
debt extinguishment losses of $ 1.1billion. The net gains and losses are recorded in Other income
(expense), net in our consolidated statements of income. The total non-cash debt extinguishment gains
are reflected within Other, net cash flow from operating activities, and the total cash payments to
extinguish the debt are reflected within Other, net cash flow from financing activities in our
consolidated statements of cash flows.
Guarantees
We guarantee the debentures of our operating telephone company subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2024,
$ 614million aggregate principal amount of these obligations remained outstanding. Each guarantee
will remain in place for the life of the obligation unless terminated pursuant to its terms,
including the operating telephone company no longer being a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
Debt Covenants
We and our consolidated subsidiaries are in compliance with all of our restrictive covenants in our
debt agreements.
 Note 8. Device Payment Plan Agreement and Wireless 
 Service Receivables 
The following table presents information about accounts receivable, net of allowances, recorded in
our consolidated balance sheet:
 At 
 December 
 31, 2024 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 (dollars Device 
 in payment Wireless Other Total 
 millions) plan service receivabl… 
 agreement 
 Accounts $ 15,839 $ 5,809 $ 5,613 $ 27,261 
 receivab… 
 Less 
 Allowance 
 for 698 240 214 1,152 
 credit 
 losses 
 Accounts 
 receivab… $ 15,141 $ 5,569 $ 5,399 $ 26,109 
 net of 
 allowance 
(1) Other receivables primarily include wireline and other receivables, of which the allowances are
individually insignificant.
 80 
Table of Contents
Included in Other assets and Accounts receivable, net at December 31, 2024 are net device payment
plan agreement receivables, net wireless service receivables and net other receivables of $
29.9billion, which have been transferred to ABS Entities and continue to be reported in our
consolidated balance sheet. Included in Other Assets and Accounts receivable, net at December 31,
2023 are net device payment plan agreement receivables and net wireless service receivables of $
26.1billion, which have been transferred to ABS Entities and continue to be reported in our
consolidated balance sheet. Included in Accounts receivable, net at December 31, 2024 and December
31, 2023 are net other receivables of $ 1.2billion and $ 911million, respectively, on which a
participation interest has been transferred to ABS Entities and continue to be reported in our
consolidated balance sheets. See Note 7 for additional information. We believe the carrying value of
these receivables approximate their fair value using a Level 3 expected cash flow model.
Under the Verizon device payment program, our eligible wireless customers purchase wireless devices
under a device payment plan agreement. Customers that activate service on devices purchased under the
device payment program generally pay lower service fees as compared to those under our fixed-term
service plans, and their device payment plan charge is included on their wireless monthly bill. While
we no longer offer Consumer customers fixed-term subsidized service plans for devices, we continue to
offer subsidized plans to our Business customers. We also continue to service existing plans for
customers who have not yet purchased and activated devices under the Verizon device payment program.
Wireless Device Payment Plan Agreement Receivables
The following table displays both the current and non-current portions of device payment plan
agreement receivables, net, recognized in our consolidated balance sheets:
 At December 31, 2024 2023 (dollars in millions) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Device payment plan agreement $ 31,308 $ 29,206 
 receivables, gross 
 Unamortized imputed interest -975 -758 
 Device payment plan agreement 30,333 28,448 
 receivables, at amortized cost 
 Allowance(1) -1,315 -1,151 
 Device payment plan agreement $ 29,018 $ 27,297 
 receivables, net 
 Classified in our consolidated balance 
 sheets: 
 Accounts receivable, net $ 15,141 $ 13,173 
 Other assets 13,877 14,124 
 Device payment plan agreement $ 29,018 $ 27,297 
 receivables, net 
(1) Includes allowance for both short-term and long-term device payment plan agreement receivables.
For indirect channel wireless contracts with customers, we impute risk adjusted interest on the
device payment plan agreement receivables. We record the imputed interest as a reduction to the
related accounts receivable. The associated interest income, which is included within Service
revenues and other in our consolidated statements of income, is recognized over the financed device
payment term.
Promotions
In connection with certain device payment plan agreements, we may offer a promotion to allow our
customers to upgrade to a new device after paying down a certain specified portion of the required
device payment plan agreement amount as well as trading in their device in good working order. When a
customer enters into a device payment plan agreement with the right to upgrade to a new device, we
account for this trade-in right as a guarantee obligation.
We may offer certain promotions that allow a customer to trade in their owned device in connection
with the purchase of a new device. Under these types of promotions, the customer receives a credit
for the value of the trade-in device. At December 31, 2024 and December 31, 2023, the amount of
trade-in liability was $ 396million and $ 566million, respectively.
In addition, we may provide the customer with additional future billing credits that will be applied
against the customer’s monthly bill as long as service is maintained. These future billing credits
are accounted for as consideration payable to a customer and are included in the determination of
total transaction price, resulting in a contract liability.
Device payment plan agreement receivables, net, disclosed in the table above, does not reflect the
trade-in liability, additional future credits or the guarantee liability.
Origination of Device Payment Plan Agreements
When originating device payment plan agreements, we use internal and external data sources to create
a credit risk score to measure the credit quality of a customer and to determine eligibility for the
device payment program. Verizon’s experience has been that the payment attributes of longer tenured
customers are highly predictive for estimating their reliability to make future payments. Customers
with longer tenures tend to exhibit similar risk characteristics to other customers with longer
tenures, and receivables due from customers with longer tenures tend to perform better than
receivables from customers that have not
 81 
Table of Contents
previously been Verizon customers. As a result of this experience, we make initial lending decisions
based upon whether the customers are "established customers" or "short-tenured customers." If a
Consumer customer has been a customer for 45days or more, or if a Business customer has been a
customer for 12months or more, the customer is considered an "established customer." For established
customers, the credit decision and ongoing credit monitoring processes rely on a combination of
internal and external data sources. If a Consumer customer has been a customer less than 45days, or a
Business customer has been a customer for less than 12months, the customer is considered a "short-
tenured customer." For short-tenured customers, the credit decision and credit monitoring processes
rely more heavily on external data sources.
Available external credit data from credit reporting agencies along with internal data are used to
create custom credit risk scores for Consumer customers. The custom credit risk score is generated
automatically from the applicant’s credit data using proprietary custom credit models. The credit
risk score measures the likelihood that the potential customer will become severely delinquent and be
disconnected for non-payment. For a small portion of short-tenured customer applications, a
traditional credit report is not available from one of the national credit reporting agencies because
the potential customer does not have sufficient credit history. In those instances, alternative
credit data is used for the risk assessment. For Business customers, we also verify the existence of
the business with external data sources.
Based on the custom credit risk score, we assign each customer a credit class, each of which has
specified offers of credit. This includes an account level spending limit and a maximum amount of
credit allowed per device for Consumer customers or a required down payment percentage for Business
customers.
Credit Quality Information
Subsequent to origination, we assess indicators for the quality of our wireless device payment plan
agreement portfolio using two models, one for new customers and one for existing customers. The model
for new customers pools all Consumer and Business wireless customers based on less than 210days as
"new customers." The model for existing customers pools all Consumer and Business wireless customers
based on 210days or more as "existing customers."
The following table presents device payment plan agreement receivables, at amortized cost, and gross
write-offs recorded, as of and for the twelve months ended December 31, 2024, by credit quality
indicator and year of origination:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Device payment plan 
 agreement receivables, Year of Origination(1) 
 at amortized cost 2024 2023 2022 and prior Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 New customers $ 3,277 $ 1,542 $ 397 $ 5,216 
 Existing customers 14,136 8,075 2,906 25,117 
 Total $ 17,413 $ 9,617 $ 3,303 $ 30,333 
 Gross write-offs 
 New customers $ 376 $ 563 $ 111 $ 1,050 
 Existing customers 52 201 155 408 
 Total $ 428 $ 764 $ 266 $ 1,458 
(1) Includes accounts that have been suspended at a point in time.
The data presented in the table above was last updated on December 31, 2024.
We assess indicators for the quality of our wireless service receivables portfolio as one overall
pool. The following table presents wireless service receivables, at amortized cost, and gross write-
offs recorded, as of and for the twelve months ended December 31, 2024, by year of origination:
 Year of Origination 
 (dollars in millions) 2024 2023 and prior Total 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Wireless service receivables, at $ 5,760 $ 49 $ 5,809 
 amortized cost 
 Gross write-offs 374 183 557 
The data presented in the table above was last updated on December 31, 2024.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The credit quality indicators are used in determining the estimated amount and the timing of expected
credit losses for the device payment plan agreement and wireless service receivables portfolios.
For device payment plan agreement receivables, we record bad debt expense based on a default and loss
calculation using our proprietary loss model. The expected loss rate is determined based on customer
credit scores and other qualitative factors as noted above. The loss rate is assigned individually on
a customer by customer basis and the custom credit scores are then
 82 
Table of Contents
aggregated by vintage and used in our proprietary loss model to calculate the weighted-average loss
rate used for determining the allowance balance.
We monitor the collectability of our wireless service receivables as one overall pool. Wireline
service receivables are disaggregated and pooled by the following types of customers and related
contracts: consumer, small and medium business, enterprise, public sector and wholesale. For wireless
service receivables and wireline consumer and small and medium business receivables, the allowance is
calculated based on a 12 month rolling average write-off balance multiplied by the average life-cycle
of an account from billing to write-off. The risk of loss is assessed over the contractual life of
the receivables and is adjusted based on the historical loss amounts for current and future
conditions based on management’s qualitative considerations. For enterprise, public sector and
wholesale wireline receivables, the allowance for credit losses is based on historical write-off
experience and individual customer credit risk, if applicable.
Activity in the allowance for credit losses by portfolio segment of receivables was as follows:
 Device Payment 
 Plan Agreement Wireless Service Plan 
 (dollars in millions) Receivables(1) Receivables 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1, 2024 $ 1,151 $ 213 
 Current period provision for 
 expected 1,585 538 
 credit losses 
 Write-offs charged against -1,458 -557 
 the allowance 
 Recoveries collected 37 46 
 Balance at December 31, 2024 $ 1,315 $ 240 
(1) Includes allowance for both short-term and long-term device payment plan agreement receivables.
We monitor delinquency and write-off experience based on the quality of our device payment plan
agreement and wireless service receivables portfolios. The extent of our collection efforts with
respect to a particular customer are based on the results of our proprietary custom internal scoring
models that analyze the customer’s past performance to predict the likelihood of the customer falling
further delinquent. These custom scoring models assess a number of variables, including origination
characteristics, customer account history and payment patterns. Since our customers’ behaviors may be
impacted by general economic conditions, we analyzed whether changes in macroeconomic conditions
impact our credit loss experience and have concluded that our credit loss estimates are generally not
materially impacted by reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions. Based on
the score derived from these models, accounts are grouped by risk category to determine the
collection strategy to be applied to such accounts. For device payment plan agreement receivables and
wireless service receivables, we consider an account to be delinquent and in default status if there
are unpaid charges remaining on the account on the day after the bill’s due date. The risk class
determines the speed and severity of the collections effort including initiatives taken to facilitate
customer payment.
The balance and aging of the device payment plan agreement receivables, at amortized cost, were as
follows:
 (dollars in millions) At December 31, 2024 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Unbilled $ 28,916 
 Billed: 
 Current 1,116 
 Past due 301 
 Device payment plan agreement receivables, at $ 30,333 
 amortized cost 
 83 
Table of Contents
 Note 9. Fair Value Measurements and Financial 
 Instruments 
Recurring Fair Value Measurements
The following table presents the balances of assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a
recurring basis as of December 31, 2024:
 Assets: (dollars in 
 Prepaid expenses millions) 
 and other: Level 1(1) Level 2(2) Level 3(3) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fixed income $ — $ 16 $ — $ 16 
 securities 
 Interest rate — 3 — 3 
 caps 
 Other assets: 
 Fixed income — 269 — 269 
 securities 
 Cross currency — 500 — 500 
 swaps 
 Total $ — $ 788 $ — $ 788 
 Liabilities: 
 Other current 
 liabilities: 
 Interest rate $ — $ 1,964 $ — $ 1,964 
 swaps 
 Cross currency — 345 — 345 
 swaps 
 Foreign exchange — 5 — 5 
 forwards 
 Interest rate — 3 — 3 
 caps 
 Other 
 liabilities: 
 Interest rate — 3,338 — 3,338 
 swaps 
 Cross currency — 2,344 — 2,344 
 swaps 
 Total $ — $ 7,999 $ — $ 7,999 
(1) Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
(2) Observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and
liabilities.
(3) Unobservable pricing inputs in the market.
 84 
Table of Contents
The following table presents the balances of assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a
recurring basis as of December 31, 2023:
 Assets: (dollars in 
 Prepaid expenses millions) 
 and other: Level 1(1) Level 2(2) Level 3(3) Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Fixed income $ — $ 25 $ — $ 25 
 securities 
 Cross currency — 4 — 4 
 swaps 
 Foreign exchange — 4 — 4 
 forwards 
 Interest rate — 37 — 37 
 caps 
 Other assets: 
 Fixed income — 254 — 254 
 securities 
 Cross currency — 758 — 758 
 swaps 
 Interest rate — 7 — 7 
 caps 
 Total $ — $ 1,089 $ — $ 1,089 
 Liabilities: 
 Other current 
 liabilities: 
 Interest rate $ — $ 823 $ — $ 823 
 swaps 
 Cross currency — 294 — 294 
 swaps 
 Foreign exchange — 1 — 1 
 forwards 
 Interest rate — 37 — 37 
 caps 
 Contingent — — 52 52 
 consideration 
 Other 
 liabilities: 
 Interest rate — 3,648 — 3,648 
 swaps 
 Cross currency — 1,791 — 1,791 
 swaps 
 Interest rate — 7 — 7 
 caps 
 Total $ — $ 6,601 $ 52 $ 6,653 
(1) Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
(2) Observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and
liabilities.
(3) Unobservable pricing inputs in the market.
Certain of our equity investments do not have readily determinable fair values and are excluded from
the tables above. Such investments are measured at cost, less any impairment, plus or minus changes
resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for an identical or similar
investment of the same issuer and are included in Investments in unconsolidated businesses in our
consolidated balance sheets. As of December 31, 2024 and December 31, 2023, the carrying amount of
our investments without readily determinable fair values was $ 724million and $ 764million,
respectively. During 2024, there were insignificant adjustments due to observable price changes and
insignificant impairment charges. Cumulative adjustments due to observable price changes and
impairment charges were approximately $ 186million and $ 120million, respectively.
Verizon had a liability for contingent consideration related to its acquisition of TracFone,
completed in November 2021. The fair value was calculated using a probability-weighted discounted
cash flow model and represented a Level 3 measurement. Level 3 instruments include valuation based on
unobservable inputs reflecting our own assumptions, consistent with reasonably available assumptions
made by other market participants. Subsequent to the Acquisition Date, at each reporting date, the
contingent consideration liability was remeasured to fair value. Contingent consideration payments
were completed in January of 2024. During 2024 and 2023, we made payments of $ 52million and $
257million, respectively, related to the contingent consideration. See Note 3 for additional
information.
Fixed income securities consist primarily of investments in municipal bonds. The valuation of the
fixed income securities is based on the quoted prices for similar assets in active markets or
identical assets in inactive markets or models that apply inputs from observable market data. The
valuation determines that these securities are classified as Level 2.
Derivative contracts are valued using models based on readily observable market parameters for all
substantial terms of our derivative contracts and thus are classified within Level 2. We use mid-
market pricing for fair value measurements of our derivative instruments. Our derivative instruments
are recorded on a gross basis.
We recognize transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy as of the end of the reporting
period.
 85 
Table of Contents
Fair Value of Short-term and Long-term Debt
The fair value of our debt is determined using various methods, including quoted prices for identical
debt instruments, which is a Level 1 measurement, as well as quoted prices for similar debt
instruments with comparable terms and maturities, which is a Level 2 measurement.
The fair value of our short-term and long-term debt, excluding finance leases, was as follows:
 (do… 
 in Carr… Fair Level Level Level 
 mil… Amou… Value 1 2 3 Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 At 
 Dec… $ 141,… $ 81,5… $ 55,464 $ — $ 137,… 
 31, 
 2024 
 At 
 Dec… 148,… 86,8… 58,804 — 145,… 
 31, 
 2023 
Derivative Instruments
We enter into derivative transactions primarily to manage our exposure to fluctuations in foreign
currency exchange rates and interest rates. We employ risk management strategies, which may include
the use of a variety of derivatives including interest rate swaps, cross currency swaps, forward
starting interest rate swaps, treasury rate locks, interest rate caps, swaptions and foreign exchange
forwards. We do not hold derivatives for trading purposes.
The following table sets forth the notional amounts of our outstanding derivative instruments:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest rate swaps $ 24,025 $ 26,071 
 Cross currency swaps 32,053 33,526 
 Foreign exchange forwards 620 1,050 
The following tables summarize the activities of our designated derivatives:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2024 2023 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Interest Rate Swaps: 
 Notional value entered into $ — $ — 
 Notional value settled 2,046 — 
 Pre-tax gain recognized in Interest 4 1 
 expense 
 Cross Currency Swaps: 
 Notional value entered into 2,146 — 
 Notional value settled 3,619 1,450 
 Pre-tax gain (loss) on cross currency -1,839 1,119 
 swaps recognized in Interest expense 
 Pre-tax gain (loss) on hedged debt 1,839 -1,119 
 recognized in Interest expense 
 Excluded components recognized in Other 730 826 
 comprehensive income (loss) 
 Initial value of the excluded component 96 109 
 amortized into Interest expense 
 Treasury Rate Locks: 
 Notional value entered into 1,000 500 
 Notional value settled 1,000 500 
 Pre-tax gain (loss) recognized in Other -21 5 
 comprehensive income (loss) 
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Other, net Cash Flows from Operating 
 Activities: 
 Cash paid for settlement of interest $ -57 $ — 
 rate swaps 
 Cash received (paid) for settlement of -21 5 
 treasury rate locks 
 Other, net Cash Flows from Financing 
 Activities: 
 Cash paid for settlement of cross -243 -67 
 currency swaps, net 
 86 
Table of Contents
The following table displays the amounts recorded in Long-term debt in our consolidated balance
sheets related to cumulative basis adjustments for our interest rate swaps designated as fair value
hedges. The cumulative amounts exclude cumulative basis adjustments related to foreign exchange risk.
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2024 2023 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Carrying amount of hedged liabilities $ 18,863 $ 21,838 
 Cumulative amount of fair value hedging 
 adjustment included in the carrying -5,192 -4,354 
 amount of the hedged liabilities 
 Cumulative amount of fair value hedging 
 adjustment remaining for which hedge 281 400 
 accounting has been discontinued 
Interest Rate Swaps
We enter into interest rate swaps to achieve a targeted mix of fixed and variable rate debt. We
principally receive fixed rates and pay variable rates, resulting in a net increase or decrease to
Interest expense. These swaps are designated as fair value hedges and hedge against interest rate
risk exposure of designated debt issuances. We record the interest rate swaps at fair value in our
consolidated balance sheets as assets and liabilities. Changes in the fair value of the interest rate
swaps are recorded to Interest expense, which are primarily offset by changes in the fair value of
the hedged debt due to changes in interest rates.
Cross Currency Swaps
We have entered into cross currency swaps to exchange our British Pound Sterling, Euro, Swiss Franc,
Canadian Dollar and Australian Dollar-denominated cash flows into U.S. dollars and to fix our cash
payments in U.S. dollars, as well as to mitigate the impact of foreign currency transaction gains or
losses. These swaps are designated as fair value hedges. We record the cross currency swaps at fair
value in our consolidated balance sheets as assets and liabilities. Changes in the fair value of the
cross currency swaps attributable to changes in the spot rate of the hedged item and changes in the
recorded value of the hedged debt due to changes in spot rates are recorded in the same income
statement line item. We present exchange gains and losses from the conversion of foreign currency
denominated debt as a part of Interest expense. During the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023,
these amounts completely offset each other and no net gain or loss was recorded.
Changes in the fair value of cross currency swaps attributable to time value and cross currency basis
spread are initially recorded to Other comprehensive income (loss). Unrealized gains or losses on
excluded components are recorded in Other comprehensive income (loss) and are recognized into
Interest expense on a systematic and rational basis through the swap accrual over the life of the
hedging instrument.
On March 31, 2022, we elected to de-designate our cross currency swaps previously designated as cash
flow hedges and re-designated these swaps as fair value hedges. The amount remaining in Accumulated
other comprehensive loss related to cash flow hedges on the date of transition will be reclassified
to earnings when the hedged item is recognized in earnings or when it becomes probable that the
forecasted transactions will not occur. For the fair value hedges, we elected to exclude the change
in fair value of the cross currency swaps related to both time value and cross currency basis spread
from the assessment of hedge effectiveness (the excluded components). The initial value of the
excluded components of $ 1.0billion as of March 31, 2022 will continue to be amortized into Interest
expense over the remaining life of the hedging instruments. During the years ended December 31, 2024
and 2023, the amortization of the initial value of the excluded component completely offset the
amortization related to the amount remaining in Other comprehensive income (loss) related to cash
flow hedges. See Note 14 for additional information. We estimate that $ 94million will be amortized
into Interest expense within the next 12 months.
Treasury Rate Locks
We enter into treasury rate locks designated as cash flow hedges to mitigate our interest rate risk
on future transactions. We recognize gains and losses resulting from interest rate movements in Other
comprehensive income (loss).
Net Investment Hedges
We have designated certain foreign currency debt instruments as net investment hedges to mitigate
foreign exchange exposure related to non-U.S. dollar net investments in certain foreign subsidiaries
against changes in foreign exchange rates. The notional amount of Euro-denominated debt designated as
a net investment hedge was € 750million as of both December 31, 2024 and 2023.
Undesignated Derivatives
We also have the following derivative contracts which we use as economic hedges but for which we have
elected not to apply hedge accounting.
 87 
Table of Contents
The following table summarizes the activity of our derivatives not designated in hedging
relationships:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2024 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Foreign Exchange Forwards: 
 Notional value entered into $ 8,640 $ 11,175 
 Notional value settled 9,070 11,045 
 Pre-tax gain (loss) recognized in Other -50 25 
 income (expense), net 
Foreign Exchange Forwards
We entered into British Pound Sterling and Euro foreign exchange forwards to mitigate our foreign
exchange rate risk related to non-functional currency denominated monetary assets and liabilities of
international subsidiaries.
Concentrations of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that subject us to concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of temporary
cash investments, short-term and long-term investments, trade receivables, including device payment
plan agreement receivables, certain notes receivable, including lease receivables, and derivative
contracts.
Counterparties to our derivative contracts are major financial institutions with whom we have
negotiated derivatives agreements (ISDA master agreements) and credit support annex (CSA) agreements
which provide rules for collateral exchange. The CSA agreements contain fixed cap amounts or rating
based thresholds such that we or our counterparties may be required to hold or post collateral based
upon changes in outstanding positions as compared to established thresholds or caps and changes in
credit ratings. We do not offset fair value amounts recognized for derivative instruments and fair
value amounts recognized for the right to reclaim cash collateral or the obligation to return cash
collateral arising from derivative instruments recognized at fair value. At both December 31, 2024
and 2023, we did not hold any collateral. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, we posted $ 2.1billion and $
1.4billion, respectively, of collateral related to derivative contracts under collateral exchange
agreements, which were recorded as Prepaid expenses and other in our consolidated balance sheets.
While we may be exposed to credit losses due to the nonperformance of our counterparties, we consider
the risk remote and do not expect that any such nonperformance would result in a significant effect
on our results of operations or financial condition due to our diversified pool of counterparties.
 Note 10. Stock-Based Compensation 
Verizon Long-Term Incentive Plan
In May 2017, our shareholders approved the 2017 Long-Term Incentive Plan (the 2017 Plan) and
terminated the Company's authority to grant new awards under the Verizon 2009 Long-Term Incentive
Plan (the 2009 Plan). The 2017 Plan provides for broad-based equity grants to employees, including
executive officers, and permits the granting of stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted
stock, restricted stock units, performance shares, performance stock units and other awards. Upon
approval of the 2017 Plan, we reserved for issuance under the 2017 Plan the number of shares that
were remaining but not issued under the 2009 Plan. Shares subject to outstanding awards under the
2009 Plan that expire, are canceled or otherwise terminated will also be available for awards under
the 2017 Plan. As of December 31, 2024, 50million shares are reserved for future issuance under the
2017 Plan.
Restricted Stock Units
Restricted Stock Units (RSUs) granted under the 2017 Plan generally vest in threeequal installments
on each anniversary of the grant date. The RSUs that are paid in stock upon vesting and are thus
classified as equity awards are measured using the grant date fair value of Verizon common stock and
are not remeasured at the end of each reporting period. In 2020, Verizon announced a broad-based
program that provides for the annual award of cash-settled RSUs under the 2017 Plan to all full-time
and part-time employees who meet eligibility requirements. The RSUs that are settled in cash are
classified as liability awards and the liability is measured at its fair value at the end of each
reporting period. All RSUs granted under the 2017 Plan have dividend equivalent units (DEUs), which
will be paid to participants if, and only to the extent the applicable RSU award vests, and is paid
at the time the RSU award is paid, and in the same proportion as the RSU award.
We estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if
actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. We use historical data to estimate forfeitures and
recognize that estimated compensation cost of restricted stock units, net of estimated forfeitures,
on a straight-line basis over the vesting period.
Performance Stock Units
The 2017 Plan also provides for grants of Performance Stock Units (PSUs) that generally vest at the
end of the third year after the grant. As defined by the 2017 Plan, the Human Resources Committee of
the Board of Directors determines the number of PSUs a participant earns based on the extent to which
the corresponding performance goals have been achieved over the three-yearperformance cycle. The PSUs
that are paid in stock upon vesting and are classified as equity awards are measured using the grant
date fair value of Verizon common stock and are not remeasured at the end of each reporting period.
The PSUs that
 88 
Table of Contents
are settled in cash and are classified as liability awards are measured at its fair value at the end
of each reporting period and, therefore, will fluctuate based on the price of Verizon common stock as
well as performance relative to the targets. All PSUs granted under the 2017 Plan have DEUs, which
will be paid to participants if, and only to the extent the applicable PSU award vests, and is paid
at the time that PSU award is paid, and in the same proportion as the PSU award. The granted and
cancelled activity for the PSU award includes adjustments for the performance goals achieved.
The following table summarizes Verizon’s Restricted Stock Unit and Performance Stock Unit activity:
 Restrict… Perform… 
 Stock Stock 
 Units Units 
 (shares Equity Liability Equity Liabili… 
 in Awards Awards Awards Awards 
 thousan… 
 Outstan… 
 January 6,779 17,290 8,640 4,465 
 1, 2022 
 Granted 4,149 11,309 5,752 197 
 Payments -3,313 -6,363 — -2,075 
 Cancell… -362 -1,627 -567 -2,171 
 Outstan… 
 December 7,253 20,609 13,825 416 
 31, 2022 
 Granted 13,047 17,441 2,537 12 
 Payments -3,612 -12,198 -3,495 -121 
 Cancell… -836 -2,366 -693 -31 
 Outstan… 
 December 15,852 23,486 12,174 276 
 31, 2023 
 Granted 11,118 16,172 -12 -46 
 Payments -6,439 -12,393 -2,175 -71 
 Cancell… -533 -1,379 -181 -1 
 Outstan… 
 December 19,998 25,886 9,806 158 
 31, 2024 
As of December 31, 2024, unrecognized compensation expense related to the unvested portion of
Verizon’s RSUs and PSUs was approximately $ 745million and is expected to be recognized over
approximately 2years.
The equity awards granted in 2024, 2023 and 2022 have weighted-average grant date fair values of $
40.31, $ 37.53and $ 53.26per unit, respectively. During 2024, 2023 and 2022, we paid $ 508million, $
415million and $ 433million, respectively, to settle RSUs and PSUs classified as liability awards.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
After-tax compensation expense for stock-based compensation related to RSUs and PSUs described above
included in Net income attributable to Verizon was $ 795million, $ 533million and $ 609million for
2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
 Note 11. Employee Benefits 
We maintain non-contributory defined benefit pension plans for certain employees. In addition, we
maintain postretirement health care and life insurance plans for certain retirees and their
dependents, which are both contributory and non-contributory, and include a limit on our share of the
cost for certain current and future retirees. In accordance with our accounting policy for pension
and other postretirement benefits, operating expenses include service costs associated with pension
and other postretirement benefits while other credits and/or charges based on actuarial assumptions,
including projected discount rates, an estimated return on plan assets, and impact from health care
trend rates are reported in Other income (expense), net. These estimates are updated in the fourth
quarter or upon a remeasurement event, to reflect actual return on plan assets and updated actuarial
assumptions. The adjustment is recognized in the income statement during the fourth quarter and upon
a remeasurement event pursuant to our accounting policy for the recognition of actuarial gains and
losses.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits
Pension and other postretirement benefits for certain employees are subject to collective bargaining
agreements. Modifications in benefits have been bargained from time to time, and we may also
periodically amend the benefits in the management plans. The following tables summarize benefit
costs, as well as the benefit obligations, plan assets, funded status and rate assumptions associated
with pension and postretirement health care and life insurance benefit plans.
 89 
Table of Contents
Obligations and Funded Status
 (dollars 
 in 
 millions) 
 Health 
 At Care and 
 December  Pension Life 
 31, 2024 2023 2024 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Change in 
 Benefit 
 Obligatio… 
 Beginning $ 15,133 $ 15,369 $ 11,455 $ 11,107 
 of year 
 Service 185 208 52 54 
 cost 
 Interest 479 752 543 545 
 cost 
 Plan — — — -26 
 amendments 
 Actuarial 
 (gain) -1,130 5 -533 757 
 loss, net 
 Benefits -419 -1,008 -978 -982 
 paid 
 Curtailme… 
 and 6 5 — — 
 terminati… 
 benefits 
 Settlemen… -725 -198 — — 
 paid 
 Annuity 
 contracts -5,611 — — — 
 transfer 
 End of 7,918 15,133 10,539 11,455 
 year 
 Change in 
 Plan 
 Assets 
 Beginning 13,536 13,739 466 450 
 of year 
 Actual 
 return on -400 751 43 62 
 plan 
 assets 
 Company 421 252 935 936 
 contribut… 
 Benefits -419 -1,008 -978 -982 
 paid 
 Settlemen… -725 -198 — — 
 paid 
 Annuity 
 contracts -5,611 — — — 
 transfer 
 End of 6,802 13,536 466 466 
 year 
 Funded 
 Status - $ -1,116 $ -1,597 $ -10,073 $ -10,989 
 End of 
 year 
 (dollars 
 in 
 millions) 
 Health  
 At Care and  
 December  Pension Life 
 31, 2024 2023 2024 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Amounts 
 recognized 
 in the 
 balance 
 sheets 
 Current $ -38 $ -42 $ -643 $ -685 
 liabiliti… 
 Non-curre… -1,078 -1,555 -9,430 -10,304 
 liabiliti… 
 Total $ -1,116 $ -1,597 $ -10,073 $ -10,989 
 Amounts 
 recognized 
 in 
 Accumulat… 
 other 
 comprehen… 
 loss 
 (pre-tax) 
 Prior 
 service $ 523 $ 635 $ -833 $ -962 
 cost 
 (benefit) 
 Total $ 523 $ 635 $ -833 $ -962 
The accumulated benefit obligation for all defined benefit pension plans was $ 7.9billion and $
15.1billion at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively.
Pension Annuitization
On February 29, 2024, we entered into twoseparate commitment agreements, one by and between the
Company, State Street Global Advisors Trust Company (State Street), as independent fiduciary of the
Verizon Management Pension Plan and Verizon Pension Plan for Associates (the Pension Plans), and The
Prudential Insurance Company of America (Prudential), and one by and between the Company, State
Street and RGA Reinsurance Company (RGA), under which the Pension Plans purchased nonparticipating
single premium group annuity contracts from Prudential and RGA, respectively, to settle approximately
$ 5.8billion of benefit liabilities of the Pension Plans, net of certain adjustments, resulting in a
net pre-tax settlement gain of $ 200million.
The purchase of the group annuity contracts closed on March 6, 2024. The group annuity contracts
primarily cover a population that includes 56,000retirees who commenced benefit payments from the
Pension Plans prior to January 1, 2023 (Transferred Participants). Prudential and RGA each
irrevocably guarantee and assume the sole obligation to make future payments to the Transferred
Participants as provided under their respective group annuity contracts, with direct payments
beginning July 1, 2024. The aggregate amount of each Transferred Participant's payment under the
group annuity contracts will be equal to the amount of each individual’s payment under the Pension
Plans.
 90 
Table of Contents
The purchase of the group annuity contracts was funded directly by transferring $ 5.6billion, of
assets of the Pension Plans, net of certain settlements. The Company made additional contributions to
the Pension Plans prior to the closing date of the transaction, as discussed below. With these
contributions, the funded ratio of each of the Pension Plans does not change as a result of this
transaction.
Pension plan assets and liabilities are primarily presented within Employee benefit obligations in
our consolidated balance sheets.
Actuarial (Gain) Loss, Net
The net actuarial gain in 2024 is primarily the result of a $ 1.4billion gain ($ 764million in our
pension plans and $ 656million in our postretirement benefit plans) due to an increase in our
discount rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities of our pension plans and
postretirement benefit plans from a weighted-average of 5.0% for both our pension and postretirement
plans at December 31, 2023 to a weighted-average of 5.8% for our pension plans and 5.6% for our
postretirement plans at December 31, 2024, as well as a net pre-tax settlement gain of $ 200million
resulting from the pension annuitization transaction discussed above.
The net actuarial loss in 2023 is primarily the result of a $ 534million loss in our postretirement
benefit plans due to an increase in our healthcare cost trend rate assumption used to determine the
current year liabilities of our postretirement benefit plans from a weighted-average of 6.6% at
December 31, 2022 to a weighted-average of 7.3% at December 31, 2023; and a $ 503million loss ($
288million in our pension plans and $ 215million in our postretirement benefit plans) due to a
decrease in our discount rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities of our
pension plans and postretirement benefit plans from a weighted-average of 5.2% at December 31, 2022
to a weighted-average of 5.0% at December 31, 2023.
Plan Amendments
The reclassifications from the amounts recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) as a
result of collective bargaining agreements and plan amendments made in 2016, 2017, 2018 and 2022
resulted in a net increase to net periodic benefit cost and net decrease to pre-tax income of an
insignificant amount during 2024. The similar reclassifications resulted in a net decrease to net
periodic benefit cost and net increase to pre-tax income of $ 252million during 2023 and $ 390million
during 2022.
Information for pension plans with an accumulated benefit obligation in excess of plan assets
follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Accumulated benefit obligation $ 7,881 $ 15,086 
 Fair value of plan assets 6,802 13,534 
Information for pension plans with a projected benefit obligation in excess of plan assets follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2024 2023 
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Projected benefit obligation $ 7,918 $ 15,133 
 Fair value of plan assets 6,802 13,536 
 91 
Table of Contents
Net Periodic Benefit Cost (Income)
The following table summarizes the components of net periodic benefit cost (income) related to our
pension and postretirement health care and life insurance plans:
 (d… 
 in 
 mi… 
 He… 
 Y… Ca… 
 E… and 
 D… Pe… Li… 
 3… 20… 20… 20… 20… 20… 20… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 S… 
 c… 
 - $ 159 $ 182 $ 216 $ 44 $ 46 $ 79 
 C… 
 of 
 s… 
 S… 
 c… 
 - 
 S… 26 26 30 8 8 15 
 g… 
 a… 
 a… 
 e… 
 S… 185 208 246 52 54 94 
 c… 
 A… 
 of 
 p… 112 112 82 -129 -419 -530 
 s… 
 c… 
 (… 
 E… 
 r… 
 on -6… -1,… -1,… -28 -31 -27 
 p… 
 a… 
 I… 479 752 544 543 545 332 
 c… 
 R… 
 l… -1… 266 1,5… -547 726 -3,… 
 (… 
 n… 
 C… 
 a… — — 2 — — — 
 t… 
 b… 
 O… -1… 117 1,0… -161 821 -3,… 
 c… 
 T… $ 46 $ 325 $ 1,2… $ -109 $ 875 $ -3,… 
The service cost component of net periodic benefit cost (income) is recorded in Cost of services and
Selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of income while the other
components, including mark-to-market adjustments, if any, are recorded in Other income (expense),
net.
Other pre-tax changes in plan assets and benefit obligations recognized in Other comprehensive
(income) loss are as follows:
 (d… 
 in  
 mi… 
 He… 
 Ca… 
 At and 
 De… Pen… Li… 
 31, 20… 20… 2022 20… 2023 20… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Re… 
 of 
 am… 
 it… 
 Pr… 
 se… $ -112 $ -112 $ -82 $ 129 $ 419 $ 530 
 co… 
 (b… 
 To… 
 re… 
 in 
 Ot… $ -112 $ -112 $ -82 $ 129 $ 419 $ 530 
 co… 
 lo… 
 (i… 
 (p… 
Assumptions
The weighted-average assumptions used in determining benefit obligations follow:
 Pension Health Care and Life 
 At December 31, 2024 2023 2024 2023 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Discount Rate 5.80 % 5.00 % 5.60 % 5.00 % 
 Rate of compensation 3.00 % 3.00 % N/A N/A 
 increases 
N/A - not applicable
The weighted-average assumptions used in determining net periodic cost follow:
 Health 
 Care 
 At and 
 Decemb… Pension Life 
 31, 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Discou… 
 rate in 
 effect 
 for 5.40 % 5.30 % 3.80 % 5.10 % 5.30 % 3.20 % 
 determ… 
 service 
 cost 
 Discou… 
 rate in 
 effect 
 for 5.20 5.10 3.20 4.90 5.10 2.30 
 determ… 
 intere… 
 cost 
 Expect… 
 return 7.90 7.70 6.70 6.30 7.30 4.90 
 on plan 
 assets 
 Rate of 
 compen… 3.00 3.00 3.00 N/A N/A N/A 
 increa… 
N/A - not applicable
In determining our pension and other postretirement benefit obligations, we used a weighted-average
discount rate of 5.7% in 2024. The rates were selected to approximate the composite interest rates
available on a selection of high-quality bonds available in the market at December 31, 2024. The
bonds selected had maturities that coincided with the time periods during which benefits payments are
expected to occur, were non-callable (or callable with certain selection criteria met) and available
in sufficient quantities to ensure marketability (at least $ 300million par outstanding).
In order to project the long-term target investment return for the total portfolio, estimates are
prepared for the total return of each major asset class over the subsequent 10-yearperiod. Those
estimates are based on a combination of factors including the current market interest rates and
valuation levels, consensus earnings expectations and historical long-term risk premiums. To
 92 
Table of Contents
determine the aggregate return for the pension trust, the projected return of each individual asset
class is then weighted according to the allocation to that investment area in the trust’s long-term
asset allocation policy.
The assumed health care cost trend rates are as follows:
 Health Care and Life 
 At December 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Weighted-average healthcare cost trend 8.80 % 7.30 % 6.60 % 
 rate assumed for next year 
 Rate to which cost trend rate gradually 4.50 4.50 4.50 
 declines 
 Year the rate reaches the level it is 2034 2032 2031 
 assumed to remain thereafter 
Plan Assets
The Company’s overall investment strategy is to achieve a mix of assets that allows us to meet
projected benefit payments while taking into consideration risk and return. While target allocation
percentages will vary over time, the current target allocation for plan assets is designed so that
53% to 63% of the assets have the objective of achieving a return in excess of the growth in
liabilities (comprised of public equities, private equities, real estate, hedge funds, high yield
bonds and emerging market debt) and 41% to 51% of the assets are invested as liability hedging assets
(where interest rate sensitivity of the liability hedging assets better match the interest rate
sensitivity of the liability) and a maximum of 10% is in cash. This allocation will shift as funded
status improves to a higher allocation of liability hedging assets. Target policies will be revisited
periodically to ensure they are in line with fund objectives. Both active and passive management
approaches are used depending on perceived market efficiencies and various other factors. Due to our
diversification and risk control processes, there are no significant concentrations of risk, in terms
of sector, industry, geography or company names.
Pension and healthcare and life plans assets do not include significant amounts of Verizon bonds or
common stock.
Pension Plans
The fair values for the pension plans by asset category at December 31, 2024 are as follows:
 (dollars in 
 Asset millions) 
 Category Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and 
 cash $ 542 $ 530 $ 12 $ — 
 equivalen… 
 Equity 12 12 — — 
 securities 
 Fixed 
 income 
 securities 
 U.S. 
 Treasuries 720 527 193 — 
 and 
 agencies 
 Corporate 1,129 627 502 — 
 bonds 
 Internati… 113 — 113 — 
 bonds 
 Other 82 -87 169 — 
 Real 934 — — 934 
 estate 
 Other 
 Private 564 — — 564 
 equity 
 Hedge 50 — 27 23 
 funds 
 Total 
 investmen… 4,146 1,609 1,016 1,521 
 at fair 
 value 
 Investmen… 
 measured 2,656 
 at NAV 
 Total $ 6,802 $ 1,609 $ 1,016 $ 1,521 
 93 
Table of Contents
The fair values for the pension plans by asset category at December 31, 2023 are as follows:
 (dollars in 
 Asset millions) 
 Category Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and 
 cash $ 1,956 $ 1,771 $ 185 $ — 
 equivalen… 
 Equity 69 55 14 — 
 securities 
 Fixed 
 income 
 securities 
 U.S. 
 Treasuries 1,412 1,274 138 — 
 and 
 agencies 
 Corporate 2,994 204 2,790 — 
 bonds 
 Internati… 341 3 338 — 
 bonds 
 Other 768 234 534 — 
 Real 996 — — 996 
 estate 
 Other 
 Private 512 — — 512 
 equity 
 Hedge 56 — 30 26 
 funds 
 Total 
 investmen… 9,104 3,541 4,029 1,534 
 at fair 
 value 
 Investmen… 
 measured 4,432 
 at NAV 
 Total $ 13,536 $ 3,541 $ 4,029 $ 1,534 
The following is a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balance of pension plan assets that are
measured at fair value using significant unobservable inputs:
 (dollars in  
 Real Private Hedge millions) 
 Estate Equity Funds Total 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at 
 January 1, $ 1,002 $ 569 $ 52 $ 1,623 
 2023 
 Actual gain 
 (loss) on -54 14 4 -36 
 plan assets 
 Purchases 48 -67 -1 -20 
 (sales) 
 Transfers out — -4 -29 -33 
 Balance at 
 December 31, 996 512 26 1,534 
 2023 
 Actual gain 
 (loss) on -69 55 1 -13 
 plan assets 
 Purchases 12 -1 -1 10 
 (sales) 
 Transfers out -5 -2 -3 -10 
 Balance at 
 December 31, $ 934 $ 564 $ 23 $ 1,521 
 2024 
Health Care and Life Plans
The fair values for the other postretirement benefit plans by asset category at December 31, 2024 are
as follows:
 (dollars in  
 millions) 
 Asset Category Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and cash $ 21 $ — $ 21 $ — 
 equivalents 
 Equity 223 223 — — 
 securities 
 Fixed income 
 securities 
 U.S. Treasuries 149 135 14 — 
 and agencies 
 Corporate bonds 45 32 13 — 
 International 15 11 4 — 
 bonds 
 Other 10 — 10 — 
 Total 
 investments at 463 401 62 — 
 fair value 
 Investments 3 
 measured at NAV 
 Total $ 466 $ 401 $ 62 $ — 
 94 
Table of Contents
The fair values for the other postretirement benefit plans by asset category at December 31, 2023 are
as follows:
 (dollars in  
 millions) 
 Asset Category Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash and cash $ 27 $ — $ 27 $ — 
 equivalents 
 Equity 229 229 — — 
 securities 
 Fixed income 
 securities 
 U.S. Treasuries 138 118 20 — 
 and agencies 
 Corporate bonds 41 29 12 — 
 International 12 10 2 — 
 bonds 
 Other 14 — 14 — 
 Total 
 investments at 461 386 75 — 
 fair value 
 Investments 5 
 measured at NAV 
 Total $ 466 $ 386 $ 75 $ — 
The following are general descriptions of asset categories, as well as the valuation methodologies
and inputs used to determine the fair value of each major category of assets.
Cash and cash equivalents include short-term investment funds (less than 90 days to maturity),
primarily in diversified portfolios of investment grade money market instruments and are valued using
quoted market prices or other valuation methods. The carrying value of cash equivalents approximates
fair value due to the short-term nature of these investments.
Investments in securities traded on national and foreign securities exchanges are valued by the
trustee at the last reported sale prices on the last business day of the year or, if no sales were
reported on that date, at the last reported bid prices. Government obligations, corporate bonds,
international bonds and asset-backed debt are valued using matrix prices with input from independent
third-party valuation sources. Over-the-counter securities are valued at the bid prices or the
average of the bid and ask prices on the last business day of the year from published sources or, if
not available, from other sources considered reliable such as multiple broker quotes.
Commingled funds not traded on national exchanges are priced by the custodian or fund's administrator
at their net asset value (NAV). Commingled funds held by third-party custodians appointed by the fund
managers provide the fund managers with a NAV. The fund managers have the responsibility for
providing this information to the custodian of the respective plan.
The investment manager of the entity values venture capital, corporate finance and natural resource
limited partnership investments. Real estate investments are valued at amounts based upon appraisal
reports prepared by either independent real estate appraisers or the investment manager using
discounted cash flows or market comparable data. Loans secured by mortgages are carried at the lesser
of the unpaid balance or appraised value of the underlying properties. The values assigned to these
investments are based upon available and current market information and do not necessarily represent
amounts that might ultimately be realized. Because of the inherent uncertainty of valuation,
estimated fair values might differ significantly from the values that would have been used had a
ready market for the securities existed. These differences could be material.
Forward currency contracts, futures, and options are valued by the trustee at the exchange rates and
market prices prevailing on the last business day of the year. Both exchange rates and market prices
are readily available from published sources. These securities are classified by the asset class of
the underlying holdings.
Hedge funds are valued by the custodian at NAV based on statements received from the investment
manager. These funds are valued in accordance with the terms of their corresponding offering or
private placement memoranda.
Commingled funds, hedge funds, venture capital, corporate finance, natural resource and real estate
limited partnership investments for which fair value is measured using the NAV per share as a
practical expedient are not leveled within the fair value hierarchy but are included in total
investments.
Employer Contributions
In 2024, we made discretionary contributions in the aggregate amount of $ 365million to the Pension
Plans, $ 56million of contributions to our nonqualified pension plans and $ 935million of
contributions to our other postretirement benefit plans. For 2025, we expect no required qualified
pension plan contributions and insignificant nonqualified pension plan contributions. Contributions
to our other postretirement benefit plans are estimated to be approximately $ 726million in 2025.
 95 
Table of Contents
Estimated Future Benefit Payments
The benefit payments to retirees are expected to be paid as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Year Pension Benefits Health Care and Life 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2025 $ 1,024 $ 754 
 2026 770 795 
 2027 357 810 
 2028 384 829 
 2029 412 836 
 2030 to 2034 2,448 4,364 
Savings Plan and Employee Stock Ownership Plans
We maintain fourleveraged employee stock ownership plans (ESOP). We match a certain percentage of
eligible employee contributions to certain savings plans with shares of our common stock from this
ESOP. At December 31, 2024, the number of allocated shares of common stock in this ESOP was
39million. There were nounallocated shares of common stock in this ESOP at December 31, 2024. All
leveraged ESOP shares are included in earnings per share computations.
Total savings plan costs were $ 700million in 2024, $ 724million in 2023 and $ 620million in 2022.
Severance Benefits
The following table provides an analysis of our severance liability:
 Charged (dollars 
 Beginn… to in  End of  
 Year of Year Expense Paymen… million… Year 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2022 $ 548 $ 319 $ -214 $ 653 
 2023 653 531 -617 567 
 2024 567 1,494 -966 1,095 
Severance, Pension and Benefits Charges (Credits)
During 2024, we recorded net pre-tax severance charges of $ 1.5billion, p rincipally as a result of
our voluntary separation program, but also as a result of other headcount reduction initiatives, in
Selling, general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of income. In June 2024,
we announced a voluntary separation program for select U.S.-based management employees. Approximately
4,800eligible employees will separate from Verizon under this program by the end of March 2025, with
the majority of these employees having exited through December 31, 2024.
During 2023 and 2022, we recorded net pre-tax severance charges of $ 531million and $ 319million,
respectively in Selling, general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of income.
During 2024, in accordance with our accounting policy to recognize actuarial gains and losses in the
period in which they occur, we recorded net pre-tax pension and benefits credits of $ 657million in
our pension and postretirement benefit plans. The net gain was recorded in Other income (expense),
net, in our consolidated statement of income. This was primarily driven by a credit of $ 1.4billion
($ 764million for pension plans and $ 656million for postretirement benefit plans) due to an increase
in our discount rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities of our pension plans
from a weighted-average of 5.0% for both our pension and post retirement plans at December 31, 2023
to a weighted-average of 5.8% for our pension plans and 5.6% for our postretirement benefit plans at
December 31, 2024; a charge of $ 1.0billion due to the difference between our estimated and our
actual return on plan assets; and a net pre-tax settlement credit of $ 200million resulting from the
pension annuitization transaction discussed above.
During 2023, we recorded net pre-tax pension and benefits charges of $ 992million in our pension and
postretirement benefit plans. The charges were recorded in Other income (expense), net, in our
consolidated statement of income and were primarily driven by a charge of $ 534million due to an
increase in our healthcare cost trend rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities
of our postretirement benefit plans from a weighted-average of 6.6% at December 31, 2022 to a
weighted-average of 7.3% at December 31, 2023; a charge of $ 503million due to a decrease in our
discount rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities of our pension plans ($
288million) and postretirement benefit plans ($ 215million) from a weighted-average of 5.2% at
December 31, 2022 to a weighted-average of 5.0% at December 31, 2023; a net credit of $ 45million
primarily due to changes in other actuarial assumption adjustments, which includes the difference
between our estimated and our actual return on plan assets.
During 2022, we recorded net pre-tax pension and benefits credits of $ 1.7billion in our pension and
postretirement benefit plans. The credits were recorded in Other income (expense), net in our
consolidated statement of income and were primarily driven by
 96 
Table of Contents
a credit of $ 7.0billion due to an increase in our discount rate assumption used to determine the
current year liabilities of our pension plans ($ 4.1billion) and postretirement benefit plans ($
2.9billion) from a weighted-average of 2.9% at December 31, 2021 to a weighted-average of 5.2% at
December 31, 2022, a charge of $ 5.5billion due to the difference between our estimated and our
actual return on assets and a credit of $ 206million due to other actuarial assumption adjustments.
 Note 12. Taxes 
The components of income before provision for income taxes are as follows:
 Years Ended December  (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Domestic $ 21,253 $ 15,668 $ 26,822 
 Foreign 1,726 1,319 1,449 
 Total $ 22,979 $ 16,987 $ 28,271 
The components of the provision for income taxes are as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Current 
 Federal $ 3,367 $ 2,070 $ 2,411 
 Foreign 240 219 201 
 State and local 608 215 938 
 Total 4,215 2,504 3,550 
 Deferred 
 Federal 807 1,799 2,529 
 Foreign -4 28 -22 
 State and local 12 561 466 
 Total 815 2,388 2,973 
 Total income tax provision $ 5,030 $ 4,892 $ 6,523 
The following table shows the principal reasons for the difference between the effective income tax
rate and the statutory federal income tax rate:
 (do… 
 Ye… in 
 En… mil… 
 De… 2024 2023 2022 
 31, Amo… Per… Amo… Per… Amou… Per… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 U.… 
 fe… 
 st… $ 4,8… 21.0 % $ 3,5… 21.0 % $ 5,9… 21.0 % 
 tax 
 ra… 
 St… 
 and 
 lo… 
 in… 
 ta… 
 net 566 2.5 664 3.9 1,1… 3.9 
 of 
 fe… 
 in… 
 tax 
 ef… 
 Fo… 
 tax -68 -0.3 -16 -0.1 -120 -0.4 
 ef… 
 Ef… 
 of 
 cr… — — 18 0.1 15 0.1 
 tax 
 la… 
 Tax -27 -0.1 -27 -0.2 -30 -0.1 
 cr… 
 Ch… 
 in 15 0.1 — — 11 — 
 va… 
 al… 
 No… 
 or 
 no… 
 it… 
 Go… — — 1,1… 6.8 — — 
 im… 
 Ot… -116 -0.5 -133 -0.8 -145 -0.5 
 Ch… 
 in 
 un… 40 0.2 -27 -0.2 -118 -0.4 
 tax 
 be… 
 Ot… 
 ad… 
 Fe… 
 re… -17 -0.1 -245 -1.4 — — 
 cl… 
 Ot… -188 -0.9 -58 -0.3 -131 -0.5 
 Ef… 
 in… $ 5,0… 21.9 % $ 4,8… 28.8 % $ 6,5… 23.1 % 
 tax 
 ra… 
(1) The states that contribute to the majority (greater than 50%) of the tax effect in this category
include California, Maryland and Pennsylvania for 2024, California, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland and
Virginia for 2023, and California, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, New Jersey, Oregon and Pennsylvania
for 2022.
The effective income tax rate for 2024 was 21.9% compared to 28.8% for 2023. The decrease in the
effective income tax rate was primarily due to the Verizon Business Group goodwill impairment charge
of $ 5.8billion in 2023 that substantially decreased income before income taxes and was not
deductible. The increase in the provision for income taxes was primarily due to the increase in
income before income taxes in the current period.
 97 
Table of Contents
The effective income tax rate for 2023 was 28.8% compared to 23.1% for 2022. The increase in the
effective income tax rate was primarily due to the Verizon Business Group goodwill impairment charge
of $ 5.8billion that substantially decreased income before income taxes and was not deductible. The
decrease in the provision for income taxes was primarily due to the decrease in income before income
taxes in the current period.
The amounts of cash taxes paid by Verizon are as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Years Ended December 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Federal $ 4,745 $ 1,447 $ 1,865 
 State 665 672 670 
 Foreign 
 Ireland 156 143 147 
 All other foreign 66 81 54 
 Income taxes, net of 5,632 2,343 2,736 
 amounts refunded 
 Employment taxes 992 1,016 1,245 
 Property and other taxes 1,836 2,007 1,959 
 Total $ 8,460 $ 5,366 $ 5,940 
In 2024, there were no individual jurisdictions with cash taxes paid that equaled or exceeded 5% of
total income taxes paid. In 2022 and 2023, the only jurisdiction with cash taxes paid that equaled or
exceeded 5% of total income taxes paid was Ireland.
Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities
Deferred taxes arise because of differences in the book and tax bases of certain assets and
liabilities. Significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities are as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2024 2023 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Deferred tax assets 
 Employee benefits $ 3,676 $ 3,913 
 Tax loss, credit, and other carry 1,719 1,922 
 forwards 
 Lease liabilities 5,138 5,480 
 Other - assets 1,735 1,708 
 12,268 13,023 
 Valuation allowances -1,399 -1,341 
 Deferred tax assets 10,869 11,682 
 Deferred tax liabilities 
 Spectrum and other intangible 29,302 28,535 
 amortization 
 Depreciation 20,424 20,884 
 Lease right-of-use assets 4,822 5,200 
 Other - liabilities 2,904 2,696 
 Deferred tax liabilities 57,452 57,315 
 Net deferred tax liability $ 46,583 $ 45,633 
Undistributed earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries continue to be indefinitely invested outside
the U.S. The majority of Verizon's cash flow is generated from domestic operations and we are not
dependent on foreign cash or earnings to meet our funding requirements, nor do we intend to
repatriate these undistributed foreign earnings to fund U.S. operations. Furthermore, a portion of
these undistributed earnings represents amounts that legally must be kept in reserve in accordance
with certain foreign jurisdictional requirements and are unavailable for distribution or
repatriation. As a result, we have not provided U.S. deferred taxes on these undistributed earnings
because we intend that they will remain indefinitely reinvested outside of the U.S. and, therefore
unavailable for use in funding U.S. operations. Determination of the amount of unrecognized deferred
taxes related to these undistributed earnings is not practicable.
At December 31, 2024, we had net after-tax loss, credit, and other carry forwards for income tax
purposes of approximately $ 1.7billion that relate to federal, state and foreign taxes. Of these net
after-tax loss, credit, and other carry forwards, approximately $ 1.1billion will expire between 2025
and 2044 and approximately $ 591million may be carried forward indefinitely.
During 2024, the valuation allowance increased by $ 59million. The $ 1.4billion valuation allowance
at December 31, 2024 is primarily related to state and foreign taxes.
 98 
Table of Contents
Unrecognized Tax Benefits
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending balance of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
 (dollars in millions) 
 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Balance at January 1, $ 2,705 $ 2,812 $ 3,134 
 Additions based on tax 
 positions related 91 114 123 
 to the current year 
 Additions for tax 
 positions of prior 203 185 122 
 years 
 Reductions for tax 
 positions of prior -229 -154 -419 
 years 
 Settlements -70 -50 -92 
 Lapses of statutes of -65 -202 -56 
 limitations 
 Balance at December 31, $ 2,635 $ 2,705 $ 2,812 
Included in the total unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022 is $ 2.3billion,
$ 2.3billion and $ 2.5billion, respectively, that if recognized, would favorably affect the effective
income tax rate.
We recognized the following net after-tax expenses (benefit) related to interest and penalties in the
provision for income taxes:
 Years Ended December 31, (dollars in millions) 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2024 $ 55 
 2023 86 
 2022 35 
The after-tax accruals for the payment of interest and penalties in the consolidated balance sheets
are as follows:
 At December 31, (dollars in millions) 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 2024 $ 684 
 2023 630 
The decrease in unrecognized tax benefits in 2024 was primarily due to the resolution of issues under
income tax examinations. The decrease in unrecognized tax benefits for 2023 was primarily due to
lapses of statutes of limitations.
Verizon and/or its subsidiaries file income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction, and various
state, local and foreign jurisdictions. As a large taxpayer, we are under audit by the IRS and
multiple state and foreign jurisdictions for various open tax years. The IRS is currently examining
the Company’s U.S. income tax returns for tax years 2017 through 2019 and Cellco's U.S. income tax
return for tax year 2020. Tax controversies are ongoing for tax years as early as 2009 in certain
states and as early as 2000 outside the U.S.
 Note 13. Segment Information 
Reportable Segments
We have tworeportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units - Consumer and
Business. We measure and evaluate our reportable segments based on segment operating income,
consistent with the chief operating decision maker's (CODM) assessment of segment performance.
The Company's CODM is the Chief Executive Officer. The CODM uses segment operating income to allocate
resources (including employees, financial or capital resources) and to assess performance during the
monthly and quarterly financial strategic review process. When assessing segment performance and how
to allocate resources, the CODM focuses on evaluating whether revenues generated are sufficient to
cover variable and fixed costs with an appropriate return on investment. Key decisions considered by
the CODM using segment operating income include prioritization and timing of changes to network
technologies, allocation of capital expenditures based on the Company's priorities, geographic
expansion of wireline and wireless networks, establishment of key financial and operational targets,
pricing decisions, branding matters and people management.
Our segments and their principal activities consist of the following:
 99 
Table of Contents
 Segment Description 
 Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline 
 communications services and products. Our wireless services are 
 provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in the U.S. 
 under the Verizon family of brands and through wholesale and other 
 arrangements. We also provide FWA broadband through our 5G or 4G LTE 
 Verizon Consumer Group networks as an alternative to traditional landline internet access. Our 
 wireline services are provided inninestates in the Mid-Atlantic and 
 Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over our 100% 
 fiber-optic network through our Verizon Fios product portfolio and over 
 a traditional copper-based network to customers who are not served by 
 Fios. 
 Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications 
 services and products, including FWA broadband, data, video and 
 advanced communication services, corporate networking solutions, 
 Verizon security and managed network services, local and long distance voice 
 Business Group services and network access to deliver various IoT services and 
 products. We provide these products and services to businesses, public 
 sector customers and wireless and wireline carriers across the U.S. and 
 a subset of these products and services to customers around the world. 
Our Consumer segment's wireless and wireline products and services are available to our retail
customers, as well as resellers that purchase wireless network access from us on a wholesale basis.
Our Business segment’s wireless and wireline products and services are organized by the primary
customer groups for these offerings: Enterprise and Public Sector, Business Markets and Other, and
Wholesale.
Corporate and other primarily includes device insurance programs, investments in unconsolidated
businesses and development stage businesses that support our strategic initiatives, as well as
unallocated corporate expenses, certain pension and other employee benefit related costs and interest
and financing expenses. Corporate and other also includes the historical results of divested
businesses and other adjustments and gains and losses that are not allocated or used in assessing
segment performance due to their nature. Although such transactions are excluded from the business
segment results, they are included in reported consolidated earnings. Gains and losses from these
transactions that are not individually significant are included in segment results and therefore
included in the CODM’s assessment of segment performance.
The following tables provide operating financial information for our tworeportable segments:
 (dollars in 
 2024 millions) 
 External Total 
 Operating Reportable 
 Revenues Consumer Business Segments 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service $ 76,880 $ — $ 76,880 
 Wireless 19,598 — 19,598 
 equipment 
 Other(1) 6,213 — 6,213 
 Enterprise and — 14,218 14,218 
 Public Sector 
 Business Markets — 13,081 13,081 
 and Other 
 Wholesale — 2,196 2,196 
 Intersegment 213 36 249 
 revenues 
 Total Operating 102,904 29,531 132,435 
 Revenues(2) 
 Operating 
 Expenses(3) 
 Cost of wireless 21,259 4,841 26,100 
 equipment 
 Centrally 
 managed network 17,781 10,200 27,981 
 and shared 
 service costs(4) 
 Depreciation and 
 amortization 13,552 4,307 17,859 
 expense 
 Other segment 20,828 8,125 28,953 
 expenses(5) 
 Total Operating 73,420 27,473 100,893 
 Expenses 
 Operating Income $ 29,484 $ 2,058 $ 31,542 
(1) Other revenue includes fees that partially recover the direct and indirect costs of complying
with regulatory and industry obligations and programs, revenues associated with certain products
included in our device protection offerings, leasing and interest recognized when equipment is sold
to the customer by an authorized agent under a device payment plan agreement.
(2) Service and other revenues and Wireless equipment revenues included in our Business segment
amounted to approximately $ 25.9billion and $ 3.6billion, respectively, for the year ended December
31, 2024.
(3) The significant expense categories and amounts align with the segment-level information that is
regularly provided to the CODM. Intersegment expenses are included within the amounts shown.
(4) Centrally managed network and shared service costs include costs for network and leased assets,
supply chain and other centralized services that are allocated to our Consumer and Business segments
based on proportionate usage of services.
(5) Other segment expenses for each reportable segment include certain personnel, digital content,
sales-related, overhead, other direct and operating costs.
 100 
Table of Contents
 (dollars in  
 2023 millions) 
 External Total 
 Operating Reportable 
 Revenues Consumer Business Segments 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service $ 74,874 $ — $ 74,874 
 Wireless 20,645 — 20,645 
 equipment 
 Other(1) 5,898 — 5,898 
 Enterprise and — 15,076 15,076 
 Public Sector 
 Business Markets — 12,697 12,697 
 and Other 
 Wholesale — 2,313 2,313 
 Intersegment 209 36 245 
 revenues 
 Total Operating 101,626 30,122 131,748 
 Revenues(2) 
 Operating 
 Expenses(3) 
 Cost of wireless 21,827 4,959 26,786 
 equipment 
 Centrally 
 managed network 17,496 10,590 28,086 
 and shared 
 service costs(4) 
 Depreciation and 
 amortization 13,077 4,488 17,565 
 expense 
 Other segment 20,215 8,019 28,234 
 expenses(5) 
 Total Operating 72,615 28,056 100,671 
 Expenses 
 Operating Income $ 29,011 $ 2,066 $ 31,077 
(1) Other revenue includes fees that partially recover the direct and indirect costs of complying
with regulatory and industry obligations and programs, revenues associated with certain products
included in our device protection offerings, leasing and interest recognized when equipment is sold
to the customer by an authorized agent under a device payment plan agreement.
(2) Service and other revenues and Wireless equipment revenues included in our Business segment
amounted to approximately $ 26.4billion and $ 3.7billion, respectively, for the year ended December
31, 2023.
(3) The significant expense categories and amounts align with the segment-level information that is
regularly provided to the CODM. Intersegment expenses are included within the amounts shown.
(4) Centrally managed network and shared service costs include costs for network and leased assets,
supply chain and other centralized services that are allocated to our Consumer and Business segments
based on proportionate usage of services.
(5) Other segment expenses for each reportable segment include certain personnel, digital content,
sales-related, overhead, other direct and operating costs.
 101 
Table of Contents
 (dollars in 
 2022 millions) 
 External Total 
 Operating Reportable 
 Revenues Consumer Business Segments 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Service $ 73,139 $ — $ 73,139 
 Wireless 23,168 — 23,168 
 equipment 
 Other(1) 6,996 — 6,996 
 Enterprise and — 15,692 15,692 
 Public Sector 
 Business Markets — 12,753 12,753 
 and Other 
 Wholesale — 2,584 2,584 
 Intersegment 203 43 246 
 revenues 
 Total Operating 103,506 31,072 134,578 
 Revenues(2) 
 Operating 
 Expenses(3) 
 Cost of wireless 25,134 5,362 30,496 
 equipment 
 Centrally 
 managed network 16,997 10,840 27,837 
 and shared 
 service costs(4) 
 Depreciation and 
 amortization 12,716 4,312 17,028 
 expense 
 Other segment 19,813 7,927 27,740 
 expenses(5) 
 Total Operating 74,660 28,441 103,101 
 Expenses 
 Operating Income $ 28,846 $ 2,631 $ 31,477 
(1) Other revenue includes fees that partially recover the direct and indirect costs of complying
with regulatory and industry obligations and programs, revenues associated with certain products
included in our device protection offerings, leasing and interest recognized when equipment is sold
to the customer by an authorized agent under a device payment plan agreement.
(2) Service and other revenues and Wireless equipment revenues included in our Business segment
amounted to approximately $ 27.0billion and $ 4.0billion, respectively, for the year ended December
31, 2022.
(3) The significant expense categories and amounts align with the segment-level information that is
regularly provided to the CODM. Intersegment expenses are included within the amounts shown.
(4) Centrally managed network and shared service costs include costs for network and leased assets,
supply chain and other centralized services that are allocated to our Consumer and Business segments
based on proportionate usage of services.
(5) Other segment expenses for each reportable segment include certain personnel, digital content,
sales-related, overhead, other direct and operating costs.
The following table provides Fios revenues for our tworeportable segments and includes intersegment
activity:
 Years Ended December (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer $ 11,647 $ 11,614 $ 11,622 
 Business 1,252 1,235 1,201 
 Total Fios revenue $ 12,899 $ 12,849 $ 12,823 
The following table provides Wireless service revenue for our reportable segments and includes
intersegment activity:
 Years Ended December (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Consumer $ 65,374 $ 63,358 $ 61,509 
 Business 13,753 13,372 12,845 
 Total Wireless service $ 79,127 $ 76,730 $ 74,354 
 revenue 
Reconciliation to Consolidated Financial Information
The reconciliation of segment operating revenues and operating income to consolidated operating
revenues and operating income below includes the effects of special items that the CODM does not
consider in assessing segment performance, primarily because of their nature.
 102 
Table of Contents
A reconciliation of the total reportable segments’ operating revenues to consolidated operating
revenues is as follows:
 Years Ended December (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating Revenues 
 Total reportable $ 132,435 $ 131,748 $ 134,578 
 segments 
 Corporate and other 2,609 2,479 2,510 
 Reconciling items: 
 Eliminations -256 -253 -253 
 Consolidated $ 134,788 $ 133,974 $ 136,835 
 Operating Revenues 
A reconciliation of the total reportable segments' operating income to consolidated income before
provision for income taxes is as follows:
 Years Ended December  (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Operating Income 
 Total reportable $ 31,542 $ 31,077 $ 31,477 
 segments 
 Corporate and other -610 -643 -319 
 Reconciling items: 
 Severance charges -1,733 -533 -304 
 Other components of net 
 periodic pension -33 -248 -387 
 and benefit charges 
 (Note 11) 
 Asset and business -374 -480 — 
 rationalization 
 Legacy legal matter -106 — — 
 Verizon Business Group 
 goodwill — -5,841 — 
 impairment 
 Legal settlement — -100 — 
 Business transformation — -176 — 
 costs 
 Non-strategic business — -179 — 
 shutdown 
 Consolidated operating 28,686 22,877 30,467 
 income 
 Equity in earnings 
 (losses) of -53 -53 44 
 unconsolidated 
 businesses 
 Other income (expense), 995 -313 1,373 
 net 
 Interest expense -6,649 -5,524 -3,613 
 Income Before Provision $ 22,979 $ 16,987 $ 28,271 
 For Income Taxes 
No single customer accounted for more than 10% of our total operating revenues during the years ended
December 31, 2024, 2023 or 2022. International operating revenues were not significant during the
years ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. As of December 31, 2024 and 2023, international long-
lived assets were not significant.
The CODM does not review disaggregated assets on a segment basis; therefore, such information is not
presented. Depreciation and amortization included in the measure of segment profitability is
primarily allocated based on proportional usage, and is included within Total reportable segment
operating income.
 Note 14. Equity and Comprehensive Income (Loss) 
Equity
Common Stock
In February 2020, the Board of Directors of the Company authorized a share buyback program to
repurchase up to 100million shares of our common stock. The program will terminate when the aggregate
number of shares purchased reaches 100million or a new share repurchase plan superseding the current
plan is authorized, whichever is sooner. During the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023, and 2022, we
did not repurchase any shares of our common stock under our authorized share buyback program. At
December 31, 2024, the maximum number of shares that could be purchased by or on behalf of Verizon
under our share buyback program was 100million.
Common stock has been used from time to time to satisfy some of the funding requirements of employee
and shareholder plans. During the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023, and 2022, we issued
5.4million, 4.4million and 2.1million shares of common stock from treasury stock, which had aggregate
values of $ 238million, $ 192million and $ 91million, respectively.
Noncontrolling Interests
During the year ended December 31, 2024, Verizon entered into and completed agreements to acquire
additional interests in certain controlled entities for cash consideration of $ 280million. Verizon
continues to retain controlling financial interest within these entities; therefore, the changes in
ownership interest were accounted for as equity transactions. This resulted in a reduction of
additional paid-in capital of $ 228million, reflected in Other, and a reduction of noncontrolling
interest of $ 52million,
 103 
Table of Contents
reflected in Distributions and other, both within our consolidated statement of changes in equity for
the year ended December 31, 2024. These transactions were recorded within Other, net cash flow from
financing activities in our consolidated statement of cash flows for the year ended December 31,
2024.
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
Comprehensive income consists of net income and other gains and losses affecting equity that, under
U.S. GAAP, are excluded from net income. Significant changes in the components of Other comprehensive
income (loss), net of provision for income taxes are described below.
The changes in the balances of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) by component are as
follows:
 Unr… Unr… 
 gain gain Un… De… 
 (lo… (lo… ga… be… 
 For… on on (l… pe… 
 (… cur… cash fair on and 
 in tra… flow val… ma… po… 
 m… adj… hed… hed… se… pl… To… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 B… 
 at 
 J… $ -5… $ -1… $ — $ 16 $ 1,0… $ -927 
 1, 
 2… 
 E… 
 c… 
 r… 
 in — — -3… — — -371 
 o… 
 c… 
 i… 
 O… 
 c… -1… -1… — -25 -317 -669 
 l… 
 A… 
 r… 
 to — 496 -60 — -334 102 
 n… 
 i… 
 N… 
 o… 
 c… -1… 322 -4… -25 -651 -938 
 i… 
 (… 
 B… 
 at 
 D… -6… -1… -4… -9 423 -1,… 
 3… 
 2… 
 E… 
 c… 
 r… 
 in — — 617 — — 617 
 o… 
 c… 
 i… 
 O… 
 c… 62 3 — 5 — 70 
 i… 
 A… 
 r… 
 to — 85 -81 2 -208 -202 
 n… 
 i… 
 N… 
 o… 
 c… 62 88 536 7 -208 485 
 i… 
 (… 
 B… 
 at 
 D… -6… -1… 105 -2 215 -1,… 
 3… 
 2… 
 E… 
 c… 
 r… 
 in — — 547 — — 547 
 o… 
 c… 
 i… 
 O… 
 c… -97 -16 — -3 — -116 
 l… 
 A… 
 r… 
 to — 97 -63 — -8 26 
 n… 
 i… 
 N… 
 o… 
 c… -97 81 484 -3 -8 457 
 i… 
 (… 
 B… 
 at 
 D… $ -7… $ -9… $ 589 $ -5 $ 207 $ -923 
 3… 
 2… 
The amounts presented above in Net other comprehensive income (loss) are net of taxes. The amounts
reclassified to net income related to unrealized gain (loss) on cash flow hedges and unrealized gain
(loss) on fair value hedges in the table above are included in Other income (expense), net and
Interest expense in our consolidated statements of income. See Note 9 for additional information. The
amounts reclassified to net income related to unrealized gain (loss) on marketable securities in the
table above are included in Other income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of income. The
amounts reclassified to net income related to defined benefit pension and postretirement plans in the
table above are included in Other income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of income. See
Note 11 for additional information.
 104 
Table of Contents
 Note 15. Additional Financial Information 
The following tables provide additional financial information related to our consolidated financial
statements:
Income Statement Information
 Years Ended December  (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Depreciation expense $ 15,112 $ 14,937 $ 14,592 
 Interest costs on debt 7,382 7,123 5,429 
 balances 
 Net amortization of 230 219 214 
 debt discount 
 Capitalized interest -963 -1,818 -2,030 
 costs 
 Advertising expense 3,976 3,847 3,556 
 -dollars in millions 
 Years Ended December  2024 2023 2022 
 31, 
 Other income (expense), 
 net 
 Interest income $ 336 $ 354 $ 146 
 Other components of net 
 periodic benefit 300 -938 2,386 
 (cost) income 
 Net debt extinguishment 385 308 -1,077 
 gains (losses) 
 Other, net -26 -37 -82 
 $ 995 $ -313 $ 1,373 
Balance Sheet Information
 (dollars in millions) 
 At December 31, 2024 2023 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Prepaid expenses and other 
 Prepaid taxes $ 811 $ 550 
 Deferred contract costs 2,932 2,756 
 Collateral payments related to 2,118 1,406 
 derivative contracts 
 Restricted cash 319 1,244 
 Other prepaid expense and other 1,793 1,651 
 $ 7,973 $ 7,607 
 Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
 Accounts payable $ 10,425 $ 10,021 
 Accrued expenses 5,058 5,190 
 Accrued vacation, salaries and wages 4,436 4,060 
 Interest payable 1,553 1,570 
 Taxes payable 1,902 2,612 
 $ 23,374 $ 23,453 
 Other current liabilities 
 Dividends payable $ 2,878 $ 2,821 
 Contract liability 7,492 6,955 
 Other 3,979 2,755 
 $ 14,349 $ 12,531 
As of December 31, 2024 and 2023, Property, plant and equipment includes approximately $ 3.3billion
and $ 3.8billion, respectively, of additions that have not yet been paid.
 105 
Table of Contents
Cash Flow Information
 Years Ended December  (dollars in millions) 
 31, 2024 2023 2022 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Cash Paid 
 Interest, net of $ 5,505 $ 4,384 $ 3,316 
 amounts capitalized 
 Income taxes, net of 5,632 2,343 2,736 
 amounts refunded 
 Other, net Cash Flows 
 from Operating 
 Activities 
 Changes in device 
 payment plan agreement $ -538 $ -2,975 $ -4,919 
 non-current receivables 
 Net debt extinguishment -385 -308 1,077 
 (gains) losses 
 Other, net 1,096 -427 64 
 $ 173 $ -3,710 $ -3,778 
 Other, net Cash Flows 
 from Financing 
 Activities 
 Net debt related $ -259 $ -73 $ -366 
 costs(1) 
 Other, net -816 -1,397 -1,706 
 $ -1,075 $ -1,470 $ -2,072 
 (1)These costs include 
 the premiums paid 
 for the early 
 extinguishment of debt, 
 fees paid in connection 
 with exchange 
 and tender offers, and 
 settlements of 
 associated instruments. 
Supplier Finance Program
We maintain a voluntary supplier finance program (SFP) with a financial institution which provides
certain suppliers the option, at their sole discretion, to participate in the program and sell their
receivables due from Verizon to the financial institution on a non-recourse basis. The eligible
suppliers negotiate the terms directly with the financial institution and we have no involvement in
establishing those terms nor are we a party to these agreements.
Our payments associated with the invoices from the suppliers participating in the SFP are made to the
financial institution according to the original invoice terms generally at 90 days from the invoice
date and for the original invoice amount. No additional payments are exchanged between Verizon and
the financial institution related to the SFP. Verizon does not pledge any assets nor provide any
guarantees to the financial institution in connection with the SFP. The SFP can be terminated by
Verizon or the financial institution with a 60-daynotice period.
The following table presents the confirmed obligations in the SFP and the related activities:
 (dollars in millions) 
 Year Ended December 31, 2024 
 ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Confirmed obligations outstanding at the $ 817 
 beginning of the year 
 Invoices added during the year 3,549 
 Invoices paid during the year -3,594 
 Confirmed obligations outstanding at the $ 772 
 end of year 
Confirmed obligations outstanding related to suppliers participating in the SFP are recorded within
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets and the associated
payments are reflected in the operating activities section of our consolidated statements of cash
flows. As of December 31, 2024 and 2023 , $ 772million and $ 817million, respectively, remained as
confirmed obligations outstanding related to suppliersparticipating in the SFP.
 Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies 
In the ordinary course of business, Verizon is involved in various litigation and regulatory
proceedings at the state and federal level. Where it is determined, in consultation with counsel
based on litigation and settlement risks, that a loss is probable and estimable in a given matter,
Verizon establishes an accrual. In none of the currently pending matters is the amount of accrual
material. An estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of loss in excess of the amounts
already accrued cannot be made at this time due to various factors typical in contested proceedings,
including: (1) uncertain damage theories and demands; (2) a less than complete factual record; (3)
uncertainty concerning legal theories and their resolution by courts or regulators; and (4) the
unpredictable nature of the opposing party and its demands. We continuously monitor these proceedings
as they develop and adjust any accrual or disclosure as needed. We do not expect that the ultimate
resolution of any pending regulatory or legal matter in future periods will have a material effect on
our financial condition, but it could have a material effect on our results of operations for a given
reporting period.
Verizon is currently involved in approximately 30federal district court actions alleging that Verizon
is infringing various patents. Most of these cases are brought by non-practicing entities and
effectively seek only monetary damages; a small number are brought by companies that have sold
products and could seek injunctive relief as well. These cases have progressed to various stages and
a small number may have gone to trial or may go to trial in the coming 12 months if they are not
otherwise resolved.
 106 
Table of Contents
In connection with the execution of agreements for the sales of businesses and investments, Verizon
ordinarily provides representations and warranties to the purchasers pertaining to a variety of
nonfinancial matters, such as ownership of the securities being sold, as well as indemnity from
certain financial losses. From time to time, counterparties may make claims under these provisions,
and Verizon will seek to defend against those claims and resolve them in the ordinary course of
business.
As of December 31, 2024, letters of credit totaling approximately $ 816million, which were executed
in the normal course of business and support several financing arrangements and payment obligations
to third parties, were outstanding.
As of December 31, 2024, Verizon had 28renewable energy purchase agreements (REPAs) with third
parties. Each of the REPAs is based on the expected operation of a renewable energy-generating
facility and has a fixed price term of 12to 20years from the commencement of the facility's entry
into commercial operation. Nineteenof the facilities have entered into commercial operation, and the
remainder are under development. The REPAs generally are expected to be financially settled based on
the prevailing market price as energy is generated by the facilities.
We have various unconditional purchase obligations, which represent agreements to purchase goods or
services that are enforceable and legally binding. We estimate that these unconditional purchase
obligations, for contracts with terms in excess of one year, total $ 16.7billion, and primarily
represent commitments to purchase content, network equipment, software and services, marketing
services and other items which will be used or sold in the ordinary course of business from a variety
of suppliers. Of this total amount, $ 6.2billion is attributable to 2025, $ 5.5billion is
attributable to 2026, $ 3.1billion is attributable to 2027, $ 1.3billion is attributable to 2028, $
291million is attributable to 2029 and $ 363million is attributable to years thereafter. These
amounts do not represent our entire anticipated purchases in the future, but represent only those
items that are the subject of contractual obligations. Our commitments are generally determined based
on the noncancelable quantities to which we are contractually obliged. Since the commitments to
purchase programming services from television networks and broadcast stations have no minimum volume
requirement, we estimated our obligation based on number of subscribers at December 31, 2024, and
applicable rates stipulated in the contracts in effect at that time. We also purchase products and
services as needed with no firm commitment.
 Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with 
 Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure 
None.
 Item 9A.    Controls and Procedures 
 Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures 
Our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have evaluated the effectiveness of the
registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934), as of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report, that
ensure that information relating to the registrant which is required to be disclosed in this report
is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within required time periods using the criteria for
effective internal control established in Internal Control–Integrated Framework issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission in 2013. Based on this evaluation,
our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have concluded that the registrant’s
disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of December 31, 2024.
 Changes in Internal Control over Financial 
 Reporting 
In the ordinary course of business, we routinely review our system of internal control over financial
reporting and make changes to our systems and processes that are intended to ensure an effective
internal control environment. In the third quarter of 2020, we began a multi-year implementation of a
new global enterprise resource planning (ERP) system, which will replace many of our existing core
financial systems. The new ERP system is designed to enhance the flow of financial information,
facilitate data analysis and accelerate information reporting. The implementation is ongoing and is
expected to continue over the next few years.
As the phased implementation of the new ERP system continues, we could have changes to our processes
and procedures which, in turn, could result in changes to our internal controls over financial
reporting. As such changes occur, we will evaluate quarterly whether such changes materially affect
our internal control over financial reporting.
There were no changes in Verizon's internal control over financial reporting during the fourth
quarter of 2024 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our
internal control over financial reporting.
 107 
Table of Contents
 Management's Annual Report on Internal Control 
 over Financial Reporting 
The management of Verizon Communications Inc. is responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial reporting of Verizon. Management has evaluated internal
control over financial reporting of Verizon using the criteria for effective internal control
established in Internal Control–Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission in 2013.
Management has assessed the effectiveness of Verizon’s internal control over financial reporting as
of December 31, 2024. Based on this assessment, management believes that the internal control over
financial reporting of Verizon is effective as of December 31, 2024. In connection with this
assessment, there were no material weaknesses in Verizon’s internal control over financial reporting
identified by management. The Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, Ernst & Young
LLP, has provided an attestation report on Verizon’s internal control over financial reporting and is
included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
 Item 9B.    Other Information 
During the three months ended December 31, 2024 , none of our directors or officers (as defined in
Rule 16a-1(f) under the Exchange Act) adopted or terminated a “Rule 10b5-1 trading arrangement” or
“non-Rule 10b5-1 trading arrangement,” as each term is defined in Item 408 of Regulation S-K.
 Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign 
 Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections 
Not applicable.
 PART III 
 Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and 
 Corporate Governance 
Set forth below is information with respect to our current executive officers.
 Name Age Office Held Since 
 Hans Vestberg 59 Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 2019 
 Samantha Hammock 46 Executive Vice President and Chief Human 2021 
 Resources Officer 
 Kyle Malady 57 Executive Vice President and Group CEO -   2023 
 Verizon Business 
 Joseph Russo 51 Executive Vice President and President - Global 2023 
 Networks and Technology 
 Sowmyanarayan Sampath 48 Executive Vice President and Group CEO - 2023 
 Verizon Consumer 
 Anthony Skiadas 56 Executive Vice President and Chief Financial 2023 
 Officer 
 Mary-Lee Stillwell 51 Senior Vice President and Controller 2023 
 Vandana Venkatesh 53 Executive Vice President - Public Policy and 2022 
 Chief Legal Officer 
Each of the above officers has held the indicated office or other high-level managerial positions
within the Company or one of its subsidiaries for at least five years, with the exception of Samantha
Hammock and Mary-Lee Stillwell, who have both been with Verizon since 2020. Officers are not elected
for a fixed term of office and may be removed from office at any time at the discretion of the Board
of Directors.
Samantha Hammock is the Executive Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer of the Company.
Ms. Hammock joined Verizon in December 2020 as Senior Vice President of Global Talent and began
serving in her current role in December 2021. Prior to joining Verizon, Ms. Hammock spent 14 years at
the American Express Company, a globally integrated payments company and provider of credit and
charge cards to consumers and businesses around the world, where she served as Head of Talent and
Learning from April 2020 to December 2020, Chief Learning Officer from 2017 to April 2020, and Vice
President, Leadership Strategy, from 2016 to April 2020.
Mary-Lee Stillwell is the Senior Vice President and Controller of the Company. Ms. Stillwell joined
Verizon in August 2020 as Vice President - Accounting & External Reporting and began serving in her
current role in May 2023. Prior to joining Verizon, Ms. Stillwell spent 17 years in senior leadership
roles in the energy industry, including Chief Accounting Officer of Clearway Energy, Inc. from 2018
until 2020, and, prior to that, Vice President and Assistant Controller for NRG Energy, Inc.
For other information required by this item, see the sections entitled "Governance — Item 1: Election
of Directors — Election process and — Nominees for election, — Our governance framework — Board
committees — Audit Committee, — Other risk-related matters — Business conduct and ethics and —
Insider trading policy, and — Where to find more information" in our definitive Proxy Statement to be
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and delivered to shareholders in connection with
our 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, which are incorporated herein by reference.
 108 
Table of Contents
 Item 11.    Executive Compensation 
For information with respect to executive compensation, see the sections entitled "Governance — Non-
employee Director compensation" and "Executive compensation — Compensation discussion and analysis, —
Compensation Committee Report and — Compensation tables" (excluding information under "— Pay versus
performance") in our definitive Proxy Statement to be filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission and delivered to shareholders in connection with our 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders,
which are incorporated by reference herein. There were no relationships to be disclosed under
paragraph (e)(4) of Item 407 of Regulation S-K.
 Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial 
 Owners and Management and Related Stockholder 
 Matters 
For information with respect to the security ownership of certain beneficial owners, the directors
and executive officers, see the section entitled "Stock ownership — Security ownership of certain
beneficial owners and management" in our definitive Proxy Statement to be filed with the Securities
and Exchange Commission and delivered to shareholders in connection with our 2025 Annual Meeting of
Shareholders, which is incorporated herein by reference.
The following table provides information as of December 31, 2024 for (i) all equity compensation
plans previously approved by the Company’s shareholders, and (ii) all equity compensation plans not
previously approved by the Company’s shareholders. Since May 4, 2017, the Company has only issued
awards under the 2017 Verizon Communications. Inc. Long-Term Incentive Plan (2017 LTIP), which
provides for awards of stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units, performance stock
units and other equity-based hypothetical stock units to employees of Verizon. No new awards are
permitted to be issued under any other equity compensation plan. In accordance with SEC rules, the
table does not include outstanding awards that are payable solely in cash by the terms of the award,
and such awards do not reduce the number of shares remaining for issuance under the 2017 LTIP.
 Number of 
 securities 
 remaining 
 Number of available for 
 securities to be future issuance 
 issued upon under equity 
 exercise of Weighted-average compensation 
 outstanding exercise price of plans (excluding 
 options, outstanding securities 
 warrants and options, warrants reflected in 
 Plan category rights (a) and rights (b) column (a)) (c) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Equity 
 compensation 
 plans approved 29,804,583 -1 $ — -2 49,966,120 -3 
 by 
 security 
 holders 
 Equity 
 compensation 
 plans not 68,189 -4 — — 
 approved 
 by security 
 holders 
 Total 29,872,772 $ — 49,966,120 
(1) This amount includes: 29,804,583 shares of common stock subject to outstanding restricted stock
units and performance stock units, including dividend equivalents accrued on such awards through
December 31, 2024. This does not include performance stock units, deferred stock units and deferred
share equivalents payable solely in cash.
(2) The Company's outstanding restricted stock units, performance stock units and deferred stock
units do not have exercise prices associated with the settlement of these awards.
(3) This number reflects the number of shares of common stock that remained available for future
issuance under the 2017 LTIP.
(4) This number reflects shares subject to deferred stock units credited to the Verizon Income
Deferral Plan, which were awarded in 2002 under the Verizon Communications Broad-Based Incentive
Plan. No new awards are permitted to be issued under this plan.
 Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related 
 Transactions, and Director Independence 
For information with respect to certain relationships and related transactions and director
independence, see the sections entitled "Governance — Our governance framework — Other risk-related
matters — Related person transactions and — Item 1: Election of Directors — Our Board's independence"
in our definitive Proxy Statement to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and
delivered to shareholders in connection with our 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, which are
incorporated herein by reference.
 Item 14.    Principal Accounting Fees and Services 
Our independent registered public accounting firm is Ernst & Young LLP, New York, NY, Auditor Firm
ID: 42.
For information with respect to principal accounting fees and services, see the section entitled
"Audit matters — Item 3: Ratification of appointment of independent registered public accounting
firm" in our definitive Proxy Statement to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and
delivered to shareholders in connection with our 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, which is
incorporated herein by reference.
 109 
Table of Contents
 PART IV 
 Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement 
 Schedules 
(a) Documents filed as part of this report:
 Page 
 (1) Financial Statements 
 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Internal Control Over 51 
 Financial Reporting 
 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Financial Statements 52 
 Financial Statements covered by Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting 
 Firm: 
 Consolidated Statements of Income 54 
 Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income 55 
 Consolidated Balance Sheets 56 
 Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 57 
 Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity 58 
 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 59 
 (2) Financial Statement Schedule 
 II – Valuation and Qualifying Accounts 113 
 (3) Exhibits 
 Exhibits identified in parentheses below, on file with the SEC, are incorporated 
 herein by reference as exhibits hereto. Unless otherwise indicated, all exhibits 
 so incorporated are from File No. 1-8606. 
 Pursuant to Regulation S-K, Item 601(b)(4)(iii)(A), certain instruments which 
 define the rights of holders of long-term debt of Verizon Communications Inc. and 
 its consolidated subsidiaries are not filed herewith, and the Company hereby 
 agrees to furnish a copy of any such instrument to the SEC upon request. 
 110 
Table of Contents
 Description 
 Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of 
 September 4, 2024, by and among Verizon 
 Communications Inc., Frontier 
 Communications Parent, Inc. and France 
 Merger Sub Inc. (filed as Exhibit 2.1 to 
 Form 8-K filed on September 5, 2024 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).* 
 Restated Certificate of Incorporation of 
 Exhibit Verizon Communications Inc. (filed as 
 Number Exhibit 3a to Form 10-Q for the period 
 2 ended June 30, 2014 and incorporated 
 3a herein by reference). 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Bylaws of Verizon Communications Inc., as 
 amended and restated, effective as of 
 3b December 5, 2024 (filed as Exhibit 3b to 
 Form 8-K filed on December 6, 2024 and 
 incorporated herein by reference). 
 Indenture between Verizon Communications 
 Inc., both individually and as successor 
 in interest to Verizon Global Funding 
 Corp., and U.S. Bank National 
 Association, as successor trustee to 
 Wachovia Bank, National Association, 
 4a formerly known as First Union National 
 Bank, as Trustee, dated as of December 1, 
 2000 (filed as Exhibit 4.1 to Verizon 
 Global Funding Corp.’s Registration 
 Statement on Form S-4, Registration No.  
 333-64792, and incorporated herein by 
 reference). 
 First Supplemental Indenture between 
 Verizon Communications Inc., both 
 individually and as successor in interest 
 to Verizon Global Funding Corp., and U.S. 
 Bank National Association, as successor 
 trustee to Wachovia Bank, National 
 4b Association, formerly known as First 
 Union National Bank, as Trustee, dated as 
 of May 15, 2001 (filed as Exhibit 4.2 to 
 Verizon Global Funding Corp.’s 
 Registration Statement on Form S-3, 
 Registration No. 333-67412, and 
 incorporated herein by reference). 
 Second Supplemental Indenture between 
 Verizon Communications Inc., both 
 individually and as successor in interest 
 to Verizon Global Funding Corp., and U.S. 
 Bank National Association, as successor 
 4c trustee to Wachovia Bank, National 
 Association, formerly known as First 
 Union National Bank, as Trustee, dated as 
 of September 29, 2004 (filed as Exhibit 
 4.1 to Form 8-K filed on February 9, 
 2006, and incorporated herein by 
 reference). 
 Third Supplemental Indenture between 
 Verizon Communications Inc., both 
 individually and as successor in interest 
 to Verizon Global Funding Corp., and U.S. 
 Bank National Association, as successor 
 4d trustee to Wachovia Bank, National 
 Association, formerly known as First 
 Union National Bank, as Trustee, dated as 
 of February 1, 2006 (filed as Exhibit 4.2 
 to Form 8-K filed on February 9, 2006, 
 and incorporated herein by reference). 
 Fourth Supplemental Indenture between 
 Verizon Communications Inc., both 
 individually and as successor in interest 
 to Verizon Global Funding Corp., and U.S. 
 Bank National Association, as successor 
 trustee to Wachovia Bank, National 
 4e Association, formerly known as First 
 Union National Bank, as Trustee, dated as 
 of April 4, 2016 (filed as Exhibit 4.5 to 
 Verizon Communications Inc.’s 
 Registration Statement on Form S-4, 
 Registration No. 333-212307, and 
 incorporated herein by reference). 
 Fifth Supplemental Indenture between 
 Verizon Communications Inc., both 
 individually and as successor in interest 
 to Verizon Global Funding Corp., and U.S. 
 Bank National Association, as successor 
 4f trustee to Wachovia Bank, National 
 Association, formerly known as First 
 Union National Bank, as Trustee, dated as 
 of May 15, 2020 (filed as Exhibit 4.1 to 
 Form 8-K filed on May 15, 2020, and 
 incorporated herein by reference). 
 Description of Verizon's Securities 
 4g Registered Pursuant to Section 12 of the 
 Securities and Exchange Act of 1934. 
 2017 Verizon Communications Inc. 
 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by 
 10a reference to Appendix B of the 
 Registrant’s Proxy Statement included in 
 Schedule 14A filed on March 20, 2017).** 
 Form of 2022 Performance Stock Unit 
 Agreement pursuant to the 2017 Verizon 
 10a(i) Communications Inc. Long-Term Incentive 
 Plan (filed as Exhibit 10a to Form 10-Q 
 for the period ended March 31, 2022 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Form of 2022 Restricted Stock Unit 
 Agreement pursuant to the 2017 Verizon 
 10a(ii) Communications Inc. Long-Term Incentive 
 Plan (filed as Exhibit 10b to Form 10-Q 
 for the period ended March 31, 2022 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Form of 2023 Performance Stock Unit 
 Agreement pursuant to the 2017 Verizon 
 10a(iii) Communications Inc. Long-Term Incentive 
 Plan (filed as Exhibit 10a to Form 10-Q 
 for the period ended March 31, 2023 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Form of 2023 Restricted Stock Unit 
 Agreement pursuant to the 2017 Verizon 
 10a(iv) Communications Inc. Long-Term Incentive 
 Plan (filed as Exhibit 10b to Form 10-Q 
 for the period ended March 31, 2023 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Form of 2024 Performance Stock Unit 
 Agreement pursuant to the 2017 Verizon 
 10a(v) Communications Inc. Long-Term Incentive 
 Plan (filed as Exhibit 10a to Form 10-Q 
 for the period ended March 31, 2024 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Form of 2024 Restricted Stock Unit 
 Agreement pursuant to the 2017 Verizon 
 10a(vi) Communications Inc. Long-Term Incentive 
 Plan (filed as Exhibit 10b to Form 10-Q 
 for the period ended March 31, 2024 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 111 
Table of Contents
 Verizon Communications Inc. Short-Term 
 Incentive Plan (filed as Exhibit 10a to 
 Form 10-Q for the period ended March 31, 
 2019 and incorporated herein by 
 reference).** 
 Verizon Executive Deferral Plan (filed as 
 Exhibit 10e to Form 10-K for the period 
 10b ended December 31, 2017 and incorporated 
 10c herein by reference).** 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Verizon Communications Inc. Income 
 Deferral Plan (filed as Exhibit 10f to 
 10d Form 10-Q for the period ended June 30, 
 2002 and incorporated herein by 
 reference).** 
 Description of Amendment to Verizon 
 Communications Inc. Income Deferral Plan 
 10d(i) (filed as Exhibit 10o(i) to Form 10-K for 
 the year ended December 31, 2004 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Verizon Excess Pension Plan (filed as 
 10e Exhibit 10p to Form 10-K for the year 
 ended December 31, 2004 and incorporated 
 herein by reference).** 
 First Amendment to Verizon Excess Pension 
 10e(i) Plan (filed as Exhibit 10p(i) to Form 
 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004 
 and incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Bell Atlantic Senior Management Long-Term 
 Disability and Survivor Protection Plan, 
 as amended (filed as Exhibit 10h to Form 
 10f SE filed on March 27, 1986 and Exhibit 
 10b(ii) to Form 10-K for the year ended 
 December 31, 1997 and incorporated herein 
 by reference).** 
 Verizon Executive Life Insurance Plan, As 
 Amended and Restated September 2009 
 10g (filed as Exhibit 10s to Form 10-K for 
 the year ended December 31, 2010 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Form of Aircraft Time Sharing Agreement 
 10h (filed as Exhibit 10i to Form 10-K for 
 the year ended December 31, 2020 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 Verizon Senior Manager Severance Plan 
 10i (filed as Exhibit 10d to Form 10-Q for 
 the period ended March 31, 2010 and 
 incorporated herein by reference).** 
 19 Verizon Communications Inc. Policy on 
 Insider Trading. 
 21 List of principal subsidiaries of Verizon 
 Communications Inc. 
 23 Consent of Ernst & Young LLP. 
 24 Powers of Attorney. 
 Certification of Chief Executive Officer 
 31.1 pursuant to Section 302 of the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
 Certification of Chief Financial Officer 
 31.2 pursuant to Section 302 of the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
 Certification of Chief Executive Officer 
 32.1 pursuant to Section 906 of the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
 Certification of Chief Financial Officer 
 32.2 pursuant to Section 906 of the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
 Verizon Communications Inc. Policy for 
 the Recovery of Erroneously Awarded 
 97 Compensation (filed as Exhibit 97 to Form 
 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2023 
 and incorporated herein by reference). 
 XBRL Instance Document - the instance 
 document does not appear in the 
 101.INS interactive data file because its XBRL 
 tags are embedded within the inline XBRL 
 document. 
 101.SCH XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document. 
 101.PRE XBRL Taxonomy Presentation Linkbase 
 Document. 
 101.CAL XBRL Taxonomy Calculation Linkbase 
 Document. 
 101.LAB XBRL Taxonomy Label Linkbase Document. 
 101.DEF XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition 
 Linkbase Document. 
 Cover Page Interactive Data File 
 104 (formatted as inline XBRL with applicable 
 taxonomy extension information contained 
 in Exhibits 101). 
 Schedules (or similar attachments) have 
 been omitted from this filing pursuant to 
 * Item 601(a)(5) of Regulation S-K. A copy 
 of any omitted schedule will be furnished 
 to the SEC upon request. 
 ** Indicates management contract or 
 compensatory plan or arrangement. 
 112 
Table of Contents
 Schedule II - Valuation and Qualifying Accounts 
 Verizon Communications Inc. and Subsidiaries 
For the Years Ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022
 Descr… 
 Allow… 
 for 
 credit 
 losses Balan… 
 deduc… at Charged Balance 
 from Begin… Charg… to at End (doll… 
 accou… of to Other of in 
 recei… Period Additi… Expen… Accoun… Deduc… Period… milli… 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Year $ 1,609 $ 2,269 $ 113 $ 2,222 $ 1,769 
 2024 
 Year 1,261 2,146 38 1,836 1,609 
 2023 
 Year 1,151 1,531 69 1,490 1,261 
 2022 
 Additi… 
 Balan… Charged Balan… 
 at Charg… to at End 
 Descr… Begin… to Other Deduc… of 
 of Expen… Accoun… Period 
 Period 
 Valua… 
 allow… 
 for 
 defer… 
 tax 
 asset… 
 Year $ 1,341 $ 157 $ — $ 99 $ 1,399 
 2024 
 Year 1,347 68 13 87 1,341 
 2023 
 Year 1,574 41 — 268 1,347 
 2022 
(a) Charged to Other Accounts primarily includes amounts previously written off which were credited
directly to this account when recovered.
(b) Deductions primarily include amounts written off as uncollectible or transferred to other
accounts or utilized.
(c) Allowance for credit losses includes approximately $ 617million, $ 592million, and $ 436million
at December 31, 2024, 2023, and 2022, respectively, related to long-term device payment receivables.
(d) Charged to Other Accounts includes current year increase to valuation allowance charged to equity
and reclassifications from other balance sheet accounts.
(e) Reductions to valuation allowances related to deferred tax assets.
 113 
Table of Contents
 Item 16.    Form 10-K Summary 
None.
 Signatures 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the
registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized.
 VERIZON COMMUNICATIONS INC. Date: 
 By: /s/ Mary-Lee Stillwell February 12, 2025 
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Mary-Lee Stillwell 
 Senior Vice President and Controller 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates
indicated.
 Principal Executive Officer: 
 /s/ Hans E. Vestberg February 12, 2025 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Hans E. Vestberg 
 Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
 Principal Financial Officer: 
 /s/ Anthony T. Skiadas February 12, 2025 
 Anthony T. Skiadas 
 Executive Vice President and Chief 
 Financial Officer 
 Principal Accounting Officer: 
 /s/ Mary-Lee Stillwell February 12, 2025 
 Mary-Lee Stillwell 
 Senior Vice President and Controller 
 114 
Table of Contents
 * Director February 12, 2025 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Hans E. Vestberg 
 * Director February 12, 2025 
 Shellye L. Archambeau 
 * Director February 12, 2025 
 Roxanne S. Austin 
 * Director February 12, 2025 
 Mark T. Bertolini 
 * Director February 12, 2025 
 Vittorio Colao 
 * Director February 12, 2025 
 Caroline Litchfield 
 * Director February 12, 2025 
 Laxman Narasimhan 
 * Director February 12, 2025 
 Clarence Otis, Jr. 
 * Director February 12, 2025 
 Daniel H. Schulman 
 * Director February 12, 2025 
 Rodney E. Slater 
 * Director February 12, 2025 
 Carol B. Tomé 
 * By: /s/ Mary-Lee Stillwell 
 Mary-Lee Stillwell 
 (as attorney-in-fact) 
 115