Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K and other reports, statements and information that Walmart Inc.
(which individually or together with its subsidiaries, as the context otherwise requires, is referred
to as "we," "Walmart" or the "Company") has filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange
Commission ("SEC") or may file with or furnish to the SEC in the future, and prior or future public
announcements and presentations that we or our management have made or may make, include or may
include, or incorporate or may incorporate by reference, statements that may be deemed to be
"forward-looking statements" within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended (the "Exchange Act"), that are intended to enjoy the protection of the safe harbor
for forward-looking statements provided by the Exchange Act as well as protections afforded by other
federal securities laws.
Nature of Forward-Looking Statements
Such forward-looking statements are not statements of historical facts, but instead express our
estimates or expectations for our consolidated, or one of our segment's, economic performance or
results of operations for future periods or as of future dates or events or developments that may
occur in the future or discuss our plans, objectives or goals. These forward-looking statements may
relate to:
• macroeconomic, geopolitical, and business conditions, trends and events around the world and in the
markets in which we operate, including inflation or deflation, generally, and in certain product
categories, the impact of supply chain challenges, tariffs and recessionary pressures;
• the growth of our business or change in our competitive position in the future, or in or over
particular periods, both generally, and with respect to particular markets, segments or lines of
business, including, but not limited to, advertising, fulfillment, healthcare and financial services;
• the amount, number, growth, increase, reduction or decrease in or over certain periods, of or in
certain financial items or measures or operating measures, including our earnings per share, net
sales, growth rates, comparable store and club sales, our eCommerce sales, liabilities, expenses of
certain categories, including share-based compensation, expense leverage, operating income, returns,
capital and operating investments or expenditures of particular types and new store and club
openings, inventory levels and associated costs, product mix and demand for certain merchandise,
consumer confidence, disposable income, credit availability, spending levels, shopping patterns and
debt levels;
• our increasing investments in eCommerce, technology (including the use of artificial intelligence
"AI" and generative AI), automation, supply chain, new stores and clubs as well as remodels and other
omni-channel customer initiatives, such as same day pickup and delivery;
• investments and capital expenditures we will make and how certain of those investments and capital
expenditures are expected to be financed;
• our workforce strategy, including the availability of necessary personnel to staff our stores,
clubs and other facilities and the potential impact of changes to the costs of labor;
• volatility in currency exchange rates affecting our consolidated, or one or more of our segments'
results of operations;
• the Company continuing to provide returns to shareholders through share repurchases and dividends,
the use of share repurchase authorization over a certain period or the source of funding of a certain
portion of our share repurchases;
• our sources of liquidity, including our cash, continuing to be adequate or sufficient to fund our
operations, finance our global investment and expansion activities, pay dividends and fund share
repurchases;
• cash flows from operations, our current cash position and access to capital markets or credit will
continue to be sufficient to meet our anticipated operating cash needs;
• our effective tax rate for certain periods and the realization of certain net deferred tax assets
and the effects of resolutions of tax-related matters;
• the adoption or creation of new, and modification of existing, governmental policies, programs,
initiatives and actions in the markets in which we operate and elsewhere and actions with respect to
such policies, programs and initiatives (including, but not limited to, changes in the enforcement
priorities of regulatory authorities);
 4 
• the effect of adverse decisions in, or settlement of, litigation or other proceedings or
investigations to which we are subject;
• the effect on our results of operations or financial position of our adoption of certain new, or
amendments to existing, accounting standards; or
• our commitments, intentions, plans or goals related to our shared value priorities, including, but
not limited to, the sustainability of our environment and supply chains, the promotion of economic
opportunity or other societal initiatives.
Our forward-looking statements may also include statements of our strategies, plans and objectives
for our operations, including areas of future focus in our operations, and the assumptions underlying
any of the forward-looking statements we make. The forward-looking statements we make can typically
be identified by the use therein of words and phrases such as "aim," "anticipate," "believe,"
"continue," "could be," "could increase," "could occur," "could result," "estimate," "expansion,"
"expect," "expectation," "expected to be," "focus," "forecast," "goal," "grow," "guidance," "intend,"
"invest," "is expected," "may continue," "may fluctuate," "may grow," "may impact," "may result,"
"objective," "plan," "priority," "project," "should," "strategy," "to be," "we'll," "we will," "will
add," "will allow," "will be," "will benefit," "will change," "will come in at," "will continue,"
"will decrease," "will grow," "will have," "will impact," "will include," "will increase," "will
open," "will remain," "will result," "will stay," "will strengthen," "would be," "would decrease" and
"would increase," variations of such words or phrases, other phrases commencing with the word "will"
or similar words and phrases denoting anticipated or expected occurrences or results.
The forward-looking statements that we make or that are made by others on our behalf are based on our
knowledge of our business and our operating environment and assumptions that we believe to be or will
believe to be reasonable when such forward-looking statements were or are made. As a consequence of
the factors described above, the other risks, uncertainties and factors we disclose below and in the
other reports as mentioned above, other risks not known to us at this time, changes in facts,
assumptions not being realized or other circumstances, our actual results may differ materially from
those discussed in or implied or contemplated by our forward-looking statements. Consequently, this
cautionary statement qualifies all forward-looking statements we make or that are made on our behalf,
including those made herein and incorporated by reference herein. We cannot assure you that the
results or developments expected or anticipated by us will be realized or, even if substantially
realized, that those results or developments will result in the expected consequences for us or
affect us, our business, our operations or our operating results in the manner or to the extent we
expect. We caution readers not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements, which
speak only as of their dates. We undertake no obligation to revise or update any of the forward-
looking statements to reflect subsequent events or circumstances except to the extent required by
applicable law.
 5 
 ITEM 1. BUSINESS 
 General 
Walmart Inc. ("Walmart," the "Company" or "we") is a people-led, technology-powered omni-channel
retailer dedicated to helping people around the world save money and live better by providing the
opportunity to shop in both retail stores and through eCommerce, and to access our other service
offerings. Through innovation, we strive to continuously improve a customer-centric experience that
seamlessly integrates our eCommerce and retail stores in an omni-channel offering that saves time for
our customers. Each week, we serve approximately 270 million customers who visit more than 10,750
stores and numerous eCommerce websites in 19 countries.
Our strategy is to make every day easier for busy families, operate with discipline, sharpen our
culture and become more digital, and make trust a competitive advantage. Making life easier for busy
families includes our commitment to price leadership, which has been and will remain a cornerstone of
our business, as well as increasing convenience to save our customers time. By leading on price, we
earn the trust of our customers every day by providing a broad assortment of quality merchandise and
services at everyday low prices ("EDLP"). EDLP is our pricing philosophy under which we price items
at a low price every day so our customers trust that our prices will not change under frequent
promotional activity. Everyday low cost ("EDLC") is our commitment to control expenses so our cost
savings can be passed along to our customers.
Our operations comprise three reportable segments: Walmart U.S., Walmart International and Sam's Club
U.S. Our fiscal year ends on January 31 for our United States ("U.S.") and Canadian operations. We
consolidate all other operations generally using a one-month lag and on a calendar year basis. Our
discussion is as of, and for the fiscal years ended, January 31, 2025 ("fiscal 2025"), January 31,
2024 ("fiscal 2024") and January 31, 2023 ("fiscal 2023"). During fiscal 2025, we generated total
revenues of $681.0 billion, which primarily comprised net sales of $674.5 billion.
We maintain our principal offices in Bentonville, Arkansas. Our common stock trades on the New York
Stock Exchange under the symbol "WMT."
 The Development of Our Company 
The businesses conducted by our founders began in 1945 when Sam M. Walton opened a franchise Ben
Franklin variety store in Newport, Arkansas. In 1946, his brother, James L. Walton, opened a similar
store in Versailles, Missouri. Until 1962, our founders' business was devoted entirely to the
operation of variety stores, at which time we began to open discount stores. We completed our initial
public offering in 1970. In 1983, we opened our first Sam's Club, and in 1988, we opened our first
supercenter. In 1998, we opened our first Walmart Neighborhood Market. In 1991, we began our first
international initiative when we entered into a joint venture in Mexico and, as of January 31, 2025,
our Walmart International segment conducted business in 18 countries.
In 1996, we began our first eCommerce initiative by creating both walmart.com and samsclub.com. Since
then, our eCommerce presence has continued to grow. In 2007, leveraging our physical stores,
walmart.com launched its Site-to-Store service, enabling customers to make a purchase online and pick
up merchandise in stores. To date, we now have over 8,000 pickup and delivery locations globally. In
2018, we expanded our eCommerce and digital presence through acquisitions with our majority stakes in
Flipkart and PhonePe in India. We continue to heavily invest in omni-channel and eCommerce
innovation, which enables us to leverage technology, talent and expertise, and expand our assortment
and service offerings.
We are enhancing our omni-channel capabilities through a combination of stores, eCommerce websites
and service offerings, as well as our supply chain, combined with approximately 2.1 million
associates as of January 31, 2025, to better serve our customers. Together, these elements produce a
global retail ecosystem that we believe allows customers to view Walmart as their primary retail
destination. In the U.S., our Walmart+ membership incorporates several service offerings which
provide enhanced omni-channel shopping experiences and benefits for members. As we execute on our
strategy globally, our business is expanding through offerings such as advertising, marketplace and
fulfillment services, and financial services. These offerings represent mutually reinforcing pieces
of our omni-channel model centered on our customers around the world who are increasingly seeking
convenience.
 Information About Our Segments 
We are engaged in global operations of retail, wholesale and other units, as well as eCommerce,
located throughout the U.S., Africa, Canada, Central America, Chile, China, India and Mexico. Our
operations are conducted in three reportable segments: Walmart U.S., Walmart International and Sam's
Club U.S., which are further described below. Each segment contributes to the Company's operating
results differently. However, each has generally maintained a consistent contribution rate to the
Company's net sales in recent years other than minor changes to the contribution rate for the Walmart
International segment due to fluctuations in currency exchange rates. Additional information on our
operating segments and geographic information is contained in Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial
Statements.
 6 
 Walmart U.S. Segment 
Walmart U.S. is our largest segment and operates 4,605 stores in the U.S., including in all 50
states, Washington D.C. and Puerto Rico. Walmart U.S. is a mass merchandiser of consumer products,
operating under the "Walmart" and "Walmart Neighborhood Market" brands, including walmart.com.
Walmart U.S. had net sales of $462.4 billion for fiscal 2025, representing 69% of our fiscal 2025
consolidated net sales, and had net sales of $441.8 billion and $420.6 billion for fiscal 2024 and
2023, respectively.
Omni-channel. Walmart U.S. provides a convenient and seamless omni-channel experience to customers,
integrating retail stores and eCommerce. Substantially all our stores provide same-day pickup and
delivery, including offerings such as express delivery within 90 minutes, in-home delivery and
digital pharmacy fulfillment options. Our Walmart+ membership offering provides enhanced omni-channel
shopping benefits including unlimited free shipping on eligible items with no order minimum,
unlimited delivery from store, fuel discounts, mobile Scan & Go and access to additional member
benefits. The following table provides the approximate size of our retail stores as of January 31,
2025:
 Minimum Square Feet Maximum Square Feet Average Square Feet 
 Supercenters (general 
 merchandise and 69,000 260,000 178,000 
 grocery) 
 Discount stores (general 
 merchandise and 30,000 206,000 105,000 
 limited grocery) 
 Neighborhood 28,000 65,000 42,000 
 markets(1)(grocery) 
(1) Excludes other small formats.
Merchandise and Other Offerings. Walmart U.S. does business primarily in three strategic merchandise
units, listed below:
• Grocery consists of a full line of grocery items, including dry grocery, snacks, dairy, meat,
produce, deli and bakery, frozen foods, alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages, as well as consumables
such as health and beauty aids, pet supplies, household chemicals, paper goods and baby products;
• General merchandise includes:
◦ Entertainment (e.g., electronics, toys, seasonal merchandise, wireless, video games, movies, music
and books);
◦ Hardlines (e.g., automotive, hardware and paint, sporting goods, outdoor living and stationery);
◦ Fashion (e.g., apparel for adults and children, as well as shoes, jewelry and accessories); and
◦ Home (e.g., housewares and small appliances, bed and bath, furniture and home organization, home
furnishings, home decor, fabrics and crafts).
• Health and wellness includes pharmacy, over-the-counter drugs and other medical products, and
optical services.
Periodically, revisions are made to the categorization of the components comprising our strategic
merchandise units. When revisions are made, the previous periods' presentation is adjusted to
maintain comparability.
Brand name merchandise represents a significant portion of the merchandise sold in Walmart U.S. We
also market lines of merchandise under our private brands, including brands such as: "Allswell,"
"Athletic Works," "bettergoods," "Equate," "Free Assembly," "Freshness Guaranteed," "George," "Great
Value," "Holiday Time," "Hyper Tough," "Mainstays," "Marketside," "No Boundaries," "onn.," "Ozark
Trail," "Parent's Choice," "Sam's Choice," "Scoop," "Spring Valley," "Time and Tru," "Way to
Celebrate" and "Wonder Nation." The Company also markets lines of merchandise under licensed brands,
some of which include: "Avia," "Better Homes & Gardens," "Sofia Jeans by Sofia Vergara," and "The
Pioneer Woman."
Other offerings in the Walmart U.S. business include in-house advertising for brands and online
marketplace sellers, supply chain and fulfillment capabilities to online marketplace sellers, and
data analytics and insights for merchants and suppliers. Additional offerings include fuel, financial
services and related products such as money orders, prepaid access, money transfers, check cashing,
bill payment and certain types of installment lending.
Distribution. We continue to invest in supply chain automation and utilize a total of 164
distribution facilities which are located strategically throughout the U.S. For fiscal 2025, the
majority of Walmart U.S.'s purchases of store merchandise were shipped through these facilities,
while most of the remaining store merchandise we purchased was shipped directly from suppliers.
General merchandise and dry grocery merchandise is transported primarily through the segment's
private truck fleet; however, we contract with common carriers to transport the majority of our
perishable grocery merchandise. We ship merchandise purchased by customers on our eCommerce platforms
by a number of methods from multiple locations by leveraging our ability to deliver directly from
stores and shipping from our 29 dedicated eCommerce fulfillment centers.
 7 
 Walmart International Segment 
Walmart International is our second largest segment and operates 5,566 stores across 18 countries
outside of the U.S. Walmart International operates through our wholly-owned subsidiaries in Canada,
Chile, China, and Africa (which includes Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South
Africa, Eswatini, and Zambia), and our majority-owned subsidiaries in India, as well as Mexico and
Central America (which includes Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua).
Walmart International includes numerous formats divided into two major categories: retail and
wholesale. These categories consist of many formats, including: supercenters, supermarkets, warehouse
clubs (including our membership-only Sam's Club format) and cash and carry, as well as eCommerce
through websites and mobile applications, including walmart.com.mx, walmart.ca, flipkart.com, PhonePe
and other sites. Walmart International had net sales of $121.9 billion for fiscal 2025, representing
18% of our fiscal 2025 consolidated net sales, and had net sales of $114.6 billion and $101.0 billion
for fiscal 2024 and 2023, respectively.
Walmart International's strategy is to bring Walmart to the world and the world to Walmart, which
means we help millions of customers and members save money and live better every day by leveraging
our global ecosystem and deep local expertise to provide access to affordable products and services.
In addition, we share what we learn in our markets to help the enterprise innovate and grow even
faster. We are being deliberate about where and how we choose to operate and continue to re-shape the
portfolio to best enable long-term, sustainable and profitable growth. As such, we have taken certain
strategic actions to strengthen our Walmart International portfolio for the long-term, which include
the following highlights over the last three years:
• Bought out the noncontrolling interest shareholders of our Massmart subsidiary in November 2022 and
exited operations in certain countries in Africa.
• Increased our ownership in PhonePe, our digital payments platform in India, as part of the
separation from Flipkart in December 2022.
• Sold our equity investment in JD.com in August 2024.
Omni-channel. Walmart International provides a convenient and seamless omni-channel experience to
customers, integrating retail stores and eCommerce, such as through our pickup and delivery services
in most of our markets, including same-day delivery. We continue to expand our marketplace offerings,
which also further unlocks fulfillment and advertising services.
Generally, retail units' selling areas range in size from 1,400 square feet to 186,000 square feet.
Our wholesale stores' selling areas generally range in size from 25,000 square feet to 158,000 square
feet. As of January 31, 2025, Walmart International had approximately 2,900 pickup and delivery
locations.
Merchandise and Other Offerings. The merchandising strategy for Walmart International is similar to
that of our operations in the U.S. in terms of the breadth and scope of merchandise offered for sale.
While brand name merchandise accounts for a majority of our sales, we have both leveraged U.S.
private brands and developed market specific private brands to serve our customers with high quality,
low priced items. Along with the private brands we market globally, such as "Equate," "George,"
"Great Value," "Holiday Time," "Mainstays," "Marketside" and "Parent's Choice," our international
markets have developed market specific brands including "Aurrera" and "Lider." In addition, we have
developed and continue to grow our relationships with regional and local suppliers in each market to
ensure reliable sources of quality merchandise that is equal to national brands at low prices.
Consistent with its strategy, Walmart International continues to build mutually reinforcing
businesses in areas such as advertising, marketplace and fulfillment services, financial services and
healthcare. Our businesses in Mexico and Canada, for example, offer prepaid cards and money
transfers, and our PhonePe business in India continues to grow, providing a platform that offers
mobile and bill payment, person-to-person (P2P) payment, investment and insurance solutions,
financial services and advertising. In Mexico, we also offer a value-based internet and telephone
service enhancing customer experiences through digital connectivity.
Distribution. We utilize a total of 184 distribution facilities located in Canada, Central America,
Chile, China, India, Mexico and Africa. Through these facilities, we process and distribute both
imported and domestic products to the operating units of the Walmart International segment. During
fiscal 2025, the majority of Walmart International's purchases passed through these distribution
facilities. Suppliers ship the remainder of Walmart International's purchases directly to our stores
in the various markets in which we operate. Across the segment, we have efficient networks connecting
physical stores and distribution and fulfillment centers, which facilitate the movement of goods to
where our customers live.
 8 
 Sam's Club U.S. Segment 
Sam's Club U.S. is a membership-only club that operates 600 clubs in 44 states in the U.S. and Puerto
Rico and also operates samsclub.com. Sam's Club U.S. had net sales of $90.2 billion for fiscal 2025,
representing 13% of our consolidated fiscal 2025 net sales, and had net sales of $86.2 billion and
$84.3 billion for fiscal 2024 and 2023, respectively. As a membership-only club, membership income is
a significant component of the segment's operating income.
Membership. The following two options are available to members:
 Plus Membership Club Membership 
 Annual Membership Fee $110 $50 
 Number of Add-on Memberships ($45 each) Up to 16 Up to 8 
All memberships include a spouse/household card at no additional cost. Club members are eligible for
free curbside pickup with orders of $50 or greater. Plus members receive free curbside pickup, free
delivery-from-club and free shipping on orders of $50 or greater, exclusive discounts and convenience
offers, and the ability to shop before regular shopping hours. Beginning in fiscal 2023, Sam's Club
U.S. launched a rewards program through which members may earn Sam's Cash on purchases that can be
redeemed for cash, used for purchases, or used to pay membership fees.
Omni-channel. Sam's Club U.S. provides a fast and seamless omni-channel experience to members,
integrating physical clubs and eCommerce. Curbside pickup provides fast, easy and contact-free
shopping for members; Scan & Go mobile checkout and payment solution allows members to bypass the
checkout line; and Just Go, launched in fiscal 2025, provides members with a friction-free exit
experience. The warehouse facility sizes generally range between 94,000 and 168,000 square feet, with
an average size of approximately 134,000 square feet.
Merchandise. Sam's Club U.S. offers merchandise in the following four merchandise categories:
• Grocery consists of dairy, meat, bakery, deli, produce, dry, chilled or frozen packaged foods,
alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages, floral, snack foods, candy, other grocery items, as well as
consumables such as health and beauty aids, paper goods, laundry and home care, baby care, pet
supplies and other consumable items;
• General merchandise includes home, hardlines and seasonal items (such as home improvement, outdoor
living, gardening, furniture, apparel, jewelry, tools and power equipment, housewares, toys and
mattresses), as well as technology and entertainment items (such as consumer electronics and
accessories, software, video games, office supplies, appliances and third-party gift cards);
• Health and wellness includes pharmacy, optical and hearing services, over-the-counter drugs; and
protein and nutrition; and
• Fuel and other categories.
Within the categories above, the Member's Mark private label brand continues to expand its assortment
and deliver member value. Periodically, revisions are made to the categorization of the components
comprising our strategic merchandise units. When revisions are made, the previous periods'
presentation is adjusted to maintain comparability.
Distribution. Sam's Club U.S. utilizes 31 dedicated distribution facilities located strategically
throughout the U.S., as well as some of the Walmart U.S. segment's distribution facilities which
service the Sam's Club U.S. segment for certain items. Sam's Club U.S. uses a combination of our
private truck fleet, as well as common carriers, to transport perishable and non-perishable
merchandise from distribution facilities to clubs. During fiscal 2025, the majority of Sam's Club
U.S.'s non-fuel club purchases were shipped from these facilities, while the remainder of our
purchases were shipped directly to Sam's Club U.S. locations by suppliers. Sam's Club U.S. ships
merchandise purchased on samsclub.com and through its mobile applications by a number of methods
including shipments made directly from clubs, 14 dedicated eCommerce fulfillment centers and other
distribution centers.
 9 
 Other Information 
Competition. We compete with brick and mortar, eCommerce and omni-channel retailers operating
discount, department, retail and wholesale grocery, drug, dollar, variety and specialty stores,
supermarkets, and supercenter-type stores, membership-only warehouse clubs, gasoline stations, social
commerce platforms, as well as companies that offer services in digital advertising, fulfillment and
delivery services, health and wellness and financial services. Our ability to develop and effectively
operate different formats at the right locations and to deliver a customer-centric omni-channel
experience largely determines our competitive position in the retail industry within the markets
where we operate. Each of these landscapes is highly competitive and rapidly evolving, and new
business models and the entry of new, well-funded competitors continue to intensify this competition.
Some of our competitors have longer histories in these lines of business, more customers and greater
brand recognition. They may be able to obtain more favorable terms from suppliers and business
partners and to devote greater resources to the development of these businesses. In addition, for
eCommerce and other internet-based businesses, newer or smaller businesses may be better able to
innovate and compete with us.
We compete in a variety of ways, including the prices at which we sell our merchandise, merchandise
and selection availability, services offered to customers, the quality of the products and services
we offer, location, store hours, in-store amenities, the shopping convenience and overall shopping
experience we offer, the attractiveness and ease of use of our digital platforms, cost and speed of
and options for delivery to customers of merchandise purchased through our digital platforms or
through our omni-channel integration of our physical and digital operations. We employ many
strategies and programs designed to meet competitive pressures within our industry. These strategies
include the following:
• EDLP: our pricing philosophy under which we price items at everyday low prices so our customers
trust that our prices will not change under frequent promotional activity;
• EDLC: everyday low cost is our commitment to control expenses so our cost savings can be passed
along to our customers;
• Omni-channel offerings such as pickup and delivery, all of which enhance convenience and seek to
serve customers in the ways they want to be served; and
• Expanding our ecosystem and the products and services we offer in areas such as digital
advertising, marketplace and fulfillment services, health and wellness, and financial services to
provide our customers a broader set of offerings to meet expanding needs.
Seasonal Aspects of Operations. Our business is seasonal to a certain extent and varies by country
due to different national and religious holidays, festivals and customs, as well as different weather
patterns. Historically, our highest sales volume for each segment has occurred in the fourth quarter
of our fiscal year.
Suppliers and Supply Chain. As a retailer and warehouse club operator, we utilize a global supply
chain that includes both U.S. and international suppliers from whom we purchase the merchandise that
we sell in our stores, clubs and online. In many instances, we purchase merchandise from producers
located near the stores and clubs in which such merchandise will be sold, particularly products in
the "fresh" category. Consistent with applicable laws, we offer our suppliers the opportunity to
efficiently sell significant quantities of their products to us. These relationships enable us to
obtain pricing that reflects the volume, certainty and cost-effectiveness these arrangements provide
to such suppliers, which in turn enables us to provide low prices to our customers. Our suppliers are
subject to standards of conduct, including requirements that they comply with local labor laws, local
worker safety laws and other applicable laws. Our ability to acquire from our suppliers the
assortment and volume of products we wish to offer to our customers, to receive those products within
the required time through our supply chain and to distribute those products to our stores and clubs,
determines, along with other supply chain logistics matters (such as containers or port access for
example), in part, our in-stock levels in our stores and clubs and the attractiveness of our
merchandise assortment we offer to our customers and members.
Intellectual Property. We regard our trademarks, service marks, copyrights, patents, domain names,
trade dress, trade secrets, proprietary technologies and similar intellectual property as important
to our success, and with respect to our associates, customers and others, we rely on trademark,
copyright, and patent laws, trade-secret protection, and confidentiality and/or license agreements to
protect our proprietary rights. We have registered, or applied for the registration of, a number of
U.S. and international domain names, trademarks, service marks and copyrights. Additionally, we have
filed U.S. and international patent applications covering certain of our proprietary technology. We
have licensed in the past, and expect that we may license in the future, certain of our proprietary
rights to third parties.
Government Regulation. As a company with global operations, we are subject to the laws of the United
States and multiple foreign jurisdictions in which we operate and the rules and regulations of
various governing bodies, which may differ among jurisdictions. For additional information, see the
risk factors herein in " Item 1A. Risk Factors " under the sub-caption "Legal, Tax, Regulatory,
Compliance, Reputational and Other Risks."
 10 
 Our Shared Value Priorities 
We seek to operate our business in a way that creates shared value: We believe we maximize long-term
value and create competitive advantage for the Company by delivering for our stakeholders, including
our customers, associates, shareholders, suppliers, business partners and communities. We believe
that addressing their needs builds the value of our business, including by enhancing trust, creating
new business opportunities, managing cost and risk, building capabilities for future advantage and
strengthening the underlying systems on which we rely.
We prioritize issues that offer the greatest potential for Walmart to create long-term shared value:
Issues that rank high in relevance to our business, importance to building and maintaining
stakeholder trust and in which Walmart has the ability to be an effective actor. Our current
priorities are categorized into four broad themes: opportunity, sustainability, community and ethics
and integrity.
• Opportunity . We believe that promoting economic opportunity helps Walmart attract and retain the
talent we need to run our business, respond to customer needs, and promote economic resilience in the
places where we operate. Our approach includes creating opportunities for Walmart associates (as
further described in the Human Capital Management section below), our suppliers, workers in supply
chains and the communities we serve. We offer good entry-level jobs in addition to multiple career
pathways; endeavor to cultivate a culture of belonging—rooted in respect for the individual—where
associates and customers feel seen, supported and connected; and provide tens of thousands of local,
national and global suppliers the opportunity to grow with us.
• Sustainability . Walmart's sustainability efforts endeavor to create and preserve long-term
business value through increasing the efficiency and resilience of our operations, promoting surety
of supply, sourcing responsibly and enhancing our product assortment. With respect to people, we aim
to respect the dignity of people throughout our supply chain, create economic opportunity for people
working in supply chains, and sell safer, healthier products. With respect to the environment, our
efforts aim to enhance the sustainability of product supply chains; preserve, protect, and restore
nature; reduce waste; procure renewable sources of energy; and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
• Community . We believe that Walmart thrives in strong, resilient communities, and we endeavor to
help communities thrive. We aim to strengthen communities by providing convenient access to
affordable, quality goods and services through our omni-channel retail model and everyday low prices;
contributing to the economic vitality of communities by providing quality jobs, training and career
paths; investing in local suppliers; and supporting organizations and causes that matter to our
customers and associates.
• Ethics and Integrity . We believe that people want to work for and do business with a company they
can trust, and Walmart works to create a culture that inspires trust with our stakeholders. We seek
to achieve this, by focusing on promoting ethics and compliance, governance and oversight,
responsibly engaging in public policy activities, using data and technology responsibly and
respecting human rights.
We periodically publish information on our shared value priorities, strategies, progress, and
challenges on the environmental, social and governance (" ESG") reporting section of our corporate
website and may update those disclosures from time to time. Nothing on our website, including our ESG
reporting, documents or sections thereof, shall be deemed incorporated by reference into this Annual
Report on Form 10-K or incorporated by reference into any of our other filings with the SEC.
 Human Capital Management 
Our associates – powered by technology – play a critical role in delivering on our purpose to help
people save money and live better. Our business is focused on serving people and this is delivered by
our approximately 2.1 million associates around the world with approximately 1.6 million associates
in the U.S. and approximately 0.5 million associates internationally. In the U.S., approximately 92%
of our associates are hourly and approximately 68% of our associates are full-time.
We believe our people make the difference, and we are focused on investing in the growth and well-
being of our associates, investing in digital experiences to improve their quality of work and
creating a culture of belonging. An important part of our focus is to provide opportunities for
associates to grow and learn. For some, we are a foundational entry point to develop critical skills
that are relevant for a variety of careers. We are focused on developing, rewarding and retaining
associates in an ever-changing environment. Our people ultimately make Walmart a better place to work
and a better place to shop. Our workforce strategy includes the following strategic priorities:
belonging, well-being, growth and digital.
Belonging - Focus on creating a workplace where all associates feel seen, supported and connected
through a culture of belonging. We publish our workforce representation and hold ourselves
accountable to providing recurring belonging updates to senior leadership – including our President
and CEO – and members of the Board of Directors. Of the approximately 2.1 million associates employed
worldwide, 51% are women. In the U.S., 51% of the approximately 1.6 million associates are people of
color.
 11 
Our Belonging focus aims to create opportunities for everyone, so that every eligible and qualified
individual can thrive and perform. We regularly review our processes around fair-pay practices and
are committed to creating a performance culture where associates are rewarded based on meaningful
factors such as qualifications, experience, performance and the work they do.
To build a company where associates feel seen, supported and connected, we gather and respond to
associate feedback in a variety of ways, including in-person dialogue; leadership visits and
listening sessions; surveys like our associate engagement survey and monthly pulse surveys; and
always-on confidential channels, including our Open Door processes and ethics channels.
Well-being - Prioritize the emotional, physical and financial well-being of associates. We invest in
our associates by offering competitive wages, as well as a broad range of benefits to meet the
diverse needs of our global associate population and their eligible dependents. In the U.S., this
includes company-paid benefits such as 401(k) match, family building benefits, maternity leave,
fertility benefits, a paid parental leave program to all full-time associates, paid time off,
Associate Stock Purchase Plan match, life insurance, medical coverage (including supporting
associates with a U.S. Medical Plan with free virtual visits for medical doctor urgent care),
behavioral and mental health services (including virtual care with psychiatrists and psychologists),
a Walmart discount card or Sam's Club membership and predictable scheduling that helps associates
plan for life outside of work and know what to expect in their paychecks.
Additional information about how we invest in our associates' well-being, including wage structure
and pay, can be found in the Our People brief in our most recent ESG reporting, which is available on
our corporate website. Nothing on our website, including our ESG reporting documents, or sections
thereof, shall be deemed incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K or
incorporated by reference into any of our other filings with the SEC. Certain information relating to
retirement-related benefits we provide to our associates is included in Note 11 to our Consolidated
Financial Statements.
Growth - Provide ongoing growth, development and learning opportunities for associates and continue
to attract talent with new skills. We are invested in the growth of our associates – in support of
our business and their success – by offering good entry-level jobs in addition to multiple career
pathways that lead to great careers and better lives.
Approximately 75% of our U.S. salaried store, club and supply chain management started their careers
in hourly positions. Our focus on providing a path of opportunity for our associates through robust
training, competitive wages and benefits and career mobility creates a strong associate value
proposition and strengthens our workforce. In the U.S., we seek to enable these pathways through
programs like Walmart Academy, Live Better U ("LBU"), and other various associate training programs.
Walmart Academy offers training for on-the-job retail skills, leadership and well-being, serving our
associates through a combination of digital and in-person offerings. Additionally, our LBU program
provides access to educational opportunities for our eligible part-time and full-time associates in
the U.S. and Puerto Rico, allowing associates the opportunity to learn critical skills in order to
promote into in-demand jobs within the company through high school diplomas, short-form certificates
and credentials or college degrees.
Digital - Drive a digital transformation that improves the associate experience and powers the
business . To deliver a seamless customer and associate experience, we continue to invest in
consumer-grade digital tools designed to improve associate productivity, efficiency, engagement, and
performance — and these capabilities have been expanded to some international markets. This allows
associates to share real-time feedback and spend more time generating new ideas, developing strategy,
and building relationships.
Our Website and Availability of SEC Reports and Other Information
Our corporate website is located at www.stock.walmart.com. We file with, or furnish to, the SEC
Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, amendments
to those reports, proxy statements and annual reports to shareholders, and, from time to time, other
documents. The reports and other documents filed with, or furnished to, the SEC are available to
investors on or through our corporate website free of charge as soon as reasonably practicable after
we electronically file them with or furnish them to the SEC. The SEC maintains a website that
contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information regarding issuers, such as
the Company, that file electronically with the SEC. The address of that website is www.sec.gov. Our
SEC filings, our Reporting Protocols for Senior Financial Officers and our Code of Conduct can be
found on our website at www.stock.walmart.com. These documents are available in print to any
shareholder who requests a copy by writing or calling our Investor Relations Department, which is
located at our principal offices.
A description of any substantive amendment or waiver of Walmart's Reporting Protocols for Senior
Financial Officers or our Code of Conduct for our chief executive officer, our chief financial
officer and our controller, who is our principal accounting officer, will be disclosed on our website
at www.stock.walmart.com under the Corporate Governance section. Any such description will be located
on our website for a period of 12 months following the amendment or waiver.
 12 
 Information About Our Executive Officers 
The following chart names the executive officers of the Company as of the date of the filing of this
Annual Report on Form 10-K with the SEC, each of whom is elected by, and serves at the pleasure of,
the Board of Directors. The business experience shown for each officer has been his or her principal
occupation for at least the past five years, unless otherwise noted.
 Current 
 Name Business Experience Position Age 
 Held Since 
 Executive Vice President, Corporate Affairs, 
 effective June 2013. From November 2007 to June 
 Daniel J. Bartlett 2013, he served as Chief Executive Officer and 2013 53 
 President of U.S. Operations at Hill & Knowlton, 
 Inc., a public relations company. 
 Executive Vice President, Global Governance, Chief 
 Legal Officer and Corporate Secretary, effective 
 Rachel Brand April 2018. From May 2017 to February 2018, she 2018 51 
 served as Associate Attorney General in the United 
 States Department of Justice. 
 Senior Vice President and Controller effective 
 David M. Chojnowski January 2017. From October 2014 to January 2017, he 2017 55 
 served as Vice President and Controller, Walmart 
 U.S. 
 Executive Vice President, President and Chief 
 Executive Officer, Walmart U.S. effective November 
 John Furner 2019. From February 2017 until November 2019, he 2019 50 
 served as President and Chief Executive Officer, 
 Sam's Club U.S. 
 Executive Vice President, Global Chief Technology 
 Officer and Chief Development Officer effective July 
 Suresh Kumar 2019. From February 2018 until June 2019, Mr. Kumar 2019 60 
 was Vice President and General Manager at Google 
 LLC. 
 Executive Vice President, President and Chief 
 Executive Officer, Walmart International, effective 
 August 2023. From 2019 to 2023, she served as 
 Executive Vice President, President and Chief 
 Kathryn McLay Executive Officer, Sam's Club U.S.From February 2019 2023 51 
 to November 2019, she served as Executive Vice 
 President, Walmart U.S. Neighborhood Markets. From 
 December 2015 until February 2019, she served as 
 Senior Vice President, U.S. Supply Chain. 
 President and Chief Executive Officer, effective 
 C. Douglas McMillon February 2014. From February 2009 to January 2014, 2014 58 
 he served as Executive Vice President, President and 
 Chief Executive Officer, Walmart International. 
 Executive Vice President, Global People, and Chief 
 People Officer, effective February 2020. From April 
 Donna Morris 2002 to January 2020, she worked at Adobe Inc. in 2020 57 
 various roles, including most recently, Chief Human 
 Resources Officer and Executive Vice President, 
 Employee Experience. 
 Executive Vice President, President and Chief 
 Executive Officer, Sam's Club U.S. effective 
 September 2023.From October 2021 to September 2023, 
 he served as Executive Vice President, Chief 
 Operating Officer, Walmart U.S. From February 2021 
 Christopher Nicholas until October 2021, he served as Executive Vice 2023 48 
 President, Chief Financial Officer Walmart U.S. From 
 January 2020 until February 2021, he served as 
 Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer 
 Walmart International. He joined the Company in 
 August 2018 as Senior Vice President and Deputy 
 Chief Financial Officer, Walmart International. 
 Executive Vice President and Chief Financial 
 Officer, effective June 2022. From September 2015 to 
 John David Rainey June 2022, he served as Chief Financial Officer and 2022 54 
 Executive Vice President, Global Customer Operations 
 for PayPal Holdings, Inc. 
 13 
 ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS 
The risks described below could, in ways we may or may not be able to accurately predict, materially
and adversely affect our business, results of operations, financial position and liquidity. Our
business operations could also be affected by additional factors that apply to all companies
operating in the U.S. and globally. The following risk factors do not identify all risks that we may
face.
 Strategic Risks 
Failure to successfully execute our omni-channel strategy and the cost of our investments in
eCommerce and technology may materially adversely affect our market position, net sales and financial
performance.
The retail business continues to rapidly evolve with consumers embracing the digital shopping
experience and expecting a robust online marketplace of goods available for purchase and delivery. As
a result, the portion of total consumer expenditures with retailers and wholesale clubs occurring
through digital platforms is increasing and the pace of this increase could continue to accelerate.
Our strategy, which includes investments in eCommerce, technology, including the use of artificial
intelligence ("AI") and generative AI technologies (which continues to grow and evolve within our
Company), talent, supply chain automation and enhancements, advertising, acquisitions, joint
ventures, store remodels and other customer initiatives may not adequately or effectively allow us to
continue to grow our eCommerce business, increase comparable sales, maintain or grow our overall
market position or otherwise offset the impact on the growth of our business of a moderated pace of
new store and club openings and sustain the current pace of remodels. The success of this strategy
will depend in large measure on our ability to continue building and delivering a seamless omni-
channel shopping experience and interconnected ecosystem for our customers that deepens and maintains
our relationships with our customers across our various businesses and partnerships and reinforces
our overall enterprise strategy.
The success of this strategy is further subject to the related risks discussed in this Item 1A . With
the interconnected components of this enterprise strategy and an increasing allocation of capital
expenditures focused on these initiatives, changes in customer or member perceptions about our
reputation in general, or our failure to successfully execute on individual components of this
strategy may adversely affect our market position, net sales and financial performance, which could
also result in impairment charges to intangible assets or other long-lived assets. In addition, a
greater concentration of eCommerce sales, including increasing online grocery sales, could result in
a reduction in the amount of traffic in our stores and clubs, which would, in turn, reduce the
opportunities for cross-store or cross-club sales of merchandise that such traffic creates and could
reduce our sales within our stores and clubs and materially adversely affect our financial
performance.
Furthermore, the cost of certain investments in eCommerce, technology, talent and automation,
including any operating losses incurred for those initiatives, will adversely impact our financial
performance in the short-term and failure to realize the benefits of these investments may adversely
impact our financial performance over the longer term.
If we do not timely identify or effectively respond to consumer trends or preferences, it could
negatively affect our reputation, relationship with our customers, demand for the products and
services we sell, our market share and the growth of our business.
It is difficult to predict consistently and successfully the products and services our customers will
demand and changes in their shopping patterns, tastes and preferences. The success of our business
depends in part on how accurately we predict consumer demand, availability of merchandise, the
related impact on the demand for existing products and services and the competitive environment. Our
business is dependent on our ability to make critical decisions and predictions with respect to
merchandise categories that quickly respond to changing consumer spending patterns, tastes and
preferences, and any incorrect calculations by us may result in lower sales, spoilage and inventory
markdowns, which could adversely impact our results of operations. Our ability to predict and adapt
to changing tastes and preferences depends on many factors, including obtaining accurate and relevant
data on customer preferences, emphasizing relevant merchandise categories, effectively managing our
inventory levels, and implementing competitive and effective pricing and promotion strategies. Price
transparency, assortment of products, customer experience, convenience, ease and the speed and cost
of shipping are of primary importance to customers and continue to increase in importance,
particularly as a result of digital tools and social media available to consumers and the choices
available to consumers for purchasing products. We must continue to preserve our reputation, which is
impacted by public perceptions and customer experiences. It may be difficult to address negative
publicity across media channels, regardless of whether it is accurate. Negative incidents, including
the loss of merchandise as a result of shrink or theft, misuse of AI technologies or a data breach as
a result of a cyberattack could quickly erode trust and confidence in our business and could result
in consumer boycotts, workforce unrest and government investigations. These incidents may involve us,
our vendors that handle our data or personal information, our workforce or others with whom we do
business, including third-party service providers and independent contractors. Societal expectations,
preferences, trends and political expression are ever-changing and we try to adapt, evolve and
maintain a balance that meets the acceptance of our customers, members, associates, shareholders,
suppliers and other stakeholders, but we may not always move as quickly or in the direction that
various competing interests desire or demand, which could impact our reputation. For instance, strong
opinions continue to be publicly expressed both for
 14 
and against diversity, equity and inclusion and ESG initiatives and positions taken by many
corporations, including Walmart, are tracked, monitored and subject to heightened scrutiny from
consumers, investors, advocacy groups and public figures, potentially leading to consumer boycotts,
negative publicity campaigns, litigation and reputational harm. Negative reputational incidents or
negative perceptions of us could adversely impact our business and results of operations, including
through lower sales, the termination of business relationships and negative impacts to associate
retention and recruiting efforts. Moreover, failure to adequately predict customer demand and
consumer spending patterns or otherwise optimize and operate our distribution and fulfillment centers
could result in excess or insufficient inventory, service interruptions and increased costs, any of
which could significantly harm our business. As we continue to add new fulfillment centers, our
fulfillment and technology networks become increasingly complex and operating them in a way that
effectively meets consumer demands continues to be challenging. There can be no assurance that we
will be able to operate our networks effectively.
We face strong competition from other retailers, wholesale club operators, omni-channel retailers and
other businesses which could materially adversely affect our financial performance.
Each of our segments competes for customers, employees, digital prominence, products and services and
in other important aspects of its business with many other local, regional, national and global
physical, eCommerce and omni-channel retailers, social commerce platforms, wholesale club operators
and retail intermediaries, as well as companies that offer services in digital advertising, data
analytics/insights, fulfillment and delivery services, health and wellness and financial services.
The omni-channel retail landscape is highly competitive and rapidly evolving, and the entry of new,
well-funded competitors may increase competitive pressures. In addition, for eCommerce and other
internet-based businesses, newer or smaller businesses may be better able to innovate and compete
with us.
We compete in a variety of ways, including the prices at which we sell our merchandise, merchandise
selection and availability, services offered to customers, location, store hours, in-store amenities,
the shopping convenience and overall shopping experience we offer, the attractiveness and ease of use
of our digital platforms, quality and accessibility of data for customers, suppliers, and associates,
and cost, speed of and options for accurate delivery to customers of merchandise purchased through
our digital platforms or through our omni-channel integration of our physical and digital operations.
A failure to respond effectively to competitive pressures and changes in the retail and other markets
in which we operate, omni-channel innovations and omni-channel ecosystems developed by our
competitors or delays or failure in execution of our strategy could materially adversely affect our
financial performance. See " Item 1. Business " above for additional discussion of the competitive
situation of each of our reportable segments.
Certain segments of the retail industry are undergoing consolidation or substantially reducing
operations, whether due to bankruptcy, economics or other factors. Such consolidation, or other
business combinations or alliances, competitive omni-channel ecosystems or reductions in operations
may result in competitors with improved financial resources, improved access to merchandise, greater
market penetration and other improvements in their competitive positions. Such business combinations
or alliances could allow these companies to provide a wider variety of products and services at
competitive prices, which could adversely affect our financial performance.
General or macro-economic factors, both domestically and internationally, may materially adversely
affect our financial performance.
General economic conditions and other economic factors, globally or in one or more of the markets we
serve, may adversely affect our financial performance. Higher interest rates, higher prices of
petroleum products, including crude oil, natural gas, gasoline and diesel fuel, increased costs for
electricity and other energy, weakness in the housing market, inflation, deflation, increased costs
of essential services, such as medical care and utilities, higher levels of unemployment, decreases
in GDP and consumer disposable income, unavailability of consumer credit, higher consumer debt
levels, changes in consumer spending and shopping patterns, fluctuations in currency exchange rates,
higher tax rates, imposition of new taxes or other changes in tax laws, changes in healthcare laws,
other regulatory changes, the imposition of export and import restrictions, tariffs, trade barriers
or other measures that create barriers to or increase the costs associated with international trade,
overall economic slowdown or recession and other economic factors in the U.S., or in any of the other
markets in which we operate, could adversely affect consumer demand for the products and services we
sell in the U.S. or such other markets, change the mix of products we sell to any one or more markets
with a lower average gross margin, cause a slowdown in discretionary purchases of goods, adversely
affect our net sales, growth rates, operating income and result in slower inventory turnover and
greater markdowns of inventory, or otherwise materially adversely affect our operations and operating
results and could result in impairment charges to intangible assets, goodwill or other long-lived
assets.
In addition, the economic factors listed above, any other economic factors or circumstances resulting
in higher transportation, labor, insurance or healthcare costs or commodity prices, including energy
prices, and other economic factors in the U.S. and other countries in which we operate can increase
our cost of sales and operating, selling, general and administrative expenses and otherwise
materially adversely affect our operations and operating results.
The economic factors that affect our operations may also adversely affect the operations of our
suppliers, which can result in an increase in the cost to us of the goods we sell to our customers
or, in more extreme cases, in certain suppliers not producing
 15 
goods in the volume typically available to us for sale, or adversely impact product margins due to
higher labor and material costs of our suppliers that we are unable, or choose not, to pass on to our
customers.
The performance of strategic alliances and other business relationships to support the expansion of
our business could materially adversely affect our financial performance.
We may enter into strategic alliances and other business relationships in the countries in which we
have existing operations or in other markets to expand our business. These arrangements (such as ONE,
our fintech venture) may not generate the level of sales or profitability we anticipate when entering
into the arrangement or may otherwise adversely impact our business and competitive position relative
to the results we could have achieved in the absence of such alliance. In addition, any investment we
make in connection with a strategic alliance, business relationship or in certain of our divested
markets, could materially adversely affect our financial performance.
 Operational Risks 
Global or regional health pandemics or epidemics could negatively impact our business, financial
position and results of operations.
The emergence, severity, magnitude and duration of global or regional pandemics, epidemics or other
health crises are uncertain and difficult to predict. A pandemic, epidemic or contagious disease
outbreak that affects humans or the food supply, such as the avian flu impact on poultry and egg
production could impact our business operations, demand for our products and services, in-stock
positions, costs of doing business, access to inventory, supply chain operations, the extent and
duration of measures to try to contain the spread of a virus or other disease (such as travel bans
and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, limitations on large gatherings, business and
government shutdowns and other restrictions on retailers), our ability to predict future performance,
exposure to litigation and our financial performance, among other things. In the event of any global
or regional health crisis, customer demand for certain products may fluctuate, customer behaviors may
change and consumer disposable income could be negatively impacted, which may challenge our ability
to anticipate and/or adjust inventory levels to meet that demand. These risks and their impacts are
difficult to predict and could otherwise disrupt and adversely affect our operations and our
financial performance.
To the extent that a future pandemic, epidemic or contagious disease outbreak occurs, such events may
also heighten other risks described in this Item 1A, including but not limited to those related to
consumer behavior and expectations, competition, our reputation, implementation of strategic
initiatives, cybersecurity threats, payment-related risks, technology systems disruption, supply
chain disruptions, labor availability and cost, and litigation and regulatory requirements.
Natural disasters, climate change, geopolitical events, catastrophic and other events could
materially adversely affect our financial performance.
Natural disasters, weather conditions, geopolitical tensions and other catastrophic events may have a
material adverse effect on our operations and financial performance. These may include extreme
weather-related events such as hurricanes, tropical storms, typhoons, floods, wildfires, cyclones,
tornadoes, winter storms, droughts, and extreme temperatures, any of which may be exacerbated by a
changing climate, as well as other natural disasters such as earthquakes and tsunamis. Moreover,
geopolitical tensions or events; and catastrophic and other events, such as war, civil unrest
(including theft, looting or vandalism), terrorist attacks or other acts of violence, including
active shooter situations (such as those that have occurred in our U.S. stores), or the loss of
merchandise as a result of shrink or theft in countries in which we operate, in which our suppliers
are located or regions goods are transported from or through, or in other areas of the world (such as
in Ukraine and Israel, armed hostilities in the Red Sea and surrounding areas through which ocean
carrier vessels travel to the Suez Canal and delays that have occurred traversing the Panama Canal
resulting from drought) could adversely affect our operations and financial performance. Protecting
the safety of our associates, including our senior leaders, is critical to preventing business
disruption and executing on our business strategies and objectives.
Any of the events described above could result in physical damage to, or the complete loss of, one or
more of our properties, the closure of one or more stores, clubs and distribution or fulfillment
centers, limitations on store or club operating hours, the lack of an adequate work force in a
market, the inability of customers and associates to reach or have transportation to our stores and
clubs affected by such events, the evacuation of the populace from areas in which our stores, clubs
and distribution and fulfillment centers are located, the unavailability of our digital platforms to
our customers, changes in the purchasing patterns of consumers (including the frequency of visits by
consumers to physical retail locations, whether as a result of limitations on large gatherings,
travel and movement limitations or otherwise), temporary or long-term disruption in the supply of
products from some suppliers or disruption or delay in the delivery of goods to our distribution and
fulfillment centers or stores within a country in which we are operating and could negatively impact
our operations and financial performance. In fiscal 2025, Hurricanes Helene and Milton impacted our
stores, operations and supply chains in the Southeastern U.S., although such events did not
materially impact our consolidated financial performance. Moreover, these disasters and events can
negatively impact consumers' disposable income, the temporary or long-term disruption in the supply
of products from some suppliers, the disruption in the transport of goods from overseas, the
disruption or delay in the delivery of goods to our distribution and fulfillment centers or stores
within a country in which we are operating, the reduction in the availability of products in our
 16 
stores, increases in the costs of procuring products as a result of either reduced availability or
economic sanctions, increased transportation costs (whether due to fuel prices, fuel supply or
otherwise), the disruption (whether directly or indirectly) of critical infrastructure systems,
banking systems, utility services or energy availability to our stores, clubs and our facilities and
the disruption in our communications with our stores, clubs and our other facilities.
Furthermore, the long-term impacts of climate change, whether involving physical risks (such as
extreme weather conditions, drought or rising sea levels) or transition risks (such as regulatory or
technology changes) may be widespread and are unpredictable. Certain impacts of physical risk may
include: temperature changes that increase the heating and cooling costs at stores, clubs and
distribution or fulfillment centers; extreme weather patterns that affect the production or sourcing
of certain commodities; flooding and extreme storms that damage or destroy our buildings and
inventory; disruption of electrical grids or utilities required to operate our stores, clubs and
information systems; and heat and extreme weather events that cause long-term disruption or threats
to the habitability of the communities in which we operate. Relative to transition risk, certain
impacts may include: changes in energy and commodity prices driven by climate-related weather events;
prolonged climate-related events affecting macroeconomic conditions with related effects on consumer
spending and confidence; stakeholder perception of our engagement in climate-related policies; and
new regulatory requirements resulting in higher compliance risk and operational costs.
We bear the risk of losses incurred as a result of physical damage to, or destruction of, any stores,
clubs and distribution or fulfillment centers; theft, loss or spoilage of inventory; and business
interruption caused by such events. These events and their impacts could otherwise disrupt and
adversely affect our operations and could materially adversely affect our financial performance.
Moreover, our operations in the U.S. comprise a significant portion of our financial and operational
performance. Therefore, any of the above matters that uniquely impact or are specifically
concentrated in the U.S. could materially adversely affect our financial and operational performance
.
Risks associated with our suppliers could materially adversely affect our financial performance.
The products we sell are sourced from a wide variety of domestic and international suppliers. Global
sourcing of many of the products we sell is an important factor in our financial performance. We
expect our suppliers to comply with applicable laws, including labor, safety, anti-corruption and
environmental laws, and to otherwise meet our required supplier standards of conduct. Our ability to
find qualified suppliers who uphold our standards and to access products in a timely and efficient
manner and in the large volumes we may demand, are significant challenges, especially with respect to
suppliers located and goods sourced outside the U.S.
Political and economic instability, as well as other impactful events and circumstances (such as we
previously experienced (and could experience again) with the pandemic recovery related challenges,
including supply chain disruption and production, labor shortages and increases in labor costs) in
the countries in which our suppliers and their manufacturers are located or regions goods are
transported from or through, the financial instability of suppliers, suppliers not having the
financial ability or capacity to fulfill their indemnification obligations to us if called upon,
thereby exposing us to the full cost of risks and claims, suppliers' failure to meet our terms and
conditions or our supplier standards (including our responsible sourcing standards), labor problems
experienced by our suppliers and their manufacturers, the availability of raw materials to suppliers,
extreme weather events impacting the growing, manufacturing, mining and harvesting of commodities and
products, merchandise safety and quality issues, disruption or delay in the transportation of
merchandise from the suppliers and manufacturers to our stores, clubs and other facilities, including
as a result of extreme weather or labor slowdowns and/or strikes at any port at which a material
amount of merchandise we purchase enters into the markets in which we operate, currency exchange
rates, transport availability and cost, transport security, inflation and other factors relating to
the suppliers and the countries in which they are located are beyond our control.
In addition, U.S. and international trade policies, tariffs, trade barriers and other restrictions on
the exportation and importation of goods, trade sanctions imposed between certain countries and
entities, the limitation on the exportation or importation of certain types of goods or of goods
containing certain materials from other countries and other factors relating to foreign trade are
beyond our control. These and other factors affecting our suppliers, our access to products and our
access to service providers (such as transportation and logistics providers) could adversely affect
our operations and financial performance.
If the quality or safety of products we sell in stores or online fails to meet our customers'
expectations or regulatory standards, we could lose customers, incur liability for any injuries
caused by a product we sell or otherwise experience a material impact to our brand, reputation and
financial performance.
Our customers count on us to provide them with quality products at an affordable price. Occasionally,
the quality of products that we source from our suppliers fails to meet customer expectations. In
many cases, these products are subject to regulatory action or recall. For general merchandise, this
could be because the product fails to meet safety standards. For food products, it could be because
the product is a source of foodborne illness. For health and wellness products, it could be because
the product does not produce the expected result for the customer or harms the customer. Any of these
factors could cause customers to avoid purchasing certain products from us or to choose to buy
products from a different retailer, even if the quality issue is outside of our control. Any lost
confidence on the part of our customers would be difficult and costly to reestablish. When a
 17 
product we sell does not meet quality or safety standards, there is an increased risk of liability
for harm the product may cause our customers. While we rely on our suppliers to meet our safety and
quality expectations, and to indemnify us if their products do not, certain suppliers may not have
the financial capacity or ability to fulfill their indemnification obligations. In that case, we may
be exposed to the full cost of liability claims. Any issue regarding the quality or safety of
products we sell, regardless of the cause, could adversely affect our brand, reputation and financial
performance.
If the quality or safety of products offered for sale on our third-party marketplace fails to meet
our customers' expectations or regulatory standards, we could be held directly liable, lose
customers, become subject to regulatory enforcement or otherwise experience reputational harm.
Some of the products customers buy from our website are sold by third parties, which we refer to as
marketplace transactions. While that transaction ultimately occurs between the third-party seller and
the customer, some regulators and courts have taken a view that the retailer is responsible for
marketplace transactions that occur on a retailer's digital platform. Unsettled law on whether a
retailer is responsible for intellectual property or product liability claims related to marketplace
transactions creates additional risk. Any unfavorable changes or legal interpretations could further
expose us to liability. Our arrangements with our third-party marketplace sellers are complex and we
may not be able to implement, maintain and develop the components of these commercial relationships,
which may include fulfillment, inventory management, tax collection, payment processing, content and
engaging other third parties to perform services.
In addition, poor quality or safety of third-party products offered for sale on our platforms could
erode customer trust, leading to loss of sales, reduction in transactions and deterioration of our
competitive position. In addition, we may face reputational, financial and other risks, including
liability for third-party products offered for sale on our platform that are controversial,
counterfeit, pirated or stolen or that infringe the intellectual property rights of others. We may
not be able to collect sufficient damages for these types of breaches from third-party sellers.
Furthermore, even if we are successful in negotiating a contractual shift in risk of loss to third
parties, a regulator may view us as having responsibility for regulatory compliance of the third-
party products offered for sale on our platform. Although we have marketplace compliance controls in
place and impose contractual terms on sellers to prohibit sales of non-compliant products, we may not
be able prevent sellers from offering prohibited items for sale, enforce such terms or fully protect
against regulatory risk. Any of these events could have a material adverse impact on our business and
results of operations and impede the execution of our eCommerce growth and enterprise strategy.
We rely extensively on information and financial systems to process transactions, summarize results
and manage our business. Disruptions in our systems could harm our ability to conduct our operations.
Given the number of individual transactions we have each year, it is crucial that we maintain
uninterrupted operation of our business-critical information systems. Our information systems are
subject to damage or interruption from power outages, computer and telecommunications failures,
computer viruses, ransomware, worms, other malicious computer programs, denial-of-service attacks,
security incidents and breaches from a variety of threat actors, including both cybercriminals and
nation state-sponsored actors, catastrophic events such as wildfires, major or extended winter
storms, tornadoes, earthquakes and hurricanes, utility outages, usage errors by our associates or
contractors and civil or political unrest or armed hostilities. The availability of our information
systems and the integrity of data are essential to our business operations, including the processing
of transactions, management of our associates, facilities, logistics, inventories, physical stores
and clubs and our online operations. Our information systems are not fully redundant and our disaster
recovery planning cannot account for all eventualities. If our systems are damaged, breached,
attacked, interrupted or otherwise cease to function properly, we may have to make a significant
investment to repair or replace them, and may experience loss or corruption of data as well as suffer
interruptions in our business operations in the interim. Any interruption to the availability of our
information systems or corruption of our data may have a material adverse effect on our business or
results of operations. In addition, the cost of securing our systems against failure or attack is
considerable, and increases in these costs, particularly in the wake of a breach or failure, could be
significant.
In addition, we frequently update our information technology hardware, software, processes and
systems. The risk of system disruption is increased when significant system changes are undertaken.
If we fail to timely or successfully integrate and update our information systems and processes,
system disruptions may occur and we may fail to realize the cost savings or operational benefits
anticipated to be derived from these initiatives and our business, results of operations, financial
condition and cash flows could be negatively impacted.
If the technology-based systems that give our customers the ability to shop with us online and enable
us to deliver products and services do not function effectively, our operating results, as well as
our ability to grow our omni-channel business globally, could be materially adversely affected.
Increasingly, customers are using computers, tablets and smart phones to shop with us and with our
competitors and to do comparison shopping. We use social media, online advertising and email to
interact with our customers and as a means to enhance their shopping experience. As a part of our
omni-channel sales strategy, we offer various pickup, delivery and shipping programs including
options where many products available for purchase online can be picked up by the customer or member
at a local Walmart store or Sam's Club, which provides additional customer traffic at such stores and
clubs. Omni-channel
 18 
retailing is a rapidly evolving part of the retail industry and of our operations around the world,
and we continue to make investments in supply chain automation and enhancements to support our omni-
channel strategy. We must anticipate and meet our customers' changing expectations while adjusting
for technology investments and developments in our competitors' operations through focusing on the
building and delivery of a seamless shopping experience across all channels by each operating
segment. We continue to invest in AI and generative AI technologies to enhance our customers’
shopping experience and our associate work experience and to improve efficiencies of our supply
chain, operations, management functions and talent recruitment and development; however, these are
evolving technologies and there are inherent operational and legal complexities associated with
implementation of these technologies within our business. When integrating and introducing AI and
generative AI technologies into our platforms, processes and systems, we may be exposed to new or
expanded liabilities and risks due to elevated governmental scrutiny and monitoring, litigation, data
privacy risks and compliance issues in a disparate and at times conflicting regulatory environment,
all of which could negatively affect our financial performance and business reputation.
Some of the various technology systems and services on which we rely are provided and managed by an
increasing number of third-party service providers. To the extent either our or such other third-
party systems and services do not perform or function as anticipated, whether because of an inherent
flaw in the technology, faulty implementation or a cybersecurity incident, such failure can
significantly interfere with our ability to meet our customers' changing expectations. Any disruption
or failure on our part to provide attractive, user-friendly and secure digital platforms that offer a
wide assortment of merchandise and services at competitive prices and with low cost and rapid
delivery options and that continually meet the changing expectations of online shoppers and
developments in online and digital platform merchandising and related technology in a cost-efficient
manner could place us at a competitive disadvantage, result in the loss of eCommerce and other sales,
harm our reputation with customers, have a material adverse impact on the growth of our eCommerce
business globally and have a material adverse impact on our business and results of operations.
Any failure to maintain the privacy or security of the information relating to our company,
customers, members, associates, business partners and vendors, whether as a result of cyberattacks on
our information systems or otherwise, could damage our reputation, result in litigation or other
legal actions against us, result in fines, penalties, and liability, cause us to incur substantial
additional costs and materially adversely affect our business and operating results.
Like most retailers, we process in our information systems personal information and/or payment
information about our customers and members, and we also process information concerning our
associates and vendors. In addition, our health and wellness business operations and third-party
service providers who handle information on our behalf store and maintain protected health
information. Further, we recently acquired VIZIO Holding Corp. and its subsidiaries, which collects
certain consumer data, including certain television viewing data. Some of this information is stored
digitally in connection with the digital platforms and technologies that we use to conduct and
facilitate our various businesses. We utilize third-party service providers for a variety of reasons,
including, without limitation, for digital storage technology, compute capacity, medical record
documentation, content delivery to customers and members, back-office support and other functions.
Such providers may have access to information we hold about our customers, members, associates,
business partners or vendors. In addition, our eCommerce operations depend upon the secure
transmission of confidential information over public networks, including information permitting
cashless payments.
Cyber threats are rapidly evolving and those threats and the means for disrupting or obtaining access
to information systems or information stored in digital and other storage media are becoming
increasingly sophisticated and frequent, and in some cases, they may lead to successful attacks.
Unauthorized activities directed against information systems and devices, whether our own or those of
our third-party service providers and vendors, have resulted in cybersecurity incidents, including
malware, ransomware, denial of service attacks or phishing incidents. We expect that our information
systems and those of our third-party service providers, vendors and suppliers will continue to
experience such attacks in the future, which could include disruptions to our supply chain system.
Cyberattacks and threat actors can be sponsored by particular nation-states, or be the work of
sophisticated criminal organizations, insiders (including our associates or contractors) or third
parties, each with a wide-range of motives and expertise. We and the businesses with which we
interact have experienced and continue to experience incidents and threats to data and information
systems. These incidents and threats have included and are likely to continue to include both random
and targeted cyberattacks, computer viruses, phishing incidents, worms, bot attacks, ransomware or
other destructive or disruptive software and attempts to misappropriate customer information,
including credit card and payment information, and cause system failures and disruptions. The use of
remote work infrastructure in recent years has also increased the possible attack surfaces to be
exploited. Our logging capabilities, or the logging capabilities of third parties, are also not
always complete or sufficiently detailed, affecting our ability to fully investigate and understand
the scope of security events. As noted above, some of our information systems and those of our third-
party service providers have experienced cybersecurity incidents or breaches, including during fiscal
2025, and, although to date they have not had a material adverse effect on our operating results or
business, there can be no assurance of a similar result in the future.
Our digital platforms, which are increasingly important to our business and continue to grow in
complexity and scope, and the systems on which they run, including those applications and systems
used in legacy operations and acquired eCommerce, technology or other businesses, are regularly
subject to cyberattacks. Those attacks involve attempts to impede the operations of
 19 
our system or gain unauthorized access to our eCommerce websites (including marketplace platforms) or
mobile commerce applications to obtain and misuse customers' or members' information including
personal information and/or payment information, and related risks discussed in this Item 1A . Such
attacks, if successful, may result in potential data and personal information misuse and/or loss and
may create denials of service or otherwise disable, degrade or sabotage the information systems that
enable or support one or more of our digital platforms or otherwise significantly disrupt our
customers' and members' shopping experience, our supply chain integrity and continuity and our
ability to efficiently operate our business. If we are unable to maintain the security of the
information systems that enable or support our digital platforms and keep them operating within
acceptable parameters, we could be subject to regulatory fines, suffer loss of sales, reductions in
transactions, reputational damage and deterioration of our competitive position and incur liability
for any damage to customers, members or others whose personal or confidential information is
unlawfully obtained and misused, any of which events could have a material adverse impact on our
business and results of operations and impede the execution of our strategy for the growth of our
business.
Associate error or malfeasance, faulty password and identity management, social engineering or other
vulnerabilities and irregularities may also result in a defeat of our security measures or those of
our third-party service providers and a compromise or breach of our or their information systems.
Moreover, the hardware, software or applications that comprise our information system and networked
environment may have vulnerabilities or defects of design, coding, manufacture or operations that
could be intentionally exploited or inadvertently used in a manner that could compromise information
security. Given the age, size and complexity of these information systems and our networked
environment, patches for certain vulnerabilities may not exist and, even where patches or other risk-
mitigating activities are available, the deployment of patches or execution of risk-mitigating
actions may not occur before an underlying vulnerability is exploited by threat actors or
inadvertently results in the compromise of our information systems or data.
Any compromise of our information systems or of those of businesses with which we interact, which
results in regulated data or confidential information being accessed, obtained, damaged, disclosed,
destroyed, modified, lost or used by unauthorized persons could harm our reputation and expose us to
regulatory actions (including, with respect to health information, liability under the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, as amended by the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009, collectively known as "HIPAA" and with respect to personal information,
liability under international and state data breach notification laws), customer attrition,
remediation expenses and claims from customers, members, associates, vendors, financial institutions,
payment card networks and other persons, any of which could materially and adversely affect our
business operations, reputation, financial position and results of operations.
Because the techniques used to obtain unauthorized access, disable or degrade service, or sabotage
systems or data change frequently and may not immediately produce signs of a compromise, we may be
unable to anticipate these techniques or implement adequate preventative measures, or detect the
activities of a threat actor. Moreover, the increasing sophistication of AI technologies poses a
greater risk of identity fraud, as malicious actors may exploit AI to create convincing false
identities or manipulate verification processes. Even if we detect a fraudulent or cybersecurity
incident, the nature and extent of that incident may not be immediately clear. Based on the
sophistication of the threat actors and the size and complexity of our information systems and
networked environment, among other factors, an investigation into a cybersecurity incident could take
a significant amount of time to complete. We may not understand or appreciate that what is detected
and treated as multiple individual cybersecurity incidents or events may be associated with the
coordinated actions of a single threat actor or group. In addition, while our investigation of a
cybersecurity incident is ongoing, we may not know the full extent of the harm caused by a threat
actor, and such harm may spread both internally and to certain customers, vendors or other third
parties. These factors may inhibit our ability to provide rapid, complete and reliable information
about the cybersecurity incident to customers, counterparties and regulators, as well as the public.
It may also not be clear how best to contain and remediate any harm caused by the cybersecurity
incident, and certain errors or actions could be repeated or compounded before they are discovered
and remediated. Any or all of these factors could further increase the costs and consequences of a
cybersecurity incident on our business operations, financial position and results of operations.
To the extent that any cyberattack, ransomware or incursion in our or one of our third-party service
provider's information systems results in the loss, damage, misappropriation or other compromise of
information, we may be materially adversely affected by claims from customers, members, financial
institutions, regulatory authorities, payment card networks and others.
Our compliance programs, information technology and enterprise risk management efforts cannot
eliminate all systemic risk. Disruptions in our systems caused by associate error or malfeasance,
security incidents, breaches or cyberattacks – including attacks on those parties we do business with
(such as strategic partners, suppliers, banks or utility companies) – could harm our ability to
conduct our operations, which may have a material effect on us, may result in losses that could have
a material adverse effect on our financial position or results of operations, or may have a cascading
effect that adversely impacts our partners, third-party service providers, customers, members,
financial services firms and other third parties that we interact with on a regular basis.
Our reputation with our customers and members is important to the success of our enterprise strategy,
which combines traditional retail, membership models, marketplaces, financial services, health and
wellness and other customer and business
 20 
services into a series of interconnected assets to make it seamless for customers to interact with
us. Security-related events could be widely publicized and could materially adversely affect our
reputation with our customers, members, associates, vendors and shareholders, could harm our
competitive position particularly with respect to our eCommerce operations, and could result in a
material reduction in our net sales in our eCommerce operations, as well as in our stores, thereby
materially adversely affecting our operations, net sales, growth rates, operating income, results of
operations, financial position, cash flows and liquidity. Such events could also result in the
release to the public of confidential information about our operations and financial position and
performance and could result in litigation or other legal actions against us or the imposition of
penalties, fines, fees or liabilities, which may not be covered by our insurance policies. Moreover,
a security compromise or operationally impactful malware event, such as ransomware, could require us
to devote significant management resources to address the problems created by the issue and to expend
significant additional resources to upgrade further the security measures we employ to guard personal
and confidential information against cyberattacks and other attempts to access or otherwise
compromise such information and could result in a disruption of our operations, particularly our
digital operations.
We accept payments using a variety of methods, including cash, checks, credit and debit cards,
electronic benefits transfer (EBT) cards, mobile payments and our private label credit cards and gift
cards, and we may offer new payment options over time, which may have information security risk
implications. As a retailer accepting debit and credit cards for payment, we are subject to various
industry data protection standards and protocols, such as payment network security operating
guidelines and the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard. We cannot be certain that the
security measures we or our third-party suppliers maintain are able to detect, prevent or contain
cyberattacks, cyberterrorism, security incidents, breaches or other compromises from malware,
ransomware or other threats that are known or may be developed in the future. In certain
circumstances, our contracts with payment card processors and payment card networks (such as Visa,
Mastercard, American Express and Discover) generally require us to adhere to payment card network
rules which could make us liable to payment card issuers and others if information in connection with
payment cards and payment card transactions that we process is compromised, which liabilities could
be substantial.
We also have compliance obligations associated with privacy laws enacted to protect and regulate the
collection, use, retention, disclosure and transfer of personal information, which include liability
for security and privacy breaches. Among other obligations, breaches may trigger obligations under
U.S. federal and state laws and laws in certain other countries to notify affected individuals,
government agencies and the media. Consequently, cybersecurity incidents that result in a data breach
or our failure to comply with such laws could subject us to fines, sanctions and other legal
liability and harm our reputation.
Changes in third-party reimbursements and contracts, type or scope of offerings of our health and
wellness business could adversely affect our overall results of operations, cash flows and liquidity.
We have retail pharmacy operations in our Walmart U.S. and Sam's Club U.S. segments across the U.S.
and in various of our international markets such as Canada and Mexico.
A large majority of our retail pharmacy net sales are generated by filling prescriptions for which we
receive payment through established contractual relationships with third-party payers and payment
administrators, such as private insurers, governmental agencies and pharmacy benefit managers
("PBMs"). Our retail pharmacy operations are subject to numerous risks, including: reductions in the
third-party reimbursement rates for drugs; changes in our payer mix (i.e., shifts in the relative
distribution of our pharmacy customers across drug insurance plans and programs toward plans and
programs with less favorable reimbursement terms); changes in third-party payer drug formularies
(i.e., the schedule of prescription drugs approved for reimbursement or which otherwise receive
preferential coverage treatment); growth in, and our participation in or exclusion from, pharmacy
payer network arrangements, including exclusive and preferred pharmacy network arrangements operated
by PBMs and/or any insurance plan or program; increases in the prices we pay for brand name and
generic prescription drugs we sell; increases in the administrative burdens associated with seeking
third-party reimbursement; changes in the frequency with which new brand name pharmaceuticals become
available to consumers; introduction of lower cost generic drugs as substitutes for existing brand
name drugs for which there was no prior generic drug competition; changes in drug mix (i.e., the
relative distribution of drugs customers purchase at our pharmacies between brands and generics);
changes in the health insurance market generally; changes in the scope of or the elimination of
Medicare Part D or Medicaid drug programs; increased competition from other retail pharmacy
operations including competitors offering online retail pharmacy options and/or home delivery
options; further consolidation and strategic alliances among third-party payers, PBMs or purchasers
of drugs; overall economic conditions and the ability of our pharmacy customers to pay for drugs
prescribed for them to the extent the costs are not reimbursed by a third-party; failure to meet any
performance or incentive thresholds to which our level of third-party reimbursement may be subject;
changes in laws or regulations or the practices of third-party payers and PBMs related to the use of
third-party financial assistance to assist our pharmacy customers with paying for drugs prescribed
for them; and any additional changes in the state or federal regulatory environment for the retail
pharmacy industry and the pharmaceutical industry, including as a result of health reform efforts and
other changes to or novel interpretations of existing state or federal laws, rules and regulations
that affect our retail pharmacy business.
If the supply of certain pharmaceuticals provided by one or more of our vendors were to be disrupted
for any reason, our pharmacy operations could be severely affected until at least such time as we
could obtain a new supplier for such
 21 
pharmaceuticals. Any such disruption could cause reputational damage and result in a significant
number of our pharmacy customers transferring their prescriptions to other pharmacies.
One or a combination of the factors above may adversely affect the volumes of brand name and generic
pharmaceuticals we sell, our cost of sales associated with our retail pharmacy operations, the net
sales and gross margin of those operations or result in the loss of cross-store or cross-club selling
opportunities. In addition, these and other factors may adversely affect the type, volume and mix of
services we provide and the reimbursement we receive for health and wellness services rendered. Any
of these developments could, in turn, adversely affect our overall net sales, other results of
operations, cash flows and liquidity.
Our failure to attract and retain qualified associates, increases in wage and benefit costs, changes
in laws and other labor issues could materially adversely affect our financial performance.
Our ability to continue to conduct and expand our operations depends on our ability to attract and
retain a large and growing number of qualified associates globally. Our ability to meet our labor
needs, including our ability to find qualified personnel to fill positions that become vacant at our
existing stores, clubs, distribution and fulfillment centers and corporate offices, while controlling
our associate wage and related labor costs, is generally subject to numerous external factors,
including the availability of a sufficient number of qualified persons in the work force of the
markets in which we operate, unemployment levels within those markets, prevailing wage rates,
changing demographics, health and other insurance costs and adoption of new or revised employment and
labor laws and regulations. Additionally, our ability to successfully execute organizational changes,
including our enterprise strategy and management transitions within our senior leadership, and to
effectively motivate and retain associates are critical to our business success. We compete for
talent with other retail and non-retail businesses, including, for example, technology, health and
wellness and fintech businesses, and invest significant resources in training and motivating our
associates. Increased competition among potential employers at all levels, including senior
management and executive levels, could result in increased associate costs or make it more difficult
to recruit and retain associates. If we are unable to locate, attract or retain qualified personnel,
or manage leadership transition successfully, the quality of service we provide to our customers may
decrease and our financial performance may be adversely affected.
In addition, if our costs of labor or related costs increase for other reasons or if new, revised or
novel interpretations of existing labor laws, rules or regulations or healthcare laws, including
those related to worker classification, are adopted or implemented that further increase our labor
costs, our financial performance could be materially adversely affected.
Illegal or inappropriate activity of our independent contractors or third-party service providers
could expose us to liability and adversely affect our business, reputation and financial performance.
We are subject to risks related to our engagement of independent contractors or other third-party
service providers. The qualification processes and background checks we utilize when engaging
independent contractors may not reveal all potentially relevant information, including accurate
worker authorization information and criminal history. If these independent contractors engage in
misconduct, consumers may not consider our goods and services safe, and we may receive negative press
coverage. Further, we have in the past incurred, and may in the future incur, losses from various
types of fraud with respect to unauthorized uses of another person's identity and use of fraudulent
identification documents. Any physical injury, loss of life, fraud, property and/or financial damage
caused by our independent contractors or third-party service providers could adversely affect our
business reputation, which could negatively affect demand for our goods and services, lead to
increased regulatory or litigation exposure and adversely affect our financial performance.
 Financial Risks 
Failure to meet market expectations for our financial performance could adversely affect the market
price and volatility of our stock.
We believe that the price of our stock generally reflects high market expectations for our future
operating results. Any failure to meet or delay in meeting these expectations, including our
consolidated net sales, consolidated operating income, growth rates, eCommerce growth rates,
advertising and other higher-margin initiatives (which are expected to help drive our operating
income growth at a rate faster than net sales over the long term), capital expenditures, comparable
store and club sales growth rates or earnings and adjusted earnings per share could cause the market
price of our stock to decline, as could changes in our dividend or stock repurchase programs or
policies, changes in our effective tax rates, changes in our financial estimates and recommendations
by securities analysts or, failure of our performance to compare favorably to that of other retailers
may have a negative effect on the price of our stock.
Fluctuations in foreign exchange rates may materially adversely affect our financial performance and
our reported results of operations.
Our operations in countries other than the U.S. are conducted primarily in the local currencies of
those countries. Our Consolidated Financial Statements are denominated in U.S. dollars, and to
prepare those financial statements we must translate the amounts of the assets, liabilities, net
sales, other revenues and expenses of our operations outside of the U.S. from local currencies into
U.S. dollars using exchange rates for the current period. In recent years, fluctuations in currency
exchange rates that were unfavorable have had adverse effects on our reported results of operations.
 22 
As a result of such translations, fluctuations in currency exchange rates from period-to-period that
are unfavorable to us may also result in our Consolidated Financial Statements reflecting significant
adverse period-over-period changes in our financial performance or reflecting a period-over-period
improvement in our financial performance that is not as robust as it would be without such
fluctuations in the currency exchange rates. Such unfavorable currency exchange rate fluctuations
will adversely affect the reported performance of our Walmart International operating segment and
have a corresponding adverse effect on our reported consolidated results of operations.
We may pay for products we purchase for sale in our stores, clubs and eCommerce platforms around the
world with a currency other than the local currency of the country in which the goods will be sold.
When we must acquire the currency to pay for such products and the exchange rates for the payment
currency fluctuate in a manner unfavorable to us, our cost of sales may increase and we may be unable
or unwilling to change the prices at which we sell those goods to address that increase in our costs,
with a corresponding adverse effect on our gross profit. Consequently, unfavorable fluctuations in
currency exchange rates have adversely affected, and may continue to adversely affect, our results of
operations.
Legal, Tax, Regulatory, Compliance, Reputational and Other Risks
Our international operations subject us to legislative, judicial, accounting, legal, regulatory, tax,
political and economic risks and conditions specific to the countries or regions in which we operate,
which could materially adversely affect our business or financial performance.
In addition to our U.S. operations, we operate retail and eCommerce businesses in Africa, Canada,
Central America, Chile, China, India and Mexico.
During fiscal 2025, our Walmart International operations generated approximately 18% of our
consolidated net sales. Walmart International's operations in various countries also source goods and
services from other countries. Our future operating results in these countries could be negatively
affected by a variety of factors, most of which are beyond our control. These factors include
political conditions, including political instability, local and global economic conditions; legal
and regulatory constraints, such as regulation of product and service offerings including regulatory
restrictions (such as foreign ownership restrictions) on eCommerce and retail operations in
international markets, such as in India; restrictive governmental actions, such as trade protection
measures or nationalization; antitrust and competition law regulatory matters, such as those underway
in Canada, Mexico and India (relating to our Flipkart subsidiary); local product safety and
environmental laws; tax regulations; local labor laws; anti-money laundering laws and regulations;
trade policies; foreign exchange or currency regulations; laws and regulations regarding consumer and
data protection; and other matters in any of the countries or regions in which we operate, now or in
the future.
Changing our operations in accordance with new or changed restrictions on international trade or
newly imposed sanctions can be expensive, time-consuming and disruptive to our operations. Such
restrictions can be announced with little or no advance notice and we may not be able to effectively
mitigate all adverse impacts from such measures. In addition, tensions between nation-state
governments and conflicts of laws may lead to challenges for our operations. If disputes and
conflicts further escalate in the future, actions by governments in response, or consumer boycotts in
certain regions, could be significantly more severe and restrictive and could adversely affect our
business or financial performance and our reputation. Political uncertainty surrounding trade and
other international disputes could also have a negative effect on consumer confidence and spending,
which could also adversely affect our business or financial performance and our reputation. The
economies of some of the countries in which we have operations have in the past suffered from high
rates of inflation and currency devaluations, which, if they recur, could adversely affect our
financial performance. Other factors which may impact our international operations include foreign
trade, monetary and fiscal policies of the U.S. and other countries, laws, regulations and other
activities of foreign governments, agencies and similar organizations, and risks associated with
having numerous facilities located in countries that have historically been less stable than the U.S.
Additional risks inherent in our international operations generally include, among others, the costs
and difficulties of managing international operations, adverse tax consequences and greater
difficulty in enforcing intellectual property rights in countries other than the U.S. The various
risks inherent in doing business in the U.S. generally also exist when doing business outside of the
U.S., and may be exaggerated by the difficulty of doing business in numerous sovereign jurisdictions
due to differences in culture, geopolitical tensions or events, laws and regulations.
In foreign countries in which we have operations, a risk exists that our associates, contractors or
agents could, in contravention of our policies, engage in business practices prohibited by U.S. laws
and regulations applicable to us, such as the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act or U.S. sanctions laws
and regulations or the laws and regulations of other countries. Our global policies designed to
regulate such business practices and our global compliance programs designed to ensure compliance
with these laws and regulations may not be adequate to prevent the risk that one or more of our
associates, contractors or agents, including those based in or from countries where practices that
violate such U.S. laws and regulations or the laws and regulations of other countries may be
customary, will engage in business practices that are appropriately regulated by our policies,
circumvent our compliance programs and, by doing so, violate such laws and regulations. Any such
violations, even if prohibited by our internal policies, could subject us to fines and penalties and
adversely affect our business or financial performance and our reputation.
 23 
Changes in tax and trade laws, regulations and interpretations could materially adversely affect our
financial performance.
In fiscal 2025, our Walmart U.S. and Sam's Club U.S. operating segments generated approximately 82%
of our consolidated net sales. Significant changes in tax and trade policies, including tariffs,
trade barriers, other restrictions on the exportation and importation of goods and government
regulations affecting trade between the U.S. and other countries where we source many of the products
we sell in our stores and clubs could have an adverse effect on our business and financial
performance. A significant portion of the general merchandise we sell in our U.S. stores and clubs is
manufactured in other countries. Any such actions, including the imposition of further tariffs on
imports could increase the cost to us of such merchandise (whether imported directly or indirectly)
and cause increases in the prices at which we sell such merchandise to our customers, which could
materially adversely affect the financial performance of our U.S. and international operations as
well as our business.
We are subject to income taxes, other taxes and tax collection and reporting obligations in both the
U.S. and the foreign jurisdictions in which we currently operate or have historically operated. The
determination of our worldwide provision for income taxes and current and deferred tax assets and
liabilities requires judgment and estimation. Our taxes could be materially adversely affected by
earnings being lower than anticipated in jurisdictions that have lower statutory tax rates and higher
than anticipated in jurisdictions that have higher statutory tax rates, by changes in the valuation
of our deferred tax assets and liabilities, or by changes in worldwide tax laws, tax rates,
regulations or accounting principles and the interpretations of those rules. In addition, we also may
not have sufficient notice to enable us to build systems and adopt processes to properly comply with
new reporting or collection obligations by the effective date of those obligations.
We are also exposed to future tax legislation, as well as the issuance of future regulations and
changes in administrative interpretations of existing tax laws, and changes in transfer pricing
arrangements with our subsidiaries, any of which can impact our or our subsidiaries' current and
future years' tax provision. The effect of such changes in tax law, changes in administrative
interpretations of existing tax laws or changes in transfer pricing arrangements could also have a
material effect on our business, financial position and results of operations. In the U.S., the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the "Tax Act") significantly changed federal income tax laws that affect
U.S. corporations. As further guidance is issued by the U.S. Treasury Department, the Internal
Revenue Service and other standard-setting bodies, any resulting changes in our estimates will be
treated in accordance with the relevant accounting guidance. Compliance with the Tax Act and any
other new tax rules, regulations, guidance and interpretations, including collecting information not
regularly produced by us or unexpected changes in our estimates, may require us to incur additional
costs and could affect our results of operations.
In addition, legislatures and taxing authorities in many jurisdictions in which we operate may enact
changes to or seek to enforce novel interpretations of their tax rules. These changes could include
modifications that have temporary effect and more permanent changes. For example, the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development (the "OECD"), the European Union and other countries
(including countries in which we operate) have committed to enacting substantial changes to numerous
long-standing tax principles impacting how large multinational enterprises are taxed. In particular,
the OECD's Pillar Two initiative introduces a 15% global minimum tax applied on a country-by-country
basis, which became effective in many jurisdictions in which we operate starting January 1, 2024. The
impact of these potential new rules as well as any other changes in domestic and international tax
rules and regulations could have a material effect on our effective tax rate.
Furthermore, we are subject to regular review and audit by both domestic and foreign tax authorities
as well as subject to the prospective and retrospective effects of changing tax regulations,
legislation and interpretations. Although we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, the ultimate
tax outcome may materially differ from the tax amounts recorded in our Consolidated Financial
Statements and may materially affect our income tax provision, net income or cash flows in the period
or periods for which such determination and settlement is made.
Changes in and/or failure to comply with other laws, regulations and interpretations of such laws and
regulations specific to the businesses and jurisdictions in which we operate could materially
adversely affect our reputation, market position or our business and financial performance.
We operate in complex regulated environments in the U.S. and other countries in which we operate and
could be materially adversely affected by changes to existing legal requirements, including the
related interpretations and enforcement practices, new legal requirements and/or any failure to
comply with applicable regulations. In addition, the degree of regulatory, political, and media
scrutiny we face increases the likelihood that our efforts to adhere to our practices and procedures
to comply with these laws and legal requirements may be subject to frequent or increasing challenges.
If we fail to prevent independent contractors or third-party service providers from violating our
policies or applicable laws or committing any fraudulent acts against us or our customers, it could
harm our business or damage our reputation, and we could face liability for unlawful activities by
such third parties.
Our health and wellness operations in the U.S. are subject to numerous federal, state and local laws
and regulations including, but not limited to, those related to: licensing; reimbursement
arrangements and other requirements and restrictions; registration and regulation of pharmacies;
dispensing and sale of controlled substances and products containing pseudoephedrine; governmental
(including Medicare and Medicaid) and commercial reimbursement; data privacy and security and the
sharing
 24 
and interoperability of data, including obligations and restrictions related to health information
(such as those imposed under HIPAA); protection of consumer health data; billing and coding for
healthcare services and properly handling overpayments; debt collection; necessity and adequacy of
healthcare services; relationships with referral sources and referral recipients and other fraud and
abuse issues, such as those addressed by anti-kickback and false claims laws and patient inducement
regulations; qualification of healthcare practitioners; quality and standards of medical services and
equipment; and the practice of the professions of pharmacy and optometry.
Health-related legislation at the federal and state level may have an adverse effect on our business
or require us to modify certain aspects of our operations. For example, in the U.S., the Drug
Enforcement Administration ("DEA") and various other regulatory authorities regulate the purchase,
distribution, maintenance and dispensing of pharmaceuticals and controlled substances. We are
required to hold valid DEA and state-level licenses, meet various security and operating standards
and comply with the federal and various state-controlled substance acts and related regulations
governing the sale, dispensing, disposal and holding of controlled substances. The DEA, the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration and state regulatory authorities have broad enforcement powers, including the
ability to seize or recall products and impose significant criminal, civil and administrative
sanctions for violations of these laws and regulations. In addition, there has been recent heightened
governmental and public scrutiny of pharmaceutical product pricing, which has resulted in federal and
state legislation and regulations, executive orders and other initiatives and proposals designed to
increase transparency in pharmaceutical product pricing and reform government program reimbursement
methodologies (for example, the Inflation Reduction Act, which includes, among other matters,
policies designed to impact drug prices and reduce drug spending by the federal government). Other
health reform efforts at the federal and state levels may also impact our business or require us to
modify certain aspects of our operations. States may enact conflicting laws, mandating changes in
operations that negatively impact our ability to execute uniformly and achieve economies of scale
across states. We may not be able to predict the nature or success of reform initiatives, and the
resulting uncertainties may have an adverse effect on our business.
Additionally, through various financial service partners and our ONE fintech venture, we offer
various services such as money transfers, digital payment platforms, bill payment, money orders,
check cashing, prepaid access, co-branded credits cards, installment lending and earned wage access.
These products and services require us to comply with legal and regulatory requirements, including
those intended to help detect and prevent fraud and other illicit activity, privacy, information
security, anti-money laundering and sanctions regimes and consumer protection under U.S. state and
federal laws and regulations, as well as those of certain other countries. Failure to comply with
these laws and regulations could result in fines, sanctions, penalties and harm to our reputation.
Increased U.S. regulation of non-bank financial institutions may also result in additional
requirements and scrutiny of certain financial services we offer.
We are also governed by foreign, national and state laws and regulations of general applicability,
including laws and regulations related to competition and antitrust matters; protection of the
environment and health and safety matters, including exposure to, and the management and disposal of,
hazardous substances; food and drug safety, including drug supply chain security requirements;
consumer protection, and safety, including the availability, sale, price label accuracy,
advertisement and promotion of products we sell and the financial services we offer (including
through our digital channels, stores and clubs, as well as our ONE fintech venture); anti-money
laundering prohibitions; consumer financial protection laws; economic, trade and other sanctions
matters; licensure, including supply chain logistics licensure, certification and enrollment with
government programs; cross border data transfer; data privacy, cybersecurity and the sharing and
interoperability of data; working conditions, workplace health and safety, equal employment
opportunity, worker classification, employee benefit and other labor and employment matters; and
health and wellness related regulations for our pharmacy and optometry operations. Failure to meet
these requirements could affect the profitability of our business activities; limit our ability to
pursue business opportunities or conduct business in certain jurisdictions; require changes to
business practices or governance or alter our relationships with our customers, partners and other
third parties, including our ability to continue certain relationships in Mexico, India or other
international jurisdictions; result in increased costs related to regulatory oversight and
compliance, litigation-related settlements, judgments or expenses, restitution to customers or the
imposition of fines or monetary penalties.
Governmental and societal attention to ESG matters, including expanding mandatory and voluntary
reporting diligence, and disclosure topics such as climate change, sustainability (including with
respect to our supply chain), natural resources, waste reduction, energy, human capital and risk
oversight could change the nature, scope and complexity of matters that we are required to control,
assess and report.
Data privacy and protection laws or customer expectations relating to the collection, use, retention,
disclosure, transfer and processing of personal information continue to undergo a rapid
transformation in the U.S. and non-U.S. jurisdictions. Recently enacted state laws, such as the
California Consumer Privacy Act ("CCPA"), in a number of states that have become effective, or will
soon be effective, have created a substantially more complex regulatory regime associated with data-
handling practices. Moreover, other laws and regulations related to data-handling and privacy that
apply to our business, such as the Illinois Biometric Information Privacy Act, the European Union's
General Data Protection Regulation ("GDPR"), the United Kingdom's General Data Protection Regulation
(which implements the GDPR into U.K. law), China's Personal Information Protection Act ("PIPL"), and
similar legislation in Quebec, Canada further increase the compliance obligations of our business.
Certain of these laws have required us to modify our data processing practices and policies and to
incur substantial costs and
 25 
expenses to comply, which we anticipate will continue in the future. These and other privacy and
cybersecurity laws may carry significant potential damages and civil penalties for noncompliance. For
example, in the case of noncompliance with a material provision of the GDPR (such as non-adherence to
the core principles of processing personal data), regulators have the authority to levy a fine in an
amount that is up to the greater of €20 million or 4% of global annual turnover (i.e., revenue) in
the prior year. These administrative fines are discretionary and based, in each case, on a multi-
factored approach. Further, PIPL took effect in China in November 2021. PIPL raises the requirements
for processing personal information and requires our China business to undergo a cybersecurity
assessment and obtain approval from the Cyberspace Administration of China ("CAC") as well as consent
from the personal information owner before personal information collected in China may be transferred
to, or accessed from, outside of China. Walmart obtained CAC approval in September 2023. Fines for
PIPL violations range from approximately RMB 50 million to up to 5% of the infringing company's
previous year's revenues generated from within China. We have made changes, and we may in the future
make additional adjustments to our business practices, to comply with the personal information
protection laws and regulations in China as they evolve. Residents in jurisdictions with
comprehensive privacy laws generally have rights to access, correct and require deletion of their
personal information, opt out of certain personal information sharing and selling, receive detailed
information about how their personal information is used and may have a private right of action for
data breaches. Furthermore, our marketing and customer engagement activities are subject to
communications privacy laws such as the Telephone Consumer Protection Act. We may be subject to
penalties and other consequences for noncompliance, including being required to change some portions
of our business. Even an unsuccessful challenge by customer or regulatory authorities of our
activities could result in adverse publicity, impact our reputation and could require a costly
response from and defense by us.
The impact of new laws, regulations and policies and the related interpretations, as well as changes
in enforcement practices or regulatory scrutiny as to existing laws and regulations (including, but
not limited to, in the U.S., shifting enforcement priorities for existing antitrust, competition and
pricing laws, use and disposal of plastics, recycled plastics or other packaging materials, ESG,
consumer protection and AI technology, as well as proposed new rules and regulations) generally
cannot be predicted, and changes in applicable laws, regulations and policies and the related
interpretations and enforcement practices of existing laws and regulations may require extensive
system and operational changes, be difficult to implement, increase our operating costs, require
significant capital expenditures, adversely impact the cost or attractiveness of the products or
services we offer, or result in adverse publicity and harm our reputation. If we fail to predict or
respond adequately to changes, including by implementing strategic and operational initiatives, or do
not respond as effectively as our competitors, our business, operations and financial performance may
be adversely affected.
We acquired VIZIO Holding Corp. and its subsidiaries (collectively "VIZIO") in December 2024. As part
of its business, VIZIO collects certain consumer data, including viewing data from its opted-in
internet-connected televisions. In 2017, VIZIO stipulated to the entry of a judgment in federal
district court with the Federal Trade Commission and the New Jersey Attorney General to settle
alleged violations related to certain of its business practices (the "VIZIO Order"). The VIZIO Order
remains in effect until 2037 and requires VIZIO to comply with specified obligations related to its
collection and use of certain information collected from a VIZIO internet-connected device. These
requirements apply to certain VIZIO entities and all other persons in active concert or participation
with them. Our ownership of VIZIO and these compliance obligations are new, and if we fail to
adequately design or implement controls for these matters, we may face additional regulatory action,
penalties or monetary fines, any of which could have a substantial negative impact on our business,
operations and financial performance.
In addition, we may face audits or investigations by one or more government agencies relating to our
compliance with applicable laws and regulations. The regulatory, political and media scrutiny we
face, which may continue, amplifies these risks. To the extent a regulator or court disagrees with
our interpretation of these laws and determines that our practices are not in compliance with
applicable laws and regulations, we could be subject to civil and criminal penalties that could
adversely affect the continued operation of our businesses, including: suspension of payments from
government programs; loss of required licenses and certifications; loss of authorizations to
participate in or exclusion from government programs, including the Medicare and Medicaid programs in
the U.S.; termination from contractual relationships, including those with our drug suppliers and
third-party payers; and significant fines or monetary damages. Failure to comply with applicable
legal or regulatory requirements in the U.S. or in any of the countries in which we operate could
result in significant legal and financial exposure, damage to our reputation and have a material
adverse effect on our business operations, financial position and results of operations.
We are subject to risks related to litigation and other legal proceedings that may materially
adversely affect our results of operations, financial position and liquidity.
We operate in a highly regulated and litigious environment. We are or may be involved in legal
proceedings, including litigation, arbitration and other claims, investigations, inspections, audits,
claims, inquiries and similar actions by pharmacy, healthcare, tax, consumer protection, employment,
environmental and other governmental authorities as well as private individuals. We may also be
involved in legal proceedings brought by regulatory authorities, organizations and individuals
relating to product packaging, including that such packaging is made of plastic, is not appropriately
disposed, contains PFAS, or contains misrepresentations about its recyclability, compostability,
biodegradability or reusability. We may also have indemnification obligations for legal commitments
of certain business customers we contract with and businesses we have
 26 
divested. Legal proceedings, in general, and securities, derivative actions, class and representative
actions and multi-district litigation, in particular, can be expensive and disruptive. Some of these
suits may purport or may be determined to be class actions and/or involve parties seeking large
and/or indeterminate amounts, including punitive or exemplary damages, and may remain unresolved for
several years. For example, we are currently a defendant in a number of cases containing class,
representative or collective action allegations in which the plaintiffs have brought claims under
federal, state and local wage and hour and employment laws, as well as a number of cases containing
class-action allegations in which the plaintiffs have brought claims under federal and state
competition and consumer protection laws.
We have been responding to subpoenas, information requests and investigations from governmental
entities related to nationwide controlled substance dispensing and distribution practices involving
opioids. We are a defendant in numerous litigation proceedings related to opioids, including the
multidistrict litigation entitled In re National Prescription Opiate Litigation (MDL No. 2804)
currently pending in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Ohio, cases pending in
various state and federal courts, and a lawsuit filed against us by the U.S. Department of Justice in
the District of Delaware in 2020. We cannot predict the ultimate number of opioids-related claims
that may be filed or their outcomes and cannot reasonably estimate any loss or range of loss that may
arise from opioids-related matters.
In addition, we have been responding to subpoenas, information requests and investigations from
governmental entities regarding the independent contractor classification of drivers and payment and
operational practices with respect to our driver platform, as well as defending putative class and
representative action civil litigation relating to driver classification and defending other civil
litigation and arbitration claims in connection with the driver platform. On December 23, 2024, the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau ("CFPB") filed a lawsuit against the Company and Branch
Messenger, Inc. in the District of Minnesota alleging the Company violated the Consumer Financial
Protection Act by allegedly requiring independent contractor drivers on the Spark platform to receive
payments through a financial product offered by Branch. The CFPB seeks an injunction and unspecified
restitution, damages and civil penalties. On February 20, 2025, the Court entered an order that
indefinitely stays the case and vacates all deadlines. We cannot predict the outcome of the
investigations by the governmental entities or the civil litigation and arbitration matters. We
cannot provide any assurance as to the scope and outcome of these matters and no assurance that our
business, financial position, results of operations or cash flows will not be materially adversely
affected.
In July 2021, the Directorate of Enforcement in India issued a show cause notice to Flipkart Private
Limited and one of its subsidiaries ("Flipkart"), and to unrelated companies and individuals,
including certain current and former shareholders and directors of Flipkart. The notice requests the
recipients to show cause as to why further proceedings under India's Foreign Direct Investment rules
and regulations (the "Rules") should not be initiated against them based on alleged violations during
the period from 2009 to 2015, prior to our acquisition of a majority stake in Flipkart in 2018 (the
"Notice"), in addition to more recent requests for information from the Directorate of Enforcement to
Flipkart for periods prior and subsequent to April 2016 regarding the Rules, including the most
recent request in February 2025 (the "Requests"). The Notice is an initial stage of proceedings under
the Rules which could, depending upon the conclusions at the end of the initial stage, lead to a
hearing to consider the merits of the allegations described in the Notice. If a hearing is initiated,
whether with respect to the Notice or from further proceedings related to the Requests, and if it is
determined that violations of the Rules occurred, then the regulatory authority has the authority to
impose monetary and/or non-monetary relief, such as share ownership restrictions. We are unable to
predict whether the Notice will lead to a hearing on the merits or, if it does, the final outcome of
the resulting proceedings, as well as whether any further proceedings will arise with respect to the
Requests. We cannot reasonably estimate any loss or range of loss that may arise from these matters
and can provide no assurance as to the scope or outcome of any proceeding that might result from the
Notice or the Requests and further can provide no assurance that its business, financial position,
results of operations or cash flows will not be materially adversely affected.
On January 13, 2020, the Competition Commission of India ("CCI") ordered its Director General (the
"DG") to investigate certain matters alleging competition law violations by certain subsidiaries of
Flipkart in India and other parties. On September 13, 2024, those subsidiaries received a non-
confidential version of the DG's Investigation Report (the "Report"), alleging certain competition
law violations. CCI is not bound by the Report, and will conduct its independent analysis of the
allegations, including hearing objections from the subsidiaries and other parties before issuing its
final order in the matter, which could include monetary and non-monetary relief. CCI's final order
would also be subject to appropriate appellate proceedings. We can provide no assurance as to the
scope and outcome of this matter, cannot reasonably estimate any loss or range of loss that may
arise, and can provide no assurance that its business, financial position, results of operations or
cash flows will not be materially adversely affected.
Also, in October 2023, the main Mexican operating subsidiary of Wal-Mart de México, S.A.B. de C.V.
("Walmex") was notified of the initiation of a quasi-judicial administrative process against it for
alleged relative monopolistic practices in connection with the supply and wholesale distribution of
certain consumer goods and retail marketing practices of such consumer goods and related services. On
December 12, 2024, the Comisión Federal de Competencia Económica of México ("COFECE") issued a split
decision that Walmex's subsidiary had engaged in a single relative monopolistic practice in relation
to the negotiation of two types of contributions with its suppliers. The resolution imposed a
monetary penalty on Walmex's subsidiary and certain non-structural conduct measures. Walmex and its
business operations may continue to be closely
 27 
monitored and subject to heightened scrutiny from regulatory authorities on these matters leading to
possible negative publicity, additional litigation proceedings and reputational harm, all of which
could have a material adverse effect on our business operations, financial position and results of
operations.
We are also a defendant in litigation with the Federal Trade Commission regarding our money transfer
agent services and are also cooperating with and responding to subpoenas issued by the U.S.
Attorney's Office for the Middle District of Pennsylvania on behalf of the U.S. Department of Justice
regarding our consumer fraud prevention program and anti-money laundering compliance related to our
money transfer services, where we are an agent. We are unable to predict the outcome of the
litigation or investigations or any other related actions by governmental entities regarding these
matters and can provide no assurance as to the scope and outcome of these matters and whether our
business, financial position, results of operations or cash flows will not be materially adversely
affected.
We discuss in more detail these cases and other litigation to which we are party below under the
caption " Item 3. Legal Proceedings " and in Note 10 in the "Notes to our Consolidated Financial
Statements," which are part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our amended and restated bylaws designate the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware as the sole
and exclusive forum for certain types of actions and proceedings that may be initiated by our
shareholders, which could increase the costs for our shareholders to bring claims, discourage our
shareholders from bringing claims, or limit our shareholders' ability to obtain a favorable judicial
forum for disputes with us or our directors, officers, associates or shareholders in such capacity.
Our amended and restated bylaws designate the Delaware Court of Chancery as the exclusive forum for
certain shareholder claims, including derivative claims alleging a violation of duty by a current or
former director, officer, associate or shareholder, unless we agree otherwise in writing. This
exclusive forum provision may increase the cost for shareholders to bring claims or limit their
ability to choose a favorable forum, potentially discouraging lawsuits. Alternatively, if a court
finds this provision unenforceable, we may face higher costs resolving such matters in other
jurisdictions, which could negatively impact our business and financial results. However, this
provision does not affect the exclusive or concurrent jurisdiction of federal courts over actions
brought under the federal securities laws, including the Exchange Act, as amended, the Securities Act
of 1933, as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
Not satisfying stakeholder expectations with respect to our ESG efforts could adversely affect our
reputation or subject us to regulatory or litigation risk.
We strive to deliver shared value through our business, although stakeholder expectations continue to
evolve and are not uniform, and our diverse stakeholders expect us to make significant progress in
certain areas. We have established, and may continue to establish, various goals and initiatives on
certain matters, including with respect to climate change, waste, packaging, plastic usage and other
topics. We periodically publish information about our shared value priorities, strategies, progress
and challenges through our online ESG reporting, which is not incorporated by reference into and does
not form any part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Achievement of these aspirations and goals is
subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which are outside of our control, and we cannot guarantee
that we will achieve our goals or that our initiatives will achieve their desired results.
Consequently, it is possible that we may fail, or be perceived to have failed, in the achievement of
our ESG goals and certain customers, associates, shareholders, investors, suppliers, business
partners, government agencies and non-governmental organizations might not be satisfied with our
progress. Furthermore, federal, state and local regulatory authorities, private organizations and
individuals may challenge our approach to ESG issues, including allegations that we failed in our
efforts, should not have undertaken such efforts or that we improperly engaged with other entities in
our approach to ESG issues. These challenges could involve administrative proceedings or litigation,
including as class or mass actions. A failure or perceived failure to meet our goals or to otherwise
meet evolving and diverse stakeholder expectations could adversely affect public perception of our
business, associate morale or customer or shareholder support.
 ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS 
None.
 ITEM 1C. CYBERSECURITY 
Walmart seeks to build and maintain the trust of customers, associates, shareholders and other
stakeholders with respect to our use of technology and data. Our digital trust commitments, in line
with our Company's values of service, excellence, integrity and respect for the individual, provide a
foundation for our approach to cybersecurity.
The Board of Directors, committees of the Board of Directors and management coordinate risk oversight
and management responsibilities, and cybersecurity represents an important component of our overall
approach to enterprise risk management. In general, we seek to address cybersecurity risks through a
cross-functional approachfocused on protecting business operations and preserving the
confidentiality, integrity and availability of information by identifying, preventing and mitigating
cybersecurity threats and effectively responding to cybersecurity incidents when they occur.
 28 
Board of Directors' oversight of risks from cybersecurity threats
Our Board of Directors, which has primary responsibility for overseeing risk management, has
delegated risk management oversight responsibility for information systems, information security,
data privacy and cybersecurity to the Audit Committee.Several of our Board members, including certain
members of our Audit Committee, have backgrounds or professional experience in risk management,
digital platforms, information technology or cybersecurity.
The Audit Committee receives periodic updates from our Chief Information Security Officer ("CISO"),
Chief Technology Officer ("CTO") and other members of management on risks related to information
systems, information security, data privacy and cybersecurity. Specific topics may include updates to
our company's approach to cybersecurity risk management; recent developments; key initiatives; the
threat landscape; trends; and the results of certain assessments and testing. The Boardof Directors
receives regular reports from the Audit Committee chair on these and other risk-related matters as
deemed necessary. Our CISO or other members of management provide information to the Audit Committee
pursuant to risk-based escalation protocols for cybersecurity incidents that exceed established
reporting thresholds.
Management's role in assessing and managing material risks from cybersecurity threats
Our CISOleads Walmart's Information Security organization and has responsibility for overseeing our
Company's cybersecurity program.To operationalize our program, we deploy multidisciplinary teams,
including cybersecurity personnel and professionals, to address cybersecurity threats and respond to
cybersecurity incidents, including for those recently acquired and non-wholly owned subsidiaries
whose systems have not been fully integrated into Walmart's networks. Through ongoing engagement with
these teams and certain third-party service providers, our CISO monitors the prevention, detection,
mitigation and remediation of cybersecurity threats and incidents and reports cybersecurity incidents
that reach established thresholds to senior management and the Audit Committee, which are also
analyzed for external reporting requirements.
Our CISO has been a Walmart associate for over 30 years, has served in various roles in information
technology and information security at Walmart for more than 20 years, and has received industry-
recognized information security certifications. Our CTO, to whom the CISO reports, has served as
Walmart's CTO since 2019 and prior to that had experience managing technology and other risks at
several other large public companies.
 Risk Management and Strategy 
Our cybersecurity program is informed by various industry frameworks including the National Institute
of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Framework (NIST-CSF), which are reflected in our related
policies, standards, processes and practices. We may implement changes to our cybersecurity program
when deemed appropriate based on updates to laws or industry standards among other things. We have
multiple layers of security designed to detect and prevent cybersecurity events, as well as dedicated
teams of cybersecurity personnel and professionals, which assist our CISO in helping to assess,
identify, monitor, detect and manage cybersecurity risks, threats, vulnerabilities and incidents. We
collaborate with public and private entities and industry groups and engage third-party service
providers to expand the capabilities and capacity of our cybersecurity program when deemed
appropriate. Certain key components of our cybersecurity program include the following:
Protecting our technology and information systems: When we implement significant changes to our
technologies or information systems, we conduct risk-based security and privacy impact assessments
and deploy technical safeguards that are designed to reasonably protect our technology and
information systems from cybersecurity threats. We actively monitor and proactively research
potential cybersecurity threats to our technologies and information systems. We use what we learn to
evolve our security controls over time to mitigate risks posed by such threats.
Incident response and recovery planning: We maintain incident response and recovery plans that
address our response to cybersecurity incidents, including incidents that we become aware of at third
parties that support our operations. These plans guide how we evaluate and assign incident severity
levels and reporting thresholds; escalate and engage incident response teams; and manage and mitigate
the related risks.
Third-party risk management: We maintain a risk-based approach to identifying and managing
cybersecurity threats presented to Walmart by third-party systems that support our operations, as
well as third-party users of our data and systems, including vendors, service providers and
subcontractors.
Training and awareness: We provide recurring information security training (which includes
cybersecurity training) to our associates and certain third parties based on access, risk, roles,
policies, standards and behaviors.
Assessments and testing: We engage in periodic assessment and testing of our policies, standards,
processes and practices that are designed to address cybersecurity threats. These efforts include
tabletop exercises, threat modeling, vulnerability testing and other exercises focused on evaluating
the effectiveness of our cybersecurity measures and planning. We regularly engage assessors,
consultants, auditors or other third parties to assist with our assessments and testing.Where
appropriate we adjust our cybersecurity policies, standards, processes and practices accordingly
based on internal and external assessment and testing results.
 29 
Certain of Walmart's systems and those of our third-party service providers have experienced
cybersecurity incidents and threats. Based on the information available as of the date of this Annual
Report on Form 10-K, we are not aware of any risks from cybersecurity threats, including as a result
of any cybersecurity incidents, which have materially affected us or are reasonably likely to
materially affect us, including our business strategy, results of operations, or financial
condition.Despite our security measures, however, there can be no assurance that we, or the third
parties with which we interact, will not experience a cybersecurity incident in the future that will
materially affect us. Additional information about cybersecurity risks we face is discussed in " Item
1A. Risk Factors ," which should be read in conjunction with the information above.
 ITEM 2. PROPERTIES 
As of January 31, 2025 (1) , retail unit counts for Walmart U.S., Sam's Club U.S. and Walmart
International are summarized as follows:
 Total Square feet(2) 
 Walmart U.S. 
 Supercenters 3,559 632,577 
 Discount Stores 355 37,127 
 Neighborhood Markets and other small 691 28,245 
 formats 
 Walmart U.S. Total 4,605 697,949 
 Sam's Club U.S. 600 80,351 
 U.S. Total 5,205 778,300 
 Walmart International 
 Retail 5,230 235,279 
 Wholesale 336 39,141 
 Walmart International Total 5,566 274,420 
 Total Company 10,771 1,052,720 
(1) Walmart International unit counts, with the exception of Canada, are as of December 31, 2024, to
correspond with the balance sheet date of the related geographic market. Canada unit counts are as of
January 31, 2025.
(2) Square feet reported in thousands.
 Owned and Leased Properties 
The following table provides further details of our retail units and distribution facilities,
including return facilities and dedicated eCommerce fulfillment centers, as of January 31, 2025 (1) :
 Owned Leased(2) Total 
 Retail Units 
 Walmart U.S. retail units 4,039 566 4,605 
 Sam's Club U.S. retail units 513 87 600 
 Walmart International retail units 1,487 4,079 5,566 
 Total retail units 6,039 4,732 10,771 
 Distribution Facilities 
 Walmart U.S. distribution facilities 115 49 164 
 Sam's Club U.S. distribution facilities 10 21 31 
 Walmart International distribution 23 161 184 
 facilities 
 Total distribution facilities 148 231 379 
(1) Walmart International properties, with the exception of Canada, are as of December 31, 2024, to
correspond with the balance sheet date of the related geographic market. Canada unit counts are as of
January 31, 2025.
(2) Includes distribution facilities which are third-party owned and operated.
We own office facilities in Bentonville, Arkansas, that serve as our principal office and own and
lease office facilities throughout the U.S. and internationally for operations as well as for field
and market management. The land on which our stores are located is either owned or leased by the
Company. We use independent contractors to construct our buildings. All store leases provide for
annual rentals, some of which escalate during the original lease or provide for additional rent based
on sales volume. Substantially all of the Company's store and club leases have renewal options, some
of which include rent escalation clauses. For further information on our distribution centers, see
the caption "Distribution" provided for each of our segments under " Item 1. Business ."
 30 
 ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 
I. SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION: The Company is involved in legal proceedings arising in the normal
course of its business, including litigation, arbitration and other claims, and investigations,
inspections, subpoenas, audits, claims, inquiries and similar actions by governmental authorities. We
discuss certain legal proceedings in Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in "
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data ," which is captioned "Contingencies," under the
sub-caption "Legal Proceedings." We refer you to that discussion for important information concerning
those legal proceedings, including the basis for such actions and, where known, the relief sought. We
provide the following additional information concerning those legal proceedings, including the name
of the lawsuit, the court in which the lawsuit is pending, and the date on which the petition
commencing the lawsuit or appeal was filed, in addition to disclosure of certain other legal matters.
Opioid-Related Litigation: In re National Prescription Opiate Litigation (MDL No. 2804) (the "MDL")
is pending in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Ohio and includes approximately
250 cases with claims against the Company as of March 10, 2025. In addition, there are more than 25
other opioid-related cases against the Company and its subsidiaries pending in U.S. state and federal
courts and Canadian courts as of March 10, 2025. The non-MDL case citations are listed on Exhibit
99.1 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
DOJ Opioid Civil Litigation: United States of America v. Walmart Inc., et al., USDC, Dist. of DE,
12/22/20.
Settlement of Certain Opioid-Related Matters: As described in more detail in Note 10 to our
Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company accrued a liability of approximately $3.3 billion in
fiscal year 2023 for certain opioid-related settlements. As of January 31, 2025, all of the accrued
liability has been paid. Certain eligible political subdivisions and federally recognized Native
American tribes have until July 15, 2025 and February 24, 2026, respectively, to join the settlement.
Opioid-Related Derivative Lawsuits: Abt v. Alvarez et al. , USDC, Dist. of DE, 2/9/21; Nguyen v.
McMillon et al., USDC, Dist. of DE, 4/16/21; Ontario Provincial Council of Carpenters' Pension Trust
Fund et al. v. Walton et al., DE Court of Chancery, 9/27/21.
Opioid-Related Securities Class Actions: Stanton v. Walmart Inc. et al. , USDC, Dist. of DE, 1/20/21
and Martin v. Walmart Inc. et al., USDC , Dist. of DE, 3/5/21, consolidated into In re Walmart Inc.
Securities Litigation , USDC, Dist. of DE, 5/11/21; In re Walmart Inc. Securities Litigation, USCCA,
3d Cir., 4/29/24.
False Claims Act Litigation: United States of America ex rel. James Marcilla and Isela Chavez , USDC,
Dist. of N.M., 8/23/19, transferred to USDC Dist. of DE 7/25/24.
ASDA Equal Value Claims: Ms S Brierley & Others v. ASDA Stores Ltd (2406372/2008 & Others –
Manchester Employment Tribunal); Abbas & Others v Asda Stores limited (KB-2022-003243); and Abusubih
& Others v Asda Stores limited (KB-2022-003240).
Money Transfer Agent Services Litigation: Federal Trade Commission v. Walmart Inc. , USDC, N. Dist.
Of Ill, 6/28/22; Federal Trade Commission v. Walmart Inc. , USCCA, 7th Cir., 10/28/24.
Driver Platform Matter: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau v. Walmart Inc., et al. , USDC D. of
Minn., 12/23/24.
Mexico Antitrust Matter: Comisión Federal de Competencia Económica of México, Investigative Authority
v. Nueva Wal-Mart de México, S.de R.L. de C.V. (Docket IO-002-2020, consolidated with Docket
DE-026-2020), Mexico, 10/6/23.
India Antitrust Matter: Competition Commission of India, Case No. 40 of 2019, order initiating
investigation 1/13/20.
II. ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS: Item 103 of SEC Regulation S-K requires disclosure of certain
environmental matters when a governmental authority is a party to the proceedings and such
proceedings involve potential monetary sanctions that the Company reasonably believes will exceed an
applied threshold not to exceed $1 million.
In October 2023, the Company received a Finding of Violation from the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (the "EPA") alleging violations of the Clean Air Act in connection with the Company's
refrigeration leak detection and repair program at certain of its facilities. The Company is
evaluating the findings and cooperating with the EPA in its investigation. The EPA may seek to impose
monetary and non-monetary penalties for the alleged violations of the Clean Air Act. Due to the fact
that this process is in an early stage, the Company is unable to predict the final outcome of this
matter. Although the Company does not believe this matter will have a material adverse effect on its
business, financial position, results of operations, or cash flows, the Company can provide no
assurance that its business, financial position, results of operations or cash flows will not be
materially adversely affected.
 ITEM 4. MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES 
Not applicable.
 31