Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K and other reports, statements, and information that Walmart Inc.
(which individually or together with its subsidiaries, as the context otherwise requires, is referred
to as "we," "Walmart" or the "Company") has filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange
Commission ("SEC") or may file with or furnish to the SEC in the future, and prior or future public
announcements and presentations that we or our management have made or may make, include or may
include, or incorporate or may incorporate by reference, statements that may be deemed to be
"forward-looking statements" within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended (the "Act"), that are intended to enjoy the protection of the safe harbor for
forward-looking statements provided by the Act as well as protections afforded by other federal
securities laws.
Nature of Forward-Looking Statements
Such forward-looking statements are not statements of historical facts, but instead express our
estimates or expectations for our consolidated, or one of our segment's, economic performance or
results of operations for future periods or as of future dates or events or developments that may
occur in the future or discuss our plans, objectives or goals. These forward-looking statements may
relate to:
• macroeconomic, geopolitical, and business conditions, trends and events around the world and in the
markets in which we operate, including inflation or deflation, generally and in certain product
categories, the impact of supply chain challenges, and recessionary pressures;
• the growth of our business or change in our competitive position in the future or in or over
particular periods, both generally and with respect to particular markets, segments or lines of
business, including, but not limited to, advertising, fulfillment, healthcare, and financial
services;
• the amount, number, growth, increase, reduction or decrease in or over certain periods, of or in
certain financial items or measures or operating measures, including our earnings per share, net
sales, comparable store and club sales, our eCommerce sales, liabilities, expenses of certain
categories, expense leverage, operating income, returns, capital and operating investments or
expenditures of particular types and new store and club openings, inventory levels and associated
costs, product mix and demand for certain merchandise, consumer confidence, disposable income, credit
availability, spending levels, shopping patterns and debt levels;
• our increasing investments in eCommerce, technology, automation, supply chain, new stores and clubs
as well as remodels and other omni-channel customer initiatives, such as same day pickup and
delivery;
• investments and capital expenditures we will make and how certain of those investments and capital
expenditures are expected to be financed;
• our workforce strategy, including the availability of necessary personnel to staff our stores,
clubs and other facilities and the potential impact of changes to the costs of labor;
• volatility in currency exchange rates affecting our consolidated, or one or more of our segments'
results of operations;
• the Company continuing to provide returns to shareholders through share repurchases and dividends,
the use of share repurchase authorization over a certain period or the source of funding of a certain
portion of our share repurchases;
• our sources of liquidity, including our cash, continuing to be adequate or sufficient to fund our
operations, finance our global investment and expansion activities, pay dividends and fund share
repurchases;
• cash flows from operations, our current cash position and access to capital markets or credit will
continue to be sufficient to meet our anticipated operating cash needs;
• the reclassification of amounts related to our derivatives;
• our effective tax rate for certain periods and the realization of certain net deferred tax assets
and the effects of resolutions of tax-related matters;
• the adoption or creation of new, and modification of existing, governmental policies, programs,
initiatives and actions in the markets in which we operate and elsewhere and actions with respect to
such policies, programs and initiatives (including, but not limited to, changes in the enforcement
priorities of regulatory authorities);
 4 
• the effect of adverse decisions in, or settlement of, litigation or other proceedings or
investigations to which we are subject;
• the effect on the Company's results of operations or financial position of the Company's adoption
of certain new, or amendments to existing, accounting standards; or
• our commitments, intentions, plans or goals related to environmental, social, and governance
("ESG") priorities, including, but not limited to, the sustainability of our environment and supply
chains, the promotion of economic opportunity or other societal initiatives.
Our forward-looking statements may also include statements of our strategies, plans and objectives
for our operations, including areas of future focus in our operations, and the assumptions underlying
any of the forward-looking statements we make. The forward-looking statements we make can typically
be identified by the use therein of words and phrases such as "aim," "anticipate," "believe," "could
be," "could increase," "could occur," "could result," "continue," "estimate," "expansion," "expect,"
"expectation," "expected to be," "focus," "forecast," "goal," "grow," "guidance," "intend," "invest,"
"is expected," "may continue," "may fluctuate," "may grow," "may impact," "may result," "objective,"
"plan," "priority," "project," "strategy," "to be," "we'll," "we will," "will add," "will allow,"
"will be," "will benefit," "will change," "will come in at," "will continue," "will decrease," "will
grow," "will have," "will impact," "will include," "will increase," "will open," "will remain," "will
result," "will stay," "will strengthen," "would be," "would decrease" and "would increase,"
variations of such words or phrases, other phrases commencing with the word "will" or similar words
and phrases denoting anticipated or expected occurrences or results.
The forward-looking statements that we make or that are made by others on our behalf are based on our
knowledge of our business and our operating environment and assumptions that we believe to be or will
believe to be reasonable when such forward-looking statements were or are made. As a consequence of
the factors described above, the other risks, uncertainties and factors we disclose below and in the
other reports as mentioned above, other risks not known to us at this time, changes in facts,
assumptions not being realized or other circumstances, our actual results may differ materially from
those discussed in or implied or contemplated by our forward-looking statements. Consequently, this
cautionary statement qualifies all forward-looking statements we make or that are made on our behalf,
including those made herein and incorporated by reference herein. We cannot assure you that the
results or developments expected or anticipated by us will be realized or, even if substantially
realized, that those results or developments will result in the expected consequences for us or
affect us, our business, our operations or our operating results in the manner or to the extent we
expect. We caution readers not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements, which
speak only as of their dates. We undertake no obligation to revise or update any of the forward-
looking statements to reflect subsequent events or circumstances except to the extent required by
applicable law.
 5 
 ITEM 1. BUSINESS 
 General 
Walmart Inc. ("Walmart," the "Company" or "we") is a people-led, technology-powered omni-channel
retailer dedicated to help people around the world save money and live better – anytime and anywhere
– by providing the opportunity to shop in both retail stores and through eCommerce, and to access our
other service offerings. Through innovation, we strive to continuously improve a customer-centric
experience that seamlessly integrates our eCommerce and retail stores in an omni-channel offering
that saves time for our customers. Each week, we serve approximately 240 million customers who visit
more than 10,500 stores and numerous eCommerce websites in 20 countries.
Our strategy is to make every day easier for busy families, operate with discipline, sharpen our
culture and become more digital, and make trust a competitive advantage. Making life easier for busy
families includes our commitment to price leadership, which has been and will remain a cornerstone of
our business, as well as increasing convenience to save our customers time. By leading on price, we
earn the trust of our customers every day by providing a broad assortment of quality merchandise and
services at everyday low prices ("EDLP"). EDLP is our pricing philosophy under which we price items
at a low price every day so our customers trust that our prices will not change under frequent
promotional activity. Everyday low cost ("EDLC") is our commitment to control expenses so our cost
savings can be passed along to our customers.
Our operations comprise three reportable segments: Walmart U.S., Walmart International and Sam's
Club. Our fiscal year ends on January 31 for our United States ("U.S.") and Canadian operations. We
consolidate all other operations generally using a one-month lag and on a calendar year basis. Our
discussion is as of and for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2023 ("fiscal 2023"), January 31, 2022
("fiscal 2022") and January 31, 2021 ("fiscal 2021"). During fiscal 2023, we generated total revenues
of $611.3 billion, which was comprised primarily of net sales of $605.9 billion.
We maintain our principal offices in Bentonville, Arkansas. Our common stock trades on the New York
Stock Exchange under the symbol "WMT."
 The Development of Our Company 
The businesses conducted by our founders began in 1945 when Sam M. Walton opened a franchise Ben
Franklin variety store in Newport, Arkansas. In 1946, his brother, James L. Walton, opened a similar
store in Versailles, Missouri. Until 1962, our founders' business was devoted entirely to the
operation of variety stores. In 1983, we opened our first Sam's Club, and in 1988, we opened our
first supercenter. In 1998, we opened our first Walmart Neighborhood Market. In 1991, we began our
first international initiative when we entered into a joint venture in Mexico and, as of January 31,
2023, our Walmart International segment conducted business in 19 countries.
In 2000, we began our first eCommerce initiative by creating both walmart.com and samsclub.com. Since
then, our eCommerce presence has continued to grow. In 2007, leveraging our physical stores,
walmart.com launched its Site to Store service, enabling customers to make a purchase online and pick
up merchandise in stores. To date, we now have over 8,100 pickup and approximately 7,000 delivery
locations globally. In recent years, we have heavily invested in omni-channel and eCommerce
innovation, which has enabled us to leverage technology, talent and expertise, incubate digitally-
native brands, and expand our assortment and service offerings. We have also continued to enhance our
eCommerce initiatives, such as with our acquisition of a majority stake in Flipkart Private Limited
("Flipkart"), which is our ecosystem in India that includes eCommerce platforms of Flipkart and
Myntra, as well as with our majority stake in PhonePe Private Limited ("PhonePe"), a digital
transaction platform.
We are enhancing our ecosystem with our omni-channel capabilities, stores, service offerings,
eCommerce websites and marketplaces as well as our supply chain combined with approximately 2.1
million associates as of January 31, 2023 to better serve our customers. Together, we believe these
elements produce a flywheel effect which creates relationships where customers view Walmart as their
primary destination. In the U.S., our Walmart+ membership incorporates several service offerings
which provide enhanced omni-channel shopping experiences and benefits for members. As we execute on
our strategy globally, our flywheel is accelerating through offerings such as our Walmart Connect
advertising business, Walmart Fulfillment Services, providing access to quality, affordable
healthcare via Walmart Health and Flipkart Health+, and our financial services businesses. These
offerings represent mutually reinforcing pieces of our flywheel centered around our customers around
the world who are increasingly seeking convenience.
 6 
 Information About Our Segments 
We are engaged in global operations of retail, wholesale and other units, as well as eCommerce,
located throughout the U.S., Africa, Canada, Central America, Chile, China, India and Mexico. We also
previously operated in Argentina prior to the sale of Walmart Argentina in fiscal 2021 and operated
in the United Kingdom and Japan prior to the sale of those operations in the first quarter of fiscal
2022. Refer to Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information on these
divestitures. Our operations are conducted in three reportable segments: Walmart U.S., Walmart
International and Sam's Club, which are further described below. Each segment contributes to the
Company's operating results differently. However, each has generally maintained a consistent
contribution rate to the Company's net sales in recent years other than minor changes to the
contribution rate for the Walmart International segment due to the exit of certain markets and
fluctuations in currency exchange rates. Additional information on our operating segments and
geographic information is contained in Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
 Walmart U.S. Segment 
Walmart U.S. is our largest segment and operates in the U.S., including in all 50 states, Washington
D.C. and Puerto Rico. Walmart U.S. is a mass merchandiser of consumer products, operating under the
"Walmart" and "Walmart Neighborhood Market" brands, as well as walmart.com and other eCommerce
brands. Walmart U.S. had net sales of $420.6 billion for fiscal 2023, representing 69% of our fiscal
2023 consolidated net sales, and had net sales of $393.2 billion and $370.0 billion for fiscal 2022
and 2021, respectively. Of our three segments, Walmart U.S. has historically had the highest gross
profit as a percentage of net sales ("gross profit rate"). In addition, Walmart U.S. has historically
contributed the greatest amount to the Company's net sales and operating income.
Omni-channel. Walmart U.S. provides an omni-channel experience to customers, integrating retail
stores and eCommerce, through services such as pickup and delivery, in-home delivery, ship-from-
store, and digital pharmacy fulfillment options. As of January 31, 2023, we had more tha n 4,600
pickup locations and more than 3,900 same-day delivery locations. Our Walmart+ membership offering
provides enhanced omni-channel shopping benefits including unlimited free shipping on eligible items
with no order minimum, unlimited delivery from store, fuel discounts, access to Paramount+ streaming
service, and mobile scan & go for a streamlined in-store shopping experience. We have several
eCommerce websites, the largest of which is walmart.com. We define eCommerce sales as sales initiated
by customers digitally and fulfilled by a number of methods including our dedicated eCommerce
fulfillment centers and leveraging our stores, as well as certain other business offerings that are
part of our flywheel strategy, such as our Walmart Connect advertising business. The following table
provides the approximate size of our retail stores as of January 31, 2023:
 Minimum Square Feet Maximum Square Feet Average Square Feet 
 Supercenters (general 
 merchandise and 69,000 260,000 178,000 
 grocery) 
 Discount stores (general 
 merchandise and 30,000 206,000 105,000 
 limited grocery) 
 Neighborhood 28,000 65,000 42,000 
 markets(1)(grocery) 
(1) Excludes other small formats.
Merchandise. Walmart U.S. does business primarily in three strategic merchandise units, listed below:
• Grocery consists of a full line of grocery items, including dry grocery, snacks, dairy, meat,
produce, deli & bakery, frozen foods, alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages, as well as consumables
such as health and beauty aids, pet supplies, household chemicals, paper goods and baby products;
• General merchandise includes:
◦ Entertainment (e.g., electronics, toys, seasonal merchandise, wireless, video games, movies, music
and books);
◦ Hardlines (e.g., automotive, hardware and paint, sporting goods, outdoor living and stationery);
◦ Apparel (e.g., apparel for men, women, girls, boys and infants, as well as shoes, jewelry and
accessories); and
◦ Home (e.g., housewares and small appliances, bed & bath, furniture and home organization, home
furnishings, home decor, fabrics and crafts).
• Health and wellness includes pharmacy, over-the-counter drugs and other medical products, optical
services and other clinical services.
Other categories in the Walmart U.S. business include an in-house advertising offering via Walmart
Connect, supply chain and fulfillment capabilities to online marketplace sellers via Walmart
Fulfillment Services, and newer initiatives such as B2B last mile delivery services via Walmart
GoLocal, and a suite of data products for merchants and suppliers via Walmart Luminate. Additional
service offerings include fuel, financial services and related products (including through our
digital channels, stores and our fintech venture, ONE), such as money orders, prepaid access, money
transfers, check cashing, bill payment, and certain types of installment lending.
 7 
Brand name merchandise represents a significant portion of the merchandise sold in Walmart U.S. We
also market lines of merchandise under our private brands, including brands such as: "Allswell,"
"Athletic Works," "Eloquii Elements," "Equate," "Free Assembly," "Freshness Guaranteed," "George,"
"Great Value," "Holiday Time," "Hyper Tough," "Mainstays," "Marketside," "No Boundaries," "onn.,"
"Ozark Trail," "Parent's Choice," "Sam's Choice," "Scoop," "Spring Valley," "Time and Tru," "Way to
Celebrate" and "Wonder Nation." The Company also markets lines of merchandise under licensed brands,
some of which include: "Avia," "Love & Sports," "Better Homes & Gardens," "Pioneer Woman" and "Sofia
Jeans by Sofia Vergara."
Periodically, revisions are made to the categorization of the components comprising our strategic
merchandise units. When revisions are made, the previous periods' presentation is adjusted to
maintain comparability.
Operations. Walmart U.S. is available to customers through supercenters, discount stores and
neighborhood markets, as well as online or through the mobile application 24 hours a day. Consistent
with its strategy, Walmart U.S. continues to develop technology tools and services to better serve
customers and help stores operate more efficiently, such as pickup and delivery, Walmart+, ship-from-
store and other initiatives which provide convenient and seamless omni-channel shopping experiences.
Seasonal Aspects of Operations. Walmart U.S.'s business is seasonal to a certain extent due to
calendar events and national and religious holidays, as well as different weather patterns.
Historically, its highest sales volume has occurred in the fiscal quarter ending January 31.
Competition. Walmart U.S. competes with brick and mortar, eCommerce, and omni-channel retailers
operating discount, department, retail and wholesale grocers, drug, dollar, variety and specialty
stores, supermarkets, hypermarkets and supercenter-type stores, social commerce platforms, as well as
companies that offer services in digital advertising, fulfillment and delivery services, health and
wellness, and financial services. Each of these landscapes is highly competitive and rapidly
evolving, and new business models and the entry of new, well-funded competitors continue to intensify
this competition. Some of our competitors have longer histories in these lines of business, more
customers, and greater brand recognition. They may be able to obtain more favorable terms from
suppliers and business partners and to devote greater resources to the development of these
businesses. In addition, for eCommerce and other internet-based businesses, newer or smaller
businesses may be better able to innovate and compete with us.
Our ability to develop and operate units at the right locations and to deliver a customer-centric
omni-channel experience largely determines our competitive position within the retail industry. We
compete in a variety of ways, including the prices at which we sell our merchandise, merchandise and
selection availability, services offered to customers, location, store hours, in-store amenities, the
shopping convenience and overall shopping experience we offer, the attractiveness and ease of use of
our digital platforms, cost and speed of and options for delivery to customers of merchandise
purchased through our digital platforms or through our omni-channel integration of our physical and
digital operations. We employ many strategies and programs designed to meet competitive pressures
within our industry. These strategies include the following:
• EDLP: our pricing philosophy under which we price items at everyday low prices so our customers
trust that our prices will not change under frequent promotional activity;
• EDLC: everyday low cost is our commitment to control expenses so our cost savings can be passed
along to our customers;
• Omni-channel offerings such as pickup and delivery and our Walmart+ membership offering, all of
which enhance convenience and seek to serve customers in the ways they want to be served; and
• Expanding our flywheel and the products and services we offer in areas such as digital advertising,
fulfillment services, health and wellness, and financial services to provide our customers a broader
set of offerings to meet expanding needs.
Distribution. We continue to invest in supply chain automation and utilize a total of 163
distribution facilities which are located strategically throughout the U.S. For fiscal 2023, the
majority of Walmart U.S.'s purchases of store merchandise were shipped through these facilities,
while most of the remaining store merchandise we purchased was shipped directly from suppliers.
General merchandise and dry grocery merchandise is transported primarily through the segment's
private truck fleet; however, we contract with common carriers to transport the majority of our
perishable grocery merchandise. We ship merchandise purchased by customers on our eCommerce platforms
by a number of methods from multiple locations including from our 34 dedicated eCommerce fulfillment
centers, as well as leveraging our ability to ship or deliver directly from more tha n 3,900 s tores.
 8 
 Walmart International Segment 
Walmart International is our second largest segment and operated in 19 countries outside of the U.S.
as of January 31, 2023. Walmart International operates through our wholly-owned subsidiaries in
Canada, Chile, China, and Africa (which includes Botswana, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique,
Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, and Zambia), and our majority-owned subsidiaries in India, as well
as Mexico and Central America (which includes Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and
Nicaragua). Walmart International previously operated in Argentina prior to the sale of Walmart
Argentina in fiscal 2021 and operated in the United Kingdom and Japan prior to the sale of those
operations in the first quarter of fiscal 2022. Refer to Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial
Statements for discussion of recent divestitures.
Walmart International includes numerous formats divided into two major categories: retail and
wholesale. These categories consist of many formats, including: supercenters, supermarkets,
hypermarkets, warehouse clubs (including Sam's Clubs) and cash & carry, as well as eCommerce through
walmart.com.mx, walmart.ca, flipkart.com, walmart.cn and other sites. Walmart International had net
sales of $101.0 billion for fiscal 2023, representing 17% of our fiscal 2023 consolidated net sales,
and had net sales of $101.0 billion and $121.4 billion for fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. The
gross profit rate is lower than that of Walmart U.S. primarily because of its format mix.
Walmart International's strategy is to create strong local businesses powered by Walmart which means
being locally relevant and customer-focused in each of the markets it operates. We are being
deliberate about where and how we choose to operate and continue to re-shape the portfolio to best
enable long-term, sustainable and profitable growth. As such, we have taken certain strategic actions
to strengthen our Walmart International portfolio for the long-term, which include the following
highlights over the last three years:
• Divested of Walmart Argentina in November 2020.
• Divested of Asda Group Limited ("Asda"), our retail operations in the U.K., in February 2021.
• Divested of a majority stake in Seiyu, our retail operations in Japan, in March 2021.
• Bought out the noncontrolling interest shareholders of our Massmart subsidiary in November 2022 and
exited operations in certain countries in Africa in December 2022.
• Increased our ownership in PhonePe, our digital transaction platform in India, as part of the
separation from Flipkart in December 2022.
Omni-channel. Walmart International provides an omni-channel experience to customers, integrating
retail stores and eCommerce, such as through pickup and delivery services in most of our markets and
our marketplaces such as Flipkart in India. Our financial services offerings continue to expand with
our digital transaction platform anchored in payments at PhonePe in India. We have expanded our
marketplace in Mexico and Canada, which unlocks fulfillment and advertising services, and in China,
our partnerships with JD.com and JD Daojia continue to drive ecommerce growth.
Generally, retail units' selling areas range in size from 1,400 square feet to 186,000 square feet.
Our wholesale stores' selling areas generally range in size from 24,000 square feet to 158,000 square
feet. As of January 31, 2023, Walmart International had over 2,900 pickup and approximately 2,500
delivery locations.
Merchandise. The merchandising strategy for Walmart International is similar to that of our
operations in the U.S. in terms of the breadth and scope of merchandise offered for sale. While brand
name merchandise accounts for a majority of our sales, we have both leveraged U.S. private brands and
developed market specific private brands to serve our customers with high quality, low priced items.
Along with the private brands we market globally, such as "Equate," "George," "Great Value," "Holiday
Time," "Mainstays," "Marketside" and "Parent's Choice," our international markets have developed
market specific brands including "Aurrera," "Lider," and "PhonePe." In addition, we have developed
and continue to grow our relationships with regional and local suppliers in each market to ensure
reliable sources of quality merchandise that is equal to national brands at low prices.
Consistent with its strategy, Walmart International continues to build mutually reinforcing
businesses in areas such as advertising, marketplace and fulfillment services, healthcare and
financial services. Our businesses in Mexico and Canada, for example, offer prepaid cards and money
transfers, and our PhonePe business in India continues to grow, providing a platform that offers
mobile and bill payment, person-to-person (P2P) payment, investment and insurance solutions,
financial services and advertising. In Mexico, we also offer a value-based internet and telephone
service allowing customers to enjoy digital connectivity, and in India we launched Flipkart Health+
enabling us to increase access to affordable care in that country. Combined, these offerings did not
represent a significant portion of annual segment revenues.
Operations. The hours of operation for operating units in Walmart International vary by country and
by individual markets within countries, depending upon local and national ordinances governing hours
of operation. Consistent with its strategy, Walmart International continues to develop technology
tools and services to better serve customers and help its various formats operate more efficiently,
as well as to provide convenient and seamless omni-channel shopping experiences.
 9 
Seasonal Aspects of Operations. Walmart International's business is seasonal to a certain extent.
Historically, its highest sales volume has occurred in the fourth quarter of our fiscal year. The
seasonality of the business varies by country due to different national and religious holidays,
festivals and customs, as well as different weather patterns.
Competition. Walmart International competes with brick and mortar, eCommerce, and omni-channel
retailers who operate department, drug, discount, variety and specialty stores, supermarkets,
hypermarkets and supercenter-type stores, wholesale clubs, home-improvement stores, specialty
electronics stores, cash & carry operations and convenience stores, and eCommerce retailers, as well
as companies that offer services in digital advertising, fulfillment services, health and wellness,
and financial services. Our ability to develop and operate units at the right locations and to
deliver a customer-centric omni-channel experience largely determines our competitive position within
the retail industry. We believe price leadership is a critical part of our business model and we
continue to focus on moving our markets towards an EDLP approach. Additionally, our ability to
operate food departments effectively has a significant impact on our competitive position in the
markets where we operate. Each of these landscapes is highly competitive and rapidly evolving, and
new business models and the entry of new, well-funded competitors continue to intensify this
competition. Some of our competitors have longer histories in these lines of business, more
customers, and greater brand recognition. They may be able to obtain more favorable terms from
suppliers and business partners and to devote greater resources to the development of these
businesses. In addition, for eCommerce and other internet-based businesses, newer or smaller
businesses may be better able to innovate and compete with us.
Distribution. We utilize a total of 188 distribution facilities located in Canada, Central America,
Chile, China, India, Mexico and South Africa. Through these facilities, we process and distribute
both imported and domestic products to the operating units of the Walmart International segment.
During fiscal 2023, the majority of Walmart International's purchases passed through these
distribution facilities. Suppliers ship the remainder of Walmart International's purchases directly
to our stores in the various markets in which we operate. Across the segment, we have efficient
networks connecting physical stores and distribution and fulfillment centers which facilitate the
movement of goods to where our customers live. We ship merchandise purchased by customers on our
eCommerce platforms by a number of methods from multiple locations including from our 100 dedicated
eCommerce fulfillment centers, more than 3,600 eCommerce sort centers and last-mile delivery
facilities in India, as well as our physical retail stores.
 Sam's Club Segment 
Sam's Club operates in 44 states in the U.S. and in Puerto Rico. Sam's Club is a membership-only
warehouse club that also operates samsclub.com. Sam's Club had net sales of $84.3 billion for fiscal
2023, representing 14% of our consolidated fiscal 2023 net sales, and had net sales of $73.6 billion
and $63.9 billion for fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. As a membership-only warehouse club,
membership income is a significant component of the segment's operating income. Sam's Club operates
with a lower gross profit rate and lower operating expenses as a percentage of net sales than our
other segments.
Membership. The following two options are available to members:
 Plus Membership Club Membership 
 Annual Membership Fee $110 $50 
 Number of Add-on Memberships ($45 each) Up to 16 Up to 8 
All memberships include a spouse/household card at no additional cost. Plus Members are also eligible
for free shipping on the majority of merchandise, with no minimum order size, and receive discounts
on prescriptions and glasses. Beginning in fiscal 2023, Sam's Club launched a single loyalty rewards
currency called Sam's Cash which merges and replaces existing Cash Rewards for Plus members and Cash
Back for Sam's Club Mastercard holders. Members may redeem Sam's Cash on purchases in the club and
online, to pay for membership fees or for cash in clubs. Sam's Cash does not expire and is available
for monthly redemption.
Omni-channel. Sam's Club provides an omni-channel experience to members, integrating warehouse clubs
and eCommerce through such services as Curbside Pickup, mobile Scan & Go, ship-from-club, and
delivery-from-club. Members have access to a broad assortment of merchandise and services, including
those not found in our clubs, online at samsclub.com and through our mobile commerce applications.
The warehouse facility sizes generally range between 32,000 and 168,000 square feet, with an average
size of approximately 134,000 square feet.
Merchandise. Sam's Club offers merchandise in the following five merchandise categories:
• Grocery and consumables includes dairy, meat, bakery, deli, produce, dry, chilled or frozen
packaged foods, alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages, floral, snack foods, candy, other grocery
items, health and beauty aids, paper goods, laundry and home care, baby care, pet supplies and other
consumable items;
• Fuel, tobacco and other categories;
 10 
• Home and apparel includes home improvement, outdoor living, gardening, furniture, apparel, jewelry,
tools and power equipment, housewares, toys, seasonal items, mattresses, and tire and battery
centers;
• Health and wellness includes pharmacy, optical and hearing services and over-the-counter drugs; and
• Technology, office and entertainment includes consumer electronics and accessories, software, video
games, office supplies, appliances, and third-party gift cards.
Within the categories above, the Member's Mark private label brand continues to expand its assortment
and deliver member value.
Operations. Sam's Club is available to members through warehouse club locations, as well as online or
through the mobile application 24 hours a day. Club locations offer Plus Members the ability to shop
before regular operating hours. Consistent with its strategy, Sam's Club continues to develop
technology tools to drive a great member experience. Curbside Pickup is available at all clubs to
help provide fast, easy and contact-free shopping for members. Sam's Club also offers "Scan & Go," a
mobile checkout and payment solution, which allows members to bypass the checkout line.
Seasonal Aspects of Operations. Sam's Club's business is seasonal to a certain extent due to calendar
events and national and religious holidays, as well as different weather patterns. Historically, its
highest sales volume has occurred in the fiscal quarter ending January 31.
Competition. Sam's Club competes with other membership-only warehouse clubs, the largest of which is
Costco, as well as with discount retailers, retail and wholesale grocers, general merchandise
wholesalers and distributors, gasoline stations as well as omni-channel and eCommerce retailers and
catalog businesses. At Sam's Club, we provide value at members-only prices, a quality merchandise
assortment, and bulk sizing to serve both our Plus and Club members. Our eCommerce website and mobile
commerce applications have increasingly become important factors in our ability to compete.
Distribution. We utilize 29 dedicated distribution facilities located strategically throughout the
U.S., as well as some of the Walmart U.S. segment's distribution facilities which service the Sam's
Club segment for certain items. During fiscal 2023, the majority of Sam's Club's non-fuel club
purchases were shipped from these facilities, while the remainder of our purchases were shipped
directly to Sam's Club locations by suppliers. Sam's Club ships merchandise purchased on samsclub.com
and through its mobile commerce applications by a number of methods including shipments made directly
from clubs, 13 dedicated eCommerce fulfillment centers and other distribution centers.
Sam's Club uses a combination of our private truck fleet, as well as common carriers, to transport
perishable and non-perishable merchandise from distribution facilities to clubs.
 Intellectual Property 
We regard our trademarks, service marks, copyrights, patents, domain names, trade dress, trade
secrets, proprietary technologies, and similar intellectual property as important to our success, and
with respect to our associates, customers and others, we rely on trademark, copyright, and patent
law, trade-secret protection, and confidentiality and/or license agreements to protect our
proprietary rights. We have registered, or applied for the registration of, a number of U.S. and
international domain names, trademarks, service marks and copyrights. Additionally, we have filed
U.S. and international patent applications covering certain of our proprietary technology. We have
licensed in the past, and expect that we may license in the future, certain of our proprietary rights
to third parties.
 11 
 Suppliers and Supply Chain 
As a retailer and warehouse club operator, we utilize a global supply chain that includes both U.S.
and international suppliers from whom we purchase the merchandise that we sell in our stores, clubs
and online. In many instances, we purchase merchandise from producers located near the stores and
clubs in which such merchandise will be sold, particularly products in the "fresh" category.
Consistent with applicable laws, we offer our suppliers the opportunity to efficiently sell
significant quantities of their products to us. These relationships enable us to obtain pricing that
reflects the volume, certainty and cost-effectiveness these arrangements provide to such suppliers,
which in turn enables us to provide low prices to our customers. Our suppliers are subject to
standards of conduct, including requirements that they comply with local labor laws, local worker
safety laws and other applicable laws. Our ability to acquire from our suppliers the assortment and
volume of products we wish to offer to our customers, to receive those products within the required
time through our supply chain and to distribute those products to our stores and clubs, determines,
along with other supply chain logistics matters (such as containers or port access for example), in
part, our in-stock levels in our stores and clubs and the attractiveness of our merchandise
assortment we offer to our customers and members.
 Government Regulation 
As a company with global operations, we are subject to the laws of the United States and multiple
foreign jurisdictions in which we operate and the rules and regulations of various governing bodies,
which may differ among jurisdictions. For additional information, see the risk factors herein in "
Item 1A. Risk Factors " under the sub-caption "Legal, Tax, Regulatory, Compliance, Reputational and
Other Risks."
Environmental, Social and Governance ("ESG") Priorities
Our ESG strategy is centered on the concept of creating shared value: we believe we maximize long-
term value and create competitive advantage for the Company by serving our stakeholders, including
our customers, associates, shareholders, suppliers, business partners, and communities. We believe
that addressing such societal needs builds the value of our business, including by enhancing customer
and associate trust, creating new revenue streams, managing cost and risk, building capabilities for
future advantage, and strengthening the underlying systems on which Walmart and our stakeholders
rely.
We prioritize the ESG issues that offer the greatest potential for Walmart to create shared value:
issues that rank high in relevance to our business and stakeholders and which Walmart is positioned
to make a positive impact. Our current ESG priorities are categorized into four broad themes:
opportunity, sustainability, community, and ethics and integrity.
• Opportunity . Retail can be a powerful engine for inclusive economic opportunity. We aim to advance
diversity, equity, and inclusion, and create opportunity for Walmart associates (as further described
in the Human Capital Management section below), our suppliers and workers in supply chains, and the
communities in which we operate. Doing so helps us fulfill our customer mission, strengthens our
business and helps people build a better life for themselves and their families.
• Sustainability . Walmart's sustainability efforts focus on our ability to create and preserve long-
term value for both people and planet. With respect to people, our sustainability efforts include
sourcing responsibly, helping prevent forced labor, empowering women, creating inclusive economic
opportunity and selling safer, healthier products. With respect to the planet, our efforts aim to
enhance the sustainability of product supply chains by reducing emissions, protecting and restoring
nature, and reducing waste. To help address the effects of climate change, Walmart has set science-
based targets for emissions reduction, including our goal to achieve zero emissions in our operations
by 2040—without offsets—and to reduce or avoid one billion metric tons of emissions in our value
chain by 2030 under our Project Gigaton™ initiative.
• Community . Walmart aims to serve and strengthen communities by operating our business in a way
that meets the needs of our customer and community stakeholder groups, including by providing safer,
healthier and more affordable food and other products, disaster support, associate volunteerism,
local grant programs and community cohesion initiatives.
• Ethics and Integrity . At every level of our Company, we work to create a culture that inspires
trust among our associates, with our customers, and in the communities we serve .
We periodically publish information on our ESG priorities, strategies, and progress on our corporate
website and may update those disclosures from time to time. Nothing on our website, including our ESG
reporting, documents or sections thereof, shall be deemed incorporated by reference into this Annual
Report on Form 10-K or incorporated by reference into any of our other filings with the Securities
and Exchange Commission.
 Human Capital Management 
At Walmart, we're committed to help people save money and live better around the world. This mission
is delivered by our associates who make the difference for our millions of customers and members
every day. As of the end of fiscal 2023, we
 12 
employed approximately 2.1 million associates worldwide, with approximately 1.6 million associates in
the U.S. and approximately 0.5 million associates internationally. In the U.S., approximately 93% of
our associates are hourly and approximately 70% of our associates are full-time.
We know the success and progress we've seen this year and throughout our Company's history is because
of our associates who work every day to fulfill our mission. That's why we're focused on providing
opportunities for associates to grow and learn. For some, we are a foundational entry point to
develop critical skills that are relevant for a variety of careers, and for others a place where
associates can grow their careers across our global omni-channel business. No matter the role or
location, we're focused on developing, rewarding, and retaining associates in an ever-changing
environment. As customer expectations and technology change the nature of work, we know it's our
people – our humanity – that will differentiate us from the competition, so this must be a top
priority.
Our workforce strategy includes the following strategic priorities: belonging, well-being, growth and
digital.
Belonging - Build a Walmart for everyone: a diverse, equitable and inclusive company, where
associates' ideas and opinions matter . We are focused on having an inclusive culture where everyone
feels they belong. We publish our diversity representation twice yearly, and hold ourselves
accountable to providing recurring culture, diversity, equity, and inclusion updates to senior
leadership, including our President and CEO, and members of the Board of Directors. Of the
approximately 2.1 million associates employed worldwide, 52% identify as women. In the U.S., 50% of
the approximately 1.6 million associates identify as people of color.
We review our processes regarding our commitment to fair-pay practices. We are committed to creating
a performance culture where associates are rewarded based on meaningful factors such as
qualifications, experience, performance, and the work they do.
To build a company where associates feel engaged, valued and heard, we gather and respond to
associates' feedback in a variety of ways, including but not limited to our annual associate
engagement survey, our Open Door process, and one-on-one interactions. Management reviews the results
of feedback obtained from our formal associate engagement survey.
Well-being - Focus on the physical, emotional, and financial well-being of our associates. We invest
in our associates by offering competitive wages, as well as a broad range of benefits that vary based
on customary local practices and statutory requirements. In the U.S., we offer affordable healthcare
coverage to our full-time and eligible part-time associates as well as company paid benefits such as
401(k) match, family building support, maternity leave, a paid parental leave program to all full-
time associates, paid time off, Associate Stock Purchase Plan match, life insurance, behavioral and
mental health services, and a store discount card or Sam's Club membership. Additional information
about how we invest in our associates' well-being, including wage structure and pay, can be found in
our Human Capital brief in our most recent ESG reporting, which is available on our corporate
website. Nothing on our website, including our ESG reporting documents, or sections thereof, shall be
deemed incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K or incorporated by reference
into any of our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Certain information
relating to retirement-related benefits we provide to our associates is included in Note 11 to our
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Growth - Provide ongoing growth, development and learning opportunities for associates and continue
to attract talent with new skills. We are invested in the growth of our associates in support of our
business and their success by offering good jobs that lead to great careers and better lives. We
launched the global Walmart Academy to help associates build and grow their careers, creating one of
the largest learning ecosystems in the world. The global Walmart Academy offers training for on-the-
job retail skills, leadership courses, and well-being training, serving associates through
combination of digital and in-person offerings. The global focus builds on moving much more to a
learning in the flow of work approach.
We also provide access to educational opportunities for our part-time and full-time frontline
eligible associates in the U.S. through our Live Better U program, which provides access to earn a
high school diploma or a college degree. Walmart pays 100% of associates' college tuition, books and
fees. Our Live Better U program aligns education offerings with Walmart's own areas of growth,
providing opportunities for associates to become great at the job they have today and prepare for the
job of tomorrow. Approximately 75% of our U.S. salaried store, club and supply chain management
started their careers in hourly positions. Our focus on providing a path of opportunity for our
associates through robust training, competitive wages and benefits, and career advancement creates a
strong associate value proposition and strengthens our workforce.
Digital - Accelerate digital transformation and ways of working to improve the associate experience
and drive business results . To deliver a seamless customer and associate experience, we continue to
invest in digital tools like Me@Walmart, MyClub and Me@Campus to improve associate productivity,
engagement, and performance. The MyFeedback app was developed to capture real-time associate
feedback. Walmart supports associates who are on the U.S. Medical Plan with free virtual visits which
include visits for medical doctor urgent care, along with mental health care with psychiatrist and
psychologists.
 13 
 Information About Our Executive Officers 
The following chart names the executive officers of the Company as of the date of the filing of this
Annual Report on Form 10-K with the SEC, each of whom is elected by and serves at the pleasure of the
Board of Directors. The business experience shown for each officer has been his or her principal
occupation for at least the past five years, unless otherwise noted.
 Current 
 Name Business Experience Position Age 
 Held Since 
 Executive Vice President, Corporate Affairs, 
 effective June 2013. From November 2007 to June 2013, 
 Daniel J. Bartlett he served as the Chief Executive Officer and 2013 51 
 President of U.S. Operations at Hill & Knowlton, 
 Inc., a public relations company. 
 Executive Vice President, Global Governance, Chief 
 Legal Officer and Corporate Secretary, effective 
 Rachel Brand April 2018. From May 2017 to February 2018, she 2018 49 
 served as Associate Attorney General in the United 
 States Department of Justice. 
 Senior Vice President and Controller effective 
 David M. Chojnowski January 2017. From October 2014 to January 2017, he 2017 53 
 served as Vice President and Controller, Walmart U.S. 
 Executive Vice President, President and Chief 
 Executive Officer, Walmart U.S. effective November 
 John Furner 2019. From February 2017 until November 2019, he 2019 48 
 served as President and Chief Executive Officer, 
 Sam's Club. 
 Executive Vice President, Global Chief Technology 
 Suresh Kumar Officer and Chief Development Officer effective July 2019 58 
 2019. From February 2018 until June 2019, Mr. Kumar 
 was Vice President and General Manager at Google LLC. 
 Executive Vice President, President and Chief 
 Executive Officer, Walmart International, effective 
 Judith McKenna February 2018. From February 2015 to January 2018, 2018 56 
 she served as Executive Vice President and Chief 
 Operating Officer of Walmart U.S. 
 Executive Vice President, President and Chief 
 Executive Officer, Sam's Club effective November 15, 
 2019.From February 2019 to November 2019, she served 
 Kathryn McLay as Executive Vice President, Walmart U.S. 2019 49 
 Neighborhood Markets. From December 2015 until 
 February 2019, she served as Senior Vice President, 
 U.S. Supply Chain. 
 President and Chief Executive Officer, effective 
 C. Douglas McMillon February 2014. From February 2009 to January 2014, he 2014 56 
 served as Executive Vice President, President and 
 Chief Executive Officer, Walmart International. 
 Executive Vice President, Global People, and Chief 
 People Officer, effective February 2020.  From April 
 Donna Morris 2002 to January 2020, she worked at Adobe Inc. in 2020 55 
 various roles, including most recently, Chief Human 
 Resources Officer and Executive Vice President, 
 Employee Experience. 
 Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, 
 effective June 2022. From September 2016 to June 
 John David Rainey 2022, he served as Chief Financial Officer and 2022 52 
 Executive Vice President, Global Customer Operations 
 for PayPal Holdings, Inc. 
Our Website and Availability of SEC Reports and Other Information
Our corporate website is located at www.stock.walmart.com. We file with or furnish to the SEC Annual
Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, amendments to
those reports, proxy statements and annual reports to shareholders, and, from time to time, other
documents. The reports and other documents filed with or furnished to the SEC are available to
investors on or through our corporate website free of charge as soon as reasonably practicable after
we electronically file them with or furnish them to the SEC. The SEC maintains a website that
contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information regarding issuers, such as
the Company, that file electronically with the SEC. The address of that website is www.sec.gov. Our
SEC filings, our Reporting Protocols for Senior Financial Officers and our Code of Conduct can be
found on our website at www.stock.walmart.com. These documents are available in print to any
shareholder who requests a copy by writing or calling our Investor Relations Department, which is
located at our principal offices.
 14 
A description of any substantive amendment or waiver of Walmart's Reporting Protocols for Senior
Financial Officers or our Code of Conduct for our chief executive officer, our chief financial
officer and our controller, who is our principal accounting officer, will be disclosed on our website
at www.stock.walmart.com under the Corporate Governance section. Any such description will be located
on our website for a period of 12 months following the amendment or waiver.
 ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS 
The risks described below could, in ways we may or may not be able to accurately predict, materially
and adversely affect our business, results of operations, financial position and liquidity. Our
business operations could also be affected by additional factors that apply to all companies
operating in the U.S. and globally. The following risk factors do not identify all risks that we may
face.
 Strategic Risks 
Failure to successfully execute our omni-channel strategy and the cost of our investments in
eCommerce and technology may materially adversely affect our market position, net sales and financial
performance.
The retail business continues to rapidly evolve and consumers increasingly embrace digital shopping.
As a result, the portion of total consumer expenditures with retailers and wholesale clubs occurring
through digital platforms is increasing and the pace of this increase could continue to accelerate.
Our strategy, which includes investments in eCommerce, technology, talent, supply chain automation,
acquisitions, joint ventures, store remodels and other customer initiatives, may not adequately or
effectively allow us to continue to grow our eCommerce business, increase comparable sales, maintain
or grow our overall market position or otherwise offset the impact on the growth of our business of a
moderated pace of new store and club openings. The success of this strategy will depend in large
measure on our ability to continue building and delivering a seamless omni-channel shopping
experience and interconnected ecosystem for our customers that deepens and maintains our
relationships with our customers across our various businesses and partnerships and reinforces our
overall enterprise strategy. The success of this strategy is further subject to the related risks
discussed in this Item 1A . With the interconnected components of this enterprise strategy and an
increasing allocation of capital expenditures focused on these initiatives, changes in customer or
member perceptions about our reputation or our failure to successfully execute on individual
components of this strategy may adversely affect our market position, net sales and financial
performance which could also result in impairment charges to intangible assets or other long-lived
assets. In addition, a greater concentration of eCommerce sales, including increasing online grocery
sales, could result in a reduction in the amount of traffic in our stores and clubs, which would, in
turn, reduce the opportunities for cross-store or cross-club sales of merchandise that such traffic
creates and could reduce our sales within our stores and clubs and materially adversely affect our
financial performance.
Furthermore, the cost of certain investments in eCommerce, technology, talent, automation, including
any operating losses incurred, will adversely impact our financial performance in the short-term and
failure to realize the benefits of these investments may adversely impact our financial performance
over the longer term.
If we do not timely identify or effectively respond to consumer trends or preferences, it could
negatively affect our relationship with our customers, demand for the products and services we sell,
our market share and the growth of our business.
It is difficult to predict consistently and successfully the products and services our customers will
demand and changes in their shopping patterns. The success of our business depends in part on how
accurately we predict consumer demand, availability of merchandise, the related impact on the demand
for existing products and services and the competitive environment. Price transparency, assortment of
products, customer experience, convenience, ease and the speed and cost of shipping are of primary
importance to customers and continue to increase in importance, particularly as a result of digital
tools and social media available to consumers and the choices available to consumers for purchasing
products. Our failure to adequately or effectively respond to changing consumer tastes, preferences
(including those related to ESG issues) and shopping patterns, or any other failure on our part to
timely identify or effectively respond to changing consumer tastes, preferences and shopping patterns
could negatively affect our reputation and relationship with our customers, the demand for the
products we sell or services we offer, our market share and the growth of our business.
We face strong competition from other retailers, wholesale club operators, omni-channel retailers,
and other businesses which could materially adversely affect our financial performance.
Each of our segments competes for customers, employees, digital prominence, products and services and
in other important aspects of its business with many other local, regional, national and global
physical, eCommerce and omni-channel retailers, social commerce platforms, wholesale club operators
and retail intermediaries, as well as companies that offer services in digital advertising,
fulfillment and delivery services, health and wellness, and financial services. The omni-channel
retail landscape is highly competitive and rapidly evolving, and the entry of new, well-funded
competitors may increase competitive
 15 
pressures. In addition, for eCommerce and other internet-based businesses, newer or smaller
businesses may be better able to innovate and compete with us.
We compete in a variety of ways, including the prices at which we sell our merchandise, merchandise
selection and availability, services offered to customers, location, store hours, in-store amenities,
the shopping convenience and overall shopping experience we offer, the attractiveness and ease of use
of our digital platforms, cost and speed of and options for delivery to customers of merchandise
purchased through our digital platforms or through our omni-channel integration of our physical and
digital operations.
A failure to respond effectively to competitive pressures and changes in the retail and other markets
in which we operate, omni-channel innovations and omni-channel ecosystems developed by our
competitors or delays or failure in execution of our strategy could materially adversely affect our
financial performance. See " Item 1. Business " above for additional discussion of the competitive
situation of each of our reportable segments.
Certain segments of the retail industry are undergoing consolidation or substantially reducing
operations, whether due to bankruptcy, consolidation or other factors. Such consolidation, or other
business combinations or alliances, competitive omni-channel ecosystems, or reductions in operations
may result in competitors with greatly improved financial resources, improved access to merchandise,
greater market penetration and other improvements in their competitive positions. Such business
combinations or alliances could allow these companies to provide a wider variety of products and
services at competitive prices, which could adversely affect our financial performance.
General or macro-economic factors, both domestically and internationally, may materially adversely
affect our financial performance.
General economic conditions and other economic factors, globally or in one or more of the markets we
serve, may adversely affect our financial performance. Higher interest rates, lower or higher prices
of petroleum products, including crude oil, natural gas, gasoline, and diesel fuel, higher costs for
electricity and other energy, weakness in the housing market, inflation, deflation, increased costs
of essential services, such as medical care and utilities, higher levels of unemployment, decreases
in consumer disposable income, unavailability of consumer credit, higher consumer debt levels,
changes in consumer spending and shopping patterns, fluctuations in currency exchange rates, higher
tax rates, imposition of new taxes or other changes in tax laws, changes in healthcare laws, other
regulatory changes, the imposition of tariffs or other measures that create barriers to or increase
the costs associated with international trade, overall economic slowdown or recession and other
economic factors in the U.S. or in any of the other markets in which we operate could adversely
affect consumer demand for the products and services we sell in the U.S. or such other markets,
change the mix of products we sell to one with a lower average gross margin, cause a slowdown in
discretionary purchases of goods, adversely affect our net sales and result in slower inventory
turnover and greater markdowns of inventory, or otherwise materially adversely affect our operations
and operating results and could result in impairment charges to intangible assets, goodwill or other
long-lived assets.
In addition, the economic factors listed above, any other economic factors or circumstances resulting
in higher transportation, labor, insurance or healthcare costs or commodity prices, including energy
prices, and other economic factors in the U.S. and other countries in which we operate can increase
our cost of sales and operating, selling, general and administrative expenses and otherwise
materially adversely affect our operations and operating results.
The economic factors that affect our operations may also adversely affect the operations of our
suppliers, which can result in an increase in the cost to us of the goods we sell to our customers
or, in more extreme cases, in certain suppliers not producing goods in the volume typically available
to us for sale.
The performance of strategic alliances and other business relationships to support the expansion of
our business could materially adversely affect our financial performance.
We may enter into strategic alliances and other business relationships in the countries in which we
have existing operations or in other markets to expand our business. These arrangements (such as ONE,
our fintech joint venture, and our healthcare initiative with UnitedHealth Group) may not generate
the level of sales we anticipate when entering into the arrangement or may otherwise adversely impact
our business and competitive position relative to the results we could have achieved in the absence
of such alliance. In addition, any investment we make in connection with a strategic alliance,
business relationship or in certain of our recently divested markets, could materially adversely
affect our financial performance.
 16 
 Operational Risks 
Global or regional health pandemics or epidemics, including COVID-19, could negatively impact our
business, financial position and results of operations.
The emergence, severity, magnitude and duration of global or regional pandemics or epidemics are
uncertain and difficult to predict. A pandemic, such as COVID-19, or other epidemic could impact our
business operations, demand for our products and services, in-stock positions, costs of doing
business, access to inventory, supply chain operations, the extent and duration of measures to try to
contain the spread of a virus or other disease (such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines,
shelter-in-place orders, business and government shutdowns, and other restrictions on retailers), our
ability to predict future performance, exposure to litigation, and our financial performance, among
other things. Customer behaviors changed rapidly during the course of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the
event of a resurgence of infections or future mutations, variants or related strains of the virus
become prevalent, customer demand for certain products may fluctuate and customer behaviors may
change, which may challenge our ability to anticipate and/or adjust inventory levels to meet that
demand. These factors may result in higher demand for certain products and less demand for others, as
well as out-of-stock positions in certain products, along with delays in delivering those products
(due to supply chain and transportation issues) and could impact inventory levels in the future.
Other factors and uncertainties may include, but are not limited to: the severity and duration of the
pandemic, including whether there are additional outbreaks or spikes in the number of cases, future
mutations or related strains of the virus in areas in which we and our suppliers operate; further
increased operational costs; evolving macroeconomic factors, including general economic uncertainty,
unemployment rates, and recessionary pressures; unknown consequences on our business performance and
initiatives stemming from the substantial investment of time, capital and other resources to the
pandemic response; the effectiveness and extent of administration of vaccinations and medical
treatments, including for any variants; the pace of recovery when the pandemic subsides; and the
long-term impact of the pandemic or epidemic on our business, including consumer behaviors. These
risks and their impacts are difficult to predict and could otherwise disrupt and adversely affect our
operations and our financial performance.
To the extent that the COVID-19 pandemic continues to adversely affect the U.S. and the global
economy, or a future pandemic or epidemic occurs, such events may also heighten other risks described
in this section, including but not limited to those related to consumer behavior and expectations,
competition, our reputation, implementation of strategic initiatives, cybersecurity threats, payment-
related risks, technology systems disruption, supply chain disruptions, labor availability and cost,
litigation, and regulatory requirements.
Natural disasters, climate change, geopolitical events, global health epidemics or pandemics,
catastrophic and other events could materially adversely affect our financial performance.
The occurrence of one or more natural disasters, such as hurricanes, tropical storms, floods, fires,
earthquakes, tsunamis, cyclones, typhoons; weather conditions such as major or extended winter
storms, droughts and tornadoes, whether as a result of climate change or otherwise; geopolitical
tensions or events; regional or global health epidemics or pandemics or other contagious outbreaks
(such as COVID-19); and catastrophic and other events, such as war, civil unrest (including theft,
looting or vandalism), terrorist attacks or other acts of violence, including active shooter
situations (such as those that have occurred in our U.S. stores), or the loss of merchandise as a
result of shrink or theft in countries in which we operate, in which our suppliers are located, or in
other areas of the world (such as in Ukraine where a war currently exists between Ukraine and Russia)
could adversely affect our operations and financial performance.
Such events could result in physical damage to, or the complete loss of, one or more of our
properties, the closure of one or more stores, clubs and distribution or fulfillment centers,
limitations on store or club operating hours, the lack of an adequate work force in a market, the
inability of customers and associates to reach or have transportation to our stores and clubs
affected by such events, the evacuation of the populace from areas in which our stores, clubs and
distribution and fulfillment centers are located, the unavailability of our digital platforms to our
customers, changes in the purchasing patterns of consumers (including the frequency of visits by
consumers to physical retail locations, whether as a result of limitations on large gatherings,
travel and movement limitations or otherwise) and in consumers' disposable income, the temporary or
long-term disruption in the supply of products from some suppliers, the disruption in the transport
of goods from overseas, the disruption or delay in the delivery of goods to our distribution and
fulfillment centers or stores within a country in which we are operating, the reduction in the
availability of products in our stores, increases in the costs of procuring products as a result of
either reduced availability or economic sanctions, increased transportation costs (whether due to
fuel prices, fuel supply, or otherwise), the disruption (whether directly or indirectly) of critical
infrastructure systems, banking systems, utility services or energy availability to our stores, clubs
and our facilities, and the disruption in our communications with our stores, clubs and our other
facilities.
Furthermore, the long-term impacts of climate change, whether involving physical risks (such as
extreme weather conditions, drought, or rising sea levels) or transition risks (such as regulatory or
technology changes) are expected to be widespread and unpredictable. Certain impacts of physical risk
may include: temperature changes that increase the heating and cooling costs at stores, clubs, and
distribution or fulfillment centers; extreme weather patterns that affect the production or sourcing
of certain commodities; flooding and extreme storms that damage or destroy our buildings and
inventory; and heat and extreme weather
 17 
events that cause long-term disruption or threats to the habitability of the communities in which
Walmart operates. Relative to transition risk, certain impacts may include: changes in energy and
commodity prices driven by climate-related weather events; prolonged climate-related events affecting
macroeconomic conditions with related effects on consumer spending and confidence; stakeholder
perception of our engagement in climate-related policies; and new regulatory requirements resulting
in higher compliance risk and operational costs.
We bear the risk of losses incurred as a result of physical damage to, or destruction of, any stores,
clubs and distribution or fulfillment centers; theft, loss or spoilage of inventory; and business
interruption caused by such events. These events and their impacts could otherwise disrupt and
adversely affect our operations and could materially adversely affect our financial performance.
Moreover, our operations in the U.S. comprise a significant portion of our financial and operational
performance. Therefore, any of the above matters that uniquely impact or are specifically
concentrated in the U.S. could materially adversely affect our financial and operational performance
.
Risks associated with our suppliers could materially adversely affect our financial performance.
The products we sell are sourced from a wide variety of domestic and international suppliers. Global
sourcing of many of the products we sell is an important factor in our financial performance. We
expect our suppliers to comply with applicable laws, including labor, safety, anti-corruption and
environmental laws, and to otherwise meet our required supplier standards of conduct. Our ability to
find qualified suppliers who uphold our standards, and to access products in a timely and efficient
manner and in the large volumes we may demand, is a significant challenge, especially with respect to
suppliers located and goods sourced outside the U.S.
Political and economic instability, as well as other impactful events and circumstances in the
countries in which our suppliers and their manufacturers are located (such as the COVID-19 pandemic),
the financial instability of suppliers, suppliers' failure to meet our terms and conditions or our
supplier standards (including our responsible sourcing standards), labor problems experienced by our
suppliers and their manufacturers, the availability of raw materials to suppliers, merchandise safety
and quality issues, disruption or delay in the transportation of merchandise from the suppliers and
manufacturers to our stores, clubs, and other facilities, including as a result of labor slowdowns at
any port at which a material amount of merchandise we purchase enters into the markets in which we
operate, currency exchange rates, transport availability and cost, transport security, inflation and
other factors relating to the suppliers and the countries in which they are located are beyond our
control (such as, for example, the factors that occurred with respect to the availability of supply
for baby formula during the prior fiscal year).
In addition, U.S. and international trade policies, tariffs and other restrictions on the exportation
and importation of goods, trade sanctions imposed between certain countries and entities, the
limitation on the exportation or importation of certain types of goods or of goods containing certain
materials from other countries and other factors relating to foreign trade are beyond our control.
These and other factors affecting our suppliers and our access to products could adversely affect our
operations and financial performance.
If the products we sell are not safe or otherwise fail to meet our customers' expectations, we could
lose customers, incur liability for any injuries suffered by customers using or consuming a product
we sell or otherwise experience a material impact to our brand, reputation and financial performance.
We are also subject to reputational and other risks related to third-party sales on our digital
platforms.
Our customers count on us to provide them with safe products. Concerns regarding the safety of food
and non-food products that we source from our suppliers or that we prepare and then sell could cause
customers to avoid purchasing certain products from us, or to seek alternative sources of supply for
all of their food and non-food needs, even if the basis for the concern is outside of our control.
Any lost confidence on the part of our customers would be difficult and costly to reestablish and
such products also expose us to product liability or food safety claims. As such, any issue regarding
the safety of any food or non-food items we sell, regardless of the cause, could adversely affect our
brand, reputation and financial performance. In addition, third-parties sell goods on some of our
digital platforms, which we refer to as marketplace transactions. Whether laws related to these
marketplace transactions, including, but not limited to, intellectual property and products liability
laws, apply to us is currently unsettled and any unfavorable changes or interpretations could expose
us to liability, loss of sales, reduction in transactions and deterioration of our competitive
position. In addition, we may face reputational, financial and other risks, including liability, for
third-party sales of goods that are controversial, counterfeit, pirated, or stolen, or otherwise fail
to comply with applicable law or the proprietary rights of others. Although we have marketplace
compliance controls and impose contractual terms on sellers to prohibit sales of certain type of
products, we may not be able to detect certain prohibited items, enforce such terms, or collect
sufficient damages for breaches. Any of these events could have a material adverse impact on our
business and results of operations and impede the execution of our eCommerce growth and enterprise
strategy.
 18 
We rely extensively on information and financial systems to process transactions, summarize results
and manage our business. Disruptions in our systems could harm our ability to conduct our operations.
Given the number of individual transactions we have each year, it is crucial that we maintain
uninterrupted operation of our business-critical information systems. Our information systems are
subject to damage or interruption from power outages, computer and telecommunications failures,
computer viruses, worms, other malicious computer programs, denial-of-service attacks, security
incidents and breaches (including through cyberattacks, which may be from cybercriminals or
sophisticated state-sponsored threat actors), catastrophic events such as fires, major or extended
winter storms, tornadoes, earthquakes and hurricanes, usage errors by our associates or contractors,
civil or political unrest, or armed hostilities. Our information systems are essential to our
business operations, including the processing of transactions, management of our associates,
facilities, logistics, inventories, physical stores and clubs and our online operations. Our
information systems are not fully redundant and our disaster recovery planning cannot account for all
eventualities. If our systems are damaged, breached, attacked, interrupted, or otherwise cease to
function properly, we may have to make a significant investment to repair or replace them, and may
experience loss or corruption of critical data as well as suffer interruptions in our business
operations in the interim. Any interruption to our information systems may have a material adverse
effect on our business or results of operations. In addition, we frequently update our information
technology hardware, software, processes and systems. The risk of system disruption is increased when
significant system changes are undertaken. If we fail to timely or successfully integrate and update
our information systems and processes, we may fail to realize the cost savings or operational
benefits anticipated to be derived from these initiatives. For example, during the first quarter of
fiscal year ending January 31, 2024, we initiated an upgrade to our existing financial system,
including our general ledger and other applications. If we are unable to implement this upgrade as
planned, the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting could be adversely
affected; our ability to assess those controls adequately could be delayed; and our reputation,
business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows could be negatively impacted.
If the technology-based systems that give our customers the ability to shop with us online and enable
us to deliver products and services do not function effectively, our operating results, as well as
our ability to grow our omni-channel business globally, could be materially adversely affected.
Increasingly, customers are using computers, tablets, and smart phones to shop with us and with our
competitors and to do comparison shopping. We use social media, online advertising, and email to
interact with our customers and as a means to enhance their shopping experience. As a part of our
omni-channel sales strategy, we offer various pickup, delivery and shipping programs including
options where many products available for purchase online can be picked up by the customer or member
at a local Walmart store or Sam's Club, which provides additional customer traffic at such stores and
clubs. Omni-channel retailing is a rapidly evolving part of the retail industry and of our operations
around the world, and we continue to make investments in supply chain automation to support our omni-
channel strategy. We must anticipate and meet our customers' changing expectations while adjusting
for technology investments and developments in our competitors' operations through focusing on the
building and delivery of a seamless shopping experience across all channels by each operating
segment. Moreover, some of the various technology systems and services on which we rely are provided
and managed by third-party service providers. To the extent either our or such other third-party
systems and services do not perform or function as anticipated, whether because of an inherent flaw
in the technology or a faulty implementation, such failure can significantly interfere with our
ability to meet our customers' changing expectations. Any disruption or failure on our part to
provide attractive, user-friendly, and secure digital platforms that offer a wide assortment of
merchandise and services at competitive prices and with low cost and rapid delivery options and that
continually meet the changing expectations of online shoppers and developments in online and digital
platform merchandising and related technology in a cost-efficient manner could place us at a
competitive disadvantage, result in the loss of eCommerce and other sales, harm our reputation with
customers, have a material adverse impact on the growth of our eCommerce business globally and have a
material adverse impact on our business and results of operations.
Our digital platforms, which are increasingly important to our business and continue to grow in
complexity and scope, and the systems on which they run, including those applications and systems
used in our acquired eCommerce, technology or other businesses, are regularly subject to
cyberattacks. Those attacks involve attempts to gain unauthorized access to our eCommerce websites
(including marketplace platforms) or mobile commerce applications to obtain and misuse customers' or
members' information including personal information and/or payment information and related risks
discussed in this Item 1A . Such attacks, if successful, in addition to potential data misuse and/or
loss, may also create denials of service or otherwise disable, degrade or sabotage one or more of our
digital platforms or otherwise significantly disrupt our customers' and members' shopping experience,
our supply chain integrity and continuity, and our ability to efficiently operate our business. If we
are unable to maintain the security of our digital platforms and keep them operating within
acceptable parameters, we could suffer loss of sales, reductions in transactions, reputational damage
and deterioration of our competitive position and incur liability for any damage to customers,
members or others whose personal or confidential information is unlawfully obtained and misused, any
of which events could have a material adverse impact on our business and results of operations and
impede the execution of our strategy for the growth of our business.
 19 
Any failure to maintain the privacy or security of the information relating to our company,
customers, members, associates, business partners and vendors, whether as a result of cyberattacks on
our information systems or otherwise, could damage our reputation, result in litigation or other
legal actions against us, result in fines, penalties, and liability, cause us to incur substantial
additional costs, and materially adversely affect our business and operating results.
Like most retailers, we receive and store in our information systems personal information and/or
payment information about our customers and members, and we also receive and store information
concerning our associates and vendors. In addition, our health and wellness business operations, the
Walmart Health locations, and third-party service providers who handle information on our behalf,
store and maintain personal health information. Some of this information is stored digitally in
connection with the digital platforms and technologies that we use to conduct and facilitate our
various businesses. We utilize third-party service providers for a variety of reasons, including,
without limitation, for digital storage technology, content delivery to customers and members, back-
office support, and other functions. Such providers may have access to information we hold about our
customers, members, associates, business partners or vendors. In addition, our eCommerce operations
depend upon the secure transmission of confidential information over public networks, including
information permitting cashless payments.
Cyber threats are rapidly evolving and those threats and the means for obtaining access to
information in digital and other storage media are becoming increasingly sophisticated and frequent.
Attacks against information systems and devices, whether our own or those of our third-party service
providers, create risk of cybersecurity incidents, including ransomware, malware, or phishing
incidents. We expect to continue to experience such attempted attacks in the future. Cyberattacks and
threat actors can be sponsored by particular countries or sophisticated criminal organizations or be
the work of hackers with a wide range of motives and expertise. We and the businesses with which we
interact have experienced and continue to experience threats to data and systems, including by
perpetrators of random or targeted malicious cyberattacks, computer viruses, phishing incidents,
worms, bot attacks, ransomware or other destructive or disruptive software and attempts to
misappropriate customer information, including credit card and payment information, and cause system
failures and disruptions. Mitigation and remediation recommendations continue to evolve, and
addressing vulnerabilities is a priority for us. The increased use of remote work infrastructure in
recent years has also increased the possible attack surfaces. Some of our systems and third-party
service providers' systems have experienced security incidents or breaches and although they have not
had a material adverse effect on our operating results, there can be no assurance of a similar result
in the future.
Associate error or malfeasance, faulty password management, social engineering or other
vulnerabilities and irregularities may also result in a defeat of our or our third-party service
providers' security measures and a compromise or breach of our or their information systems.
Moreover, hardware, software or applications we use may have inherent vulnerabilities or defects of
design, manufacture or operations or could be inadvertently or intentionally implemented or used in a
manner that could compromise information security.
Any compromise of our data security systems or of those of businesses with which we interact, which
results in confidential information being accessed, obtained, damaged, disclosed, destroyed,
modified, lost or used by unauthorized persons could harm our reputation and expose us to regulatory
actions (including, with respect to health information, liability under the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, or "HIPAA"), customer attrition, remediation expenses,
and claims from customers, members, associates, vendors, financial institutions, payment card
networks and other persons, any of which could materially and adversely affect our business
operations, financial position and results of operations. Because the techniques used to obtain
unauthorized access, disable or degrade service, or sabotage systems change frequently and may not
immediately produce signs of a compromise, we may be unable to anticipate these techniques or to
implement adequate preventative measures and we or our third-party service providers may not discover
any security event, breach, vulnerability or compromise of information for a significant period of
time after the security incident occurs. To the extent that any cyberattack, ransomware or incursion
in our or one of our third-party service provider's information systems results in the loss, damage,
misappropriation or other compromise of information, we may be materially adversely affected by
claims from customers, members, financial institutions, regulatory authorities, payment card networks
and others.
Our compliance programs, information technology, and enterprise risk management efforts cannot
eliminate all systemic risk. Disruptions in our systems caused by security incidents, breaches or
cyberattacks – including attacks on those parties we do business with (such as strategic partners,
suppliers, banks, or utility companies) – could harm our ability to conduct our operations, which may
have a material effect on us, may result in losses that could have a material adverse effect on our
financial position or results of operations, or may have a cascading effect that adversely impacts
our partners, third-party service providers, customers, members, financial services firms, and other
third parties that we interact with on a regular basis.
Our reputation with our customers and members is important to the success of our enterprise strategy,
which combines traditional retail, membership models, marketplaces, financial services, healthcare,
and other customer and business services into a series of interconnected assets to make it seamless
for customers to interact with us. Security-related events could be widely publicized and could
materially adversely affect our reputation with our customers, members, associates, vendors and
shareholders, could harm our competitive position particularly with respect to our eCommerce
operations, and could result in a material reduction in our net sales in our eCommerce operations, as
well as in our stores thereby materially adversely affecting
 20 
our operations, net sales, results of operations, financial position, cash flows and liquidity. Such
events could also result in the release to the public of confidential information about our
operations and financial position and performance and could result in litigation or other legal
actions against us or the imposition of penalties, fines, fees or liabilities, which may not be
covered by our insurance policies. Moreover, a security compromise or ransomware event could require
us to devote significant management resources to address the problems created by the issue and to
expend significant additional resources to upgrade further the security measures we employ to guard
personal and confidential information against cyberattacks and other attempts to access or otherwise
compromise such information and could result in a disruption of our operations, particularly our
digital operations.
We accept payments using a variety of methods, including cash, checks, credit and debit cards,
electronic benefits transfer (EBT) cards, mobile payments, and our private label credit cards and
gift cards, and we may offer new payment options over time, which may have information security risk
implications. As a retailer accepting debit and credit cards for payment, we are subject to various
industry data protection standards and protocols, such as payment network security operating
guidelines and the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard. We cannot be certain that the
security measures we maintain to protect all of our information technology systems are able to
prevent, contain or detect cyberattacks, cyberterrorism, security incidents, breaches, or other
compromises from known malware or ransomware or other threats that may be developed in the future. In
certain circumstances, our contracts with payment card processors and payment card networks (such as
Visa, Mastercard, American Express and Discover) generally require us to adhere to payment card
network rules which could make us liable to payment card issuers and others if information in
connection with payment cards and payment card transactions that we process is compromised, which
liabilities could be substantial.
Additionally, through various financial service partners and our ONE fintech joint venture, we offer
various services such as money transfers, digital payment platforms, bill payment, money orders,
check cashing, prepaid access, co-branded credits cards, installment lending, and earned wage access.
These products and services require us to comply with legal and regulatory requirements, including
privacy, authentication and tokenization, global anti-money laundering and sanctions laws and
regulations as well as international, federal and state consumer financial laws and regulations.
Failure to comply with these laws and regulations could result in fines, sanctions, penalties and
harm to our reputation.
The Company also has compliance obligations associated with privacy laws enacted to protect and
regulate the collection, use, retention, disclosure and transfer of personal information, which
include liability for security and privacy breaches. Among other obligations, breaches may trigger
obligations under international, federal and state laws to notify affected individuals, government
agencies and the media. Consequently, cybersecurity attacks that cause a data breach could subject us
to fines, sanctions and other legal liability and harm our reputation.
Changes in type or scope of offerings of our health and wellness business or the Walmart Health
business could adversely affect our overall results of operations, cash flows and liquidity.
Walmart has retail pharmacy operations in our Walmart U.S. and Sam's Club segments across the U.S.
and in various of our international markets such as Canada and Mexico. We also provide management
services to Walmart Health centers that offer medical, dental, behavioral health and other health
services in a number of states, as well as a national telehealth service provider. In addition,
Walmart's 10-year collaboration with UnitedHealth Group includes agreements for Walmart Health to
provide value-based care to patients in certain areas of the U.S., among other initiatives.
A large majority of our retail pharmacy net sales are generated by filling prescriptions for which we
receive payment through established contractual relationships with third-party payers and payment
administrators, such as private insurers, governmental agencies and pharmacy benefit managers
("PBMs"). Our retail pharmacy operations are subject to numerous risks, including: reductions in the
third-party reimbursement rates for drugs; changes in our payer mix (i.e., shifts in the relative
distribution of our pharmacy customers across drug insurance plans and programs toward plans and
programs with less favorable reimbursement terms); changes in third-party payer drug formularies
(i.e., the schedule of prescription drugs approved for reimbursement or which otherwise receive
preferential coverage treatment); growth in, and our participation in or exclusion from, pharmacy
payer network arrangements including exclusive and preferred pharmacy network arrangements operated
by PBMs and/or any insurance plan or program; increases in the prices we pay for brand name and
generic prescription drugs we sell; increases in the administrative burdens associated with seeking
third-party reimbursement; changes in the frequency with which new brand name pharmaceuticals become
available to consumers; introduction of lower cost generic drugs as substitutes for existing brand
name drugs for which there was no prior generic drug competition; changes in drug mix (i.e., the
relative distribution of drugs customers purchase at our pharmacies between brands and generics);
changes in the health insurance market generally; changes in the scope of or the elimination of
Medicare Part D or Medicaid drug programs; increased competition from other retail pharmacy
operations including competitors offering online retail pharmacy options and/or home delivery
options; further consolidation and strategic alliances among third-party payers, PBMs or purchasers
of drugs; overall economic conditions and the ability of our pharmacy customers to pay for drugs
prescribed for them to the extent the costs are not reimbursed by a third-party; failure to meet any
performance or incentive thresholds to which our level of third-party reimbursement may be subject;
changes in laws or regulations or the practices of third-party payers and PBMs related to the use of
third-party financial assistance to assist our pharmacy customers with paying for drugs prescribed
for them; and any
 21 
additional changes in the state or federal regulatory environment for the retail pharmacy industry
and the pharmaceutical industry, including as a result of health reform efforts, and other changes to
or novel interpretations of existing state or federal laws, rules and regulations that affect our
retail pharmacy business.
If the supply of certain pharmaceuticals provided by one or more of our vendors were to be disrupted
for any reason, our pharmacy operations could be severely affected until at least such time as we
could obtain a new supplier for such pharmaceuticals. Any such disruption could cause reputational
damage and result in a significant number of our pharmacy customers transferring their prescriptions
to other pharmacies.
Walmart Health clinical operations are also subject to numerous risks, including but not limited to:
reductions in the third-party reimbursement rates for services; changes in our payer mix; changes in
the health insurance market generally; our inability to retain and negotiate favorable contracts with
private third-party payers, including managed care plans; competition for patients from other
healthcare providers, including those that offer telehealth services; changes to healthcare provider
utilization practices and treatment methodologies; trends toward value-based purchasing and price
transparency; overall economic conditions and the ability of patients to pay for services; staffing
challenges, including retention of a sufficient number and quality of healthcare professionals;
compliance with the complex and extensive laws and regulations governing the healthcare industry;
changes in laws and regulations, including as a result of health reform efforts; and healthcare
technology initiatives, including those related to patient data and interoperability; and public
health conditions.
One or a combination of the factors above may adversely affect the volumes of brand name and generic
pharmaceuticals we sell, our cost of sales associated with our retail pharmacy operations, and the
net sales and gross margin of those operations or result in the loss of cross-store or cross-club
selling opportunities. In addition, these and other factors may adversely affect the type, volume and
mix of services we provide, the reimbursement we receive for health and wellness services rendered,
and the scope and pace of expansion of Walmart Health and related offerings. Any of these
developments could, in turn, adversely affect our overall net sales, other results of operations,
cash flows and liquidity.
Our failure to attract and retain qualified associates, increases in wage and benefit costs, changes
in laws and other labor issues could materially adversely affect our financial performance.
Our ability to continue to conduct and expand our operations depends on our ability to attract and
retain a large and growing number of qualified associates globally. Our ability to meet our labor
needs, including our ability to find qualified personnel to fill positions that become vacant at our
existing stores, clubs, distribution and fulfillment centers and corporate offices, while controlling
our associate wage and related labor costs, is generally subject to numerous external factors,
including the availability of a sufficient number of qualified persons in the work force of the
markets in which we operate, unemployment levels within those markets, prevailing wage rates,
changing demographics, health and other insurance costs and adoption of new or revised employment and
labor laws and regulations. Additionally, our ability to successfully execute organizational changes,
including our enterprise strategy and management transitions within the Company's senior leadership,
and to effectively motivate and retain associates are critical to our business success. We compete
for talent with other retail and non-retail businesses, including, for example, technology, health
and wellness, and fintech businesses, and invest significant resources in training and motivating our
associates. Increased competition among potential employers at all levels, including senior
management and executive levels, could result in increased associate costs or make it more difficult
to recruit and retain associates. If we are unable to locate, attract or retain qualified personnel,
or manage leadership transition successfully, the quality of service we provide to our customers may
decrease and our financial performance may be adversely affected.
In addition, if our costs of labor or related costs increase for other reasons or if new, revised, or
novel interpretations of existing labor laws, rules or regulations or healthcare laws are adopted or
implemented that further increase our labor costs, our financial performance could be materially
adversely affected.
 Financial Risks 
Failure to meet market expectations for our financial performance could adversely affect the market
price and volatility of our stock.
We believe that the price of our stock generally reflects high market expectations for our future
operating results. Any failure to meet or delay in meeting these expectations, including our
consolidated net sales, consolidated operating income, capital expenditures, comparable store and
club sales growth rates, eCommerce growth rates, gross margin, or earnings and adjusted earnings per
share could cause the market price of our stock to decline, as could changes in our dividend or stock
repurchase programs or policies, changes in our effective tax rates, changes in our financial
estimates and recommendations by securities analysts or, failure of Walmart's performance to compare
favorably to that of other retailers may have a negative effect on the price of our stock.
 22 
Fluctuations in foreign exchange rates may materially adversely affect our financial performance and
our reported results of operations.
Our operations in countries other than the U.S. are conducted primarily in the local currencies of
those countries. Our Consolidated Financial Statements are denominated in U.S. dollars, and to
prepare those financial statements we must translate the amounts of the assets, liabilities, net
sales, other revenues and expenses of our operations outside of the U.S. from local currencies into
U.S. dollars using exchange rates for the current period. In recent years, fluctuations in currency
exchange rates that were unfavorable have had adverse effects on our reported results of operations.
As a result of such translations, fluctuations in currency exchange rates from period-to-period that
are unfavorable to us may also result in our Consolidated Financial Statements reflecting significant
adverse period-over-period changes in our financial performance or reflecting a period-over-period
improvement in our financial performance that is not as robust as it would be without such
fluctuations in the currency exchange rates. Such unfavorable currency exchange rate fluctuations
will adversely affect the reported performance of our Walmart International operating segment and
have a corresponding adverse effect on our reported consolidated results of operations.
We may pay for products we purchase for sale in our stores and clubs around the world with a currency
other than the local currency of the country in which the goods will be sold. When we must acquire
the currency to pay for such products and the exchange rates for the payment currency fluctuate in a
manner unfavorable to us, our cost of sales may increase and we may be unable or unwilling to change
the prices at which we sell those goods to address that increase in our costs, with a corresponding
adverse effect on our gross profit. Consequently, unfavorable fluctuations in currency exchange rates
have and may continue to adversely affect our results of operations.
Legal, Tax, Regulatory, Compliance, Reputational and Other Risks
Our international operations subject us to legislative, judicial, accounting, legal, regulatory, tax,
political and economic risks and conditions specific to the countries or regions in which we operate,
which could materially adversely affect our business or financial performance.
In addition to our U.S. operations, we operate retail and eCommerce businesses in Africa, Canada,
Central America, Chile, China, India and Mexico.
During fiscal 2023, our Walmart International operations generated approximately 17% of our
consolidated net sales. Walmart International's operations in various countries also source goods and
services from other countries. Our future operating results in these countries could be negatively
affected by a variety of factors, most of which are beyond our control. These factors include
political conditions, including political instability, local and global economic conditions, legal
and regulatory constraints (such as regulation of product and service offerings including regulatory
restrictions (such as foreign ownership restrictions) on eCommerce and retail operations in
international markets, such as India), restrictive governmental actions (such as trade protection
measures or nationalization), antitrust and competition law regulatory matters (such as the
competition investigations currently underway in Mexico related to our subsidiary Wal-Mart de Mexico,
in Canada related to our subsidiary Wal-Mart Canada and competition proceedings in India related to
our Flipkart subsidiary), local product safety and environmental laws, tax regulations, local labor
laws, anti-money laundering laws and regulations, trade policies, foreign exchange or currency
regulations, laws and regulations regarding consumer and data protection, and other matters in any of
the countries or regions in which we operate, now or in the future.
The economies of some of the countries in which we have operations have in the past suffered from
high rates of inflation and currency devaluations, which, if they occurred again, could adversely
affect our financial performance. Other factors which may impact our international operations include
foreign trade, monetary and fiscal policies of the U.S. and of other countries, laws, regulations and
other activities of foreign governments, agencies and similar organizations, and risks associated
with having numerous facilities located in countries that have historically been less stable than the
U.S. Additional risks inherent in our international operations generally include, among others, the
costs and difficulties of managing international operations, adverse tax consequences and greater
difficulty in enforcing intellectual property rights in countries other than the U.S. The various
risks inherent in doing business in the U.S. generally also exist when doing business outside of the
U.S., and may be exaggerated by the difficulty of doing business in numerous sovereign jurisdictions
due to differences in culture, geopolitical tensions or events, laws and regulations.
In foreign countries in which we have operations, a risk exists that our associates, contractors or
agents could, in contravention of our policies, engage in business practices prohibited by U.S. laws
and regulations applicable to us, such as the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act or the laws and
regulations of other countries. We maintain a global policy prohibiting such business practices and
have in place a global anti-corruption compliance program designed to ensure compliance with these
laws and regulations. Nevertheless, we remain subject to the risk that one or more of our associates,
contractors or agents, including those based in or from countries where practices that violate such
U.S. laws and regulations or the laws and regulations of other countries may be customary, will
engage in business practices that are prohibited by our policies, circumvent our compliance
 23 
programs and, by doing so, violate such laws and regulations. Any such violations, even if prohibited
by our internal policies, could adversely affect our business or financial performance and our
reputation.
Changes in tax and trade laws and regulations could materially adversely affect our financial
performance.
In fiscal 2023, our Walmart U.S. and Sam's Club operating segments generated approximately 83% of our
consolidated net sales. Significant changes in tax and trade policies, including tariffs and
government regulations affecting trade between the U.S. and other countries where we source many of
the products we sell in our stores and clubs could have an adverse effect on our business and
financial performance. A significant portion of the general merchandise we sell in our U.S. stores
and clubs is manufactured in other countries. Any such actions including the imposition of further
tariffs on imports could increase the cost to us of such merchandise (whether imported directly or
indirectly) and cause increases in the prices at which we sell such merchandise to our customers,
which could materially adversely affect the financial performance of our U.S. and international
operations as well as our business.
We are subject to income taxes and other taxes in both the U.S. and the foreign jurisdictions in
which we currently operate or have historically operated. The determination of our worldwide
provision for income taxes and current and deferred tax assets and liabilities requires judgment and
estimation. Our income taxes could be materially adversely affected by earnings being lower than
anticipated in jurisdictions that have lower statutory tax rates and higher than anticipated in
jurisdictions that have higher statutory tax rates, by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax
assets and liabilities, or by changes in worldwide tax laws, tax rates, regulations or accounting
principles.
We are also exposed to future tax legislation, as well as the issuance of future regulations and
changes in administrative interpretations of existing tax laws, any of which can impact our current
and future years' tax provision. The effect of such changes in tax law could have a material effect
on our business, financial position and results of operations. In the U.S., the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
of 2017 (the "Tax Act") significantly changed federal income tax laws that affect U.S. corporations.
As further guidance is issued by the U.S. Treasury Department, the IRS, and other standard-setting
bodies, any resulting changes in our estimates will be treated in accordance with the relevant
accounting guidance. Compliance with the Tax Act and any other new tax rules, regulations, guidance,
and interpretations, including collecting information not regularly produced by the Company or
unexpected changes in our estimates, may require us to incur additional costs and could affect our
results of operations.
In addition, legislatures and taxing authorities in many jurisdictions in which we operate may enact
changes to or seek to enforce novel interpretations of their tax rules. These changes could include
modifications that have temporary effect and more permanent changes. For example, the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development (the "OECD"), the European Union and other countries
(including countries in which we operate) have committed to enacting substantial changes to numerous
long-standing tax principles impacting how large multinational enterprises are taxed. In particular,
the OECD's Pillar Two initiative introduces a 15% global minimum tax applied on a country-by-country
basis and for which many jurisdictions have now committed to an effective enactment date starting
January 1, 2024. The impact of these potential new rules as well as any other changes in domestic and
international tax rules and regulations could have a material effect on our effective tax rate.
Furthermore, we are subject to regular review and audit by both domestic and foreign tax authorities
as well as subject to the prospective and retrospective effects of changing tax regulations and
legislation. Although we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, the ultimate tax outcome may
materially differ from the tax amounts recorded in our Consolidated Financial Statements and may
materially affect our income tax provision, net income, or cash flows in the period or periods for
which such determination and settlement is made.
Changes in and/or failure to comply with other laws, regulations, and interpretations of such laws
and regulations specific to the businesses and jurisdictions in which we operate could materially
adversely affect our reputation, market position, or our business and financial performance.
We operate in complex regulated environments in the U.S. and in other countries in which we operate
and could be materially adversely affected by changes to existing legal requirements including the
related interpretations and enforcement practices, new legal requirements and/or any failure to
comply with applicable regulations. In addition, the degree of regulatory, political, and media
scrutiny we face increases the likelihood that our efforts to adhere our practices and procedures to
comply with these laws and legal requirements may be subject to frequent or increasing challenges.
Our health and wellness operations in the U.S. and the operations of the Walmart Health locations are
subject to numerous federal, state and local laws and regulations including, but not limited to,
those related to: licensing, reimbursement arrangements, and other requirements and restrictions;
registration and regulation of pharmacies; dispensing and sale of controlled substances and products
containing pseudoephedrine; governmental and commercial reimbursement (including Medicare and
Medicaid); data privacy and security and the sharing and interoperability of data, including
obligations and restrictions related to health information (such as those imposed under HIPAA);
billing and coding for healthcare services and properly handling overpayments; debt collection;
necessity and adequacy of healthcare services; relationships with referral sources and referral
recipients and other fraud and abuse issues, such as those addressed by anti-kickback and false
claims laws and patient inducement regulations; qualification of healthcare practitioners; quality
and standards of medical services and
 24 
equipment; and the practice of the professions of pharmacy, medical, dental, and behavioral
healthcare services, including limitations on the corporate practice of medicine in certain states.
Health-related legislation at the federal and state level may have an adverse effect on our business
or require us to modify certain aspects of our operations. For example, in the U.S., the Drug
Enforcement Administration ("DEA") and various other regulatory authorities regulate the purchase,
distribution, maintenance and dispensing of pharmaceuticals and controlled substances. We are
required to hold valid DEA and state-level licenses, meet various security and operating standards
and comply with the federal and various state controlled substance acts and related regulations
governing the sale, dispensing, disposal and holding of controlled substances. The DEA, the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration and state regulatory authorities have broad enforcement powers, including the
ability to seize or recall products and impose significant criminal, civil and administrative
sanctions for violations of these laws and regulations. In addition, there has been recent heightened
governmental and public scrutiny of pharmaceutical product pricing, which has resulted in federal and
state legislation and regulations, executive orders and other initiatives and proposals designed to
increase transparency in pharmaceutical product pricing and reform government program reimbursement
methodologies (for example, the Inflation Reduction Act, which includes, among other matters,
policies designed to impact drug prices and reduce drug spending by the federal government). Other
health reform efforts at the federal and state levels may also impact our business or require us to
modify certain aspects of our operations. We may not be able to predict the nature or success of
reform initiatives, and the resulting uncertainties may have an adverse effect on our business.
We are also governed by foreign, national and state laws and regulations of general applicability,
including laws and regulations related to competition and antitrust matters; protection of the
environment and health and safety matters, including exposure to, and the management and disposal of,
hazardous substances; food and drug safety, including drug supply chain security requirements; trade,
consumer protection, and safety, including the availability, sale, price label accuracy,
advertisement, and promotion of products we sell and the financial services we offer (including
through our digital channels, stores and clubs as well as our ONE fintech joint venture); anti-money
laundering prohibitions; consumer financial protection laws; economic, trade, and other sanctions
matters; licensure, certification, and enrollment with government programs; data privacy and security
and the sharing and interoperability of data; working conditions, health and safety, equal employment
opportunity, employee benefit and other labor and employment matters; and health and wellness related
regulations for our pharmacy operations outside of the U.S. In addition, certain financial services
we offer or make available are subject to legal and regulatory requirements, including those intended
to help detect and prevent money laundering, fraud and other illicit activity as well as consumer
financial protections laws and U.S. sanctions. Increasing governmental and societal attention to ESG
matters, including expanding mandatory and voluntary reporting diligence, and disclosure topics such
as climate change, sustainability (including with respect to our supply chain), natural resources,
waste reduction, energy, human capital, and risk oversight could expand the nature, scope, and
complexity of matters that we are required to control, assess, and report.
Moreover, we are also subject to data privacy and protection laws regulating the collection, use,
retention, disclosure, transfer and processing of personal information, such as the California
Consumer Privacy Act ("CCPA"), which was significantly modified by the California Privacy Rights Act
("CPRA"), new comprehensive privacy legislation passed in Connecticut (the Connecticut Data
Protection Act), Colorado (the Colorado Privacy Act), Utah (the Utah Privacy Act) and Virginia (the
Consumer Data Protection Act), each of which go into effect in 2023, as well as other laws and
regulations such as the Illinois Biometric Information Privacy Act, the European Union's General Data
Protection Regulation ("GDPR"), the United Kingdom's General Data Protection Regulation (which
implements the GDPR into U.K. law), China's Personal Information Protection Act, and similar
legislation in Quebec (An Act to modernize legislative provisions as regards the protection of
personal information, SQ 2021, c 25). The potential effects of these laws are far-reaching, continue
to evolve, and may require us to modify our data processing practices and policies and to incur
substantial costs and expenses to comply. These and other privacy and cybersecurity laws may carry
significant potential penalties for noncompliance. For example, in the case of non-compliance with a
material provision of the GDPR (such as non-adherence to the core principles of processing personal
data), regulators have the authority to levy a fine in an amount that is up to the greater of €20
million or 4% of global annual turnover in the prior year. These administrative fines are
discretionary and based, in each case, on a multi-factored approach. Residents in jurisdictions with
comprehensive privacy laws have expanded rights to access, correct and require deletion of their
personal information, opt out of certain personal information sharing and receive detailed
information about how their personal information is used. Laws such as those in California,
Connecticut, Colorado, Illinois, Utah, and Virginia may allow civil penalties for violations, and
CCPA and CPRA provide a private right of action for data breaches. Furthermore, our marketing and
customer engagement activities are subject to communications privacy laws such as the Telephone
Consumer Protection Act. We may be subjected to penalties and other consequences for noncompliance,
including changing some portions of our business. Even an unsuccessful challenge by customer or
regulatory authorities of our activities could result in adverse publicity, impact our reputation and
could require a costly response from and defense by us.
The impact of new laws, regulations and policies and the related interpretations, as well as changes
in enforcement practices or regulatory scrutiny as to existing laws and regulations (including, but
not limited to, in the U.S., shifting enforcement priorities for existing antitrust, competition, and
pricing laws, as well as proposed new rules and regulations) generally cannot be predicted, and
changes in applicable laws, regulations and policies and the related interpretations and enforcement
practices of
 25 
existing laws and regulations may require extensive system and operational changes, be difficult to
implement, increase our operating costs, require significant capital expenditures, or adversely
impact the cost or attractiveness of the products or services we offer, or result in adverse
publicity and harm our reputation. If we fail to predict or respond adequately to changes, including
by implementing strategic and operational initiatives, or do not respond as effectively as our
competitors, our business, operations, and financial performance may be adversely affected.
In addition, we may face audits or investigations by one or more government agencies relating to our
compliance with applicable laws and regulations. The regulatory, political, and media scrutiny we
face, which may continue, amplifies these risks. To the extent a regulator or court disagrees with
our interpretation of these laws and determines that our practices are not in compliance with
applicable laws and regulations, we could be subject to civil and criminal penalties that could
adversely affect the continued operation of our businesses, including: suspension of payments from
government programs; loss of required licenses and certifications; loss of authorizations to
participate in or exclusion from government programs, including the Medicare and Medicaid programs in
the U.S.; termination from contractual relationships, including those with our drug suppliers and
third-party payers; and significant fines or monetary damages. Failure to comply with applicable
legal or regulatory requirements in the U.S. or in any of the countries in which we operate could
result in significant legal and financial exposure, damage to our reputation, and have a material
adverse effect on our business operations, financial position and results of operations.
We are subject to risks related to litigation and other legal proceedings that may materially
adversely affect our results of operations, financial position and liquidity.
We operate in a highly regulated and litigious environment. We are involved in legal proceedings,
including litigation, arbitration and other claims, and investigations, inspections, audits, claims,
inquiries and similar actions by pharmacy, healthcare, tax, environmental and other governmental
authorities. We may also have indemnification obligations for legal commitments of certain businesses
we have divested. Legal proceedings, in general, and securities, derivative action and class action
and multi-district litigation, in particular, can be expensive and disruptive. Some of these suits
may purport or may be determined to be class actions and/or involve parties seeking large and/or
indeterminate amounts, including punitive or exemplary damages, and may remain unresolved for several
years. For example, we are currently a defendant in a number of cases containing class or collective-
action allegations, or both, in which the plaintiffs have brought claims under federal and state wage
and hour laws, as well as a number of cases containing class-action allegations in which the
plaintiffs have brought claims under federal and state consumer laws.
The Company has been responding to subpoenas, information requests and investigations from
governmental entities related to nationwide controlled substance dispensing and distribution
practices involving opioids and also is a defendant in numerous litigation proceedings related to
opioids, including the consolidated multidistrict litigation entitled In re National Prescription
Opiate Litigation (MDL No. 2804) currently pending in the U.S. District Court for the Northern
District of Ohio. Similar cases that name the Company also have been filed in state courts by state,
local and tribal governments, healthcare providers and other plaintiffs. Plaintiffs are seeking
compensatory and punitive damages, as well as injunctive relief including abatement. The Company
cannot predict the number of such claims that may be filed, and cannot reasonably estimate any loss
or range of loss that may arise from such claims and the related opioid matters. In addition, in July
2021, the Directorate of Enforcement in India issued a show cause notice to Flipkart and other
parties requesting the recipients show cause as to why further proceedings under India's Foreign
Direct Investment rules and regulations should not be initiated against them based on alleged
violations that related to a period prior to the Company's acquisition of a majority stake in
Flipkart in 2018. The Company can provide no assurance as to the scope or outcome of any proceeding
that might result from the notice, the amount of proceeds the Company may receive in indemnification,
and can provide no assurance as to whether there will be a material adverse effect to its business or
its consolidated financial statements. The Company is also a defendant in litigation with the Federal
Trade Commission regarding the Company's money transfer agent services and is also cooperating with
and responding to subpoenas issued by the U.S Attorney's Office for the Middle District of
Pennsylvania on behalf of the U.S. Department of Justice regarding the Company's consumer fraud
prevention program and anti-money laundering compliance related to the Company's money transfer
services, where Walmart is an agent. The Company is unable to predict the outcome of the litigation
or investigations or any other related actions by governmental entities regarding these matters and
can provide no assurance as to the scope and outcome of these matters and whether its business,
financial position, results of operations or cash flows will not be materially adversely affected. We
discuss in more detail these cases and other litigation to which we are party below under the caption
"Item 3. Legal Proceedings" and in Note 10 in the "Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements,"
which are part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 26 
Our amended and restated bylaws designate the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware as the sole
and exclusive forum for certain types of actions and proceedings that may be initiated by our
shareholders, which could increase the costs for our shareholders to bring claims, discourage our
shareholders from bringing claims, or limit our shareholders' ability to obtain a favorable judicial
forum for disputes with us or our directors, officers, associates or shareholders in such capacity.
Our bylaws provide that, unless we consent in writing to the selection of an alternative forum, the
Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware will, to the fullest extent permitted by law, be the sole
and exclusive forum for claims, including derivative claims that are based upon a violation of a duty
by a current or former director, officer, associate or shareholder in such capacity or as to which
the Delaware General Corporation Law confers jurisdiction upon the Court of Chancery. The exclusive
forum provision may increase the costs for a shareholder to bring a claim or limit a shareholder's
ability to bring a claim in a judicial forum that the shareholder finds favorable for disputes with
us or our directors, officers, associates or shareholders in such capacity, which may discourage such
lawsuits against us and such persons. Alternatively, if a court were to find these provisions of our
bylaws inapplicable to, or unenforceable in respect of, the claims as to which they are intended to
apply, then we may incur additional costs associated with resolving such matters in other
jurisdictions, which could adversely affect our business, financial position or results of
operations. While the exclusive forum provision applies to state and federal law claims, our
shareholders will not be deemed to have waived our compliance with, and the exclusive forum provision
will not preclude or contract the scope of exclusive federal or concurrent jurisdiction for actions
brought under, the federal securities laws, including the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended, or the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
Our reputation may be adversely affected if we are not able to achieve our ESG goals.
We strive to deliver shared value through our business and our diverse stakeholders expect us to make
significant progress in certain ESG priority issue areas. From time to time, we announce certain
aspirations and goals relevant to our priority ESG issues. We periodically publish information about
our ESG priorities, strategies, and progress on our corporate website and update our ESG reporting
from time to time. Achievement of these aspirations and goals is subject to risks and uncertainties,
many of which are outside of our control, and it is possible that we may fail, or be perceived to
have failed, in the achievement of our ESG goals or that certain of our customers, associates,
shareholders, investors, suppliers, business partners, government agencies, and non-governmental
organizations might not be satisfied with our goals or our efforts toward achieving those goals.
Certain challenges we face in the achievement of our ESG objectives are also captured within our ESG
reporting, which is not incorporated by reference into and does not form any part of this Annual
Report on Form 10-K. A failure or perceived failure to meet our goals could adversely affect public
perception of our business, associate morale or customer or shareholder support.
 ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS 
None.
 27 
 ITEM 2. PROPERTIES 
 United States 
The Walmart U.S. and Sam's Club segments comprise the Company's operations in the U.S. As of January
31, 2023, unit counts for Walmart U.S. and Sam's Club are summarized by format for each state and
territory as follows:
 Walmart U.S. Sam's Club 
 Neighborhood 
 State or Supercenters Discount Stores Markets and Clubs Grand Total 
 Territory other small 
 formats 
 Alabama 101 1 29 13 144 
 Alaska 7 2 — — 9 
 Arizona 83 2 28 12 125 
 Arkansas 76 5 36 9 126 
 California 144 68 78 30 320 
 Colorado 70 4 18 17 109 
 Connecticut 12 20 1 1 34 
 Delaware 6 3 — 1 10 
 Florida 233 9 98 46 386 
 Georgia 154 2 35 24 215 
 Hawaii — 10 — 2 12 
 Idaho 23 — 3 1 27 
 Illinois 139 15 11 25 190 
 Indiana 97 6 11 13 127 
 Iowa 58 2 — 9 69 
 Kansas 58 2 15 9 84 
 Kentucky 77 7 9 9 102 
 Louisiana 88 2 34 14 138 
 Maine 19 3 — 3 25 
 Maryland 31 16 3 11 61 
 Massachusetts 27 21 4 — 52 
 Michigan 90 3 9 23 125 
 Minnesota 65 3 1 12 81 
 Mississippi 65 3 11 7 86 
 Missouri 112 9 18 19 158 
 Montana 14 — — 2 16 
 Nebraska 35 — 7 5 47 
 Nevada 30 2 11 7 50 
 New Hampshire 19 7 — 2 28 
 New Jersey 35 27 1 8 71 
 New Mexico 35 2 9 7 53 
 New York 82 16 9 12 119 
 North Carolina 143 6 45 22 216 
 North Dakota 14 — — 3 17 
 Ohio 138 5 2 27 172 
 Oklahoma 81 7 34 13 135 
 Oregon 29 7 10 — 46 
 Pennsylvania 116 19 3 24 162 
 Puerto Rico 13 5 — 7 25 
 Rhode Island 5 4 — — 9 
 South Carolina 83 — 26 13 122 
 South Dakota 15 — — 2 17 
 Tennessee 117 1 19 14 151 
 Texas 391 18 110 82 601 
 Utah 41 — 11 8 60 
 Vermont 3 3 — — 6 
 Virginia 110 4 22 15 151 
 Washington 52 9 5 — 66 
 Washington 3 — 2 — 5 
 D.C. 
 West Virginia 38 — 1 5 44 
 Wisconsin 83 4 2 10 99 
 Wyoming 12 — — 2 14 
 U.S. total 3,572 364 781 600 5,317 
 Square feet(in 634,615 38,226 28,885 80,351 782,076 
 thousands) 
 28 
 International 
The Walmart International segment comprises the Company's operations outside of the U.S. Unit counts
as of January 31, 2023 (1) for Walmart International are summarized by major category for each
geographic market as follows:
 Geographic Market Retail Wholesale Total Square feet(2) 
 Africa(3) 289 86 375 20,939 
 Canada 402 — 402 52,557 
 Central America(4) 882 — 882 13,996 
 Chile 379 13 392 17,688 
 China 322 43 365 60,331 
 India — 28 28 1,527 
 Mexico 2,694 168 2,862 106,412 
 International total 4,968 338 5,306 273,450 
(1) Walmart International unit counts, with the exception of Canada, are as of December 31, 2022, to
correspond with the balance sheet date of the related geographic market. Canada unit counts are as of
January 31, 2023.
(2) Square feet reported in thousands.
(3) Africa unit counts primarily reside in South Africa, with other locations in Botswana, Kenya,
Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, and Zambia.
(4) Central America unit counts reside in Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua.
 Owned and Leased Properties 
The following table provides further details of our retail units and distribution facilities,
including return facilities and dedicated eCommerce fulfillment centers, as of January 31, 2023 (1) :
 Owned Leased(2) Total 
 U.S. properties 
 Walmart U.S. retail units 4,057 660 4,717 
 Sam's Club retail units 513 87 600 
 Total U.S. retail units 4,570 747 5,317 
 Walmart U.S. distribution facilities 110 53 163 
 Sam's Club distribution facilities 12 17 29 
 Total U.S. distribution facilities 122 70 192 
 Total U.S. properties 4,692 817 5,509 
 International properties 
 Africa 33 342 375 
 Canada 124 278 402 
 Central America 380 502 882 
 Chile 205 187 392 
 China 2 363 365 
 India 2 26 28 
 Mexico 710 2,152 2,862 
 Total International retail units 1,456 3,850 5,306 
 International distribution facilities 23 165 188 
 Total International properties 1,479 4,015 5,494 
 Total properties 6,171 4,832 11,003 
 Total retail units 6,026 4,597 10,623 
 Total distribution facilities 145 235 380 
 Total properties 6,171 4,832 11,003 
(1) Walmart International properties, with the exception of Canada, are as of December 31, 2022, to
correspond with the balance sheet date of the related geographic market. Canada unit counts are as of
January 31, 2023.
(2) Also includes U.S. and international distribution facilities which are third-party owned and
operated.
 29 
We own office facilities in Bentonville, Arkansas, that serve as our principal office and own and
lease office facilities throughout the U.S. and internationally for operations as well as for field
and market management. The land on which our stores are located is either owned or leased by the
Company. We use independent contractors to construct our buildings. All store leases provide for
annual rentals, some of which escalate during the original lease or provide for additional rent based
on sales volume. Substantially all of the Company's store and club leases have renewal options, some
of which include rent escalation clauses. For further information on our distribution centers, see
the caption "Distribution" provided for each of our segments under " Item 1. Business ."
 30 
 ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 
I. SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION: We discuss certain legal proceedings in Note 10 to our Consolidated
Financial Statements included in " Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data ," which is
captioned "Contingencies," under the sub-caption "Legal Proceedings." We refer you to that discussion
for important information concerning those legal proceedings, including the basis for such actions
and, where known, the relief sought. We provide the following additional information concerning those
legal proceedings, including the name of the lawsuit, the court in which the lawsuit is pending, and
the date on which the petition commencing the lawsuit was filed.
Prescription Opiate Litigation: In re National Prescription Opiate Litigation (MDL No. 2804) (the
"MDL"). The MDL is pending in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Ohio and includes
over 2,000 cases as of March 3, 2023. The liability phase of a single, two-county trial in one of the
MDL cases against a number of parties, including the Company, regarding opioid dispensing claims
resulted in a jury verdict on November 23, 2021, finding in favor of the plaintiffs as to the
liability of all defendants, including the Company. The abatement phase of the single, two-county
trial resulted in a judgment on August 17, 2022, that ordered all three defendants, including the
Company, to pay an aggregate amount of approximately $651 million over fifteen years, on a joint and
several liability basis, and granted the plaintiffs injunctive relief. The Company has filed an
appeal with the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals. The monetary aspect of the judgment is stayed pending
appeal, and the injunctive portion of the judgment went into effect on February 20, 2023. The MDL has
designated five additional single-county cases as bellwethers to proceed through discovery. In
addition, there are over 300 other cases pending in state and federal courts throughout the country
as of March 3, 2023. The case citations and currently scheduled trial dates, where applicable, are
listed on Exhibit 99.1 to this Form 10-K.
Opioid Settlement Framework: On November 15, 2022, the Company announced that it had agreed to a
Settlement Framework to resolve substantially all opioids-related lawsuits filed against the Company
by states, political subdivisions, and Native American tribes (other than the single, two-county
trial on appeal to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals as described above), as described in more
detail in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company now has settlement agreements
with all 50 states, including four states that previously settled with the Company, as well as the
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and three other U.S. territories, that are intended to resolve
substantially all opioids-related lawsuits brought by state and local governments against the
Company. The settlement will take effect if a sufficient number of political subdivisions also join.
DOJ Opioid Civil Litigation: A civil complaint pending in the U.S. District Court for the District of
Delaware has been filed by the U.S. Department of Justice (the "DOJ") against the Company, in which
the DOJ alleges violations of the Controlled Substances Act related to nationwide distribution and
dispensing of opioids. U.S. v. Walmart Inc., et al., USDC, Dist. of DE, 12/22/20. The Company filed a
motion to dismiss the DOJ complaint on February 22, 2021. After the parties had fully briefed the
Company's motion to dismiss, the DOJ filed an amended complaint on October 7, 2022. On November 7,
2022, the Company filed a partial motion to dismiss the amended complaint. The motion remains
pending.
Opioids Related Securities Class Actions and Derivative Litigation : Three derivative complaints and
two securities class actions drawing heavily on the allegations of the DOJ complaint have been filed
in Delaware naming the Company and various current and former directors and certain current and
former officers as defendants. The plaintiffs in the derivative suits (in which the Company is a
nominal defendant) allege, among other things, that the defendants breached their fiduciary duties in
connection with oversight of opioids dispensing and distribution and that the defendants violated
Section 14(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the "Exchange Act"), and are liable
for contribution under Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act in connection with the Company's disclosures
about opioids. Two of the derivative suits have been filed in the U.S. District Court in Delaware and
those suits have been stayed pending further developments in other opioids litigation matters. The
other derivative suit has been filed in the Delaware Court of Chancery. The defendants in the
derivative suit pending in the Delaware Court of Chancery moved to dismiss and/or to stay that case
on December 21, 2021; the plaintiffs responded by filing an amended complaint on February 22, 2022.
On April 20, 2022, the defendants moved to dismiss and/or stay proceedings on the amended complaint.
The court held a hearing on that motion on September 26, 2022; a ruling remains pending. The
securities class actions, alleging violations of Sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the Exchange Act
regarding the Company's disclosures with respect to opioids, purport to be filed on behalf of a class
of investors who acquired Walmart stock from March 30, 2016, through December 22, 2020. On May 11,
2021, the U.S. District Court in Delaware consolidated the class actions and appointed a lead
plaintiff and lead counsel. The defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated securities class action
on October 8, 2021. On October 14, 2022, plaintiffs filed an amended complaint, which revised the
applicable putative class of investors to those who acquired Walmart stock from March 31, 2017,
through December 22, 2020. On November 16, 2022, the Company moved to dismiss the amended complaint.
That motion remains pending.
Derivative Lawsuits: Abt v. Alvarez et al. , USDC, Dist. of DE, 2/9/21; Nguyen v. McMillon et al.,
USDC, Dist. of DE, 4/16/21: Ontario Provincial Council of Carpenters' Pension Trust Fund et al. v.
Walton et al., DE Court of Chancery, 9/27/21.
 31 
Securities Class Actions: Stanton v. Walmart Inc. et al. , USDC, Dist. of DE, 1/20/21 and Martin v.
Walmart Inc. et al., USDC , Dist. of DE, 3/5/21, consolidated into In re Walmart Inc. Securities
Litigation , USDC, Dist. of DE, 5/11/21.
ASDA Equal Value Claims: Ms S Brierley & Others v. ASDA Stores Ltd (2406372/2008 & Others –
Manchester Employment Tribunal); Abbas & Others v Asda Stores limited (KB-2022-003243); and Abusubih
& Others v Asda Stores limited (KB-2022-003240).
Money Transfer Agent Services Litigation: Federal Trade Commission v. Walmart Inc. (CV-3372), USDC,
N. Dist. Of Ill, 6/28/22.
II. CERTAIN OTHER MATTERS:
Foreign Direct Investment Matters: In July 2021, the Directorate of Enforcement in India issued a
show cause notice to Flipkart Private Limited and one of its subsidiaries ("Flipkart"), and to
unrelated companies and individuals, including certain current and former shareholders and directors
of Flipkart. The notice requests the recipients to show cause as to why further proceedings under
India's Foreign Direct Investment rules and regulations (the "Rules") should not be initiated against
them based on alleged violations during the period from 2009 to 2015, prior to the Company's
acquisition of a majority stake in Flipkart in 2018. The notice is an initial stage of proceedings
under the Rules which could, depending upon the conclusions at the end of the initial stage, lead to
a hearing to consider the merits of the allegations described in the notice. If a hearing is
initiated and if it is determined that violations of the Rules occurred, the regulatory authority has
the authority to impose monetary and/or non-monetary relief. Flipkart has begun the process of
responding to the notice and, if the matter progresses to a consideration of the merits of the
allegations described in the notice is initiated, Flipkart intends to defend against the allegations
vigorously. Due to the fact that this process is in an early stage, the Company is unable to predict
whether the notice will lead to a hearing on the merits or, if it does, the final outcome of the
resulting proceedings. While the Company does not currently believe that this matter will have a
material adverse effect on its business, financial condition, results of operations or cash flows,
the Company can provide no assurance as to the scope or outcome of any proceeding that might result
from the notice, the amount of the proceeds the Company may receive in indemnification from
individuals and entities that sold shares to the Company under the 2018 agreement pursuant to which
the Company acquired its majority stake in Flipkart, and can provide no assurance as to whether there
will be a material adverse effect to its business or its consolidated financial statements.
III. ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS: Item 103 of SEC Regulation S-K requires disclosure of certain
environmental matters when a governmental authority is a party to the proceedings and such
proceedings involve potential monetary sanctions that the Company reasonably believes will exceed an
applied threshold not to exceed $1 million.
In December 2021, the Office of the Attorney General of the State of California filed suit against
the Company, bringing enforcement claims regarding Walmart's management of waste consumer products at
its California facilities that are alleged to be hazardous. The suit was filed in Superior Court of
Alameda County, California, Case No. 21CV004367, People v. Walmart Inc., and a trial date has been
scheduled for April 22, 2024. The Company believes the suit is without merit and is vigorously
defending this litigation matter. While the Company cannot predict the ultimate outcome of this
matter, the potential for penalties or settlement costs could exceed $1 million. Although the Company
does not believe that this matter will have a material adverse effect on its business, financial
position, results of operations, or cash flows, the Company can provide no assurance as to the scope
and outcome of this matter and no assurance as to whether there will be a material adverse effect to
its business or its consolidated financial statements.
 ITEM 4. MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES 
Not applicable.
 32