ITEM 1. BUSINESS 
Exxon Mobil Corporation was incorporated in the State of New Jersey in 1882. Divisions and affiliated
companies of ExxonMobil operate or market products in the United States and most other countries of
the world. Our principal business involves exploration for, and production of, crude oil and natural
gas; manufacture, trade, transport and sale of crude oil, natural gas, petroleum products,
petrochemicals, and a wide variety of specialty products; and pursuit of lower-emission and other new
business opportunities, including carbon capture and storage, hydrogen, lower-emission fuels,
Proxxima TM systems, carbon materials, and lithium. Affiliates of ExxonMobil conduct extensive
research programs in support of these businesses.
Exxon Mobil Corporation's divisions and affiliates have many names, including ExxonMobil , Exxon ,
Esso, Mobil or XTO . For convenience and simplicity, in this report the terms ExxonMobil, Exxon,
Esso, Mobil, and XTO , as well as terms like Corporation , Company , our , we, and its , are
sometimes used as abbreviated references to specific affiliates or groups of affiliates. The precise
meaning depends on the context in question.
On May 3, 2024, the Corporation acquired Pioneer Natural Resources Company (Pioneer), an independent
oil and gas exploration and production company. With reference to the acquisition, we issued 545
million shares of ExxonMobil common stock having a fair value of $63 billion on the acquisition date,
and assumed debt with a fair value of $5 billion. The acquisition transforms ExxonMobil’s upstream
portfolio, creating an industry-leading, high-quality U.S. unconventional inventory position. For
additional information, see Note 21 in the Financial Section of this report.
The energy and petrochemical industries are highly competitive, both within the industries and also
with other industries in supplying the energy, fuel, and chemical needs of industrial and individual
consumers. Certain industry participants, including ExxonMobil, are expanding investments in lower-
emission energy and emission-reduction services and technologies. The Corporation competes with other
firms in the sale or purchase of needed goods and services in many national and international markets
and employs all methods of competition which are lawful and appropriate for such purposes.
Operating data and industry segment information for the Corporation are contained in the Financial
Section of this report under the following: “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations: Business Results ” and Note 18 . Information on oil and gas
reserves is contained in the “ Oil and Gas Reserves ” part of the “Supplemental Information on Oil
and Gas Exploration and Production Activities” portion of the Financial Section of this report.
ExxonMobil has a long-standing commitment to the development of proprietary technology. We have a
wide array of research programs designed to meet the needs identified in each of our businesses.
ExxonMobil held over 8 thousand active patents worldwide at the end of 2024. For technology licensed
to third parties, revenues totaled approximately $102 million in 2024. Although technology is an
important contributor to the overall operations and results of our Company, the profitability of each
business segment is not dependent on any individual patent, trade secret, trademark, license,
franchise, or concession.
ExxonMobil operates in a highly complex, competitive, and changing global energy business environment
where decisions and risks play out over time horizons that are often decades in length. This long-
term orientation underpins the Corporation's philosophy on talent development.
Talent development begins with recruiting exceptional candidates and continues with individually
planned experiences and training designed to facilitate broad development and a deep understanding of
our business across the business cycle. Our career-oriented approach to talent development results in
strong retention and an average length of service of about 30 years for our career employees.
Compensation, benefits, and workplace programs support the Corporation's talent management approach,
and are designed to attract and retain employees for a career through compensation that is market
competitive, long-term oriented, and highly differentiated by individual performance.
With over 60 percent of our global employees from outside the U.S. and 160 nationalities represented
across the Company, we encourage and respect diversity of thought, ideas, and perspective from our
workforce. We are focused on building an engaged, global workforce; grounded in meritocracy, we
strive to have every employee reach their potential over a long-term career by providing unrivaled
opportunities for personal and professional growth through impactful work meeting society's essential
needs.
The number of regular employees was 61 thousand, 62 thousand, and 62 thousand at years ended 2024,
2023, and 2022, respectively. Regular employees are defined as active executive, management,
professional, technical, administrative, and wage employees who work full time or part time for the
Corporation and are covered by the Corporation’s benefit plans and programs.
As discussed in Item 1A in this report, compliance with existing and potential future government
regulations, including taxes, environmental regulations, and other government regulations and
policies that directly or indirectly affect the production and sale of our products, may have
material effects on the capital expenditures, earnings, and competitive position of ExxonMobil. For
additional
 1 
information on the Corporation's worldwide environmental expenditures, see “Management's Discussion
and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations: Environmental Matters ” in the
Financial Section of this report.
Information concerning the source and availability of raw materials used in the Corporation’s
business, the extent of seasonality in the business, the possibility of renegotiation of profits or
termination of contracts at the election of governments, and risks attendant to foreign operations
may be found in Item 1A and Item 2 in this report.
ExxonMobil maintains a website at exxonmobil.com. Our annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports
on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and any amendments to those reports filed or furnished
pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 are made available through our
website as soon as reasonably practical after we electronically file or furnish the reports to the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Also available on the Corporation’s website are the
Company’s Corporate Governance Guidelines, Code of Ethics and Business Conduct, and additional
policies as well as the charters of the audit, compensation, and other committees of the Board of
Directors. Information on our website is not incorporated into this report.
The SEC maintains an internet site (http://www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and information
statements, and other information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC.
 ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS 
ExxonMobil’s financial and operating results are subject to a variety of risks inherent in the global
oil, gas, and petrochemical businesses and the pursuit of lower-emission and other new business
opportunities. Many of these risk factors are not within the Company’s control and could adversely
affect our business, our financial and operating results, or our financial condition. These risk
factors include:
 Supply and Demand 
The oil, gas, and petrochemical businesses are fundamentally commodity businesses. This means
ExxonMobil’s operations and earnings may be significantly affected by changes in oil, gas, and
petrochemical prices and by changes in margins on refined products. Oil, gas, petrochemical, and
product prices and margins in turn depend on local, regional, and global events or conditions that
affect supply and demand for the relevant commodity or product. Any material decline in oil or
natural gas prices could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s operations, financial
condition, and proved reserves, especially in the Upstream segment. On the other hand, a material
increase in oil or natural gas prices could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s
operations, especially in the Energy Products, Chemical Products, and Specialty Products segments.
Our pursuit of lower-emission and other new business opportunities, including carbon capture and
storage, hydrogen, lower-emission fuels, Proxxima TM systems, carbon materials, and lithium also
depends on the growth and development of markets for those products and services, including
implementation of supportive and stable government policies and developments in technology to enable
those products and services to be provided on a cost-effective basis at commercial scale. See
“Climate Change and the Energy Transition” in this Item 1A.
Economic conditions. The demand for energy and petrochemicals is generally linked closely with broad-
based economic activities and levels of prosperity. The occurrence of economic downturns, recessions
or other periods of low or negative economic growth will typically have a direct adverse impact on
our results. Other factors that affect general economic conditions in the world or in a major region,
such as changes in population growth rates, periods of civil unrest, government regulation or
austerity programs, national or regional trade tariffs, trade sanctions or trade controls,
international monetary and currency exchange rate fluctuations, decoupling of economies, disruptions
in trade alliances or military alliances, or a broader breakdown in global trade, security or public
health issues and responses, can also impact the demand for energy and petrochemicals. Sovereign debt
downgrades, defaults, extended government shutdowns, inability to access debt markets due to rating,
banking, or legal constraints, liquidity crises, the breakup or restructuring of fiscal, monetary, or
political systems such as the European Union, de-dollarization in global trade or the growth or use
of alternative common currencies, and other events or conditions that impair the functioning of
financial markets and institutions also pose risks to ExxonMobil, including risks to the safety of
our financial assets and to the ability of our partners and customers to fulfill their commitments to
ExxonMobil. Our future business results, including cash flows and financing needs, may also be
affected by the occurrence, severity, pace and rate of recovery of future public health epidemics or
pandemics; the responsive actions taken by governments and others; and the resulting effects on
regional and global markets and economies.
Other demand-related factors. Other factors that may affect the demand for oil, gas, petrochemicals
or our other products, and therefore impact our results, include technological improvements in energy
efficiency; seasonal weather patterns; increased competitiveness of, or government policy support
for, alternative energy sources or potential substitutes for our products; changes in technology that
alter fuel choices, such as technological advances in energy storage or other critical areas that
make wind, solar, nuclear or other alternatives more competitive for power generation; changes in
consumer preferences for our products, including consumer demand for alternative-fueled or electric
transportation or alternatives to plastic products; and broad-based changes in personal income
levels. See also “Climate Change and the Energy Transition” below.
 2 
Other supply-related factors. Commodity prices and margins also vary depending on a number of factors
affecting supply. For example, increased supply from the development of new oil and gas supply
sources and technologies to enhance recovery from existing sources tends to reduce commodity prices
to the extent such supply increases are not offset by commensurate growth in demand. Similarly,
increases in industry refining or petrochemical manufacturing capacity relative to demand tend to
reduce margins on the affected products. World oil, gas, and petrochemical supply levels can also be
affected by factors that reduce available supplies, such as the level of and adherence by
participating countries to production quotas established by OPEC or OPEC+ and other agreements among
sovereigns; government policies, including actions intended to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, that
restrict oil and gas production or increase associated production, reporting or compliance costs;
collective actions by non-governmental organizations and financial institutions to withhold funding
or support from oil and gas producers; the occurrence of wars or hostile actions, including
disruption of land or sea transportation routes; natural disasters; disruptions in competitors’
operations; and logistics constraints or unexpected unavailability of distribution channels that may
disrupt supplies. Technological change can also alter the relative costs for competitors to find,
produce and refine oil and gas, and to manufacture petrochemicals.
Other market factors. ExxonMobil’s business results are also exposed to potential negative impacts
due to changes in interest rates, inflation, currency exchange rates, changes in usage of the U.S.
dollar in global trade, and other local or regional market conditions. In addition to direct
potential impacts on our costs and revenues, market factors such as rates of inflation may indirectly
impact our results to the extent such factors reduce general rates of economic growth and therefore
energy demand, as discussed under “Economic conditions”. Market factors may also result in losses
from commodity derivatives and other instruments we use to hedge price exposures or for trading
purposes. Additional information regarding the potential future impact of market factors on our
businesses is included or incorporated by reference under Item 7A in this report.
 Government and Political Factors 
ExxonMobil’s results can be adversely affected by political or regulatory developments affecting our
businesses or operations.
Access limitations. A number of countries limit access to their oil and gas resources, including by
restricting leasing or permitting activities, or may place resources off-limits from development
altogether. Restrictions on production of oil and gas could increase to the extent governments view
such measures as a viable approach for pursuing national and global energy and climate policies.
Restrictions on foreign investment in the oil and gas sector tend to increase in times of high
commodity prices or when national governments may have less need for outside sources of private
capital. Many countries also restrict the import or export of certain products based on point of
origin and such restrictions may increase during periods of escalating geopolitical or trade
tensions.
Restrictions on doing business. ExxonMobil is subject to laws and sanctions imposed by the United
States and by other jurisdictions where we do business that may prohibit ExxonMobil or its affiliates
from doing business in certain countries or with certain counterparties or restrict the kind of
business that may be conducted, including acquiring and divesting certain assets or importing or
exporting certain materials or products. Such restrictions may provide a competitive advantage to
competitors who may not be subject to comparable restrictions.
Lack of legal certainty. Some countries in which we do business lack well-developed legal systems,
lack political or governmental stability, have not yet adopted or may be unable to maintain clear
regulatory frameworks, or may have evolving and unharmonized standards that vary or conflict across
jurisdictions. Lack of legal certainty exposes us to increased risk of adverse or unpredictable
actions by government officials, may reduce our ability to comply timely or cost-effectively with
evolving standards or requirements, and also makes it more difficult for us to enforce our contracts.
In some cases, these risks can be partially offset by agreements to arbitrate disputes in an
international forum, but the adequacy of this remedy may still depend on the local legal system to
enforce an award.
Regulatory and litigation risks. Even in countries with well-developed legal systems where ExxonMobil
does business, we remain exposed to changes in law or interpretation of settled law, including
changes that result from international treaties and accords or changes by local jurisdictions
encroaching on national regulatory frameworks or global issues, and changes in policy that could
adversely affect our results, such as:
• increases or changes in taxes, duties, or government royalty rates, including retroactive claims,
punitive taxes on oil, gas and petrochemical operations, windfall profit taxes, or global minimum
taxes;
• price controls;
• changes in environmental regulations or other laws that penalize us for past or current production
of legal and/or permitted products and operations, increase our cost of operation or compliance or
reduce or delay available business opportunities, including changes in laws affecting offshore
drilling operations, standards to complete decommissioning, water use, production of our products,
emissions, hydraulic fracturing, or production or use of new or recycled plastics, as well as laws
and regulations affecting trading, carbon capture and storage, hydrogen, lower-emission fuels,
Proxxima TM systems, carbon materials, or lithium;
• actions by policy-makers, regulators, or other actors to delay or deny necessary licenses and
permits, restrict the availability of oil and gas leases or the transportation or export of our
products, reduce or retract government incentives for emissions reductions, or otherwise require
changes in the Company's business or strategy that could result in reduced returns;
 3 
• regulatory interpretations that exclude or disfavor our products under government policies or
programs intended to support new or developing markets or technologies, or that otherwise are not
technology-neutral;
• adoption of regulations mandating efficiency standards, emission standards, the use of alternative
fuels or uncompetitive fuel components;
• use of regulatory or legal standards as a foreign policy tool;
• unstable policies impacting new or emerging markets;
• adoption of disclosure regulations that could create competitive disadvantages, require us to incur
disproportionate costs, or increase legal risk due to a need to rely on uncertain estimates or
extrapolations (such as emissions of third parties) and lack of uniform standards across
jurisdictions, or by requiring us to disclose competitively sensitive commercial information or to
violate the non-disclosure laws of other countries; and
• government actions to cancel contracts, redenominate the official currency, renounce or default on
obligations, renegotiate terms unilaterally, or expropriate assets.
Legal remedies available to compensate us for expropriation or other takings may be inadequate.
We also may be adversely affected by the outcome of litigation or arbitration, especially in
countries such as the United States in which very large and unpredictable punitive damage awards may
occur; by government enforcement proceedings alleging non-compliance with applicable laws or
regulations; or by state and local government actors as well as private plaintiffs acting in parallel
that attempt to use the legal system to promote public policy agendas (including seeking to reduce
the production and sale of hydrocarbon products through litigation targeting the Company or other
industry participants), gain political notoriety, or obtain monetary awards from the Company. The
continued adoption of similar legal practices in the European Union or elsewhere would broaden this
risk and has begun to be applied to some of our competitors in the European Union.
Security concerns. Successful operation of particular facilities or projects may be disrupted by
civil unrest, acts of sabotage, piracy, or terrorism, cybersecurity attacks, the application of
national security laws or policies that result in restricting our ability to do business in a
particular jurisdiction, strikes or protests, and other local security concerns. Such concerns may be
directed specifically at our company, our industry, or as part of broader movements and may require
us to incur greater costs for security or to shut down operations for a period of time.
 Climate Change and the Energy Transition 
Net-zero scenarios. Driven by concern over the risks of climate change, a number of countries have
adopted, or are considering the adoption of, regulatory frameworks to report on or reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, including emissions from the production and use of oil and gas and their products, as
well as increase the use of or support for different emission-reduction technologies. These actions
are being taken both independently by national and regional governments and within the framework of
United Nations Conference of the Parties summits under which many countries of the world have
endorsed objectives to reduce the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) over the coming
decades, with an ambition ultimately to achieve “net zero”. Net zero means that emissions of
greenhouse gases from human activities would be balanced by actions that remove such gases from the
atmosphere. Expectations for transition of the world’s energy system to lower-emission sources, and
ultimately net-zero, derive from hypothetical scenarios that reflect many assumptions about the
future, including supportive policy and technology advancements, and reflect substantial
uncertainties. The Company’s objective to play a leading role in the energy transition, including the
Company’s announced ambition ultimately to achieve net zero with respect to Scope 1 and 2 emissions
from operations with continued technology development and government policy support where ExxonMobil
is the operator, carries risks that the transition, including underlying technologies, government
policies, and markets as discussed in more detail below, will not be available or develop at the pace
or in the manner expected by current net-zero scenarios. The success of our strategy for the energy
transition will also depend on our ability to recognize key signposts of changes in the global energy
system on a timely basis, and our corresponding ability to direct investment to the technologies and
businesses, at the appropriate stage of development, to best capitalize on our competitive strengths.
Greenhouse gas restrictions. Government actions intended to reduce greenhouse gas emissions include
adoption of cap and trade regimes, carbon taxes, carbon accounting, carbon-based import duties or
other trade tariffs, minimum renewable usage requirements, restrictive permitting, increased mileage
and other efficiency standards, mandates for sales of electric vehicles, restrictions on sales of
gasoline-only vehicles, mandates for use of specific fuels or technologies, and other incentives or
mandates designed to support certain technologies for transitioning to lower-emission energy sources.
Political and other actors and their agents also increasingly seek to collectively advance climate
change objectives indirectly, such as by seeking to reduce the availability or increase the cost of
financing and investment in the oil and gas sector. These actions include delaying or blocking needed
infrastructure, utilizing shareholder governance mechanisms against companies or their shareholders
or financial institutions in an effort to deter investment in oil and gas activities, and taking
other actions intended to promote changes in business strategy for oil and gas companies. Depending
on how policies are formulated and applied, such policies could negatively affect our investment
returns, make our hydrocarbon-based products more expensive or less competitive, lengthen project
implementation times, and reduce demand for hydrocarbons, as well as shift hydrocarbon demand toward
relatively lower-carbon alternatives. Current and pending greenhouse gas regulations or policies
 4 
may also increase our compliance costs, such as for monitoring or sequestering emissions and
complying with increased or mandatory disclosure or due diligence requirements and government
mandated energy transition plans.
Technology and lower-emission solutions. Achieving societal ambitions to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions and ultimately achieve net zero will require new technologies and added infrastructure to
reduce the cost and increase the scalability of alternative energy sources, as well as technologies
such as carbon capture and storage (CCS). CCS technologies, focused initially on capturing and
sequestering CO2 emissions from high-carbon intensity industrial activities, can assist in meeting
society’s objective to mitigate atmospheric greenhouse gas levels while also helping ensure the
availability of the reliable and affordable energy the world requires. ExxonMobil has established a
Low Carbon Solutions (LCS) business unit and is continuing efforts in our existing businesses to
advance the development and deployment of these technologies and projects, including CCS, hydrogen,
lower-emission fuels, and lithium, breakthrough energy efficiency processes, advanced energy-saving
materials, and other technologies. The Company’s efforts include both in-house research and
development as well as collaborative efforts with leading universities and with commercial partners
involved in new energy technologies. Our future results and ability to grow our business, help others
meet their emission-reduction goals, and succeed through the energy transition will depend in part on
the success of these research and collaboration efforts and on our ability to adapt and apply the
strengths of our current business model to providing the energy products of the future in a cost-
competitive manner.
Policy and market development. The scale of the world’s energy system means that, in addition to
developments in technology as discussed above, any successful energy transition will require
appropriate support from governments and private participants throughout the global economy. Our
ability to develop and deploy CCS and other new energy technologies at commercial scale, and the
growth and future returns of LCS and other emerging businesses in which we invest, will depend in
part on the continued development of stable and supportive government policies and markets. Failure
or delay of these policies or markets to materialize or be maintained could adversely impact these
investments. Policy and other actions that result in restricting the availability of hydrocarbon
products without a commensurate reduction in demand may have unpredictable adverse effects, including
increased commodity price volatility; periods of significantly higher commodity prices and resulting
inflationary pressures; and local or regional energy shortages. Such effects in turn may depress
economic growth or lead to rapid or conflicting shifts in policy by different actors, with resulting
adverse effects on our businesses. In addition, the existence of supportive policies in any
jurisdiction is not a guarantee that those policies will continue in the future. See also the
discussion of “Supply and Demand,” “Government and Political Factors,” and “Operational and Other
Factors” in this Item 1A.
 Operational and Other Factors 
In addition to external economic and political factors, our future business results also depend on
our ability to successfully manage those factors that are, at least in part, within our control,
including our capital allocation into existing and new businesses. The extent to which we manage
these factors will impact our performance relative to competition. For projects in which we are not
the operator, we depend on the management effectiveness of one or more co-venturers whom we do not
control.
Exploration and development program. Our ability to maintain and grow our oil and gas production
depends on the success of our exploration and development efforts. Among other factors, we must
continuously improve our ability to identify the most promising resource prospects and apply our
project management expertise to bring discovered resources online as scheduled and within budget.
Project and portfolio management. The long-term success of ExxonMobil’s Upstream and Product
Solutions businesses, as well as the future success of LCS and other emerging investments, depends on
complex, long-term, capital-intensive projects. These projects in turn require a high degree of
project management expertise to maximize efficiency. Specific factors that can affect the performance
of major projects include our ability to: negotiate successfully with joint venturers, partners,
governments, suppliers, customers, or others; protect and enforce our contractual and legal rights,
including with our joint venture partners; model and optimize reservoir performance; develop markets
for project outputs, whether through long-term contracts or the development of effective spot
markets; qualify for certain incentives available under supportive government policies for emerging
markets and technologies; manage changes in operating conditions and costs, including costs of third
party equipment or services such as drilling rigs and shipping, supply-chain disruptions, and
inflationary cost pressures; prevent, to the extent possible, and respond effectively to unforeseen
technical difficulties that could delay project start-up or cause unscheduled project downtime; and
influence the performance of project operators where ExxonMobil does not perform that role. In
addition to the effective management of individual projects, ExxonMobil’s success, including our
ability to mitigate risk and provide attractive returns to shareholders, depends on our ability to
successfully manage our overall portfolio, including diversification among types and locations of our
projects, products produced, and strategies to acquire or divest assets. We may not be able to
acquire or divest assets at a price or on the timeline we contemplate in our strategies.
Additionally, we may retain certain liabilities following a divestment and could be held liable for
past use or for different liabilities than anticipated, including reversion of decommissioning or
other liabilities upon bankruptcy or other default of successors in title.
The term “project” as used in this report can refer to a variety of different activities and does not
necessarily have the same meaning as in any government payment transparency reports.
Operational efficiency. An important component of ExxonMobil’s competitive performance, especially
given the commodity-based nature of many of our businesses, is our ability to operate efficiently,
including our ability to manage expenses, improve production
 5 
yields on an ongoing basis and successfully integrate and achieve the anticipated synergies of
acquisitions, including the acquisition of Pioneer. This requires continuous management focus,
including technology integration and improvements, cost control, productivity enhancements,
harmonizing functions, policies, procedures and processes, regular reappraisal of our asset
portfolio, and the recruitment, development, and retention of high caliber employees.
Research and development and technological change. To maintain our competitive position, especially
in light of the technological nature of our businesses, the dynamic and rapidly evolving
technological landscape, and the need for continuous efficiency improvement, ExxonMobil’s technology,
research, and development organizations must be successful and able to adapt to a changing market,
regulatory, and policy environment, including continuous improvement in the efficiency of hydraulic
fracturing technology and developing technologies to help reduce greenhouse gas emissions. To remain
competitive, we must also continuously adapt and capture the benefits of new and emerging
technologies, including successfully applying advances in the ability to process very large amounts
of data to our businesses.
Safety, business controls, and environmental risk management. Our results depend on management’s
ability to minimize the inherent risks of oil, gas, and petrochemical operations, as well as
potential risks related to new energy technologies, to effectively control our business activities,
including trading, and to minimize the potential for human error. We apply rigorous management
systems and continuous focus on workplace safety and avoiding spills or other adverse environmental
events. For example, we work to minimize spills through a combined program of effective operations
integrity management, ongoing upgrades, key equipment replacements, and comprehensive inspection and
surveillance. Similarly, we are implementing cost-effective new technologies and adopting new
operating practices to reduce emissions, not only in response to government requirements but also to
address community priorities. We employ a robust and actively evolving enterprise risk management
system to identify and manage risk across our businesses. We also maintain a disciplined framework of
internal controls and apply a controls management system for monitoring compliance with this
framework. Substantial liabilities and other adverse impacts could result if we do not timely
identify and mitigate applicable risks, or if our management systems and controls do not function as
intended.
Cybersecurity. ExxonMobil is regularly subject to attempted cybersecurity disruptions from a variety
of sources including state-sponsored actors. See Item 1C in this report for information on
ExxonMobil’s program for managing cybersecurity risks. If the measures we are taking to protect
against cybersecurity disruptions prove to be insufficient or if our proprietary data is otherwise
not protected, ExxonMobil, as well as our customers, employees, or third parties, could be adversely
affected. We have limited ability to influence third parties, including our partners, suppliers and
service providers (including providers of cloud-hosting services for our data or applications), to
implement strong cybersecurity controls and are exposed to potential harm from cybersecurity events
that may affect their operations. Cybersecurity disruptions could cause physical harm to people or
the environment; damage or destroy assets; compromise business systems; result in proprietary
information being altered, lost, or stolen; result in employee, customer, or third-party information
being compromised; or otherwise disrupt our business operations. We could incur significant costs to
remedy the effects of a major cybersecurity disruption in addition to costs in connection with
resulting regulatory actions, litigation, or reputational harm.
Preparedness. Our operations may be disrupted by severe weather events, natural disasters, human
error, and similar events. For example, hurricanes may damage our offshore production facilities or
coastal refining and petrochemical plants in vulnerable areas. Our facilities are designed,
engineered, constructed, and operated to withstand a variety of extreme climatic and other
conditions, with safety factors built in to cover a number of uncertainties, including those
associated with wave, wind, and current intensity, marine ice flow patterns, permafrost stability,
storm surge magnitude, temperature extremes, extreme rainfall events, and earthquakes. Our
consideration of changing weather conditions and inclusion of safety factors in design covers the
engineering uncertainties that climate change and other events may potentially introduce. Our ability
to mitigate the adverse impacts of these events depends in part upon the effectiveness of our robust
facility engineering, our rigorous disaster preparedness and response, and business continuity
planning.
Insurance limitations. The ability of the Corporation to insure against many of the risks it faces as
described in this Item 1A is limited by the availability and cost of coverage, which may not be
economic, as well as the capacity of the applicable insurance markets, which may not be sufficient.
Competition. As noted in Item 1 above, the energy and petrochemical industries are highly
competitive. We face competition not only from other private firms, but also from state-owned
companies that are increasingly competing for opportunities outside of their home countries and as
partners with other private firms. In some cases, these state-owned companies may pursue
opportunities in furtherance of strategic objectives of their government owners, with less focus on
financial returns than companies owned by private shareholders, such as ExxonMobil. Technology and
expertise provided by industry service companies may also enhance the competitiveness of firms that
may not have the internal resources and capabilities of ExxonMobil or reduce the need for resource-
owning countries to partner with private-sector oil and gas companies in order to monetize national
resources. As described in more detail above, our hydrocarbon-based energy products are also subject
to growing and, in many cases, government-supported competition from alternative energy sources. In
addition, as we enter new markets in pursuit of lower-emission and other new business opportunities,
we will need to compete effectively with established competitors in these markets, as well as with
new market entrants seeking to capitalize on these opportunities, while successfully navigating
changing market conditions or technologies.
 6 
Reputation. Our reputation is an important corporate asset. Factors that could have a negative impact
on our reputation include an operating incident or significant cybersecurity disruption; changes in
consumer views concerning our products; changes in consumer media preferences from traditional
mainstream media to decentralized and personalized media; a perception by investors or others that
the Corporation is making insufficient progress with respect to our ambition to play a leading role
in the energy transition, or that pursuit of this ambition may result in allocation of capital to
investments with reduced returns; and other adverse events such as those described in this Item 1A.
Negative impacts on our reputation could in turn make it more difficult for us to compete
successfully for new opportunities, obtain necessary regulatory approvals, obtain financing, and
attract talent, or they could reduce consumer demand for our branded products. ExxonMobil’s
reputation may also be harmed by events which negatively affect the image of our industry as a whole.
Projections, estimates, and descriptions of ExxonMobil’s plans and objectives included or
incorporated in Items 1, 1A, 1C, 2, 5, 7, and 7A of this report are forward-looking statements.
Actual future results, including project completion dates, production rates, capital expenditures,
costs, and business plans could differ materially due to, among other things, the factors discussed
above and elsewhere in this report.
 ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS 
None.
 ITEM 1C. CYBERSECURITY 
The Corporation recognizes the importance of cybersecurity in achieving its business objectives,
safeguarding its assets, and managing its daily operations. Accordingly, the Corporation integrates
cybersecurity risks into its overall enterprise risk management system.The Audit Committee oversees
the Corporation’s risk management approach and structure, which includes an annual review of the
Corporation’s cybersecurity program.
The Corporation’s cybersecurity program is managed by the Corporation’s Vice President of Information
Technology (IT), with support from cross-functional teams led by ExxonMobil IT and operational
technology (OT) cybersecurity operations managers (collectively, Cybersecurity Operations Managers).
The Cybersecurity Operations Managers are responsible for the day-to-day management and effective
functioning of the cybersecurity program, including the prevention, detection, investigation, and
response to cybersecurity threats and incidents. The Cybersecurity Operations Managers collectively
have many years of experience in cybersecurity operations.
IT management provides regular reports to the Corporation’s senior management throughout the year,
and to the Audit Committee or the Board of Directors, as appropriate, in its annual cybersecurity
review. Such reports typically address, among other things, the Corporation’s cybersecurity strategy,
initiatives, key security metrics, penetration testing and benchmarking learnings, and business
response plans as well as the evolving cybersecurity threat landscape.
The Corporation’s cybersecurity program includes multi-layered technological capabilities designed to
prevent and detect cybersecurity disruptions and leverages industry standard frameworks, including
the National Institute of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Framework. The cybersecurity program
incorporates an incident response plan to engage cross-functionally across the Corporation and report
cybersecurity incidents to appropriate levels of management, including senior management, and the
Audit Committee or Board of Directors, based on potential impact. The Corporation conducts annual
cybersecurity awareness training and routinely tests cybersecurity awareness and business
preparedness for response and recovery, which are developed based on real-world threats. In addition,
the Corporation exchanges threat information with governmental and industry groups and proactively
engages independent, third-party cybersecurity experts to test, evaluate, and recommend improvements
on the effectiveness and resiliency of its cybersecurity program through penetration testing, breach
assessments, regular cybersecurity incident drill testing, threat information sharing, and industry
benchmarking.The Corporation takes a risk-based approach with respect to its third-party service
providers, tailoring processes according to the nature and sensitivity of the data or systems
accessed by such third-party service providers and performing additional risk screenings and
procedures, as appropriate.
As of the date of this report, we have not identified any risks from known cybersecurity threats,
including as a result of any prior cybersecurity incidents, that have materially affected, or are
reasonably likely to materially affect the Corporation, including our business strategy, results of
operations, or financial condition.
While the Corporation believes its cybersecurity program to be appropriate for managing constantly
evolving cybersecurity risks, no program can fully protect against all possible adverse events. For
additional information on these risks and potential consequences if the measures we are taking prove
to be insufficient or if our proprietary data is otherwise not protected, see " Item 1A . Risk
Factors: Operational and Other Factors -- Cybersecurity” in this report.
 7 
 ITEM 2. PROPERTIES 
Information with regard to oil and gas producing activities follows:
 1. Disclosure of Reserves 
A. Summary of Oil and Gas Reserves at Year-End 2024
The table below summarizes the oil-equivalent proved reserves in each geographic area and by product
type for consolidated subsidiaries and equity companies. Natural gas is converted to an oil-
equivalent basis at six billion cubic feet per one million barrels. The Corporation has reported
proved reserves on the basis of the average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month during
the last 12-month period. No major discovery or other favorable or adverse event has occurred since
December 31, 2024 that would cause a significant change in the estimated proved reserves as of that
date.
 Natural Oil-Equiv… 
 Proved Crude Gas Bitumen Synthetic Natural Total 
 Reserves Oil Liquids Oil Gas All 
 Products 
 -million -million -million -million -billion -million 
 bbls bbls bbls bbls cubic ft bbls 
 Developed 
 Consolida… 
 Subsidiar… 
 United 1,874 1,179 — — 11,671 4,998 
 States 
 Canada/Ot… 472 1 2,308 190 296 3,020 
 Americas(… 
 Europe 3 — — — 406 71 
 Africa 153 — — — 93 169 
 Asia 1,923 46 — — 1,900 2,286 
 Australia… 33 7 — — 3,204 574 
 Total 4,458 1,233 2,308 190 17,570 11,118 
 Consolida… 
 Equity 
 Companies 
 United 6 3 — — 47 17 
 States 
 Europe 2 — — — 262 45 
 Africa 7 — — — 816 143 
 Asia 452 117 — — 4,242 1,276 
 Total 
 Equity 467 120 — — 5,367 1,481 
 Company 
 Total 4,925 1,353 2,308 190 22,937 12,599 
 Developed 
 Undevelop… 
 Consolida… 
 Subsidiar… 
 United 1,399 909 — — 5,172 3,170 
 States 
 Canada/Ot… 646 — 121 106 245 914 
 Americas(… 
 Europe — — — — — — 
 Africa 38 — — — 2 38 
 Asia 1,186 22 — — 640 1,315 
 Australia… 22 — — — 2,275 401 
 Total 3,291 931 121 106 8,334 5,838 
 Consolida… 
 Equity 
 Companies 
 United — — — — — — 
 States 
 Europe — — — — 54 9 
 Africa — — — — — — 
 Asia 272 194 — — 6,224 1,503 
 Total 
 Equity 272 194 — — 6,278 1,512 
 Company 
 Total 3,563 1,125 121 106 14,612 7,350 
 Undevelop… 
 Total 
 Proved 8,488 2,478 2,429 296 37,549 19,949 
 Reserves 
 (1)Other 
 Americas 
 includes 
 proved 
 developed 
 reserves 
 of 375 
 million 
 barrels of 
 crude oil 
 and 176 
 billion 
 cubic feet 
 of natural 
 gas, as 
 well as 
 proved 
 undevelop… 
 reserves 
 of 633 
 million 
 barrels of 
 crude oil 
 and 231 
 billion 
 cubic feet 
 of natural 
 gas. 
 8 
In the preceding reserves information, consolidated subsidiary and equity company reserves are
reported separately. However, the Corporation operates its business with the same view of equity
company reserves as it has for reserves from consolidated subsidiaries.
The Corporation anticipates several projects will come online over the next few years providing
additional production capacity. However, actual volumes will vary from year to year due to the timing
of individual project start-ups; operational outages; reservoir performance; regulatory changes; the
impact of fiscal and commercial terms; asset sales; weather events; price effects on production
sharing contracts; changes in the amount and timing of capital investments that may vary depending on
the oil and gas price environment; international trade patterns and relations; and other factors
described in Item 1A .
The estimation of proved reserves, which is based on the requirement of reasonable certainty, is an
ongoing process based on rigorous technical evaluations, commercial and market assessments and
detailed analysis of reservoir and well performance. Furthermore, the Corporation only records proved
reserves for projects which have received significant funding commitments by management toward the
development of the reserves. Although the Corporation is reasonably certain that proved reserves will
be produced, the timing and amount recovered can be affected by a number of factors including
completion of development projects, reservoir performance, regulatory approvals, government policies,
consumer preferences, and significant changes in crude oil and natural gas price levels. In addition,
proved reserves could be affected by an extended period of low prices which could reduce the level of
the Corporation’s capital spending and also impact our partners’ capacity to fund their share of
joint projects.
B. Technologies Used in Establishing Proved Reserves Additions in 2024
Additions to ExxonMobil’s proved reserves in 2024 were based on estimates generated through the
integration of available and appropriate geological, engineering and production data, utilizing well-
established technologies that have been demonstrated in the field to yield repeatable and consistent
results.
Data used in these integrated assessments included information obtained directly from the subsurface
via wellbores, such as well logs, reservoir core samples, fluid samples, static and dynamic pressure
information, production test data, and surveillance and performance information. The data utilized
also included subsurface information obtained through indirect measurements, including high-quality
3‑D and 4‑D seismic data, calibrated with available well control information. The tools used to
interpret the data included seismic processing software, reservoir modeling and simulation software,
and data analysis packages.
In some circumstances, where appropriate analog reservoirs were available, reservoir parameters from
these analogs were used to increase the quality of and confidence in the reserves estimates.
C. Qualifications of Reserves Technical Oversight Group and Internal Controls over Proved Reserves
ExxonMobil has a dedicated Global Reserves and Resources group that provides technical oversight and
is separate from the operating organization. Primary responsibilities of this group include oversight
of the reserves estimation process for compliance with Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) rules
and regulations, review of annual changes in reserves estimates, and the reporting of ExxonMobil’s
proved reserves. This group also maintains the official company reserves estimates for ExxonMobil’s
proved reserves of crude oil, natural gas liquids, bitumen, synthetic oil, and natural gas. In
addition, the group provides training to personnel involved in the reserves estimation and reporting
process within ExxonMobil and its affiliates. The current Global Reserves and Resources Manager has
more than 30 years of experience in reservoir engineering and reserves assessment, has a degree in
Engineering, and serves on the Oil and Gas Reserves Committee of the Society of Petroleum Engineers.
The group is staffed with individuals that have an average of more than 15 years of technical
experience in the petroleum industry, including expertise in the classification and categorization of
reserves under SEC guidelines. This group includes individuals who hold degrees in either Engineering
or Geology.
The Global Reserves and Resources group maintains a central database containing the official company
reserves estimates. Appropriate controls, including limitations on database access and update
capabilities, are in place to ensure data integrity within this central database. An annual review of
the system’s controls is performed by internal audit. Key components of the reserves estimation
process include technical evaluations, commercial and market assessments, analysis of well and field
performance, and long-standing approval guidelines. No changes may be made to the reserves estimates
in the central database, including additions of any new initial reserves estimates or subsequent
revisions, unless these changes have been thoroughly reviewed and evaluated by duly authorized
geoscience and engineering professionals within the operating organization. In addition, changes to
reserves estimates that exceed certain thresholds require further review and approval by the
appropriate level of management within the operating organization before the changes may be made in
the central database. Endorsement by the Global Reserves and Resources group for all proved reserves
changes is a mandatory component of this review process. After all changes are made, reviews are held
with senior management for final endorsement.
 9 
 2. Proved Undeveloped Reserves 
At year-end 2024, approximately 7.4 billion oil-equivalent barrels (GOEB) of ExxonMobil’s proved
reserves were classified as proved undeveloped. This represents 37 percent of the 19.9 GOEB reported
in proved reserves. This compares to 6.3 GOEB of proved undeveloped reserves reported at the end of
2023. During the year, ExxonMobil conducted development activities that resulted in the transfer of
approximately 1.1 GOEB from proved undeveloped to proved developed reserves by year-end. The largest
transfers were related to development activities in the United States, Guyana, Kazakhstan, and the
United Arab Emirates. In 2024, purchases of 0.4 GOEB in the United States and extensions and
discoveries of 1.9 GOEB, primarily in the United States and Guyana, resulted in the addition of
approximately 2.3 GOEB of proved undeveloped reserves. Also, the Corporation reclassified
approximately 0.7 GOEB of proved undeveloped reserves, primarily in the United States, which was
offset by upward revision of approximately 0.6 GOEB, primarily in the United Arab Emirates. This
results in a net reclassification of approximately 0.1 GOEB of proved reserves which no longer met
the SEC definition of proved reserves.
Overall, investments of $16.4 billion were made by the Corporation during 2024 to progress the
development of reported proved undeveloped reserves, including $16.0 billion for oil and gas
producing activities, along with additional investments for other non-oil and gas producing
activities such as the construction of support infrastructure and other related facilities. These
investments represented 75 percent of the $21.8 billion in total reported Upstream capital and
exploration expenditures.
One of ExxonMobil’s requirements for reporting proved reserves is that management has made
significant funding commitments toward the development of the reserves. ExxonMobil has a disciplined
investment strategy and many major fields require long lead-time in order to be developed.
Development projects typically take several years from the time of recording proved undeveloped
reserves to the start of production and can exceed five years for large and complex projects. Proved
undeveloped reserves in Australia, Kazakhstan, and the United Arab Emirates have remained undeveloped
for five years or more primarily due to constraints on the capacity of infrastructure, as well as the
time required to complete development for very large projects. The Corporation is reasonably certain
that these proved reserves will be produced; however, the timing and amount recovered can be affected
by a number of factors including completion of development projects, reservoir performance,
regulatory approvals, government policies, consumer preferences, the pace of co-venturer/government
funding, changes in the amount and timing of capital investments, and significant changes in crude
oil and natural gas price levels. Of the proved undeveloped reserves that have been reported for five
or more years, over 80 percent are contained in the aforementioned countries. In Australia, proved
undeveloped reserves are associated with future compression for the Gorgon Jansz LNG project. In
Kazakhstan, the proved undeveloped reserves are related to the remainder of the Tengizchevroil joint
venture development that includes a production license in the Tengiz - Korolev field complex. The
Tengizchevroil joint venture is producing, and proved undeveloped reserves will continue to move to
proved developed as approved development phases progress. In the United Arab Emirates, proved
undeveloped reserves are associated with an approved development plan and continued drilling
investment for the producing Upper Zakum field.
 10 
3. Oil and Gas Production, Production Prices and Production Costs
 A. Oil and Gas Production 
The table below summarizes production by final product sold and by geographic area for the last three
years.
 (thousands 
 of barrels 2024 2023 2022 
 daily) 
 Crude Oil NGL Crude Oil NGL Crude Oil NGL 
 Crude oil 
 and 
 natural 
 gas 
 liquids 
 production 
 Consolida… 
 Subsidiar… 
 United 862 383 556 238 523 211 
 States 
 Canada/Ot… 346 2 240 2 196 2 
 Americas(… 
 Europe 2 — 2 — 2 — 
 Africa 206 2 216 4 233 5 
 Asia 422 26 417 28 407 23 
 Australia… 20 10 24 12 27 16 
 Total 
 Consolida… 1,858 423 1,455 284 1,388 257 
 Subsidiar… 
 Equity 
 Companies 
 United 2 1 8 1 41 1 
 States 
 Europe 1 — 2 — 2 — 
 Africa 1 — 1 — — — 
 Asia 206 59 216 60 216 59 
 Total 
 Equity 210 60 227 61 259 60 
 Companies 
 Total 
 crude oil 
 and 
 natural 2,068 483 1,682 345 1,647 317 
 gas 
 liquids 
 production 
 Bitumen 
 production 
 Consolida… 
 Subsidiar… 
 Canada/Ot… 374 355 327 
 Americas 
 Synthetic 
 oil 
 production 
 Consolida… 
 Subsidiar… 
 Canada/Ot… 62 67 63 
 Americas 
 Total 
 liquids 2,987 2,449 2,354 
 production 
 (millions 
 of cubic 
 feet 
 daily) 
 Natural 
 gas 
 production 
 available 
 for 
 sale 
 Consolida… 
 Subsidiar… 
 United 2,869 2,292 2,531 
 States 
 Canada/Ot… 101 96 148 
 Americas(… 
 Europe 252 266 306 
 Africa 45 35 64 
 Asia 907 915 779 
 Australia… 1,264 1,298 1,440 
 Total 
 Consolida… 5,438 4,902 5,268 
 Subsidiar… 
 Equity 
 Companies 
 United 18 19 20 
 States 
 Europe 100 148 361 
 Africa 107 90 7 
 Asia 2,415 2,575 2,639 
 Total 
 Equity 2,640 2,832 3,027 
 Companies 
 Total 
 natural 
 gas 8,078 7,734 8,295 
 production 
 available 
 for sale 
 (thousands 
 of 
 oil-equiv… 
 barrels 
 daily) 
 Oil-equiv… 4,333 3,738 3,737 
 production 
 (1)Other 
 Americas 
 includes 
 crude oil 
 production 
 for 2024, 
 2023, and 
 2022 of 
 285 
 thousand, 
 178 
 thousand, 
 and 120 
 thousand 
 barrels 
 daily, 
 respectiv… 
 and 
 natural 
 gas 
 production 
 available 
 for 
 sale for 
 2024, 
 2023, and 
 2022 of 76 
 million, 
 67 
 million, 
 and 45 
 million 
 cubic feet 
 daily, 
 respectiv… 
 11 
 B. Production Prices and Production Costs 
The table below summarizes average production prices and average production costs by geographic area
and by product type for the last three years.
 United Canada/ Australia/ 
 (dollars per unit) States Other Europe Africa Asia Oceania Total 
 Americas 
 2024 
 Consolidated 
 Subsidiaries 
 Average production 
 prices 
 Crude oil, per barrel 73.36 79.47 74.07 81.29 78.40 79.83 76.57 
 NGL, per barrel 23.08 30.43 63.29 50.51 32.34 38.74 24.32 
 Natural gas, per 0.37 1.72 10.56 2.25 2.55 8.47 3.13 
 thousand cubic feet 
 Bitumen, per barrel — 54.02 — — — — 54.02 
 Synthetic oil, per — 74.16 — — — — 74.16 
 barrel 
 Average production 
 costs, per 10.89 16.20 25.18 21.85 5.31 6.92 11.70 
 oil-equivalent barrel - 
 total 
 Average production 
 costs, per barrel - — 21.16 — — — — 21.16 
 bitumen 
 Average production 
 costs, per barrel - — 44.44 — — — — 44.44 
 synthetic oil 
 Equity Companies 
 Average production 
 prices 
 Crude oil, per barrel 73.91 — 76.34 73.99 73.17 — 73.21 
 NGL, per barrel 19.94 — — — 47.63 — 47.19 
 Natural gas, per 1.59 — 9.19 4.10 7.52 — 7.41 
 thousand cubic feet 
 Average production 
 costs, per 26.41 — 63.76 7.27 2.70 — 4.57 
 oil-equivalent barrel - 
 total 
 Total 
 Average production 
 prices 
 Crude oil, per barrel 73.36 79.47 75.06 81.25 76.69 79.83 76.23 
 NGL, per barrel 23.07 30.43 63.29 50.51 43.01 38.74 27.16 
 Natural gas, per 0.37 1.72 10.17 3.55 6.17 8.47 4.53 
 thousand cubic feet 
 Bitumen, per barrel — 54.02 — — — — 54.02 
 Synthetic oil, per — 74.16 — — — — 74.16 
 barrel 
 Average production 
 costs, per 10.94 16.20 36.41 20.68 3.93 6.92 10.53 
 oil-equivalent barrel - 
 total 
 Average production 
 costs, per barrel - — 21.16 — — — — 21.16 
 bitumen 
 Average production 
 costs, per barrel - — 44.44 — — — — 44.44 
 synthetic oil 
 2023 
 Consolidated 
 Subsidiaries 
 Average production 
 prices 
 Crude oil, per barrel 75.45 80.51 71.99 82.70 79.50 70.26 78.43 
 NGL, per barrel 23.88 24.44 64.10 44.72 29.81 34.35 25.12 
 Natural gas, per 1.16 2.57 13.64 2.04 2.40 9.31 4.26 
 thousand cubic feet 
 Bitumen, per barrel — 49.64 — — — — 49.64 
 Synthetic oil, per — 77.56 — — — — 77.56 
 barrel 
 Average production 
 costs, per 9.70 19.94 36.37 20.70 5.26 5.55 12.05 
 oil-equivalent barrel - 
 total 
 Average production 
 costs, per barrel - — 23.80 — — — — 23.80 
 bitumen 
 Average production 
 costs, per barrel - — 45.91 — — — — 45.91 
 synthetic oil 
 Equity Companies 
 Average production 
 prices 
 Crude oil, per barrel 75.48 — 77.82 71.92 74.59 — 74.63 
 NGL, per barrel 19.13 — — — 45.64 — 45.19 
 Natural gas, per 5.25 — 22.22 5.89 8.54 — 9.15 
 thousand cubic feet 
 Average production 
 costs, per 53.49 — 43.99 6.74 2.77 — 5.09 
 oil-equivalent barrel - 
 total 
 Total 
 Average production 
 prices 
 Crude oil, per barrel 75.45 80.51 74.13 82.66 77.83 70.26 77.92 
 NGL, per barrel 23.86 24.44 64.10 44.72 40.59 34.35 28.66 
 Natural gas, per 1.19 2.57 16.71 4.81 6.93 9.31 6.05 
 thousand cubic feet 
 Bitumen, per barrel — 49.64 — — — — 49.64 
 Synthetic oil, per — 77.56 — — — — 77.56 
 barrel 
 Average production 
 costs, per 10.15 19.94 39.09 19.79 3.91 5.55 10.63 
 oil-equivalent barrel - 
 total 
 Average production 
 costs, per barrel - — 23.80 — — — — 23.80 
 bitumen 
 Average production 
 costs, per barrel - — 45.91 — — — — 45.91 
 synthetic oil 
 12 
 United Canada/ Australia/ 
 (dollars per unit) States Other Europe Africa Asia Oceania Total 
 Americas 
 2022 
 Consolidated 
 Subsidiaries 
 Average production 
 prices 
 Crude oil, per barrel 93.60 97.05 91.32 103.45 94.94 94.43 96.16 
 NGL, per barrel 38.54 45.22 71.43 57.83 35.77 46.91 39.37 
 Natural gas, per 5.37 4.40 21.17 2.57 2.60 11.47 7.48 
 thousand cubic feet 
 Bitumen, per barrel — 64.12 — — — — 64.12 
 Synthetic oil, per — 96.08 — — — — 96.08 
 barrel 
 Average production 
 costs, per 9.40 24.63 23.77 21.68 7.31 4.97 13.09 
 oil-equivalent barrel - 
 total 
 Average production 
 costs, per barrel - — 29.90 — — — — 29.90 
 bitumen 
 Average production 
 costs, per barrel - — 51.52 — — — — 51.52 
 synthetic oil 
 Equity Companies 
 Average production 
 prices 
 Crude oil, per barrel 94.58 — 90.91 60.00 94.32 — 94.32 
 NGL, per barrel 39.53 — — — 59.52 — 59.05 
 Natural gas, per 5.49 — 21.10 2.72 13.08 — 13.97 
 thousand cubic feet 
 Average production 
 costs, per 40.42 — 26.86 42.24 1.45 — 5.57 
 oil-equivalent barrel - 
 total 
 Total 
 Average production 
 prices 
 Crude oil, per barrel 93.67 97.05 91.15 103.42 94.73 94.43 95.88 
 NGL, per barrel 38.55 45.22 71.43 57.83 52.85 46.91 43.09 
 Natural gas, per 5.37 4.40 21.14 2.59 10.70 11.47 9.85 
 thousand cubic feet 
 Bitumen, per barrel — 64.12 — — — — 64.12 
 Synthetic oil, per — 96.08 — — — — 96.08 
 barrel 
 Average production 
 costs, per 10.57 24.63 25.43 21.79 4.02 4.97 11.43 
 oil-equivalent barrel - 
 total 
 Average production 
 costs, per barrel - — 29.90 — — — — 29.90 
 bitumen 
 Average production 
 costs, per barrel - — 51.52 — — — — 51.52 
 synthetic oil 
Average production prices have been calculated by using sales quantities from the Corporation’s own
production as the divisor. Average production costs have been computed by using net production
quantities for the divisor. The volumes of crude oil and natural gas liquids (NGL) production used
for this computation are shown in the oil and gas production table in section 3.A. The volumes of
natural gas used in the calculation are the production volumes of natural gas available for sale and
are also shown in section 3.A. The natural gas available for sale volumes are different from those
shown in the reserves table in the “Oil and Gas Reserves” part of the “Supplemental Information on
Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Activities” portion of the Financial Section of this report
due to volumes consumed or flared. Natural gas is converted to an oil-equivalent basis at six million
cubic feet per one thousand barrels.
 13 
4. Drilling and Other Exploratory and Development Activities
 A. Number of Net Productive and Dry Wells Drilled 
 2024 2023 2022 
 Net Productive Exploratory Wells Drilled 
 Consolidated Subsidiaries 
 United States 2 — 1 
 Canada/Other Americas 3 1 3 
 Europe — 1 — 
 Africa — — — 
 Asia — — — 
 Australia/Oceania — — — 
 Total Consolidated Subsidiaries 5 2 4 
 Equity Companies 
 United States — — — 
 Europe — — — 
 Africa — — — 
 Asia — — — 
 Total Equity Companies — — — 
 Total productive exploratory wells 5 2 4 
 drilled 
 Net Dry Exploratory Wells Drilled 
 Consolidated Subsidiaries 
 United States — 1 — 
 Canada/Other Americas 3 3 4 
 Europe — — — 
 Africa — — — 
 Asia — — — 
 Australia/Oceania — — — 
 Total Consolidated Subsidiaries 3 4 4 
 Equity Companies 
 United States — — — 
 Europe — — — 
 Africa — — — 
 Asia — — — 
 Total Equity Companies — — — 
 Total dry exploratory wells drilled 3 4 4 
 14 
 2024 2023 2022 
 Net Productive Development Wells Drilled 
 Consolidated Subsidiaries 
 United States 533 446 473 
 Canada/Other Americas 22 47 33 
 Europe 1 1 — 
 Africa 4 4 3 
 Asia 6 5 5 
 Australia/Oceania 1 — — 
 Total Consolidated Subsidiaries 567 503 514 
 Equity Companies 
 United States 1 2 49 
 Europe — — — 
 Africa — — — 
 Asia 3 6 10 
 Total Equity Companies 4 8 59 
 Total productive development wells 571 511 573 
 drilled 
 Net Dry Development Wells Drilled 
 Consolidated Subsidiaries 
 United States 10 — — 
 Canada/Other Americas — — — 
 Europe — — — 
 Africa 1 — — 
 Asia — — — 
 Australia/Oceania — — — 
 Total Consolidated Subsidiaries 11 — — 
 Equity Companies 
 United States — — — 
 Europe — — — 
 Africa — — — 
 Asia — — — 
 Total Equity Companies — — — 
 Total dry development wells drilled 11 — — 
 Total number of net wells drilled 590 517 581 
 15 
B. Exploratory and Development Activities Regarding Oil and Gas Resources Extracted by Mining
Technologies
Syncrude Operations. Syncrude is a joint venture established to recover shallow deposits of oil sands
using open-pit mining methods to extract the crude bitumen, and then upgrade it to produce a high-
quality, light (32 degrees API), sweet, synthetic crude oil. Imperial Oil Limited is the owner of a
25 percent interest in the joint venture. Exxon Mobil Corporation has a 69.6 percent interest in
Imperial Oil Limited. In 2024, the Company’s share of net production of synthetic crude oil was about
62 thousand barrels per day and share of net acreage was about 55 thousand acres in the Athabasca oil
sands deposit.
Kearl Operations. Kearl is a joint venture established to recover shallow deposits of oil sands using
open-pit mining methods to extract the crude bitumen. Imperial Oil Limited holds a 70.96 percent
interest in the joint venture and ExxonMobil Canada Properties holds the other 29.04 percent. Exxon
Mobil Corporation has a 69.6 percent interest in Imperial Oil Limited and a 100 percent interest in
ExxonMobil Canada Properties. Kearl is comprised of six oil sands leases covering about 49 thousand
acres in the Athabasca oil sands deposit.
Kearl is located approximately 40 miles north of Fort McMurray, Alberta, Canada. Bitumen is extracted
from oil sands and processed through bitumen extraction and froth treatment trains. The product, a
blend of bitumen and diluent, is shipped to our refineries and to other third parties. Diluent is
natural gas condensate or other light hydrocarbons added to the crude bitumen to facilitate
transportation. During 2024, average net production at Kearl was about 262 thousand barrels per day.
 5. Present Activities 
 A. Wells Drilling 
 Wells Drilling Year-End 2024 Year-End 2023 
 Gross Net Gross Net 
 Consolidated Subsidiaries 
 United States 809 648 582 409 
 Canada/Other Americas 19 9 42 29 
 Europe 1 1 3 1 
 Africa 5 1 4 1 
 Asia 13 5 25 5 
 Australia/Oceania 1 — 3 1 
 Total Consolidated Subsidiaries 848 664 659 446 
 Equity Companies 
 United States 15 — 9 — 
 Europe — — — — 
 Africa — — — — 
 Asia 43 4 61 4 
 Total Equity Companies 58 4 70 4 
 Total gross and net wells drilling 906 668 729 450 
 16 
 B. Review of Principal Ongoing Activities 
 United States 
Net acreage totaled 9.8 million acres at year-end 2024, of which 0.2 million acres were offshore.
ExxonMobil was active in areas onshore and offshore in the lower 48 states and in Alaska. Development
activities continued on the Golden Pass LNG export project.
During the year, a total of 544.1 net exploratory and development wells were completed in the inland
lower 48 states. Development activities focused on liquids-rich opportunities in the onshore U.S.,
primarily in the Permian Basin of West Texas and New Mexico. In addition, ExxonMobil completed the
acquisition of Pioneer, increasing the Permian Basin acreage and production capacity.
Net acreage in the Gulf totaled 0.1 million acres at year-end 2024. A total of a 0.5 net development
well was completed during the year.
Participation in Alaska production and development continued with a total of 0.9 net development
wells completed.
 Canada / Other Americas 
Canada
Oil and Gas Operations: Net acreage totaled 3.9 million acres at year-end 2024, of which 2.0 million
acres were offshore. A total of 1.7 net exploratory and development wells were completed during the
year.
In Situ Bitumen Operations: Net acreage totaled 0.5 million onshore acres at year-end 2024. During
the year, a total of 14 net development wells at Cold Lake were completed.
Argentina
Net acreage totaled 0.1 million onshore acres at year-end 2024. During the year, a total of 1.6 net
development wells were completed. In 2024, ExxonMobil relinquished 2.6 million net offshore acres and
sold a portion of its interests in onshore production facilities. The sale of the remaining onshore
assets is expected to be completed in early 2025 resulting in a full Upstream operations exit from
the country.
Brazil
Net acreage totaled 1.5 million offshore acres at year-end 2024. During the year, a total of a 0.4
net exploratory well was completed and ExxonMobil relinquished its interest in 1.0 million net
offshore acres spanning 10 blocks outside of the core Bacalhau development. Development activities
continued on the Bacalhau Phase 1 project.
Guyana
Net acreage totaled 4.6 million offshore acres at year-end 2024. During the year, a total of 10.1 net
exploratory and development wells were completed. Development activities continued on the Yellowtail
and Uaru projects. The Whiptail project was funded in 2024.
 Europe 
Germany
Net acreage totaled 1.2 million onshore acres at year-end 2024. During the year, a total of 0.5 net
development wells were completed.
Netherlands
Net interest in licenses totaled 1.3 million acres at year-end 2024, of which 0.3 million acres were
offshore. Groningen field permanent closure was codified in the Dutch mining law on April 19, 2024.
United Kingdom
Net interest in licenses totaled 0.1 million offshore acres at year-end 2024.
 17 
 Africa 
Angola
Net acreage totaled 3 million acres at year-end 2024, of which 2.9 million acres were offshore.
During the year, a total of 5.6 net exploratory and development wells were completed.
Mozambique
Net acreage totaled 0.1 million offshore acres at year-end 2024 within Area 4. ExxonMobil
participated in the co-venturer-operated Coral South Floating LNG, a gross 3.4 million metric tons
per year LNG facility.
Nigeria
Net acreage totaled 0.4 million offshore acres at year-end 2024. During the year, a total of a 0.2
net development well was completed. In December 2024, the Corporation completed a transfer of 100
percent of the shares in its Nigeria affiliate, Mobil Producing Nigeria Unlimited, following the
receipt of and compliance with conditions precedent specified in government approvals.
 Asia 
Azerbaijan
Net acreage totaled 7 thousand offshore acres at year-end 2024. During the year, a total of 1 net
development wells were completed.
Indonesia
Net acreage totaled 0.1 million onshore acres at year-end 2024. During the year, a total of 0.9 net
development wells were completed.
Kazakhstan
Net acreage totaled 0.3 million acres at year-end 2024, of which 0.2 million acres were offshore.
During the year, a total of 1 net development wells were completed. Development activities continued
on the Tengiz Expansion project.
Malaysia
Net interests in production sharing contracts covered 0.2 million offshore acres at year-end 2024.
During the year, a total of 1.5 net development wells were completed.
Qatar
Through joint ventures with QatarEnergy, net acreage totaled 76 thousand offshore acres at year-end
2024. During the year, a total of 1.4 net development wells were completed. ExxonMobil participated
in 52.3 million metric tons per year gross liquefied natural gas capacity and 3.4 billion cubic feet
per day of flowing gas capacity at year-end 2024. Development activities continued on the North Field
East project and North Field Production Sustainment projects.
Thailand
Net acreage in concessions totaled 16 thousand onshore acres at year-end 2024. During the year, a
total of a 0.1 net development well was completed.
United Arab Emirates
Net acreage in the Abu Dhabi offshore Upper Zakum oil concession was 0.1 million acres at year-end
2024. During the year, a total of 2.5 net development wells were completed. Activities continued on
the ongoing phased development of the Upper Zakum field.
 Australia / Oceania 
Australia
Net acreage totaled 1.2 million offshore acres and nine thousand onshore acres at year-end 2024.
The co-venturer-operated Gorgon Jansz liquefied natural gas (LNG) development consists of a subsea
infrastructure for offshore production and transportation of the gas, a 15.6 million metric tons per
year LNG facility, and a 280 million cubic feet per day
 18 
domestic gas plant located on Barrow Island, Western Australia. During the year, operations began on
the Gorgon Stage 2 project and development activities continued on the Jansz Io Compression project.
Papua New Guinea
Net acreage totaled 1.6 million onshore acres at year-end 2024. During the year, a total of 1 net
development wells were completed. The Papua New Guinea (PNG) liquefied natural gas (LNG) integrated
development includes gas production and processing facilities in the PNG Highlands, onshore and
offshore pipelines, and a 6.9 million metric tons per year LNG facility near Port Moresby.
 Worldwide Exploration 
Exploration activities were under way in several countries in which ExxonMobil has no established
production operations and thus are not included above. Net acreage totaled 15.7 million acres at
year-end 2024. During the year, a total of a 0.5 net exploratory well was completed.
 6. Delivery Commitments 
ExxonMobil sells crude oil and natural gas from its producing operations under a variety of
contractual obligations, some of which may specify the delivery of a fixed and determinable quantity
for periods longer than one year. ExxonMobil also enters into natural gas sales contracts where the
source of the natural gas used to fulfill the contract can be a combination of our own production and
the spot market. Worldwide, we are contractually committed to deliver approximately 123 million
barrels of oil and 2.8 trillion cubic feet of natural gas for the period from 2025 through 2027. We
expect to fulfill the majority of these delivery commitments with production from our proved
developed reserves. Any remaining commitments will be fulfilled with production from our proved
undeveloped reserves and purchases on the open market as necessary.
 7. Oil and Gas Properties, Wells, Operations and Acreage 
 A. Gross and Net Productive Wells 
 Gross 
 and Net Year-End Year-End 
 Produc… 2024 2023 
 Wells 
 Oil Gas Oil Gas 
 Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net 
 Consol… 
 Subsid… 
 United 30,333 17,078 7,579 4,340 21,193 9,503 8,210 4,801 
 States 
 Canada… 4,092 4,025 2,865 1,017 4,193 4,131 2,901 1,034 
 Americ… 
 Europe 371 113 359 192 476 125 396 198 
 Africa 359 94 — — 605 204 21 8 
 Asia 789 243 151 87 995 293 148 85 
 Austra… 326 48 104 40 449 84 98 40 
 Total 
 Consol… 36,270 21,601 11,058 5,676 27,911 14,340 11,774 6,166 
 Subsid… 
 Equity 
 Compan… 
 United 2,573 329 3,303 326 2,634 340 3,322 329 
 States 
 Europe 57 20 332 102 57 20 454 139 
 Africa — — 6 2 — — 6 2 
 Asia 233 58 150 31 234 58 145 33 
 Total 
 Equity 2,863 407 3,791 461 2,925 418 3,927 503 
 Compan… 
 Total 
 gross 
 and net 39,133 22,008 14,849 6,137 30,836 14,758 15,701 6,669 
 produc… 
 wells 
There were 25,610 gross and 22,837 net operated wells at year-end 2024 and 18,518 gross and 16,171
net operated wells at year-end 2023. The number of wells with multiple completions was 434 gross in
2024 and 467 gross in 2023.
 19 
 B. Gross and Net Developed Acreage 
 Gross and Net 
 Developed Acreage Year-End 2024 Year-End 2023 
 (thousands of acres) 
 Gross Net Gross Net 
 Consolidated 
 Subsidiaries 
 United States 10,668 7,021 10,354 6,566 
 Canada/Other 1,903 1,342 2,145 1,526 
 Americas(1) 
 Europe 954 555 983 560 
 Africa 1,455 428 2,109 704 
 Asia 1,473 427 1,582 451 
 Australia/Oceania 3,142 1,043 3,174 1,033 
 Total Consolidated 19,595 10,816 20,347 10,840 
 Subsidiaries 
 Equity Companies 
 United States 581 113 583 113 
 Europe 3,590 1,109 3,590 1,109 
 Africa 178 44 178 44 
 Asia 665 152 665 157 
 Total Equity 5,014 1,418 5,016 1,423 
 Companies 
 Total gross and net 24,609 12,234 25,363 12,263 
 developed acreage 
 (1)Includes 
 developed acreage in 
 Other 
 Americas of 379 
 gross and 190 net 
 thousands of acres 
 for 2024 and 559 
 gross and 342 net 
 thousands of acres 
 for 
 2023. 
Separate acreage data for oil and gas are not maintained because, in many instances, both are
produced from the same acreage.
 C. Gross and Net Undeveloped Acreage 
 Gross and Net 
 Undeveloped Acreage Year-End 2024 Year-End 2023 
 (thousands of acres) 
 Gross Net Gross Net 
 Consolidated 
 Subsidiaries 
 United States 6,707 2,632 6,738 2,602 
 Canada/Other 21,457 9,842 30,773 15,012 
 Americas(2) 
 Europe 11,988 7,770 12,489 8,173 
 Africa 17,476 11,301 18,309 12,696 
 Asia 766 227 766 227 
 Australia/Oceania 3,554 1,805 4,811 2,309 
 Total Consolidated 61,948 33,577 73,886 41,019 
 Subsidiaries 
 Equity Companies 
 United States — — — — 
 Europe 381 110 381 110 
 Africa 418 104 418 104 
 Asia 298 19 298 19 
 Total Equity 1,097 233 1,097 233 
 Companies 
 Total gross and net 63,045 33,810 74,983 41,252 
 undeveloped acreage 
 (2)Includes 
 undeveloped acreage 
 in Other 
 Americas of 14,914 
 gross and 6,381net 
 thousands of acres 
 for 2024 and 24,221 
 gross and 11,548 net 
 thousands of acres 
 for 2023. 
ExxonMobil’s investment in developed and undeveloped acreage is comprised of numerous concessions,
blocks, and leases. The terms and conditions under which the Corporation maintains exploration and/or
production rights to the acreage are property-specific, contractually defined, and vary significantly
from property to property. Work programs are designed to ensure that the exploration potential of any
property is fully evaluated before expiration. In some instances, the Corporation may elect to
relinquish acreage in advance of the contractual expiration date if the evaluation process is
complete and there is not a business basis for extension. In cases where additional time may be
required to fully evaluate acreage, the Corporation has generally been successful in obtaining
extensions. The scheduled expiration of leases and concessions for undeveloped acreage over the next
three years is not expected to have a material adverse impact on the Corporation.
 20 
 D. Summary of Acreage Terms 
 United States 
Oil and gas exploration and production rights are acquired from mineral interest owners through a
lease. Mineral interest owners include the Federal and State governments, as well as private mineral
interest owners. Leases typically have a primary term ranging from one to 10 years, and a production
period beyond the primary term that normally remains in effect until production ceases. Under certain
circumstances, a lease may be held beyond its primary term even if production has not commenced. In
some instances a “fee interest” is acquired in private property where the underlying mineral
interests and rights are purchased and owned outright.
 Canada / Other Americas 
Canada
Exploration licenses or leases in onshore areas are acquired for varying periods of time with
renewals or extensions possible. These licenses or leases entitle the holder to continue existing
licenses or leases upon completing specified work. In general, these license and lease agreements are
held as long as there is proven production capability on the licenses and leases. Offshore
exploration licenses are generally held by work commitments of various amounts and rentals. Offshore
production licenses are valid for 25 years, with rights of extension for continued production.
Significant discovery licenses in the offshore relating to currently undeveloped discoveries do not
have a definite term.
Argentina
The Federal Hydrocarbon Law was amended in 2014 and in 2024. Pursuant to the amended law, the
production term for an onshore unconventional concession is 35 years and 25 years for a conventional
concession. ExxonMobil is actively taking steps to exit Upstream operations in the country.
Brazil
The exploration and production of oil and gas are governed by concession contracts and production
sharing contracts (PSCs). Concession contracts provide for an exploration period of up to eight years
and a production period of 27 years. PSCs provide for an exploration period of up to seven years and
a production period of up to 28 years.
Guyana
The Petroleum Activities Act 2023 authorizes the Government of Guyana to license and enter petroleum
agreements for petroleum exploration, development, production, and storage operations. The Act
enables petroleum agreements to provide for an exploration period to be established by subsidiary
legislation by the Minister (typically up to 10 years) and provide for a production period of 20
years for an oil field and 30 years for a gas field, each with a renewal period of up to 10 years.
 Europe 
Germany
Exploration concessions are granted for an initial maximum period of five years, with an unlimited
number of extensions up to three years each. Extensions are subject to specific minimum work
commitments. Production licenses were historically granted for 20 to 25 years with multiple possible
extensions subject to production on the license.
Netherlands
Under the Mining Law, effective January 1, 2003, exploration and production licenses for both onshore
and offshore areas are issued for a period as explicitly defined in the license. The term is based on
the period of time necessary to perform the activities for which the license is issued. License
conditions are stipulated in the license and are based on the Mining Law.
Production rights granted prior to January 1, 2003, remain subject to their existing terms and differ
slightly for onshore and offshore areas. Onshore production licenses issued prior to 1988 were
indefinite; from 1988, they were issued for a period as explicitly defined in the license, ranging
from 35 to 45 years. Offshore production licenses issued before 1976 were issued for a fixed period
of 40 years; from 1976, they were again issued for a period as explicitly defined in the license,
ranging from 15 to 40 years.
 21 
United Kingdom
Acreage terms are fixed by the government and are periodically changed. For example, many of the
early licenses issued under the first four licensing rounds provided an initial term of six years
with relinquishment of at least one-half of the original area at the end of the initial term, subject
to extension for a further 40 years. At the end of any such 40-year term, licenses may continue in
producing areas until cessation of production; or licenses may continue in development areas for
periods agreed on a case-by-case basis until they become producing areas; or licenses terminate in
all other areas. The majority of traditional licenses currently issued have an initial exploration
term of four years with a second term extension of four years, and a final production term of 18
years, with a mandatory relinquishment of 50 percent of the acreage after the initial term and of all
acreage that is not covered by a development plan at the end of the second term.
 Africa 
Angola
Exploration and production activities are governed by either production sharing agreements or other
concession contracts with initial exploration terms ranging from three to four years with options to
extend from one to five years. The production periods range from 20 to 30 years, with extensions
subject to negotiation with the National Concessionaire.
Mozambique
Exploration and production activities are generally governed by concession contracts with the
Government of the Republic of Mozambique, represented by the Ministry of Mineral Resources and
Energy. An interest in Area 4 offshore Mozambique was acquired in 2017. Terms for Area 4 are governed
by the Exploration and Production Concession Contract (EPCC) for Area 4 Offshore of the Rovuma Block.
The EPCC expires 30 years after an approved plan of development becomes effective for a given
discovery area.
Nigeria
Exploration and production activities are governed by production sharing contracts (PSCs) with the
national oil company, the Nigerian National Petroleum Company Limited (NNPCL). NNPCL typically holds
the underlying license or lease. The terms of the PSCs are generally 30 years (comprised of a 10-year
exploration period and a 20-year production period).
The 2021 Petroleum Industry Act will govern any further renewals to the term of the PSCs, licenses,
or leases.
 Asia 
Azerbaijan
The production sharing agreement (PSA) for the development of the Azeri-Chirag-Gunashli field was
established for an initial period of 30 years starting from the PSA execution date in 1994. The PSA
was amended in September 2017 to extend the term by 25 years to 2049.
Indonesia
Exploration and production activities in Indonesia are generally governed by cooperation contracts,
usually in the form of a production sharing contract (PSC). The current PSCs have an exploration
period of six years, which can be extended once for a period of four years with a total contract
period of 30 years including an exploitation period. PSC terms can be extended for a maximum of 20
years for each extension with the approval of the government.
Kazakhstan
Onshore exploration and production activities are governed by the production license, which includes
exploration activities and joint venture agreements negotiated with the Republic of Kazakhstan.
Existing production operations have a 40-year production period that commenced in 1993.
Offshore exploration and production activities are governed by a production sharing agreement
negotiated with the Republic of Kazakhstan. The exploration period is six years followed by separate
appraisal periods for each discovery. The production period for each discovery, which includes
development, is 20 years from the date of declaration of commerciality with the possibility of two
10-year extensions.
Malaysia
Production activities are governed by production sharing contracts (PSCs) negotiated with the
national oil company. The PSCs have production terms of 25 years. Extensions are generally subject to
the national oil company’s prior written approval.
 22 
Qatar
The State of Qatar grants gas production development project rights to develop and supply gas from
the offshore North Field to permit the economic development and production of gas reserves sufficient
to satisfy the gas and LNG sales obligations of these projects. The initial terms for these rights
generally extend for 25 years. Extensions and terms are subject to State of Qatar approval.
Thailand
The Petroleum Act of 1971 allows production under ExxonMobil’s concessions for 30 years with a
10-year extension at terms generally prevalent at the time.
United Arab Emirates
An interest in the development and production activities of the offshore Upper Zakum field was
acquired in 2006. In 2017, the governing agreements were extended to 2051.
 Australia / Oceania 
Australia
Exploration and production activities conducted offshore in Commonwealth waters are governed by
Federal legislation. Exploration permits are granted for an initial term of six years with two
possible five-year renewal periods. Retention leases may be granted for resources that are not
commercially viable at the time of application but are likely to become commercially viable within 15
years. These are granted for periods of five years, and renewals may be requested. Prior to July
1998, production licenses were granted initially for 21 years, with a further renewal of 21 years and
thereafter indefinitely, i.e., for the life of the field. Effective from July 1998, new production
licenses are granted indefinitely. In each case, a production license may be terminated if no
production operations have been carried on for five years.
Papua New Guinea
Exploration and production activities are governed by the Oil and Gas Act. Petroleum prospecting
licenses are granted for an initial term of six years with a five-year extension possible (an
additional extension of three years is possible in certain circumstances). Generally, a 50-percent
relinquishment of the license area is required at the end of the initial six-year term, if extended.
Petroleum development licenses are granted for an initial 25-year period. An extension for further
consecutive period(s) of up to 20 years may be granted at the Petroleum Minister’s discretion.
Petroleum retention licenses may be granted for gas resources that are not commercially viable at the
time of application but may become commercially viable within the maximum possible retention time of
15 years. Petroleum retention licenses are granted for an initial five-year period, and may only be
extended, at the Minister’s discretion, twice for the maximum retention time of 15 years.
 23 
Information with regard to refining and chemical capacity:
ExxonMobil manufactures, trades, and sells petroleum and petrochemical products. Our refining and
chemical operations are highly integrated and encompass a global network of manufacturing plants,
transportation systems, and distribution centers that provide a range of fuels, specialty products,
feedstocks, olefins, polyolefins, and a wide variety of other products to our customers around the
world.
 Capaci… 
 At 
 Year-E… 
 2024(1) 
 ExxonMo… ExxonMob… 
 Interest Share of Ethylene Polyethy… Polypro… 
 % Refining 
 Capacity… 
 -thousan… -millio… 
 of of 
 barrels metric 
 daily tons per 
 year 
 United 
 States 
 Joliet Illinois ■ 100 264 — — — 
 Baton Louisiana ■ ▲ ● 100 523 1.1 1.3 1.0 
 Rouge 
 Baytown Texas ■ ▲ ● 100 565 4.0 — 0.8 
 Beaumo… Texas ■ ▲ ● 100 612 0.9 1.7 — 
 Corpus Texas ● 50 — 0.9 0.7 — 
 Christi 
 Mont Texas ● 100 — — 2.3 — 
 Belvieu 
 Total 
 United 1,964 6.9 6.0 1.8 
 States 
 Canada 
 Strath… Alberta ■ 69.6 197 — — — 
 Nantic… Ontario ■ 69.6 113 — — — 
 Sarnia Ontario ■ ● 69.6 124 0.3 0.5 — 
 Total 434 0.3 0.5 — 
 Canada 
 Europe 
 Antwerp Belgium ■ ● 100 309 — 0.4 — 
 Meerho… Belgium ● 100 — — 0.5 — 
 Graven… France ■ ▲ ● 82.9/10… 244 — — — 
 Karlsr… Germany ■ 25 78 — — — 
 Rotter… Netherla… ■ ▲ ● 100 192 — — — 
 Fawley United ■ ▲ ● 100 262 — — — 
 Kingdom 
 Fife United ● 50 — 0.4 — — 
 Kingdom 
 Total 1,085 0.4 0.9 — 
 Europe 
 Asia 
 Pacific 
 Fujian China ■ ● 25 67 0.3 0.2 0.2 
 Singap… Singapore ■ ▲ ● 100 592 1.9 1.9 1.0 
 Total 
 Asia 659 2.2 2.1 1.2 
 Pacific 
 Middle 
 East 
 Al Saudi ▲ ● 50 — 0.7 0.7 — 
 Jubail Arabia 
 Yanbu Saudi ■ ● 50 200 1.0 0.7 0.2 
 Arabia 
 Total 
 Middle 200 1.7 1.4 0.2 
 East 
 Total 4,342 11.5 10.8 3.2 
 Worldw… 
 ■Energy 
 Produc… 
 Produc… 
 Produc… 
 (1)Exx… 
 share 
 reflec… 
 100 
 percent 
 for 
 operat… 
 of 
 ExxonM… 
 and 
 majori… 
 subsid… 
 For 
 compan… 
 owned 
 50 
 percent 
 or 
 less, 
 ExxonM… 
 share 
 is the 
 greater 
 of 
 ExxonM… 
 intere… 
 or that 
 portion 
 of 
 distil… 
 capaci… 
 normal… 
 availa… 
 to 
 ExxonM… 
 (2)Ref… 
 capaci… 
 data is 
 based 
 on 
 100 
 percent 
 of 
 rated 
 refine… 
 process 
 unit 
 stream… 
 capaci… 
 to 
 process 
 inputs 
 to 
 atmosp… 
 distil… 
 units 
 under 
 normal 
 operat… 
 condit… 
 less 
 the 
 impact 
 of 
 shutdo… 
 for 
 regular 
 repair 
 and 
 mainte… 
 activi… 
 averag… 
 over an 
 extend… 
 period 
 of 
 time. 
 The 
 listing 
 exclud… 
 refini… 
 capaci… 
 for a 
 minor 
 intere… 
 held 
 through 
 equity 
 securi… 
 in the 
 Laffan 
 Refine… 
 in 
 Qatar 
 for 
 which 
 results 
 are 
 report… 
 in the 
 Upstre… 
 segmen… 
 (3)Exx… 
 owners… 
 in 
 Graven… 
 is 
 split 
 82.9 
 percent 
 and 100 
 percent 
 between 
 the 
 refini… 
 and 
 chemic… 
 operat… 
 respec… 
 In 
 2024, 
 the 
 Company 
 shut 
 down a 
 portion 
 of its 
 Graven… 
 chemic… 
 operat… 
 includ… 
 the 
 steamc… 
 and 
 related 
 deriva… 
 units. 
 (4)The 
 Corpor… 
 announ… 
 a sales 
 agreem… 
 relati… 
 to 
 ExxonM… 
 owners… 
 intere… 
 in this 
 asset 
 and 
 expects 
 the 
 transa… 
 to 
 close 
 in 
 2025. 
 Due to 
 roundi… 
 numbers 
 presen… 
 above 
 may not 
 add up 
 precis… 
 to the 
 totals 
 indica… 
 24 
Information with regard to retail fuel sites:
Within the Energy Products segment, retail fuels sites sell products and services throughout the
world through our Exxon , Esso, and Mobil brands.
 Number of Retail Fuel 
 Sites At Year-End 
 2024 
 Owned/leased Distributors/resellers Total 
 United States — 10,573 10,573 
 Canada — 2,598 2,598 
 Europe 169 3,958 4,127 
 Asia Pacific 264 864 1,128 
 Latin America — 555 555 
 Middle East/Africa 169 294 463 
 Worldwide 602 18,842 19,444 
 ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 
ExxonMobil has elected to use a $1 million threshold for disclosing environmental proceedings.
As reported in the Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the third quarter of 2024, XTO Energy, Inc. (XTO)
received a Notice of Violation from the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on March
9, 2022 regarding certain well pad production facility sites in Butler County, Pennsylvania, alleging
violations of certain federal New Source Performance Standards (NSPS) and Pennsylvania’s Title V
operating permit regulations. In October 2024, XTO entered into a consent decree with the Department
of Justice (DOJ) and the Department of Environmental Protection of Pennsylvania to resolve these
alleged violations upon payment of a $4.0 million penalty. On December 13, 2024, the United States
District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania entered the consent decree, and XTO paid the
civil penalty of $4.0 million.
As reported in the Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the first quarter of 2024, on August 4, 2022, XTO
received a letter from the DOJ notifying XTO of the EPA’s request to initiate a potential civil
action against XTO regarding the Schnegg well in Powhatan Point, Ohio. The EPA alleged XTO breached
its duty under the General Duty Clause of the Clean Air Act for the Schnegg well, and such breaches
resulted in the 2018 well blowout. In December 2024, XTO signed a consent decree with the DOJ to
resolve these alleged violations upon payment of an $8.0 million penalty, which XTO intends to pay in
March 2025.
As reported in the Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the first quarter of 2023, ExxonMobil appealed to the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit a judgment of the United States District Court for the
Southern District of Texas (Texas District Court) entered on April 26, 2017, in a citizen suit
captioned Environment Texas Citizen Lobby, Inc. et al. v. Exxon Mobil Corporation, relating to
alleged Clean Air Act and other violations at the Baytown complex. The Texas District Court had
awarded approximately $20 million in civil penalties, payable to the United States Treasury. On July
29, 2020, the Fifth Circuit vacated the Texas District Court’s penalty award and remanded the case
back to the Texas District Court for further proceedings. On March 2, 2021, the Texas District Court
awarded $14.25 million in civil penalties, payable to the United States Treasury. ExxonMobil filed
its appeal of the judgment in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit on April 12, 2021. On
August 30, 2022, the Fifth Circuit affirmed the Texas District Court’s revised penalty award of
$14.25 million. On February 17, 2023, the Fifth Circuit granted ExxonMobil’s motion for rehearing en
banc. On December 11, 2024, the Fifth Circuit affirmed the Texas District Court’s judgment assessing
a $14.25 million penalty against ExxonMobil. ExxonMobil is continuing to evaluate its available
options, including seeking review in the U.S. Supreme Court.
Refer to the relevant portions of Note 16 of the Financial Section of this report for additional
information on legal proceedings.
 ITEM 4. MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES 
Not applicable.
 25 
 Information about our Executive 
 Officers(positions and ages as of 
 February 19, 2025) 
 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── 
 Name Age Current and Prior Positions (up to five years) 
 Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive 
 Darren W. Woods 60 Officer(since January 1, 2017) 
 Director and President(since January 1, 2016) 
 Neil A. Chapman 62 Senior Vice President(since January 1, 2018) 
 Senior Vice President and Chief Financial 
 Officer(since August 9, 2021) 
 Kathryn A. Mikells 59 Chief Financial Officer and a member of the board of 
 directors for Diageo plc 
 (November 2015 - June 2021) 
 Jack P. Williams, Jr. 61 Senior Vice President(since June 1, 2014) 
 Vice President(since May 1, 2022) 
 President, ExxonMobil Upstream Company (since 
 February 1, 2025) 
 Daniel L. Ammann 52 President, Low Carbon Solutions (May 1, 2022 - 
 December 31, 2024) 
 Chief Executive Officer, Cruise LLC (January 2019 - 
 December 2021) 
 Vice President, Treasurer and Investor 
 Relations(since May 1, 2024) 
 Vice President, Tax and Treasurer (November 28, 2022 
 James R. Chapman 55 - April 30, 2024) 
 Dominion Energy, Inc. (prior to November 28, 2022): 
 Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and 
 Treasurer (January 2019 - November 2022) 
 Vice President, Controller and Tax(since May 1, 2024) 
 Vice President and Controller (March 1, 2021 - April 
 30, 2024) 
 Len M. Fox 61 Assistant Treasurer, Exxon Mobil Corporation 
 (February 1, 2020 - December 31, 2020) 
 Vice President, Chemical Business Services and 
 Treasurer (June 1, 2015 - January 31, 2020) 
 President, ExxonMobil Global Projects Company(since 
 April 1, 2021) 
 Senior Vice President, Global Project Delivery, 
 Jon M. Gibbs 53 ExxonMobil Global Projects Company 
 (July 1, 2020 - March 31, 2021) 
 President, ExxonMobil Global Services Company (April 
 1, 2019 - June 30, 2020) 
 Vice President(since April 1, 2019) 
 President, ExxonMobil Product Solutions Company 
 Karen T. McKee 58 (since April 1, 2022) 
 President, ExxonMobil Chemical Company (April 1, 2019 
 - March 31, 2022) 
 Vice President, Corporate Strategic Planning(since 
 April 1, 2022) 
 Darrin L. Talley 60 President, ExxonMobil Research and Engineering 
 Company (April 1, 2020 - March 31, 2022) 
 Manager, Corporate Strategy, Corporate Strategic 
 Planning (March 15, 2017 - March 31, 2020) 
 Vice President, General Counsel and Corporate 
 Secretary(since July 1, 2024) 
 Deputy General Counsel (May 9, 2024 - June 30, 2024) 
 Jeffrey A. Taylor 60 Executive Vice President and General Counsel, Fox 
 Corporation (March 1, 2021 - May 8, 2024) 
 Executive Vice President and Chief Litigation 
 Counsel, Fox Corporation 
 (March 1, 2019 - February 28, 2021) 
Officers are generally elected by the Board of Directors at its meeting on the day of each annual
election of directors, with each such officer serving until a successor has been elected and
qualified. The above-named officers are required to file reports under Section 16 of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934.
 26